Recently, we have introduced a new generation of effective core potentials (ECPs) designed for accurate correlated calculations but equally useful for a broad variety of approaches. The guiding principle has been the isospectrality of all-electron and ECP Hamiltonians for a subset of valence many-body states using correlated, nearly-exact calculations. Here we present such ECPs for the 3d transition series Sc to Zn with Ne-core, i.e, with semi-core 3s and 3p electrons in the valence space. Besides genuine many-body accuracy, the operators are simple, being represented by a few gaussians per symmetry channel with resulting potentials that are bounded everywhere. The transferability is checked on selected molecular systems over a range of geometries. The ECPs show a high overall accuracy with valence spectral discrepancies typically ≈ 0.01-0.02 eV or better. They also reproduce binding curves of hydride and oxide molecules typically within 0.02-0.03 eV deviations over the full non-dissociation range of interatomic distances. Effective core potentials (ECPs) and closely related pseudopotentials provide a well-known technique for simplifying electronic structure calculations to valence-only degrees of freedom. The ECP Hamiltonians replace the core states by potentials with projectors that mimic the action of the core on the valence electrons with different symmetries. For very heavy elements ECPs become almost indispensable due to major complications that come from relativity, overwhelming energy scales of the core states and difficulties in correlating cores in multi-atom systems. In fact, effective core calculations might even increase the overall accuracy for valence properties since ECPs capture effects that might be otherwise ignored. Clearly, one can adjust the ECP constructions to describe at least some of the core-core and core-valence correlation effects on the valence space as noted also previously Over the past few decades, constructions of ECPs have evolved to a high degree of sophistication Further developments have targeted better description of the electron correlations and inclusion of the manybody effects into the ECP constructions. For example, correlated density matrices were employed as the key quantity to be matched outside the core region Recently, we have advanced the use of correlated methods in ECP constructions in a systematic manner and we have proposed to increase the accuracy of ECP operators to a significantly higher level Let us recall the key principles of our correlation consistent ECP (ccECP) constructions: i) reproducing many-body spectrum of all-electron, relativistic, nearly-exact calculations for a subset of atomic states; ii) adjusting the ECPs to capture the behavior of the original Hamiltonian in bonded situations for both equilibrium and non-equilibrium atomic geometries; iii) using a simple semi-local form so that the potentials are given by a minimal or small set of gaussian functions; in addition, the potentials are bounded and smooth at the origin/nucleus; we also try to keep the tails in nonlocal channels short so as to diminish their actions in bonding regions; iv) and, finally, establishing a database and systematic labeling together with data on obtained accuracy benchmarks; in addition, we keep the table open to further updates, benchmarks and refinements. In this work, we apply these ideas to the 3d transition metal series. These atoms present their own set of challenges when compared with the first-and second-rows and therefore several considerations have to be taken into account. First, although the nominal valence levels are only 3d and 4s, accurate ECPs require the semicore 3s and 3p states to be included in the valence space as has been shown repeatedly in the past Several tables of ECPs for 3d transition metal atoms and beyond have been produced over the past three decades, for example, see Refs. We expand upon these advances here and construct high accuracy ccECPs for the elements Sc to Zn. We use a very compact form with a few gaussians per channel and adjust the terms so that the potentials are finite and smooth in the origin as established previously An additional point for future use is that we provide rather accurate values of atomic total energies for the ground and selected excited states. The high accuracy CC method with extrapolations provide estimations of the exact eigenvalues within systematic errors that vary from a few to about ≈ 10 mHa for the heaviest atoms. This data offers a useful checkpoint for many methods even for those that rely on sizable error cancellations in differences such as DFT. Since practical versions of DFT employ approximate functionals this also provides a valuable data for analysis of the performance in allelectron vs. ECP formulations since they can lead to non-negligible differences. We point out that the presented ECPs include also core-core and core-valence correlations and therefore they represent effective Hamiltonians that have almost as broad use as the original all-electron one, ie, for many purposes they aspire to be almost universal. That should be true essentially for any method and any valence property that does not require explicit core presence. We believe that this is important because it offers a well-defined platform to develop a systematic understanding of biases in a variety of approaches. For transition series this is particularly relevant since fully correlated relativistic allelectron calculations of such systems are out of reach for just a few atom systems. The ECPs, therefore, enable to expand the system sizes that can be treated by manybody methods and at the same time provide reference framework to study systematic biases. In what follows we first present the methods and objective functions used in the optimization process. The results section show the atomic and molecular properties of the constructed operators compared with all-electron and other existing tables. We comment and discuss several aspects of these new constructions in the conclusions section. The ECP electronic Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian (a.u) has the following form For this work, we use a semi-local ECP form with a minimal number of parameters where r i is the radial distance of the i th electron from the core's origin, and max is the maximum angular momentum for the non-local projectors. In this work, we choose max = 1. The non-local terms contain the projectors on the angular momentum states with m quantum numbers. The local term, V loc , is chosen to cancel the Coulomb singularity at the origin, i.e. γ i e -δir 2 , (3) where Z eff is the effective core charge, Z eff = Z -Z core . The V (r) potentials are expanded as follows All variables are treated as optimization parameters in the minimization of a chosen objective function. In addition, a constraint that imposes a concave shape of the potential at the origin is imposed The fully correlated calculations of transition metals and heavier elements with very large basis sets and high accuracy methods such as CCSD(T) are very costly and, eventually, impractical. Therefore, we constructed an optimization strategy that introduces correlation into the ECP without explicitly calculating the correlation energies at each step of the optimization. This approach relies on the fact that the correlation energy for a given atomic state is similar across different ECPs, and the variation for the correlation energy error is significantly smaller than the variation in the HF error, as shown in Figure where CC,CV, and VV represent the core-core, core-valence, and valencevalence correlation contribution to the excitation energy. When using an ECP, there are only valence electrons, so the ECP excitation energy can be written as ∆ ECP g = ∆ ECP HF + ∆ ECP corr . In order to match the AE excitation energy, the ECP can either adjust ∆ ECP HF or ∆ ECP corr . By considering a variety of ECPs, we plot the spread of HF errors and the difference between the ECP correlation energy and the valence-valence correlation energy of the AE in 1 for a variety of ECPs, including BFD 1. For a given atom, a set of all-electron (AE) atomic states is calculated using CCSD(T) method with uncontracted aug-cc-pwCVnZ-DK where n labels the basis set size, E HF CBS is the CBS limit, and α and β are other fitting parameters. where the correlation energy is defined as It is known that the atomic states of some transition metals such as the ground state of V are incorrectly described by a single reference using real spherical harmonics. In order to obtain the correct atomic symmetries, we generate "symmetry equivalenced" orbitals by state-averaging the irreducible representations (irreps) of D 2h for a particular atomic state reproducing the scalar relativistic Dirac-Hartree-Fock (DHF) spectrum. We generate a large set of random ECPs and optimize each using the nonlinear DONLP2 code by Spelluci where ∆E (s) is the excitation energy for state s relative to the neutral ground state and w s is the weight assigned to that excitation. The spectrum is optimized using numerical DHF code 3. The DHF spectrum optimized ECP with the least objective function value is used to calculate the correlation energies for the states mentioned above using the same method described for the AE case. Here AE correlation energy refers to the total correlation energy (CC+CV+VV) of the state. The new shifted gaps are inserted into the objective function in equation 8 to be minimized. 5. The steps 3-4 are iterated until a self-consistent ECP is obtained. For each step is re-evaluated using the ECP from the last iteration. In every iteration, the ECP parameters are randomly perturbed within ≈ 1-2% of parameter values to ensure better scanning of possible local minimas around the current values of the parameters. Usually, a set of self-consistent parameters are obtained within a few iterations. In cases where pure energy consistency does not result in an acceptably transferable ECP (as described in section III), we reduce the spectrum by removing very highly ionized states and add additional constraints to improve the transferability. Note that the full spectral fits include also core-core and core-valence correlations that become quite significant for the highly ionized states and therefore they have tendency to steer the ECP from the optimal valence-valence description. This is especially true for our ECP form with small number of variational parameters. Although the bias is typically small (say, 0.1 eV) we opted for further refinements. This is accomplished by including oneparticle eigenvalue discrepancies into the objective function. It directs the highly ionized states to be less influenced by the corresponding correlations so as to be increase the weight of the HF character for these states. In these cases, we utilize a new objective function, Γ, given as where the first term is the initial spectral objective function and is one particle eigenvalue. The eigenvalues are weighted by γ to allow the spectrum to be minimized while keeping the oneparticle eigenvalues reasonably close to the corresponding AE ones. With few iterations one can find a compromise that reproduces a large part of the spectrum as well achieves transferability in molecular calculations. Clearly, further improvements are possible but in this work we are mostly concerned with the demonstration of principle and with providing simple ECPs that fulfill the accuracy criteria. We present results comparing our correlation consistent ECPs, labeled ccECP, to various other core approximations relative to the all-electron calculation for both the atomic spectra as well as monohydrides and monoxides. The all-electron reference in all following calculations is spin-restricted CCSD(T) where we have correlated all electrons in the system, i.e. no core orbitals have been frozen. To include relativity, we utilize a 10 th order Douglass-Kroll-Hess Hamiltonian Obviously, the methods we use have their accuracy limits. In particular, we rely on scalar relativistic approach with averaged spin-orbit effects. This introduces additional bias of ≈ 0.025 eV as a representative value that we estimated from accurate spin-orbit correlated calculations of atomic excitations We briefly discuss the results for every element in the following subsections. In section III A, we present an overview of the atomic spectra for all transition metals. In sections III B-III K, for every atom we show the atomic spectrum discrepancies and transferability tests on monohydrides and monoxides. In these molecules, we test various core approximations near and out of equilibrium geometries, i.e., compressed bond lengths. In general, we show results for our spectral-only ECP (la-beled ccECP.S) as well as the ECP that compromises a small part of the spectrum for increase in the overall transferability (this is labeled as ccECP). For oxygen ECP, we use the ECP from the corresponding table; our oxygen ccECP can be found in our previous work All ECP parameters are given in Table We first provide an overview of the atomic spectra. The optimized spectrum for ccECP.S included the neutral s 2 d n , s 1 d n+1 , d n+2 , the first ionized s 1 d n and d n+1 , all ionizations down to the Ar core, and the [Ne]3s 2 state. As we will see in future sections, the inclusion of these highly ionized states can lead to non-negligible biases and a decrease in the overall transferability. Therefore, in cases where this full spectrum is insufficient, we add in constraints and work with a reduced spectrum as described in section II B. Figure As the ionization level is increased, all previous core approximations begin to show larger discrepancies with the AE reference. In order to illustrate this, we show the ionization down to the Ar core in Figure Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn -0.1 FIG. The shaded gray window in each figure indicates a discrepancy of half of chemical accuracy in either direction from the all-electron reference. We note that for Sc and Ti, our final ccECP is equivalent to our spectral ccECP.S. In Figure across all of the states including the low-lying s↔d transitions, anions, and ionizations down to the semicore [Ar]. Our ccECP.S ECPs are able to maintain MADs of nearly 0.01 eV for all transition atoms. In the following sections focused on the individual atoms, we investigate energy consistency influences the transferability of the ECPs for each element. Our adjusted ccECP constructions, which slightly compromise the atomic spectrum when compared to the ccECP.S (as illustrated in Fig. In the case of Sc, the atomic and molecular data is given in Table For the molecular calculations, we plot discrepancies from the AE CCSD(T) binding curve for a range of bond lengths. The compressed bond regime is plotted near the dissociation threshold, i.e., where the binding energy approaches zero while the vertical line indicates the equi-librium bond length. For ScH, we see that all ECPs result in binding discrepancies that are well within chemical accuracy with regard to the AE results, indicated by the shaded region. Note that STU, BFD, and UC discrepancies vary as functions of the bond length. That might cause some shifts in the predicted vibrational frequencies, whereas a flat discrepancy should lead to better accuracy for vibrational properties. The ScO molecule probes the charge transfer and polar bond regime showing that both STU and BFD exhibit significantly larger deviations from the AE potential energy surface. Our ccECP.S results in a relatively flat discrepancy throughout the entire binding region and a very small error for the binding energy. Due to the quality of the constructed operator, we decided that no further refinements to the ccECP.S were needed. The parameters for this optimal ccECP.S are given in Table In the case of Ti, the atomic and molecular data is given in Table When considering the hydride molecule, the BFD shows significant underbinding for the compressed geometries. On the other hand, STU maintains uniform accuracy throughout the entire binding region with mild 0.04 eV underbinding. UC, eCEPP, and our ccECP.S are all very comparable for TiH, showing deviations within 0.02 eV for all bond lengths. For TiO with polar bond, we find that BFD is inadequate to describe the binding even at equilibrium and the error reaches up to 0.4 eV near in the short bond region. STU is also underbound near equilibrium, and has the opposite behavior to BFD in that the error decreases as the bond is compressed. While UC and eCEPP are well within chemical accuracy near equilibrium, each begins to underbind as the bond length is compressed. Near dissociation, both UC and eCEPP reach region outside the chemical accuracy. Our ccECP.S, on the other hand, is well within the desired error margin throughout the entire bonding region. Additionally, the ccECP.S has an extremely flat discrepancy near the equilibrium. Considering the accuracy of the constructed ccECP.S, we did not pursue any refinements. The parameters for the Ti ccECP.S are given in Table The atomic and molecular data for the V ECPs is given in Table The atomic and molecular data for Cr are given in Table IV and Fig. The atomic and molecular results for Mn are given in Table We improve upon our spectral only ccECP.S and reoptimize via Eq. 11 to obtain our final ccECP. In terms of the atomic spectrum, we slightly increase the LMAD to ≈ 0.01 eV. Some error of 0.1 eV is introduced to the highly ionized [Ar] semi-core excitation. This increase results in a MAD on the entire spectrum of only 0.024 eV, which outperforms all other core approximations including the all-electron UC. For both the hydride and oxide The atomic discrepancies for Fe atom are given in Table We achieve a remarkable balance between the atomic spectrum as well as the molecular properties with our refined ccECP. The ccECP results in an increase of only 3 meV on the LMAD, and we find larger errors only for the highest ionizations. It should be noted that the ab- solute error of 0.43 eV for the ionization to the [Ar] semicore corresponds to relative error of only ≈ 0.08 % since the excitation is sizeable, 560 eV. Additionally, despite the compromise in the spectrum, the ccECP outperforms all other ECPs on the LMAD and all the core approximations on the entire MAD. The molecular properties are significantly improved for the ccECP. For FeH, there is near perfect agreement on the binding curve, both near equilibrium as well as near dissociation. For FeO, we see a significant reduction in the overbinding, putting the binding discrepancy within the chemical accuracy of the AE CCSD(T) binding curve. The parameters for this ccECP are given in Table The atomic and molecular data for Co are given in Table VII and Fig. We show the atomic and molecular data for Ni in Table VIII and Fig. We show the atomic properties for Cu in Table In fact, all ECPs including STU, BFD, and eCEPP significantly overbind for the CuO molecule, from roughly 0.1 eV for our ccECP.S to over 0.25 eV for BFD. We substantially improve the overall transferability with our refined ccECP. For both CuH and CuO, we have near perfect agreement with AE along the entire binding curve. For CuO, we are able to obtain the accuracy that stands out when compared to previous ECPs. Note that behavior of biases for this element suggests that keeping the accuracy for energies > 500 eV one would need more variational freedom and perhaps a more sophisticated construction. This is due to different energy and also length scales for semicore vs valence spaces. The atomic and molecular data for Zn is given in Table X and Fig. For the transferability tests, we find similar behavior for both ZnH and ZnO, where the ccECP.S is within chemical accuracy near equilibrium but begins to overbind as the bond is compressed. With the refinements from our ccECP, we are able to strike a reasonable balance between the atomic properties as well as the molecular transferability. In both the hydride and oxide, the ccECP has a relatively flat discrepancy resulting in excellent vibrational frequencies as well as energy differences well within chemical accuracy for the entire curve. In terms of the atomic spectrum, the lowest states are only 0.01 eV error and we achieve a MAD on the entire spectrum that is better than all other core approximations. The parameters for our final ccECP are given in Table In Tab. XII we collect the results of molecular calculations for all elements and evaluate mean absolute deviations for the equilibrium molecular parameters. Note that even our ccECP.S set achieves very respectable accuracy that is comparable or better than the available tables. Clearly, the adjusted set ccECP is the most balanced overall, to the best of our knowledge shows overall the best consistency for all the calculated parameters. In this paper, we present the correlation consistent ECPs for 3d elements. First, we constructed the ECPs using spectral optimizations for all the elements. This optimization was iterative and included states that ionize the given atom down to the [Ne]3s 2 ion, as well as s↔d transfer energies for low-lying atomic and ionic states, including bounded anions. Quite unexpectedly, for most atoms, we were able to optimize the states within 0.01 eV or even smaller discrepancies for the full span of ionization energies, sometimes with accuracies better than the known spectroscopic data and also better than the inherent systematic biases in our methodology. As discussed above any discrepancies smaller than ≈ 0.05 eV are in fact comparable to estimated systematic errors in our calculations. These spectral-only results simply pointed out that such fits are indeed feasible using rather small number of free ECP parameters. We further probed for accuracy and transferability of the constructed operators on transition metal-hydride and oxide molecules. The hydrides appear mostly less problematic and within the error bar window of ±0.05 eV for all bond lengths with a few exceptions as analyzed above. The oxide molecules and their polar bonds revealed more complicated picture and most ECPs required refinement that has led to high fidelity and chemical accuracy along the binding curves. That set is labeled as the recommended ccECP. The spectral-only ccECP.S versions could still be useful for atomic calculations where the accuracy of highly ionized states would be of crucial interest. We note that in cases of Sc and Ti ccECP=ccECP.S since the spectral optimization provided desired accuracy without further refinement. It is quite remarkable that such accurate fits can be constructed using just the spectral information as an input. For high spin elements, the spectral-only ECPs, while still respectable, were less accurate then desired. For geometries around the equilibrium and the stretched bond regions were described very well, however, for shorter bond length regions we observed in some cases overbinding of the order ≈ 0.1 eV. Although rather small in a relative sense we have opted for further improvement that took into account the decreasing importance of correlations of deeply ionized states vs. the key desired accuracy of the low-lying excitations most relevant for valence properties. Adding a shift towards the HF eigenvalues into the objective function enabled us to mildly retune the 3s and 3p channels and that proved to be sufficient to get the binding curves within the 0.05 eV accuracy threshold. This caused some increase in spectral errors, however, only for very highly ionized states that are of the order of > 500 eV with relative errors being still very small (≈ 0.08% or smaller). For the late transition elements namely, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn we have observed similar behavior with an overbinding tendency for oxide molecules at short bond lengths. Similar refinement as for the high-spin elements have enabled to alleviate these deviations so that all the binding curves were within the chemical accuracy threshold. For these elements we also note additional complications with the largest basis sets for Co, Cu and Zn where we have encountered the feasibility limits of the used codes. Therefore we have restricted ourselves to the best results we could obtain with reasonable computational resources and we consider the achieved systematic comparisons as adequate for our present purposes. Together with accuracy tests, we have also tried to estimate the exact atomic total energies for both the ground and excited states. The extrapolations from extensive basis sets aug-cc-pCVnZ with n=2,3,4,5 provide rather a consistent picture of the corresponding correlation energies, however, at present we do not claim better systematic accuracy than ≈ 10 mHa. In order to provide these energies with better uncertainties, we plan further investigation in a subsequent study that will be devoted to decrease the error margins to much lower values. An observation on the legacy ECP constructions is that our results confirm that the Stuttgart-Koeln-Bonn ECPs Clearly, our present constructions raise the bar of accuracy higher and we believe that they provide a significant step forward for correlated calculations. Further data including the basis sets, including both cc-pVnZ and augcc-pVnZ for n ∈ {D, T, Q, 5}, can be found in web library http://pseudopotentiallibrary.org as well as in the Supplementary Information. Data for this work is also provided at the Materials Data Facility. The presented results show that there is a room for sizeable improvements of both the construction methods and practical versions of ECPs. In agreement with previous papers on first and second rows, we were aiming at offering a "minimal model" that is still more accurate than existing tables. For example, nonlocal s and p channels are described by two gaussians only (similarly to the STU table). We have demonstrated that such a combination of small variational space and accuracy is indeed feasible and the resulting constructions are ready for general use. There are several directions where this work could expand further. Heavier atoms such as Co, Cu and Zn could benefit from more variational parameters that would address differences between deeply lying 3s, 3p states vs large valence subshell. In addition, more testing and validation is needed in a variety of chemical systems such as larger molecules, solids and 2D materials. Indeed, we expect that such data would provide new insights and possibly point out the directions for further refinements and updates in future.