Using the method of perturbed angular correlation of gamma rays, diffusional jumpfrequencies of probe atoms can be measured through relaxation of the nuclear quadrupole interaction. This was first shown in 2004 for jumps of tracer atoms that lead to reorientation of the local electric field-gradient, such as jumps on the connected -sublattice in the L1 2 crystal structure. Studies on many such phases using the 111 In/Cd PAC probe are reviewed in this paper. A major finding from a 2009 study of indides of rare-earth elements, In 3 R, was the apparent observation of two diffusional regimes: one dominant for heavy-lanthanide phases, R= Lu, Tm, Er, Dy, Tb, Gd, that was consistent with a simple model of vacancy diffusion on the In -sublattice, and another for light-lanthanides, R= La, Ce, Pr, Nd, that had no obvious explanation but for which several alternative diffusion mechanisms were suggested. It is herein proposed that the latter regime arises not from a diffusion mechanism but from transfer of Cd-probes from In-sites where they originate to R-sites as a consequence of a change in site-preference of 111 Cd-daughter atoms from In-sites to Rsites following transmutation of 111 In. Support for this transfer mechanism comes from a study of site-preferences and jump-frequencies of 111 In/Cd probes in Pd 3 R phases. Possible mechanisms for transfer are described, with the most likely mechanism identified as one in which Cd-probes on sites transfer to interstitial sites, diffuse interstitially, and then react with vacancies on -sites. Implications of this proposal are discussed. For indides of heavy-lanthanide elements, the Cd-tracer remains on the In-sublattice and relaxation gives the diffusional jump-frequency. There is considerable interest in diffusion of atoms in solids Nuclear relaxation caused by diffusion. Fig. fluctuation regime, at temperatures below 340 o C, the observed spectrum appears in good approximation as the product of a static perturbation function ) (t G static and an exponential relaxation, in which  is a relaxation frequency caused by fluctuating EFGs. All spectra such as in Fig. , in which w is the inverse of the mean residence-time of the probe on a site if the EFG reorients through an angle less than 90 o in a jump. Composition dependence of jump frequencies. In 3 R phases appear in binary phase diagrams as line compounds at the stoichiometric 3:1 composition. From a practical point of view, this means that the width of the phase field is less than about 1 at%. To our knowledge, no precise measurements have been made of widths and bounding compositions of L1 2 phase fields for In 3 La or other In 3 R phases (R= rare-earth). PAC experiments to measure jump-frequencies of probe atoms were originally made in this laboratory using "stoichiometric" and presumably single-phase samples produced by arc-melting high-purity metal foils under argon in a small arc-furnace. However, repeated measurements exhibited poor reproducibility of jump frequencies , with the vacancy jumping freely around the antisite atom and occasionally reconstituting the V  . Activation enthalpies obtained from fits of the relaxationfrequency data in Fig. Nuclear relaxation for In/Cd probes in the series of rare-earth indides. Following the original experiments on In 3 La, comprehensive measurements were made on all In 3 R rare-earth (R) phases for both In-rich and In-poor boundary compositions Values of jump-frequency were obtained by fitting the experimental nuclear relaxation assuming the ). Fits of Arrhenius plots of jump-frequency w such as shown in Fig. Fig. Fitted activation enthalpies were found to be in the range 0.5-2.5 eV and prefactors of order 1-100 THz, which seems consistent with a vacancy diffusion mechanism The composition dependences of the jump-frequency can be seen in Fig. A new explanation is developed in this paper for the nuclear relaxation observed in indides of La, Ce, Pr and Nd. The large relaxation frequencies are attributed not to a stationary diffusion mechanism but instead to jumps that transfer daughter Cd-probes from the In-to R-sublattice due to a change in site preference following transmutation of the In-parent probe. 111 In decays by electron-capture with a half-life of 2.8 d to the 417 keV level of 111 Cd, which in turn decays promptly (half-life of 0.12 ns) to the 245 keV PAC level In/Cd probes as impurities in stannides, gallides, aluminides and palladides. Studies of nuclear relaxation have been carried out for 111 In/Cd probes as impurities in other L1 2 series with rare-earth elements (R), including Sn 3 R in which f  is the fraction of probes on the -sublattice at time of decay of 111 In into 111 Cd, which exhibit a (possibly damped) quadrupolar perturbation function, and f  is the fraction of probes on the -sublattice, whose sites have cubic point symmetry and a zero-frequency quadrupole interaction signal that is visible as a vertical offset in the PAC spectrum. varies with lattice parameter for all five series 1. No "universal" dependence of jump frequencies on lattice parameter exists for the five series. 2. As a heuristic rule, dilute impurity solute atoms tend to occupy sites of the sublattice of an element in which there is a deficiency In/Cd probes in Pd 3 R phases. Qiaoming Wang carried out an extensive study of site-preferences of 111 In probes and jumpfrequencies of 111 Cd daughter probes in rare-earth palladides Pd 3 R, all of which have the L1 2 structure Site-preferences (Fig. R= Sm and Eu. Pd-sites were preferred by the In-probes at low temperature, with transfer to Rsites with increasing temperature. (Confer Fig. R= Nd, Pr and Ce. Compared with R= Sm and Eu, the opposite change in site-preference was observed, with the site-fraction of probes on R-sites decreasing with increasing temperature (confer Fig. R= La. The site-preference towards R-sites was strong at both boundary compositions and no probes were detected on Pd sites. Jump-frequencies (Fig. In thermal equilibrium the ratio of site fractions of In-parent probes on the two sublattices of an A 3 B phase is thermally activated according to in which f  and f  are site fractions of In probes on the R-and Pd-sublattices, A is a prefactor and Q transf is an activation enthalpy for transfer of probes between the two sublattices. Such activation enthalpies have been measured previously in this laboratory for 111 In probes in GdAl 2 Pd-poorer The nuclear relaxation was also obtained from fits of PAC spectra for Pd-poor Pd 3 R phases using eq. 3. Taking the jump-frequency w to be equal to the fitted relaxation frequency , its temperature dependence was fitted with the thermally activated expression given in eq. 2. The five members of the series (R= Eu, Sm, Nd, Pr, Ce) in which nuclear relaxation of the Cd-probe was observed are coincidently the five in which the site-preference of the parent In-probe was observed to change. Arrhenius plots of the temperature dependences of w are shown for the five phases in Fig. From Fig. To recapitulate the main experimental results: 1. Indium has a dramatic change in site-preference along the palladide series from R=Lu to La. 2. From Lu to Tb, there is a strong site-preference of In for the Pd-site, and no observed nuclear relaxation of the quadrupole perturbation for 111 Cd-probes that originate on the Pd-sublattice. 3. From Eu to La, the preferred site of In in Pd-poor samples changes progressively from Pd-to R-sites. At the same time, the relaxation frequency of daughter Cd-probes starting on Pd-sites increases by three orders of magnitude. 4. A strong negative correlation exists between activation enthalpies Q transf and Q shown in Figs. 9 and 11, but it must be remembered that they refer to different probes, the parent In and daughter Cd, respectively. However, it makes sense that the relaxation frequency of the Cd-probe should increase as its stability on the Pd-sublattice (presumed to be similar to that of In) decreases. Origin of nuclear relaxation in the light-lanthanide indides and palladides. Nuclear relaxation in both series of phases is now reinterpreted in terms of an approach to a new equilibrium distribution of daughter probes following radioactive decay. 1. Site-preferences of Cd-and In-probes in Pd 3 R phases are assumed to change in a similar way along the lanthanide series of Pd-phases due to the likeness in chemistry and atomic volume of these neighboring sp-elements. Just as for In-probes (Fig. 2. For heavy-lanthanide indides, the observed composition dependence of the nuclear relaxation is consistent with the -sublattice vacancy mechanism (see Fig. 3. For light-lanthanide indides, the observed composition dependence is inconsistent with the simple -sublattice diffusion mechanism and, moreover, the relaxation grows very rapidly in the sequence R= Nd, Pr, Ce to La, as shown in Figs. .4, far below comparable values of activation enthalpies for diffusion observed in metals and intermetallic phases Possible transfer mechanisms. The high relaxation frequencies and low activation enthalpies observed for light-lanthanide palladide and indide phases suggest that equilibration of sitepreferences occurs very rapidly following radioactive decay. Observation of a greater relaxation frequency for In-rich samples than for In-poor ones suggests that the relaxation mechanism is mediated by R-vacancies and not -vacancies. Five alternative transfer mechanisms are considered for In-or Pd-rich samples: (1) The most elementary transfer of Cd  to -sites would be by Cd  jumping into an adjacent V  ; Presumably, such an exchange can occur between Cd  on an -site and V  on any of the probe's near-neighbor -sites, but not with more distant vacancies. Since no inhomogeneous broadening has generally been observed in spectra of In 3 R phases, mole fractions of vacancies or other point defects are believed to be low, say of order 10 -3 or smaller. This makes it implausible that the reaction in eq. 5 could equilibrate site-preferences of all Cd-probes since only probes next to a V  could transfer. Consequently, one of the reacting species in eq. 5 must undergo long-range migration in order to form reaction pairs for all Cd-probes. (2) An R-vacancy might undergo long-range migration and come next to a Cd  defect, enabling the two to react via eq. 5. Since R-sites are isolated and do not form a connected sublattice, V  cannot migrate by near-neighbor jumps that do not create additional point defects. V  might diffuse by sequences of six near-neighbor jumps (3) The Cd  -probe could diffuse on the majority sublattice via the -sublattice vacancy diffusion mechanism until it comes next to a -vacancy and then react via eq. 5. But diffusion would then be mediated by -vacancies that are present in only low mole fractions in the In-or Pd-rich samples, leading to low migration rates. The strong composition dependence observed in the light-lanthanide indides appears to rule this mechanism out (compare data sets shown in fig. (4) Cd  might replace an adjacent R-atom by kicking it into a neighboring V  : In such a "kick-out" reaction, Cd transfers to the -sublattice with creation of an antisite R  defect while regenerating another V  . This reaction would be favored if the sum of formation enthalpies of the three defects on the right-hand side of eq. 6 is less than of the two on the left-hand side. However, the mechanism obviously requires presence of -vacancies, so that the reaction rate should again be greater in In-poor alloys and not, as observed experimentally, in In-rich alloys. (5) Finally, in a variation of mechanism (1) above, Cd  might dissociate to an interstitial position from its original -site, diffuse interstitially, and then trap at V  to form a transferred Cd  defect: Since activation enthalpies for interstitial diffusion are generally low, the Cd-interstitial might migrate at temperatures lower than those typical for vacancy diffusion. Owing to the very low mole fraction of Cd-defects (< 10 -11 ), mole fractions of V  and V  would be insignificantly affected by this solute transfer. The transfer can also proceed in In-poor samples as long as the minority mole fraction of V  remains greater than the extremely low mole fraction of Cd  . This mechanism is consistent with the observed composition dependence of jump-frequencies in the light-lanthanide indides and seems to allow for transfer at low temperatures. The reaction steps in eq. 7 are pictured together schematically in Fig. Interstitial transfer mechanism. Mechanism (5) appears most consistent with the observations. It is reasonable to suppose that the interstitial i Cd traps irreversibly at V  (reaction 7c). Presumably, the activation enthalpy for formation of the interstitial (7a) is lower for In 3 La than for R= Ce, Pr or Nd owing to its larger lattice parameter and a more open structure that can accommodate the interstitial Cd-defect. The 0.53 eV activation enthalpy observed for In-poor In 3 La (Fig. Decomposition of the two relaxation regimes in the lanthanide indides. The curves in Fig. The jump-frequency for -sublattice vacancy diffusion of Cd probes decreases rapidly as the lattice parameter increases along the series R= Sc, Lu, Tm, Er, Ho, Dy, Tb and Gd. For example, the temperature at which the jump frequency equals 10 kHz is 20% lower for Lu than for Dy. This is a significant and very interesting trend, for which a clear explanation is lacking. It might be caused by an increase in the effective activation enthalpy for formation of -vacancies or in the migration enthalpy of -vacancies along the series. (2) Nuclear relaxation attributed to interstitial transfer of Cd-solutes increases dramatically along the series R= Nd, Pr, Ce and La, and is completely dominant for R= Pr, Ce, and La. Relaxation regimes in the lanthanide palladides. In contrast to the indides, no diffusional relaxation was observed up to 1100 K for probes in heavy-lanthanide Pd-poor palladides. It is assumed that diffusion via the -sublattice vacancy diffusion mechanism occurs, but at rates too low to be detected (the threshold frequency for detection of relaxation is ~1 MHz using PAC of 111 In/Cd, which is a function of the lifetime of the PAC level). Relaxation was only observed among lightlanthanide palladides in Pd-poor samples with R= Sm, Eu, Nd, Pr and Ce. The relaxation rates are comparable to rates for members of the same series in the In-poor indides and are also attributed to interstitial transfer of daughter Cd-probes from to -sublattices. The nature of nuclear relaxation in the light-lanthanide phases. In the slow-fluctuation regime, the dynamically relaxed perturbation function appears as the product of a static quadrupole perturbation function and envelope function ) exp( t   which, when fitted, determines the relaxation frequency (eq. 1). For stationary diffusion, for example via the -sublattice vacancy diffusion mechanism, the relaxation frequency is equal to the mean jump frequency w ( w   ), which represents the inverse of the mean residence time of the Cd-probe on an -site before it jumps to another -site. For the interstitial transfer mechanism, a nonstationary process reestablishing thermodynamic equilibrium of site-occupations after nuclear decay, there is no homogeneous, repeated sequence of jumps. Instead, there is a first jump of the probe to an interstitial site, with change in EFG, followed by an indeterminate number of additional jumps while the probe diffuses interstitially, with additional but different changes in EFGs, and terminating in a final jump onto a -site. While it is impossible to model  quantitatively, it is reasonable to suppose that the time of the first jump and magnitude of the first change in EFG are by far the most important. As a crude approximation, one can assume that the change in EFG will be comparable to that of a jump in the -sublattice diffusion mechanism. It then follows that the mean time to the first jump after transmutation will be given approximately by the inverse of the fitted relaxation frequency, perhaps asserting a systematic uncertainty by a factor of 4 to account for lack of knowledge of the magnitude of the EFG changes in the first and subsequent jumps. Thus, Fig. Nuclear relaxation of probes starting on cubic lattice sites. It is interesting to consider if motional relaxation can be used to measure jump-frequencies of impurity probes that start on cubic