In this paper we present scanning tunneling microscopy of Bi 2 Se 3 with superconducting Nb deposited on the surface. We find that the topologically protected surface states of the Bi 2 Se 3 leak into the superconducting over-layer, suggesting a dual topological proximity effect. Coupling between theses states and the Nb states leads to an effective pairing mechanism for the surface states, leading to a modified model for a topological superconductor in these systems. This model is consistent with fits between the experimental data and the theory. The contact of materials with different long-range ordering modifies their properties near the interface. The superconducting proximity effect (PE), whereby superconducting correlations leak into neighboring materials, is a particular example of such general phenomena that has been comprehensively studied over the years (see Refs. 1-4 for reviews and references therein). It has been recently used as the basis for topological superconductors where Majorana bound states (MBS) are predicted to be found by placing a conventional superconductor (S) on top of a topological insulator (TI) In this paper we investigate the effect of the TPSS in Bi 2 Se 3 on the superconductor Nb which is placed on top. We demonstrate that, contrary to previous expectations, the TPSS are not confined to the boundary between the materials but spread also into the superconductor. Thus to find Majorana fermions in these hybrid systems there is a delicate range of thicknesses of the superconductor layer which are thick enough to be bulk superconductors, but not so thick as to destroy the twodimensional (2D) nature and Dirac cone of the TPSS, such that the MBS will exist. Inside the superconducting over-layer there is a superconducting pairing effect for the TPSS mediated by their coupling to the native superconductor states. Thus inside the bulk superconductor one has an effective pwave like topological superconductor, provided the superconducting layer is of the appropriate thickness. The combination of the TPSS and the standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductivity gives rise to a striking density of states profile which can be measured using a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). The induced superconductivity of the TPSS is nonetheless not equivalent to the proximity induced pairing which gives rise to the topological superconductor in Ref. 5. After the prediction of p-wave pairing present in hybrid S-TI systems, there have been many other theory proposals and a wide range of experiments aiming to reveal the symmetry implications of this state in various observables e.g. Josephson current-phase relationship, tunneling conductance, current noise spectra. In particular, some experiments have focused on thin films of Bi 2 Se 3 in proximity to an s-wave 9,10 or d-wave We present data from experiments on two samples, A and B. Samples A show the effect of the TPSS and of the superconducting gap separately, and allows us also to consider superconductors both with and without the underlying TI. Samples of type B have these salient features superimposed, and allow us to compare directly with theoretical predictions of a phenomenological model of the system. The TI used in this experiment is Bi 2 Se 3 . Five atomic planes with atomic order Se 1 -Bi 1 -Se 2 -Bi 1 -Se 1 form a quintuple layer (QL); the QLs are weakly bound to each other, making it possible to readily expose a pristine surface for study. The exposed QL supports the existence of the TPSS, which features a single Dirac cone. Two distinct sample growth methods were employed. Samples of type A consist of 40 QL of Bi 2 Se 3 grown via molecular beam epitaxy on c-plane sapphire Samples of type B are uniform with respect to the x-y plane. They were grown by slowly cooling a stoichiometric mixture of Bi and Se from a temperature of 850 • C. The surface of the crystal was then cleaved in a Nitrogen gas environment. Recent work performed in our lab shows cleaving Bi 2 Se 3 in a nitrogen gas environment shifts the Dirac cone towards the Fermi level To model our experimental system we consider a superconductor deposited on top of a 3D topological insulator, as in figure where H BCS is the BCS Hamiltonian for a simple clean 2D metal including s-wave pairing, H TPSS is for the TI surface states (TPSS), which have spread throughout the Nb overlayer, and H C is a two-particle local coupling between the surface states and metallic states. Firstly, the superconductor, in our case Nb, is described by a BCS Hamiltonian H BCS = d 2 rΨ † r H BCS Ψ r with r = (x, y) the 2D spatial coordinate, and We use the Nambu basis, with Ψ † r = {c † r↑ , c † r↓ , c r↓ , -c r↑ }, and a wavefunction ψ T r : {u r↑ , u r↓ , v r↓ , v r↑ }. Here c † rσ creates a particle of spin σ at position r. We will also use τ as the Pauli matrices acting in the particle-hole subspace and σ as the Pauli matrices operating in the spin subspace. The band operator is ξ = -1/(2m)∇ 2 -μ in two dimensions (2D). The TPSS are described by 37 with χ † r = {a † r↑ , a † r↓ , a r↓ , -a r↑ } and H TPSS = drχ † r H TPSS χ r , where a † rσ creates a particle of spin σ at position r on the TI surface. We consider the simplest uniform coupling mechanism namely a local spin independent hybridization of strength γ. A Fourier transform, and a spin rotation which diagonalizes H TPSS but leaves H M + H ∆ unaffected, decouples this Hamiltonian into two independent parts. Let where Secondly V k is a spin rotation which commutes with H M + H ∆ . Then we find For the TPSS we make the spin rotation is the polar angle. The rotated Hamiltonian density for the TPSS is The coupling becomes In this basis the Hamiltonian Eq. ( with Diagonal blocks describe S and TI states, whereas off-diagonal terms describe their mutual coupling. From Eq. ( where a, b, c are each ±1 and k = ∆ 2 + ξ 2 k . In the limit γ → 0 we recover the BCS and TPSS dispersions as required. For large coupling γ there is still a full gap in the spectrum. However for small γ there are states inside the BCS gap caused by the TPSS which will have only a weak superconducting pairing effect. We use this model to compare directly with the results of the STM measurements. The density of states, where the delta function peaks have been broadened into Gaussians of width Γ, is given by This can be calculated numerically with Eq. ( A. Effective model of topologically protected surface states with s-wave pairing If we are interested in the properties of the TPSS we can find an effective model by integrating out the BCS states. In the functional integral representation this amounts to calculating e -S = e We use the Matsubara formalism, with frequencies ω n = 2π(n + 1 2 ) for n ∈ Z, and temperature T . As the action we need to integrate over is quadratic this is a standard integral and we find where g nk = Ψ nk Ψ † nk is the Green's function for the superconducting states. This is a correction to H TPSS and we have an effective Hamiltonian density where Thus in the static limit we are left with the effective model: If we can neglect the momentum dependence of the effective pairing, ∆ eff k → ∆, and chemical potential, μ eff k → μ, then one is left with the Fu-Kane model The density of states of this model can be calculated analytically. We start from Gorkov's equation: with which describes the 2D surface states of a 3D topological insulator. I n is an n × n identity matrix. ∆ = ∆iσ y is the s-wave pairing. Note that ∆H = H * ∆. Naturally this is in the Matsubara representation with Green's functions = T n e -iω n (τ-τ ) G n (r, r ) , and where T τ is time ordering along the imaginary time axis and ψ σ (r, τ) is a Heisenberg operator. Finally r = (x, y) is the 2D spatial coordinate. We find as the differential equation for The bulk solution is therefore where k ± = k x ± ik y and The normal Green's function is found from which leads to The density of states for the TPSS is and substituting in G n, k we are left with the integral This integral can be performed using standard techniques and we find where Θ is the Heaviside theta function. We note that neither this nor the BCS density of states are sufficient for explaining the experimental results, which requires the fully coupled model. We can also consider the effect on the BCS superconductor caused by the TPSS by integrating out the TPSS. In this case the self energy term would be e -S = e After a standard calculation this leads to the effective Hamiltonian where Σ eff nk and α eff nk describe electronic and spin-orbit scattering events respectively, which will contribute to the broadening of the BCS density of states. Again, this description leads, assuming the variation with momentum is small and taking the static limit, to a well known model for a topological superconductor Samples of both types were studied. Samples of type A have a pristine sub-layer of Bi 2 Se 3 that was prepared in vacuum, resulting in a Dirac point around -300 mV, as expected. The superconducting energy gap of the over-layer Nb is always centered on the Fermi level, 0 mV, well away from the Dirac point. This asymmetry between the salient features, the Dirac point and the superconducting energy gap, lets us resolve both effects separately on the same measurement. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) was performed first over a stripe of Nb on AlO x . A superconducting energy gap with a peak-to-peak width of 3 mV was measured and fit using an s-wave BCS fitting function [see figure Narrow voltage range measurements were then carried out around 0 mV near the Fermi level [figure Figure Samples of type B are symmetric with respect to the Dirac cone and superconducting energy gap about zero, and serve as ideal candidates for testing the theoretical model. We compare the differential conductance measured experimentally on three areas of 30 nm Nb on Bi 2 Se 3 to the theory. At low temperature the differential conductance measured in the experiments is then dI/dV ≈ ν(eV). In figure However we were not able to discern a length scale to the dual proximity effect. The gap ∆ used in the fits is slightly smaller than the known value for bulk Nb, which is 3.05meV. This is to be expected as the thin film can only just be considered a bulk sample, and additionally the presence of the TPSS will have an effect in reducing the strength of the pairing. The Fermi velocity of the TPSS is also reduced from its value on the Bi 2 Se 3 surface, in this case drastically. The velocity on the clean surface is v cl F = 5 • 10 5 ms -1 . According to the fits in figure A smaller Fermi velocity for the TPSS in turn means that their coherence length will be smaller, and hence any MBS will be confined very sharply near the vortex cores. Curiously, strong localization of MBS was recently found in a different system of ferromagnetic atomic chains deposited on a surface of a superconductor We have investigated the density of states on the surface of superconducting Nb deposited on a large Bi 2 Se 3 substrate, finding some striking and unforeseen behavior. A Dirac cone is quite clearly visible, despite not being native to the Nb. This is due to the TPSS of the underlying Bi 2 Se 3 leaking into the Nb, and hybridizing with its states. Our theoretical model fits very well to the experimental data, strengthening this proposed explanation. This is also in agreement with the results of Ref. 8 where Pb films are grown on TlBiSe 2 . While such a setup does still contain effective p-wave like pairing, resulting in a topological superconductor which could host MBS there are several caveats to the Fu-Kane model Comment: After our paper appeared on the arXiv we became aware of a similar study considering a model of a coupled superconductor thin film and topological insulator 