The first non-covalent functionalization of black phosphorus (BP) is presented. The treatment of BP with electron-withdrawing 7,7,8,8-tetracyano-p-quinodimethane (TCNQ) leads to electron transfer from BP to the organic dopant. On the other hand, the non-covalent interaction of BP with perylene diimide is mainly due to van-der-Waals interactions but also leads to a considerable stabilization of the BP flakes against oxygen degradation. BP has recently emerged as a very interesting new two-dimensional material. The chemical approach with which we propose to develop the non-covalent functionalization involves the combination of pristine BP crystals with TCNQ -an extremely versatile building block for charge-transfer compounds To this end, THF turned out to be the most appropriate since and it does not react with BP. For the preparation of the targeted non-covalent hybrids between BP and TCNQ, a mixture of ca. 5 mg of grinded BP in 3mL of a 1E -5 M TCNQ solution in THF was vigorously stirred during a minimum of 3 days in the glovebox, carefully controlling the O 2 content during all the working period. Indeed, the high quality of the solvent is also reflected in the absence of water absorption peaks in the nIR spectra at around 1430 nm (Fig. Fig. In the ATR-FTIR spectrum of pristine THF suspensions of BP, TCNQ, and the functionalized BP (Fig. In stark contrast, the BP-TCNQ complex exhibits a doublet for the cyano group at 2199 and 2168 cm -1 , indicative of the formation of the TCNQ •-, as well as a shoulder at around 2131 cm - 1 , related to the TCNQ 2-formation (Fig. All the spectra showed the characteristic modes of BP, labelled A g 1 , B 2g and A g 2 . We performed a statistical Raman mapping measuring a selected flake in Fig. Indeed, our group has used these molecules for the non-covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes, graphene or MoS2, exhibiting a strong absorption due to their large aromatic core that can get attached to the 2D layers via van-der-Waals interactions. S11-13 for additional AFM and Raman analyses). Strikingly, when we analysed the A g 1 /A g 2 ratio after 2 days under ambient conditions, we observed an average value of ca. 0.79 similar to that shown by freshly exfoliated flakes and remarkably higher than that exhibited by BP-TCNQ, indicative of non-oxidized samples (Fig. Significantly, increasing the number of layers of BP causes increasing of the amount of electron transfer. Due to the lower reduction potential of PDI only weak charge transfer was calculated (see Fig. In conclusion, we have presented here for the first time a concept for the non-covalent organic functionalization of black phosphorus (BP). The wet-chemical treatment of BP with the electron poor and polarizable polycyclic aromatics, namely, 7,7,8,8-tetracyano-pquinodimethane (TCNQ) molecules and a tailor-made perylene diimide leads to the formation of stable hybrids were the organic components cover and shield the surface of thin few layer BP flakes. Experimental and computational studies revealed the nature of the strong noncovalent interaction between these molecules and BP, provoking its exfoliation into fewlayers. In the case of TCNQ electron transfer from the BP to the organic component takes place. The positive charge on the BP surface is stabilized by the layers underneath which is nicely supported by quantum mechanical calculations. As a consequence, even the formation of the TCNQ 2-dianion is supported, which can be easily monitored by absorption spectroscopy. The functionalization with perylene diimide improves dramatically the resistance of the flakes against oxygen degradation. We expect that with this initiation of fundamental organic chemistry of black phosphorus, access to unprecedented 2D-materials is provided. The inherent modulation of the physical properties of black phosphorus will allow for targeting applications in electronics, optoelectronics, energy storage, sensors or fillers for composite reinforcement, to name a few. BP crystals were purchased from Smart Elements (purity 99.998%); THF, DME, DMSO, benzonitrile, pentane, CHP, NMP, IPA, TCNQ, and all other chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The different solvents (THF, DME, NMP, CHP, DMSO, benzonitrile, and pentane; Sigma-Aldrich) were dried by allowing them to stand over a desiccant (4 Å molecular sieves from Sigma-Aldrich pre-dried at 300 °C under argon atmosphere for 72 h) under argon for 96 h. A coulometric Karl Fischer titrator was used to determine the water content. Residual traces of oxygen were removed by pump freeze treatment (five iterative steps) before introducing the solvents into the argon-filled Labmaster sp Glovebox (MBraun), equipped with a gas filter to remove solvents and an argon cooling systems, with an oxygen content <0.1 ppm and a water content <0.1 ppm. Upon introduction to the Glovebox, the samples were stored in dark bottles until the experiment were completed. The mother solutions of TCNQ and PDI were prepared in situ with an initial concentration of 1E -2 M in THF or NMP, which was afterwards diluted to the desired concentration. BP crystal was ground inside the Glovebox and used as a crushed powder. In a typical procedure an excess of 5 mg of BP were added to 3 mL of the final solutions. 1,2 The samples were magnetically stirred in situ at 1100 rpm for a total of 3-5 days. After stirring the samples were subjected to centrifugation at 1000 g for 1 minute in situ to remove the non-exfoliated particles. For the absorption spectroscopy (Lambda 1050, see below) or fluorescence spectroscopy (Horiba Scientific Fluorolog-3, see below) the samples were disposed in sealed vials. After the measurements, the samples were discarded. For the entire study the samples were stored under conditions with water and oxygen contents of < 0.1 ppm. To determine the water content of solvents we used the "Karl Fischer titration" a well-known water analysis method (Metrohm USA Inc., http://www.metrohmusa.com/Service/FAQ/Titration/Coulo.html). The Coulometric Karl Fischer reaction involves adding a known mass of sample to the reaction vessel containing a base, alcohol, and iodine. A current change in the electrode is noted which relates to a chemical change occurring in the vessel. Optical extinction and absorbance was measured on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050 spectrometer in extinction, in quartz cuvettes with a path length of 0.4 cm. Fluorescence was acquired on a Horiba Scientific Fluorolog-3 system equipped with 450 W Xe halogen lamp, double monochromator in excitation (grating 600 lines/mm blazed at 500 nm) and emission (grating 1200 lines/mm blazed at 500 nm) and a PMT detector using quartz cuvettes with a path length of 1.0 cm. Spectra were obtained at room temperature. ATR-FTIR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Tensor FTIR spectrometer equipped with ZnSe. Real space studies of the samples were carried out by aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) in a JEOL JEM-ARM200CF electron microscope equipped with a spherical aberration corrector, a cold field emission gun and a Gatan Quantum EEL spectrometer, operated at 80 kV. The measurements were performed at the Centro Nacional de Microscopia Electrónica (UCM), Madrid, Spain. The suspended BP samples were dropped onto lacey carbon coated copper TEM grids under strictly inert conditions. The samples were then stored in vacuum overnight. The images were recorded using a 80 kV acceleration voltage using both a high field annular dark field detector (HAADF) and annular bright field imaging (ABF). The suspended samples were dropped onto lacey carbon coated copper TEM grids as described above. For the PDI samples, the grids were submitted to air ion cleaner prior to be measured (EC-52000IC Ion Cleaner). The images were recorded using a 80 kV acceleration voltage using a high field annular dark field detector (HAADF) and low-pass bright field imaging. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was carried out using a Solver Pro scanning probe microscope (NT-MDT Co) in tapping mode and high accuracy HA_NC Etalon tips, as well as NSG10_DLC with 1-3 nm tip radius (both from NT MDT Co). The samples were prepared by drop casting a solution of the phosphorous samples on heated Si/SiO 2 wafers with an oxide layer of 300 nm, at 120°C under inert conditions. Typical image sizes were 3-10 μm at scan rates of 0.4-0.6 Hz. To facilitate deposition, the BP-PDI samples in NMP were transferred to IPA by centrifugation at 15 krpm (22,640 g, rotor 1195-A), removal of NMP supernatant and reagitation of the sediment in IPA. Raman spectroscopy on individual flakes was performed using a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM Aramis confocal Raman spectrometer equipped with a microscope and an automated XYZ-table (excitation wavelength 532 nm) with a laser spot size of ∼1 μm (Olympus LMPlanFl 100x, NA 0.80). The influence of the step size and the oxidation degree in the scanning Raman microscopy was determined by testing micromechanically-exfoliated flakes prepared and measured under inert conditions (see Supplementary Fig. All DFT computations were performed using the projector-augmented plane wave method as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package 3,4 within the slab model approach. We adopted the exchange-correlation functional according to Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) 5 together with the van-der-correction D3 by Grimme 6 (in connection with Becke-Johnson damping 7 ) to account for van-der-Waals interactions. The plane-wave energy cut-off was 450 eV. Geometry optimizations were carried out using the "Gadget" driver by Bučko et al. 8 and were considered converged when all residual force components were smaller than 0.01 eV/Å. Vibrational frequencies were computed by finite differences, in these cases the geometry was optimized until all force components were smaller than 0.001 eV/Å. The Brillouin zone was sampled by 3x3x1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point sets. 9 For the final energies the Tetrahedron method including Blöchl corrections for interpolation between the kpoints was employed. 10 For details about the slab-models see supplementary material. Single-layer BP was optimized using orthorhombic cells containing four P-atoms. An orthorhombic cell was used to provide better comparability between the results. To avoid interactions between the P-layers (=slabs) a vacuum of ~15 Å was put in-between. A Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh containing 19x19x1 k-points was adopted in both cases. The final optimized cell-parameters are 3.292 Å x 4.441 Å for the BP monolayer. Based on these values a 6x5 supercell for single-layer BP was built, resulting in cells with 19.750 Å x 22.203 Å base area. At the same time the cell dimension perpendicular to the surface ("cell height" in the following) was set to 20 Å. Correspondingly, the k-point meshes were reduced to 3x3x1 k-points. The same procedure was repeated for the double-layer BP, yielding an orthorhombic 3.301 Å The absorption spectra before and after opening the sealed cuvettes revealed a marginal influence of the oxygen on the absorption bands, highlighting the formation of strong chargetransfer complexes. It has turned out that the choice of the solvent to be used as the dispersing reagent for wetchemical functionalization is very crucial. We have discovered that typical solvents such as 1methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) or CHP to disperse 1D-and 2D-nanomaterials undergo an intrinsic electron transfer process with TCNQ. Although this discards them for the targeted functionalization procedure of BP this new finding is highly interesting itself. (b) represent 20 nm. Principal component analysis was used to remove random noise. Compositional maps were obtained by acquiring and processing EEL spectrum images, the background was removed using power law fits and integrating the intensities remaining under the edges of interest (windows were 25 eV wide). binding energy (98%) is contributed from the van-der-Waals correction, indicating that TCNQ is mostly bound by van-der-Waals interactions. The distance between TCNQ and SL-BP is 3.1 Å. Due to this short distance and since TCNQ is a strong electron acceptor, we observe a charge transfer of 0.43 |e| from SL-BP to TCNQ as calculated by a Bader population analysis. This can be also seen from the electron density difference between BP-TCNQ and the separated molecules, see Fig S17a -and then the TCNQ 2-spectra should emerge. However, due to our calculations the BP-TCNQ system is closed shell, i.e. exhibits no radical character. Thus, the typical spectrum of TCNQ .-will not occur, but the UV/Vis spectrum would change continuously from the neutral TCNQ directly to TCNQ 2-with increasing charge on TCNQ placed on BP. This makes it plausible why already a charge transfer smaller than 2 |e| could yield an UV/Vis spectrum similar to that of TCNQ 2-. Finally, vibrational frequencies of TCNQ and TCNQ on SL-BP (ignoring solvent effects) were calculated. We find that already in our model the CN-bands get downshifted by 20-25 cm -1 , similar is true for the modes ν 20 , ν 34 , and ν 50 (see supplementary Table The adsorption energy of PDI is -2.01 eV, but in contrast to TCNQ the binding is purely due to van-der-Waals interactions, which is illustrated by the fact that the contribution from the van-der-Waals correction to the binding energy is -2.30 eV, i.e. without this correction PDI would be repelled from the BP monolayer. Moreover, the charge transfer from SL-BP to PDI is much more limited, 0.10 |e|, although the distance between PDI and SL-BP (3.0 Å) is similar to that of TCNQ and SL-BP. In case of TCNQ the adsorption on double-layer BP (DL-BP) and intercalation between two monolayers was investigated as well. The binding energy of TCNQ on DL-BP is even less dependent on the orientation than on SL-BP and amounts to -1.58 eV, i.e. is more stable than on SL-BP; the charge transfer increases to 0.65 |e|. Intercalation of TCNQ between two BP monolayers is thermodynamically not stable, but the charge transfer is then even more pronounced: 0.97 |e|. This shows that TCNQ can get highly charged by BP by noncovalent interaction with BP. 16 Moreover, the degradation of the black phosphorus is also reflected in the decrease of the lateral dimensions. This is evident from both the SRM mappings and the optical micrographs. The step size was 1 micron.