Nonreciprocal charge transport phenomena are studied theoretically for two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric superconductors under an external magnetic field B. Rashba superconductors, surface superconductivity on the surface of three-dimensional topological insulators (TIs), and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) such as MoS2 are representative systems, and the current-voltage I-V characteristics, i.e., V = V (I), for each of them is analyzed. V (I) can be expanded with respect to the current I as V (I) = j=1,∞ aj(B, T )I j , and the (B, T )-dependence of aj depends on the mechanism of the charge transport. Note that the magnetochiral anisotropy in the normal state is expressed by a1(B, T ) = R0 and a2(B, T ) = R0γB with the constant γ. Our analysis is based on the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) theory, which contains up to third order terms in the momentum of the order parameter. Above the mean field superconducting transition temperature T0, the fluctuation of the superconducting order parameter gives the additional conductivity, i.e., paraconductivity. Extending the analysis of paraconductivity to the nonlinear response, we obtain the nonreciprocal charge transport expressed by a2(B, T ) = a1(T )γ(T )B, where γ converges to a finite value at T = T0. Below T0, the motion of vortices is relevant to the voltage drop, and the dependence of a1 and a2 on B and T is different depending on the system and mechanisms. For Rashba superconductors and superconducting surface state of three dimensional TIs under the in-plane magnetic field, the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) transition occurs at TKT, below which the vortices and anti-vortices are bound and the resistivity becomes zero. Therefore, a1(B, T ) and a2(B, T ) are defined only above TKT. In this case, the vortex contributions to the transport coefficients are a1(B, T ) = const. and a2(B, T ) ∼ B(T0 -T ) -1 for T → T0. It is also found near TKT that a1(B, T ) ∼ exp[-(bτc/τ ) 1/2 ] and a2(B, T ) ∼ Bτ -3/2 exp[-(bτc/τ ) 1/2 ] with the reduced temperatures τ (T ) = (T -TKT)/TKT, τc = τ (T0), and an order of unity constant b. Below TKT, both a1(B, T ) and a2(B, T ) vanish, and a3(B, T ) ∼ const. and a4(B, T ) ∼ B become the leading two terms in the expansion. On the other hand, for TMD with the magnetic field perpendicular to the 2D system, the KT transition is gone and the system remains resistive even well below TKT. In this case, there are two possible mechanisms for the nonreciprocal charge transport. One is the anisotropy of the damping constant for the motion of the vortex induced by the external magnetic field and current. In this case, a1(B, T ) ∼ B and a2(B, T ) ∼ B 2 . The other one is the ratchet potential acting on the vortex motion, which gives a1(B, T ) ∼ B and a2(B, T ) ∼ B. Based on these results, we propose the experiments to identify the mechanism of the nonreciprocal transport with the realistic estimates for the order of magnitude of the coefficients a1(B, T ) and a2(B, T ) for each case. The nonreciprocal charge transport in noncentrosymmetric systems is a fundamental and important issue. It is deeply related to the broken symmetry of spatial inversion P and the time-reversal T . For the linear response, the microscopic time-reversal symmetry leads to the Onsager's reciprocal theorem where K AB (q, ω, B) describes the linear response of the physical observable A to the field coupled to the observable B with the wavevector q and frequency ω under the magnetic field B (which breaks the time-reversal symmetry). ǫ A = ±1 (ǫ B ) specifies the even with η A (η B ) being the analogous quantity to ǫ A = ±1 (ǫ B ) for P . When both of T and P are broken, the Onsager reciprocal theorem allows the directional linear response of the diagonal response. For example, the dielectric function for light can have the form ε μμ (q, ω, B) = ε 0 + αBq which describes the directional dichroism of unpolarized light. Rikken extended this consideration to the nonlinear response by heuristic argument, i.e., replacing the wavevector q by the current I, leading to the expression of the resistivity The coefficient γ, which is called γ-value in the following, is usually a rather small value of the order of ∼ 10 -2 to 10 -1 T -1 A -1 In the present paper, we give a comprehensive and unified treatment of the nonreciprocal charge transport in twodimensional noncentrosymmetric superconductors (2DNS). There are several possible mechanisms for it, and accordingly we generalize Eq.(3) to the current (I)-voltage (V ) characteristics as We take (i) the Rashba superconductors, and surface superconductivity on the surface of three-dimensional topological insulators (TIs), and (ii) the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) such as MoS 2 , as the two representative examples of 2DNS. In 2D superconductors, there are two characteristic temperatures. One is the mean field transition temperature T 0 , below which the amplitude of the order parameter develops, and the other is the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) transition temperature T KT , below which the vortices and anti-vortices are bound and the resistivity becomes zero. The behavior of the resistivity R(T ) as a function of the temperature is well described by with R n being the normal state resistivity and ξ + (T ) is the diverging coherent length ξ + (T ) = ξ c b -1/2 sinh[(bτ c /τ ) 1/2 ] where the reduced temperatures are introduced by τ = (T -T KT )/T KT and τ c = (T 0 -T KT )/T KT The obtained results for nonreciprocal charge transport are summarized in Table I, which will be discussed in greater detail in the rest of this paper. Our plan is as follows. In section II, we study the paraconductivity above the mean field transition temperature T 0 in terms of the Ginzburg-Landau theory derived for several cases of interest. In section III we present the analysis of the charge transport below T 0 , where the vortex motion is responsible for the voltage under the current flow. There are three mechanisms for the nonreciprocal response, i.e., (i) the change in the KT transition temperature due to the current, (ii) the modified dissipation for the vortex motion due to the current, and (iii) the Ratchet potential for the vortex. Sections IV and V are devoted to the discussion and conclusions, respectively. The detailed derivation of GL free energy is given in Appendix A. Appendices B and C describe the effects of impurity and Landau levels, respectively, for TMD. We discuss the nonreciprocal current in the temperature regime slightly above the mean field critical temperature (T T 0 ). In this regime, the charge current is mainly carried by the thermal fluctuation of the superconducting order parameter. Such excess conductivity is called paraconductivity The nonreciprocity of the paraconductivity has been studied in two-dimensional TMD In this section, we discuss the nonreciprocal paraconductivity in five models, the Rashba superconductors with and without parity mixing, the surface state of topological insulator with the parabolic dispersion and the hexagonal warping, and the two-dimensional TMD In the following, we derive an expression for the γ-value in the region where the paraconductivity dominates over the normal conductivity near the mean-field temperature T 0 . With the expressions for the conductivities defined by j = σ 1 E + σ 2 E 2 , the deviation from this limit can be included by replacing the fluctuation contribution as σ 1 -→ σ 1 + σ n where σ n is a normal conductivity. Then the temperature dependence for γ S ∝ σ 2 /(σ 1 + σ n ) 2 enters as where c 0 is an order-of-unity constant and h is a Planck constant. This formula is relevant for the wider temperature Parity mixing (E F >0) The parameters are electron charge e and band mass m, Fermi energy EF, Fermi velocity vF, Rashba parameter α (we also define EFR = 2EF + mα 2 ), triplet or singlet pair mixing parameter rt,s, cutoff energy Ec, hexagonal or trigonal warping parameter λ, spin-orbit splitting ∆SO, mean-field superconducting transition temperature T0, and Kosterlitz-Thouless transition temperature TKT. The unit system = kB = μB = 1 is used. The sample width W is omitted from the expressions. The temperature dependence for the paraconductivity contributions at T > T0 enters through the formula in Eq. range. The detailed functional forms can be found in the rest of this section. A. Rashba superconductor In the following of this paper, we use the unit system = k B = μ B = 1 unless otherwise specified explicitly. In Ref. with m, k, α, B and σ being the electron mass, electron wavenumber, Rashba parameter, in-plane magnetic field, and the Pauli matrix for real spins, respectively. If the Rashba splitting mα 2 is larger than T 0 or the superconducting gap, only the pairing in each spin-split band is relevant. Then, if both even parity and odd parity interactions exist, the parity of the superconducting order parameters is mixed. To make the discussion simple, we fix the form of the interaction Hamiltonian in the band basis as where ψ † kλ and ψ kλ are the creation and annihilation operators with the band index λ = ±, and t kλ = λie iφ k with φ k = arg(k x + ik y ). We have assumed that the spin-splitting due to the Rashba interaction is much larger than the superconducting mean-field temperature (mα 2 ≫ T 0 ), and hence, the inter-band pairings are neglected. We have assumed the interactions in the spin-basis which makes the matrix ĝ independent on k. The even-parity chan-nel is the standard BCS type on-site interaction, where c † kσ and c kσ are the creation and annihilation operators of the electron with momentum k and spin σ. The odd-parity channel is Then, the matrix ĝ in Eq. ( with In the following, we focus on two limiting cases. (1) |V u | ≪ |V g | (or equivalently, g 2 ≈ g 1 ) case. The singlet pairing is dominant and the triplet mixing is proportional to the parameter r t = g1-g2 g1 , which we treat perturbatively. (2) |V u | ≫ |V g | (or equivalently, g 2 ≈ -g 1 ) case. In this case, the triplet pairing is dominant and the singlet mixing parameter is given by r s = g1+g2 g1 . In order to treat the parity mixing, the two-component GL theory has been employed. We assume that the Fermi energy E F is on the conduction band (E F > 0) since the nonreciprocal paraconductivity vanishes for E F < 0 with the parameters We have defined E FR = 2E F + mα 2 , and γ E is the Euler's constant, and E c is the cutoff energy. Then, the paraconductivity can be calculated as with C = 32T0 πν and the density of states ν at the Fermi level. The function f is the eigenvalue of the matrix in Eq. ( The paraconductivity is shown to be in the lowest order of r t,s , and ǫ = T -T0 T0 is the reduced temperature. It should be noted that the sign of the nonreciprocal current depends on the sign of r t,s , i.e., sign of V u in the case of singlet dominant case and V g in the case of triplet dominant case. The γ-value (see Eq. ( For normal state, on the other hand, it can be shown that the nonreciprocal current exists in E F < 0 within the Boltzmann theory, where the γ-value is given by W γ N ∼ |α|/e(mα 2 E FR ) 3/2 Now we consider the nonreciprocal paraconductivity in the Rashba superconductor without parity mixing. In contrast to the previous subsection, we consider the case only for the swave pairing. Although the expansion up to the second order of the momentum of the order parameter does not create finite nonreciprocal current, we have finite nonreciprocal current by considering the expansion up to the third order. The GL free energy for the s-wave order parameter can be obtained from the two-component GL free energy written with the band basis. If we diagonalize the two-component GL free energy in the band basis, the free energy for the s-wave order parameter is found to be a sum of the diagonal components. We first define the three Fermi wavenumbers and the density of states which correspond to (1) the upper band, (2) inner branch of the lower band, and (3) outer branch of the lower band: Then, we can derive the contribution from each branch separately, whose example is shown in Appendix A. To write the GL free energy in a simple form, we define the following functions, where we have assumed B x = 0 because it does not affect the conductivity along the x direction. In the case of E F > 0, the free energy is then with g being the amplitude of the attractive interaction. Although the q-linear term in general appears, it can be absorbed by a constant shift in q-space and does not explicitly appear in the final results. The paraconductivity obtained from Eq. ( Correspondingly, the γ-value is We also consider the case of E F < 0. The free energy is given by (35) Accordingly, we obtain and the γ-value is We have shown that the simple Rashba model Eq. ( Let us compare the nonreciprocal paraconductivities with and without parity mixing. The ratio between the γ-value from the parity mixing mechanism Eq. ( If the even parity interaction corresponds to the on-site interaction and the odd parity interaction corresponds to the nearest-neighbor interaction, their amplitudes are roughly estimated as e 2 /a 0 and e 2 /a with a 0 and a being the Bohr radius and the lattice constant, respectively. Therefore, r t,s ∼ 0.1 is reasonable value for the singlet dominant case, and Eq. ( B. Surface state of topological insulator We consider the nonreciprocal paraconductivity in the superconducting surface state of a topological insulator. The simplest Hamiltonian for the surface state is with v F (> 0) being the Fermi velocity and the magnetic field is applied along the in-plane direction. However, the in-plane magnetic field simply shifts the momentum and does not affect the transport. Therefore, additional terms are necessary for the nonreciprocal current. In this subsection, we include the term proportional to k 2 , whose Hamiltonian form is equivalent to Eq. ( with the Fermi energy E F included. We first assume that the Fermi energy is on the conduction band (plus sign in the equation and E F > 0). We calculate the GL free energy corresponding to Eq. ( We can also show that the free energy in the case where E F is located on the valence band (E F < 0) is obtained by replacing v F with -v F , B y with -B y , ν 1 with ν 2 , and k F1 with k F2 . It is noted that the cubic term with respect to the wavenumber vanishes for m → ∞, which is consistent with the fact that the in-plane magnetic field simply shifts the momentum of the Cooper pairs without the parabolic term. The paraconductivity up to O E 2 x B y can be obtained by applying Eq. ( The temperature dependence of the conductivity is the same as those of the transition metal dichalcogenides and the Rashba superconductors The corresponding γ-value is and for m → ∞ which is a leading contribution in the limit of a small parabolic term. Now, we compare the γ-value with that of the normal state. The normal state conductivity is calculated by the Boltzmann equation with the relaxation time approximation where ξ k is the eigenenergy, v k = ∂ξ k ∂kx is the group velocity, and τ is the relaxation time. The Fermi distribution function is also defined by f k = 1/(e βξ k + 1). With use of this, we obtain the electronic current Therefore, the ratio for m → ∞ is which does not depend on m and v F . The enhancement of the nonreciprocity by the factor of E F /T 0 is expected in the superconducting fluctuation regime, although the power of enhancement is different from the TMD It should be noted that the direction of the nonreciprocal current is reversed between the conduction and valence bands in both of the paraconductivity and normal conductivity. The surface band of topological insulators such as Bi 2 Te 3 or Bi 2 Se 3 is hexagonally distorted because of the crystal symmetry with k ± = k x ± ik y and λ describes the strength of the hexagonal warping. The corresponding GL free energy can be obtained in a similar manner to the previous subsection. The free energy up to O(q 3 B y λ) is with v F k F = |E F | and the density of states ν at the Fermi level. The paraconductivity is obtained as Consequently, the γ-value is We also calculate the normal state current based on Eq. ( Therefore, the ratio of the γ-value of the paraconductivity and normal conductivity is which again does not depend on v F and λ. The order of magnitude of the enhancement factor is the same as that for the parabolic dispersion case. We emphasize that the direction of the nonreciprocal current does not change between the conduction and valence bands in both of the paraconductivity and normal conductivity, which is clearly different from the nonreciprocal current originates from the parabolic term in the previous subsection. The nonreciprocal paraconductivity in two-dimensional TMD has been investigated both theoretically and experimentally with k, m, λ, ∆ Z = B z , and ∆ SO being the electron wavenumber, mass, amplitude for the trigonal warping, Zeeman splitting, and spin-orbit splitting, respectively. Here xaxis is taken along a 'zigzag' chain in the honeycomb lattice, and y-axis is along 'armchair' direction. The out-ofplane magnetic field is necessary for the nonreciprocal current. Here, σ z and τ z represents the Pauli matrices for the spin and valley degrees of freedom, respectively. The GL free energy for the superconducting state can be derived based on Eq. ( (58) with Λ = 93ζ (5) 14ζ(3) ∆SOλ (πT0) 2 . The effect of nonmagnetic impurities can also be considered, whose derivation is summarized in Appendix B. By applying Eq. ( with x -E 2 y , -2E x E y , which is consistent with the crystal symmetry of the transition metal dichalcogenides. The γ-value is On the other hand, the γ-value for the normal state can be obtained by the Boltzmann equation 3 , which is quite large. While the focus of this paper is on the region at small magnetic fields, we can also consider the high magnetic field region by including the Landau level, which is discussed in Appendix C. When the superconducting gap function is sufficiently developed below T 0 , the phase of the order parameter forms the vortices whose dynamics governs electronic transport properties. In this section, we begin with the phenomenological discussion for the nonreciprocity entering through the renormalization of the superfluid density, which captures the essence of the nonreciprocal vortex dynamics. In Sec. III C, we also consider the the ratchet potential effect for the vortices, which is necessarily present for noncentrosymmetric superconductors with trigonal symmetry and disorder effects. A. Renormalization of superfluid density 1. Modified KT transition point for a system with in-plane magnetic field Let us first consider the system with the in-plane magnetic field. In this case, the vortices and antivortices are generated thermally above the KT transition temperature. We take a Rashba (E F < 0) or TI-based system with in-plane magnetic field, whose free energy density is in general given by which is phenomenologically introduced by utilizing the replacement q → m * v s in the GL theory. Here ρ s = m * n s and v s are superfluid mass density and velocity, respectively. We use a mean-field approach for analysis, in which the terms higher than second-order are approximated into quadratic one. Under the externally induced current, the superfluid acquires the uniform velocity component v unif . Hence we can replace one of v s by v unif in the third-order term and obtain the free energy density Thus the uniform current renormalizes the superfluid density due to the presence of the v-cubic term. If we choose v unif = v s0 x, the free energy has the following form The first term here renormalizes the superfluid density isotropically: The second term in Eq. ( The isotropic renormalization of the superfluid density has an influence on the force between the two vortices. This force can be interpreted as the Magnus force acting on one vortex which is located in a nearly uniform current made by the other vortex. At KT transition point, this force is balanced by an entropic force proportional to temperature, which leads to the force balance relation for two vortices separated by the sufficiently large distance r where Φ 0 = 2π/|e * | is the magnetic flux quantum and e * = 2e. Thus, the important consequence of the isotropically renormalized superfluid density is the modification of the KT transition temperature which has different values depending on the direction of the uniform current. Through the modification of T KT , the correlation length ξ + , which is exponentially diverging near T KT , and the density of unpaired vortices n v are also affected by v unif . These physical quantities are given near T KT by where b, C 1 are order of unity constants, and ξ c is the GL coherence length evaluated at T = T KT . The mean-field transition temperature is written as T 0 . The value of n v goes to zero at TKT with only bounded vortices left. Since the correlation length is dependent of the KT transition temperature, this indicates that the number of vortices is different depending on the direction of the uniform current. Now we consider the electric field caused by the vortex dynamics where we have used the force balance relation j unif,x Φ 0 = ηv L between Magnus force and friction force. The uniform electric current has been defined by ), whose higher-order terms do not modify the conclusion for the γ-value. The friction coefficient is given by η = η 0 (1 + d 0 Λ ′ B y v s0 ) with d 0 being a constant and η 0 ≃ πσ n (e * ) 2 ξ 2 . This modification enters due to the anisotropic renormalization of superfluid density. The derivation is given in Secs. III A 2 and III B in detail, and here we just employ the final results. Substituting these expressions, we obtain the resistivity Thus, there are two kinds of the sources for nonreciprocal response: one is from the modified KT transition temperature and the other from the modified friction coefficient. By extrapolating the above expression to T → T 0 , the exponential temperature dependence in the correlation length is not effective. In this case, with the transport coefficients defined in , we obtain the explicit expressions We then find that the γ-value, which is given by γ v S = -ρ 2 /ρ 1 B y W , is proportional to (T 0 -T ) -1 , where we have used the temperature dependence of the superfluid density as n s (T ) ∝ T 0 -T . We now switch our discussion to the lower temperatures near the KT transition. We write the KT transition temperature as TKT = T KT + δT KT with the unrenormalized transition temperature T KT , and expand the expression with respect to δT KT . We assume T 0 -T KT ≫ δT KT and then the transport coefficients are given for the temperature range T -T KT ≫ δT KT by where we have kept the leading order contribution remaining for T → T KT . While both ρ 1 and ρ 2 exponentially goes to zero toward T KT , the γ-value is proportional to (T -T KT ) -3/2 . Thus a large nonreciprocal signal is expected near the KT transition point. Below T KT , the linear response vanishes due to bounded vortices, and instead the third-order term characterizes the current-voltage relation. The nonreciprocal response should then be reflected in the fourth-order term. Hence the I-V relation has the form V = a 3 I 3 + a 4 I 4 with a 4 = a ′ 4 B near T KT . The higher-order terms become more relevant at lower temperatures. 2. Extended Bardeen-Stephen approach for a system with out-plane magnetic field While the vortices in a system with in-plane magnetic field are created by the thermal fluctuation, the out-plane magnetic field creates the vortices having the same vorticity, which is qualitatively different situation from the in-plane case. We here extend the Bardeen-Stephen theory By comparing this expression with Eq. ( within the 'mean-field' approximation explained above. Here only the anisotropic renormalization occurs. Using the velocity potential, the superfluid velocity can be written as v s = 1 m * ∇θ. Let us first consider the isolated superconducting vortex induced by the out-plane external magnetic field. The vortex velocity for isotropic system is given by θ = φ = tan -1 (y/x) with the polar coordinate r = (r, φ), which satisfies the equation ∇ 2 θ = 0 obtained from a variational principle. We can make Eq. (76) isotropic by the scaling x ′ = x ρ s / ρs,xx and y ′ = y ρ s / ρs,yy . In this case, the velocity potential is given by θ = tan -1 (y ′ /x ′ ). Keeping the first-order contribution with respect to Λ ′ , we get In order to calculate the spatial distribution of electric field, we employ the London equation outside the normal core accounting for zero resistivity: E = Λ∂ t j s where Λ -1 = n s (e * ) 2 /m * (Since the magnetic penetration depth is very long for atomically thin two-dimensional superconductors, the force should originate from fluid-mechanical Magnus force For the inside of the normal core (r < ξ), the electric field E = -∇φ is determined from the Poisson equation ∇ 2 φ = 0 due to a charge neutrality. We assume that the boundary between superconducting and normal regions is circular at r = ξ and is connected discontinuously. With this geometry only the e φ component of E matters for the boundary condition. We expand the scalar potential as φ = m C m (re iφ ) m and the boundary condition gives The energy dissipation rate is then calculated as where σ n is a normal conductivity. We note that this expression does not depend on the spatial coordinate r in the leading order. Equation ( The "Lorentz" force is balanced by the friction force as (j unif × Φ 0 ) y = ηv L where η = η 0 (1 + 6Λ ′ B z v s0 ) with η 0 = πσ n /(e * ) 2 ξ 2 and we have defined Φ 0 = Φ 0 ẑ. We use the expressions for the uniform current j unif = e * n s v unif and the "Faraday's law" E 0 = B × v L for the uniform electric field generated from the flux flow. (Since the magnetic field B is not time-dependent in the system with infinite magnetic penetration depth, this "Faraday's law" does not derive from an electromagnetic origin but from the Josephson relation as in the previous subsection.) We then obtain where The γ-value from the vortex dynamics is given by which is not dependent on the normal conductivity. Rewriting the coefficient Λ ′ in terms of the quantities in Sec. II C, we can estimate the ratio between γ v S from vortex motion and γ f S from superconducting fluctuation as Using the relations 2n s /n e ≃ (T 0 -T )/T 0 and the normal electron density n e = k 2 F /2π, we finally obtain It is characteristic that the γ-value from vortex dynamics is enhanced near the transition temperature and has a smaller value with the factor T 0 /E F compared to γ f S at low temperatures. The same conclusion will be obtained from the TDGL approach as described in Sec. III B in detail, and hence the above approach can be justified. The vortex dynamics induced by the out-plane magnetic field can be described by the TDGL theory, which takes account of a purely dissipative dynamics. This approach is successfully applied to the flux-flow conductivities where P = -i∇ -2eA. The gap parameter is related to the wave function by Ψ = 7ζ(3)ne 2π 2 T 2 0 ∆ with the electron number n e . There are also the relations K ∝ ΛB z and α ∝ (T 0 -T ). Note that the coefficient γ in Eq. ( to make the free energy real. The supercurrent density is given by δF/δA = 0 as x ∆ * ∆ -∆ * P 2 y ∆ -P † y ∆ * P y ∆ -P †2 y ∆ * ∆ , (91) j sy = 2eγ(∆ * P y ∆ + P † y ∆ * ∆) -2eK (∆ * P x P y ∆ + ∆ * P y P x ∆ +P † x ∆ * P y ∆ + P † y ∆ * P x ∆ + P † The total current is given by j = j n + j s with the normal current j n = σ n E. We can also show the relations and The above expressions can be used for arbitrary strength of the magnetic field. In the following, we concentrate on the two-dimensional superconductor where the magnetic penetration depth is typically longer than the sample size With a slightly shifted center as r → r + d, we have the relation which defines a friction force acting on superconductor. This force is balanced by an external force to result in a stationary motion of the vortex. The force balance equation for an isolated single vortex is given by The transport current from an external source is written as j unif . The term on the left-hand side is the external force acting on the fluxoide, which is in general composed of the sum of Lorentz and Magnus forces We also need the equation for the scalar potential, for which the equation of continuity ∇ •j = 0 is used. The explicit form is given by where we have used E = -∇φ. For a moving vortex, the spatial coordinate can be written in the laboratory frame by the replacement r → r-v L t with a boost velocity v L for the vortex. Correspondingly, we replace the time-derivative as ∂ t → -v L •∇ and rewrite the equations with dimensionless quantities as where |∆ ∞ | = |α|/β is the gap function for a uniform bulk and ξ = γ/|α| is the coherence length. We have also defined the unit vector vL = v L /v L and the dimensionless derivative ∇ = ξ∇. In the equation for the scalar potential, we have introduced the temperature independent parameter u = ξ 2 /l 2 E , where the length l E is the electric-field penetration depth given by For an ordinary metal, the parameter u is an order of unity constant When we use the relation Γ = πν /8k B T 0 with the density of states ν = m/2π 2 for a two-dimensional electron gas, where we have restored and k B , the parameter can be written as where h/e 2 = 25813 [Ω] is the von Klitzing constant. For usual BCS superconductors, the ratio between e 2 /h and the normal conductivity σ n is comparable to k B T 0 /E F . For example, in the monolayer MoS The energy dissipation is also derived from the timederivative of free energy Using the electromagnetic energy conservation law ∂ t F n = -d 2 r j • E derived from the Maxwell equation, we obtain the equation of continuity for the energy density: where j F (r, t) is an energy current density and w(r, t) is a dissipation rate. Thus we have two kinds of the dissipation terms originating from Γ and σ n . Let us now analyze the differential equation perturbatively with respect to K and v L . We expand the physical quantity A in general as For O(1), we obtain and for O(K) For O(v L ), the equations are and The force balance relation becomes where f 1 and f 2 are linear and nonlinear coefficients in the force-velocity relation. The coefficient f 1 is a sum of the contributions from u-independent Tinkham mechanism (time-dependence of amplitude of the gap) and u-dependent Bardeen-Stephen mechanism The energy dissipation part can also be expanded with respect to k and v. In the dimensionless form, we can write it as The O(v L K) component for w, or equivalently O(v 3 L K) for w, is responsible for the dissipation from nonreciprocal vortex dynamics. Let us look at the spatial dependence of the above physical quantities. We use the two-dimensional polar coordinate r = (r, φ) and the zeroth-order solution can be written as ψ 0 (r) = f (r)e iφ for an isolated vortex. From the differential equation for ψ 0 , we find the asymptotic behavior f ∝ r for r → 0 and f → 1 for r → ∞ Figures L ) contribution, having the quadrupolar distribution. The situation is further modified in the presence of the cubic term as in Figs. 1(a2) and (a4). We show in Figs. We are also interested in the parameter u = ξ 2 /l 2 E dependence of the physical quantities. Figure Using the relation E 0 = B × v L for an electric field generated by the motion of the magnetic flux, which is derived from the Josephson relation, we obtain the electrical conductivity as where the vector F is same as that in Eq. (59). To express the flux-flow conductivity in terms of normal conductivity, we use the electric field penetration depth l E and the upper critical field given by B c2 = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 . Then the conductivities are given by The γ-value from nonreciprocal vortex dynamics is given by This expression does not depend on B z since K is proportional to B z due to the Zeeman effect. We note that the parameters σ n , γ and K are in general dependent on the purity of the sample (see Appendix B). Let us compare this result with the γ-value (γ f S ) from superconducting fluctuation for T T 0 Thus we obtain the same conclusion as the extended Bardeen-Stephen approach in Sec. III A 2. As discussed above, for T < T 0 and in the presence of the finite out of plane magnetic field, the motion of quantum vortices penetrating the superconductor gives a dominant contribution to the voltage drop. Here we consider another effect for vortex dynamics. In the superconductor without inversion center, vortices driven by the external charge current feel an asymmetric pinning potential acting on them (ratchet effect). This effect has been proposed to control the vortices in superconductors The classical equation of motion of the vortices in the diffusive limit is modeled as with U being the pinning potential, which we here assume to be periodic for simplicity; U (x + L) = U (x), and F is FIG. the uniform force. The last term is the Langevin force with zero mean and unit dispersion (Gaussian white noise). η is the viscous friction coefficient, and T is the temperature. By solving the corresponding Fokker-Planck equation for the distribution function p(x, t), we obtain the steady ve-locity of the vortex after long time expressed as where we have introduced with β = 1/T being the inverse temperature. We can choose x 0 arbitrarily due to the periodicity of the potential. Potential is called symmetric when there exists certain choice of Here, we can choose x 0 = 0 by shifting the x coordinate. By using the evenness and the periodicity of the potential, we can easily prove v L (-F ) = -v L (F ) which show the absence of the nonreciprocal transport. For asymmetric potentials, the situation is different. The velocity v is expanded with respect to the force F as where the coefficients are where q 2 , nothing but a hallmark of the nonreciprocal transport, survives only for asymmetric potentials as discussed above. Hereafter, we adopt the fully asymmetric periodic potential for simplicity by using so-called sawtooth function. U 0 (> 0) is the height of the pinning potential. In this potential, the steady velocity is calculated as with the response coefficients and Since the voltage drop originating from the motion of vortices is V = B z L x v L and the force acting on vortices is F = φ0 W I, we can calculate the coefficients in current-voltage relation [Eq.( which monotonically decrease as raising temperature. Note that the exponential temperature dependence vanishes for the γ-value. In this calculation, we have neglected the vortex-vortex interaction. This assumption is justified for small magnetic field where the vortices are dilute enough. We also note that the ratchet effect is active for trigonal symmetry, but is not relevant for the systems with C ∞ and hexagonal symmetries where no ratchet potential is present. In the latter cases, the effect from asymmetric spin-orbit coupling plays the more dominant role. Here we discuss expected noreciprocal charge signals in 2DNS. Table Here we consider the typical γ-value for Rashba superconductors. With electron or hole doping, the Fermi energy can be tuned and the behavior is dependent on the sign of E F . Let us begin with the E F < 0 case. In this case, the normal contribution to γ-value becomes finite as shown in Ref. 9 (see also Table In the normal state with E F = -0.01 eV, the amplitude of the magnetochiral anisotropy is estimated as The system crossovers into the paraconductivity region with approaching to the mean-field transition temperature T 0 from above. Here, as discussed in Sec. II A, the parity mixing contribution becomes irrelevant and the cubic term in GL free energy instead becomes dominant. The paraconductivity is then given by Eq. At lower temperature below T 0 , the vortex contribution dominates over the paraconductivities. For E F > 0 case, the two-component gap parameter need to be considered for vortex dynamics. While detailed studies remain unexplored, the vortex contribution should be present and is expected to cause a singular behavior around the KT transition point as in the E F < 0 case. We here discuss the surface of topological insulators plus superconducting proximity effect. The Hamiltonian has the k-linear term, but the nonreciprocal charge transport is absent with this term only. We have thus considered the two more terms to generate the nonreciprocity: parabolic term and hexagonal warping term. Let us first consider the contribution from parabolic term based on Eq. At lower temperatures, the vortex contribution becomes dominant as in the Rashba superconductors. Since the magnetic field is applied along the two-dimensional plane and there is the cubic term in GL free energy, the behavior is essentially same as the Rashba superconductors with E F < 0. Namely, the thermally generated vortex in the T KT < T T 0 region creates the characteristic magnetochiral anisotropy in the forms γ S ∝ (T 0 -T ) -1 for T → T 0 and γ S ∝ (T -T KT ) -3/2 for T → T KT . We note that the above transport coefficients are written in the form V = a 1 I(1 + γBI), i.e. the magnetic field B enters only with γ-value. As shown below, however, the situation can qualitatively change if the magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the plane. C. TMD We estimate the physical quantities of the clean MoS 2 . Let us begin with the normal contribution well above T 0 . This system has a valley degrees of freedom, whose contribution to the normal γ-value per valley is listed in Table Below T 0 , here again the vortex contribution becomes relevant for the γ-value, but the situation is different from the Rashba and TI based systems with KT transition. Namely, the vortices with the same vorticity are induced by the out-ofplane magnetic field and the KT transition is washed away for B = 0. As a result, the number of vortices are determined by the external field B, and the ordinary resistivity a 1 (B) is proportional to B. We reflect this situation by denoting I-V characteristic as V = a ′ 1 BI + a 2 (B)I 2 . As for the coefficient a 2 (B), there are two types of contributions. One is from the q-cubic term in the GL free energy and a 2 is proportional to B 2 . The other is from the ratchet potential for vortices, and a 2 ∝ B is satisfied. Thus the B dependence of a 2 clearly distinguishes the underlying mechanism to generate nonreciprocal charge transport. Since the latter effect is discussed in detail in the next subsection, we here focus on the cubic-term contribution. The I-V relation is then written as V = a ′ 1 BI(1 + γ S BI). As discussed in Sec. III A, the q-cubic term in GL free energy effectively renormalizes the superfluid density. We have applied the generalized Bardeen-Stephen approach to this system: the force balance between driving (Magnus) force and viscous force acting on the vortex is considered. The nonreciprocity enters in the friction force through the anisotropically renormalized superfluid density. We have then found that the γ-value from vortex dynamics is given by γ ) with γ f S being the superconducting fluctuation contribution, which has a large value near the mean-field transition temperature T 0 . Here the temperature dependence enters through the unrenormalized superfluid density which behaves as n s ∝ (T 0 -T ). Such behavior has further been justified by the TDGL approach as demonstrated in Sec. III B. If the results are extrapolated to zero temperature, we get γ v S /γ f S = T 0 /E F . Since the magnitude of the paraconductivity contribution is roughly given by γ f S ∼ 10 2 T -1 A -1 as discussed above, the order of magnitude for the vortex contribution is γ v S ∼ 1T -1 A -1 in the low-temperature limit. This is much smaller than the observed values at low T in the monolayer MoS 2 We now consider the nonreciprocal transport from ratchet effect of vortex dynamics based on Eq. (135). Phenomenological parameters such as periodicity L of the pinning potential, friction coefficient η, and potential height U 0 are estimated for MoS 2 using experimental data. The parameter L is determined from the mean distance of pinning centers. This can be estimated from pinning-depinning transition point in the magnetoresistance measurement, that is about B z ≃ 0.2T The parameter η is estimated by the normal state resistivity. In the absence of the pinning potentials, (U 0 = 0), the I-V characteristic becomes v L = F/η or in the ohmic region. The resistivity R = B z Φ0 η Lx W should be same as the normal state resistivity R n when B z = B c2 ≃ 0.1 T. Thus, the parameter η is estimated as with R n,sheet ≃ 300 Ω The parameter U 0 , the height of the pinning potential of the superconducting vortex, is estimated by the plateau of R-B curve in weak B region. The plateau disappears for j sheet > j c ≃ 3A/m Another estimation of U 0 is from the thermodynamic upper critical field. The vortex energy per unit volume is B 2 c2 /(2μ 0 ). When the vortex has the overlap with normal core in the pinning center, the energy reduces. By using B c2 ≃ 0.1 T with ξ ≃ 8nm and c z ≃ 1nm being the in-plane coherence length (normal core radius) and the lattice constant in the thickness direction, respectively. These two estimations are very consistent. We note U 0 ≃ 5 meV ≃ 58 K is much larger than the transition temperature therefore low temperature limit, βU 0 ≫ 1, is the realistic situations in MoS 2 . Calculated I-V characteristic curve is shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of γ-value at low T is given by γ ′ S ∝ 1/T for the ratchet mechanism according to Eq. (135) in the U 0 ≫ T limit. With the original expression in Eq. ( Namely, by tuning the potential from the asymmetric case in Eq. ( We have theoretically investigated the nonreciprocal charge transports in the two-dimensional superconductors without inversion symmetry. We have taken the concrete examples such as the Rashba superconductors and topological insulator surface with in-plane magnetic fields, and the monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide (MoS 2 ) with out-plane magnetic field. The nonreciprocal properties of superconductors are reflected in the I-V characteristics with the form V = a 1 I + a 2 I 2 + a 3 I 3 + a 4 I 4 , and the odd-order terms represent the nonreciprocal responses. These coefficients are clarified in the temperature range both above and below the mean-field transition temperature. Table The nonreciprocal transport signals in the normal regions well above the mean-field transition temperature T 0 crossover into superconducting fluctuation contribution (paraconductivity). We have newly investigated the topological insulator based systems which have cubic term in the GL free energy, in addition to the previously investigated Rashba superconductors and transition metal dichalcogenide. The γ-values for all the systems are much enhanced compared to the normal state, which is attributed to the appearance of the small energy scale T 0 (≪ E F ). The ratio of γ-values between normal and superconducting fluctuation region is in general written as (E F /T 0 ) m with m ≥ 1 being an integer depending on the system. Below T 0 , the amplitude of the superconducting order parameters is developed and only the phase degrees of freedom are left. Then the vortex dynamics plays an important role for T T 0 . There are two different kinds of vortex behaviors. First, for systems with in-plane magnetic fields, the vortices are thermally generated and are bound below the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition temperature T KT . Due to the inversion symmetry breaking in the system, the friction force and the number of vortices for T KT < T < T 0 are different depending on the direction of external uniform current, to produce the nonreciprocal charge transport. These effects have effectively been described by the renormalization of the superfluid density. The γ-value, which is defined by V = a 1 I(1 + γBI) as in the fluctuation regime, is identified to have the temperature-dependent forms γ ∝ (T 0 -T ) -1 near T 0 and γ ∝ (T -T KT ) -3/2 near T KT , which originate from the modified friction coefficient and the modified KT transition temperature, respectively. Accordingly, we expect the two-peak structure of the temperature dependence of the γ-value in this case. For the system with out-plane magnetic field, the number of vortices with a same vorticity is determined by the strength of the external field B and the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition does not exist. The nonreciprocal signal γ is now characterized by the I-V relation with the form V = a ′ 1 BI(1 + γBI). The renormalization of superfluid density works also for this system, and we have derived the modified friction force for moving vortices and the corresponding γ-value has the form γ ∝ (T 0 -T ) -1 . This phenomenological approach is further justified by the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory. On the other hand, we have also investigated the other effect with ratchet potential for vortices. Here the magnetic field plays a role only for creating the vortex, and then the γ-value is characterized by the relation V = a ′ 1 BI(1 + γ ′ S I). We have considered one dimensional motion driven by the external transport current in the sawtooth potential, and have found that the resultant signal γ ′ can have a comparable value with the experiments in MoS 2 . We have thus systematically clarified the characteristic transport properties for two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric superconductors. The knowledge of this paper is useful for the further exploration of nonreciprocal phenomena in superconductors both theoretically and experimentally. is the unit vector in the direction of k on the warped Fermi surface and ω n = (2n + 1)πT is the fermionic Matsubara frequency. The gap equation is given by where the bracket means the average with respect to k. V g and ν are the attractive interaction parameter and density of states at the Fermi level, respectively. To derive the GL theory, we expand the right-hand side of Eq. (B2). The terms without spatial derivatives are not affected by impurities, which is known as the Anderson theorem. Hence we only keep the linear term in ∆ and consider spatial derivatives. With this condition we can use g( k, iω n ; r) = sgn ω n , since it does not have the linear term of ∆. The anomalous Green function is described by the Eilenberger equation: where v is the Fermi velocity. The self energy from impurities has been included by the self-consistent Born approximation. The Zeeman energy can be accounted for by the simple replacement iω n → iω n + B z , and we do not write this explicitly for the moment. Now we perform the gradient expansion as f = f 0 + 1 + f 2 + f 3 + • • • . The zeroth and first-order terms can be explicitly written as ) where ωn = ω n + 1 2τ sgn ω n . We conclude f 1 k = 0 since v k = 0 is satisfied. The higher-order terms can also be derived as f 3 k can be finite if the system has a trigonal warping. To be compatible with the results in the previous sections, there are the relations The real constants C 2 and C 3 are determined to be consistent with the expressions in the clean limit which has already been obtained in Ref. for superconducting fluctuation contribution. For vortex flow contribution, on the other hand, the transport coefficients are dependent on σ n (≃ n e e 2 τ /m) and cannot be written in a simple way, but can be in general estimated from the above information. Appendix C: Effect of Landau level for paraconductivity in TMD We here extend the calculation for the paraconductivity in the low-field limit to the case in the presence of quartic term and magnetic field. The paraconductivity from superconducting fluctuations can be evaluated at arbitrary strength of the magnetic field by considering the Landau levels. Let us begin with the GL free energy F = d 2 rΨ * a + P 2 2m * + ΛB z (P 3 x -3P x P 2 y ) Ψ, (C1) where P = -i∇ -e * A with e * = 2e and m * = 2m. The quartic term with |Ψ| 4 can be effectively included in the square term by using the self-consistent harmonic approximation and is dropped here. We will explain this point later. The spatially averaged supercurrent is given in the simple form where Ω = d 2 r1 is a two-dimensional system volume. The y-component can be constructed by symmetry and we do not consider here. We choose the vector potential as A x = -E x t and A y = -E y t+B z x. Now we expand the complex function off for convergence. The ordinary paraconductivity σ 1 here reproduces the results derived in the previous work Here we consider the quartic term in GL free energy We use the self-consistent harmonic approximation Hence the coefficient a is replaced by a ′ = a + b |Ψ| 2 . We have the self-consistent equation to determine a ′ : Note that here we need the cutoff energy E c ∼ T 0 for convergence, and have neglected the P -cubic term which is irrelevant in the leading-order contribution for the equilibrium case. With this consideration, the finite transition temperature in mean-field theory is washed away in the two-dimensional system reflecting the Mermin-Wagner theorem. Figure . Summary of nonreciprocal charge transport in two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric superconductors at low magnetic field B.