ITIC is the milestone of non-fullerene small molecule acceptors used in organic solar cells. We have studied the electronic states and molecular orientation of ITIC film using photoelectron spectroscopy and X-ray absorption spectroscopy. The negative integer charge transfer energy level is determined to be 4.00±0.05 eV below the vacuum level, and the ionization potential is 5.75±0.10 eV. The molecules predominantly adopt the face-on orientation on inert substrates as long as the surfaces of the substrates are not too rough. These results provide physical understanding of the high performance of ITIC-based solar cells, also afford implications to design more advanced photovoltaic small molecules. Organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted extensive attentions during the past two decades due to the advantages of light weight, mechanical flexibility, low cost, and large-scale solution-fabrication. This type of solar cell comprises a thin layer of electron donor/electron acceptor blend sandwiched between two electrodes. Fullerene derivatives such as PC61BM The IP of ITIC was measured to be 5.48-5.67 eV with the cyclic voltammetry method for solution samples. For electron acceptor materials such as ITIC the LUMO level is more pertinent to the performance of OSCs as compared with the HOMO level. The energy position of the bottom of the LUMO band (ELUMO(bottom)) is the minus of electron affinity (EA). The EA was measured to be 3.63-4.00 eV with the cyclic voltammetry method for solution samples. More detail about the concept of Eict-can be found in Refs. [18-21] and will be narrated later. Eict-can be measured with UPS, and the measured Eict-has been reported for many organic molecules. Molecular orientation has significant effect on charge transport. For planar organic molecules face-on (with the molecular plane parallel to the substrate) and edge-on (with the molecular plane perpendicular to the substrate) are two frequently encountered orientations. The face-on orientation is more beneficial to facilitate the charge transport in OSCs, since the stacking of the π (and π*) orbital forms the charge transport channel across the device. We utilized three substrates, naturally oxidized Al(111) single crystal, ITO glass, and Si:H(111), to study the electronic states and the molecular orientation. The Al(111) single crystal was simply cleaned by sonication in de-ionized water and acetone. The ITO glass was ultrasonically cleaned with detergent for 30 min, washed with much de-ionized water, and further ultrasonically cleaned with de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol. The Si:H(111) substrate was prepared as follows. Si(111) wafers were first ultrasonically cleaned in deionized water and ethyl alcohol. Then the wafers were rinsed sequentially in solution 1 (NH3·H2O:H2O2:H2O=1:1:6, 80 o C, 15 min) and solution 2 (HCl:H2O2:H2O=1:1:6, 80 o C, 15 min). After being washed in deionized water, the wafers were etched in 5% HF for 1 min to obtain the H-passivated Si(111) surface. At last, the Si:H(111) wafers were again rinsed in deionized water for less than 5 s to remove residual compounds from the etching process. After cleaning, the substrates were dried by nitrogen flow and transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box immediately. In the following we abbreviate the naturally oxidized Al(111) single crystal, the ITO glass, and the Si:H(111) to be Al, ITO, and Si, respectively. ITIC powder (purity > 99%) was purchased from the Solenne company. The powder was dissolved in chlorobenzene at a concentration of 25 mg/mL. The solution was stirred at 70 o C for ~24 hours and filtrated through a polytetrafluoroethylene filter (0.2 m). ITIC films were then spin coated (2000 rpm for 60 s) on the substrates. After the spin coating we annealed the samples on a hot plate at 130 o C for 10 min. All the above experimental operations were carried out in the glove box. The thickness of the films was not quantitatively calibrated but was proper for our study. The signal of the substrates were totally attenuated, and charging effect was not observed in the UPS measurements. The ITIC film samples were placed in a small plastic box in the glove box, and the plastic box was well sealed with parafilm before fetched out. Spectral measurements were carried out at the Photoelectron Spectroscopy Endstation of the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF). The samples were clamped onto stainless steel sample holders in a helium-filled glove box of BSRF and then transported into the vacuum system of the endstation; the time exposing to air was less than 30 s in this process. We measured the spectra after the samples were left in the ultra high vacuum environment (2×10 -10 mbar) for more than six hours. The UPS spectra were measured with the photon energy of 21.2 eV and a VG Scienta R4000 analyzer. The sample normal coincided with the entrance of the energy analyzer, and the photoelectrons with different emission angles (within ±19 o with respect to the sample normal) were integrated. In work function measurements we applied -5.0 V bias to the samples. The overall energy resolution was better than 0.05 eV. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were also measured for a portion of the samples with the photon energy of 700 eV; the overall energy resolution was ~0.75 eV. Carbon K-edge XAS spectra were acquired with the total electron yield mode; the energy resolution was ~0.2 eV. For helping to understand the XAS data we slightly doped the ITIC/Si sample by depositing Ca atoms onto the sample surface. The Ca atoms were evaporated from a Ta boat mounted in the ultra high vacuum system. C and O contamination should be well controlled for reliable spectra measured on ex-situ prepared samples. ITIC itself contains both C and O atoms, and the possible contamination cannot be checked by UPS or XPS measurements. So we prepared and measured some PC61BM and P3HT samples (the latter molecule does not contains O atom) to check the contamination. The measured UPS spectrum of the spin coated PC61BM film was unexpectedly the same as that of the PC61BM film prepared by vacuum deposition. For helping to understand the experimental data we performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations for isolated ITIC molecule. The calculating details are the same as that we described previously. , is at most ±0.10 eV. The IP of 5.75±0.10 eV for our film samples is some different from that (5.48-5.67 eV) UPS is also the most powerful tool to measure Eict-. In this case the substrate has to be properly selected. For understanding this we explain the concept of Eict-in some detail. Eict-was proposed for the energy level alignment at the interface between an electron acceptor material and an inert substrate. According to the meaning of Eict-, the substrate for measuring the Eict-of an organic acceptor material must be inert and have small work function. The Al (with natural oxide layer) and ITO substrate are both inert. The work function of our Al substrate is 3.45-3.53 eV as measured on several samples (without the ITIC overlayer); the work function of the ITO substrate is 4.30-4.50 eV. In Fig. As comparison, the work function of the ITIC/ITO sample is 4.35 eV, near that of the ITO substrate. This is because that the work function of the ITO substrate (4.30-4.50 eV) is greater than the Eict-(4.00 eV). The electron cannot transfer from the ITO substrate to the ITIC film. The electrons cannot yet transfer from the ITIC film to the ITO substrate, since the LUMO level is empty and the HOMO level is much lower than the Fermi level of the substrate (see Fig. The substrates used in this work and in actual OSC fabrication are all inert, and thus the interfacial chemical interaction is negligible. What determines the molecular orientation should be the intrinsic inter-molecular interaction and the substrate morphology. The Si:H(111) substrate is atomic smoothing. The naturally oxidized Al(111) substrate is near atomic smoothing. The ITO substrate has the surface roughness of several nm (revealed by atomic force microscopy images not shown here), but the ITIC molecules still predominantly adopt the face-on orientation. Therefore, we think that ITIC molecules prefer to form face-on oriented film on inert substrates as long as the surfaces of the substrates are not too rough. The different degree of the face-on orientation on some other substrates reported in Refs. [13,14,28] should be due to the different surface roughness of the substrates. The highly disordered orientation for the ITIC film on the PEDOT:PSS covered Si wafer The Eict-of ITIC is 4.00±0.05 eV and near that of PC61BM, which provides an reference not only for selecting matching donor materials in fabricating OSCs but also for modifying the molecular structure of ITIC to obtain more advanced acceptor materials. ITIC molecules prefer to form face-on oriented film as long as the substrate surface is not too rough. So one can control the charge transporting property of ITIC-based devices by fabricating ITIC/donor and ITIC/electrode interfaces with proper morphology.