Germanium is emerging as the substrate of choice for the growth of graphene in CMOScompatible processes. For future application in next generation devices the accurate control over the properties of high-quality graphene synthesized on Ge surfaces, such as number of layers and domain size, is of paramount importance. Here we investigate the role of the process gas flows on the CVD growth of graphene on Ge(100). The quality and morphology of the deposited material is assessed by using μ-Raman spectroscopy, x-ray photoemission spectroscopy, scanning electron and atomic force microscopies. We find that by simply varying the carbon precursor flow different growth regimes -yielding to graphene nanoribbons, graphene monolayer and graphene multilayer -are established. We identify the growth conditions yielding to a layer-by-layer growth regime and report on the achievement of homogeneous monolayer graphene with an average intensity ratio of 2D and G bands in the Raman map larger than 3. Since its isolation, graphene has attracted a huge interest due to its unique electronic structure and exceptional electronic and mechanical properties. Scalable and controlled synthesis of high quality graphene is the main request for several potential applications. Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) has been predicted as the leading growth technique for large-scale deposition of graphene films Large area single crystal graphene films on the Ge(110) substrate are achieved The catalyzed CVD growth of graphene is determined by a specific sequence of processes, i.e. the formation of active carbon species on the substrate, the graphene domain nucleation, and the domain lateral growth. In all these processes hydrogen plays an active role, promoting the activation of surface-bound carbon and acting as an etching agent that controls the size and morphology of the resulting graphene domains. In this work we investigate the processes at the basis of the different CVD growth regimes of graphene on Ge(100) by varying the methane flow, the H2:CH4 flow ratio, and the deposition time. The joint use of complementary experimental techniques, both spectroscopic and morphological, allowed an exhaustive characterization of the "as grown" materials (without the need of graphene transfer on other substrates) at different stages and conditions of the synthesis. We demonstrate that by simply varying the methane flow is possible to tune the growth so to obtain either graphene nanoribbons, graphene monolayer and graphene multilayer. The role of the different processes bringing to the formation of graphene on Ge(100), from nucleation to domain lateral growth and etching, domain merging and multilayer development in the different growth conditions are established. Notably, this work leads to the identification of a layer-by-layer growth regime which allows for the synthesis of high quality monolayer graphene in a controllable and reliable manner. As the presented process is developed in a commercially available reactor, it might be easily reproduced and its adoption in industrial production appears feasible. The report of a layer-by-layer growth on Ge substrates and in a commercially available reactor is a first step towards a larger accessibility of high quality graphene whose properties can be tuned by controlling the number of layers. Graphene was grown on Ge(100) substrates by employing a commercially available 4" coldwall CVD reactor (Aixtron BM). The Ge(100) substrates were cut into 1x1 cm 2 pieces from a 4" wafers (N-type Sb-doped, n=10 16 cm -3 , <100>+/-0.1°, double side polished) and cleaned with ultrasonic bath in isopropyl alcohol followed by rinsing in de-ionized water. The substrates were then placed at the center of the BM growth chamber and heated up to the deposition temperature in H2 and Ar gas mixture. Once the growth temperature was reached, the carbon precursor (i.e., CH4) was introduced in the chamber. In the reported experiments H2 and Ar flows were set at 200 and 800 sccm respectively, while the CH4 flow varied in the 1-10 sccm range. The growth was performed at 100 mbar and at T=930°C, only few degrees below the Ge surface melting. As a matter of fact good quality graphene on Ge can be achieved only employing growth temperatures in a small range close to the Ge melting. To ensure good reproducibility and a homogeneous temperature on the whole Ge surface the substrate heating is carried out by a multi-step temperature ramp. After graphene deposition the system was cooled down to room temperature in H2 and Ar. No differences were appreciated performing the cooling process in either an H2:Ar mixture or in pure Ar. The samples were characterized by Raman spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw inVia confocal Raman microscope) was performed using an excitation wavelength of 532 nm, a 100x objective, a laser spot size of 1 μm and a step size of 1 μm for area mapping. The intensity ratio of the 2D, G and D bands were evaluated by using the integrated area of the peaks. The sample morphology was investigated by means of SEM (FEI Helios 600 Nanolab DualBeam) and AFM (Veeco CP-II) operating in tapping mode. The xn coverage fraction of domains with n-layers of graphene (n-LG) was evaluated from a standard analysis of the SEM images performed by setting user-defined threshold levels for the grey scale intensity. For all the samples n-LG domain size distribution, domain average size (defined as the square root of the area) and its standard deviation were determined. The domain size analysis has been performed also on AFM data on the samples that do not exhibit the Ge nano-texturing induced by the graphene growth. In this case the threshold intervals for the height values associated to n-LG were extracted from line-profile analysis. The results of the two methods are in good agreement in all the analyzed samples. The XPS measurements were carried out using a monochromatic Al Kα source (hν=1486.6 eV) and a concentric hemispherical analyzer operating in retarding mode (Physical Electronics Instruments PHI), with overall resolution of 0.4 eV. The C1s core level area intensity of each sample has been normalized to that acquired in the same experimental conditions on a commercial single layer graphene (SLG), a CVD-deposited graphene on copper foil and transferred on a SiO2 substrate, purchased from Graphenea. To gain insight into the graphene CVD growth on the Ge(100) surface we investigated the influence of the CH4 flow on the growth kinetics by synthesizing graphene films at fixed deposition time tD=60 min varying the CH4 flow F in the 1-10 sccm range. The resulting H2:CH4 flow ratio R varied from R=200 down to R=20. The Raman spectra of the samples grown at different F and their analysis are shown in Figure Their asymmetric shape characterized by a relatively high length/width aspect ratio is promoted by the Ge(100) surface anisotropy. For F=2 sccm a single layer graphene film covers completely the Ge substrate. As a matter of fact, the SEM image of Figure The single layer nature of the graphene film grown at F=2 sccm is confirmed by the Raman analysis shown in Figure For F=5 sccm single, bi-and trilayer graphene domains coexist on the Ge surface as shown in Figure A further increase of the CH4 flow results in a poorer quality of the graphene films. For F=10 sccm, the Ge nanofaceting is not present. Domains having a smaller average lateral size of ~100 nm, irregular shapes, and different heights (0-, 1-, 2-, 3-LG) are observed (see the AFM topography and the relative height profile in Figure The morphology variation induced by the use of different CH4 flows is quantified in Figure In Figure The above reported analysis demonstrates that the use of F=2 sccm and R=100 corresponds to a "special" growth condition in which the combined effect of carbon activation, graphene domains growth, and etching is optimized for the development of a continuous graphene monolayer. Therefore, we have selected these process conditions to investigate the growth evolution as a function of the deposition time. The morphology of the films deposited for tD=30 and 120 min, i.e. before and after the development of the continuous graphene monolayer discussed in the previous section, is shown in Figure The surface area where graphene grain thickness is ~1 nm (delimited by the grey lines in the AFM image) is consistent with the 25% coverage of graphene grains evidenced by SEM. The Raman spectrum of the sample (Figure In Figure In the CVD growth of graphene on metallic surfaces the catalysis of methane on the surface and the successive formation of CHx active species enhanced by the presence of H produce a carbon-adatom species supersaturated surface, where the graphene nucleation takes place. Our findings suggest that the same growth model reported in Ref. After domain merging and completion of the first graphene layer the initial supersaturation condition leading to novel nucleation is restored and the second graphene layer begins to form. The high reproducibility of the continuous graphene monolayer achievement at tD=60 min in several deposition runs points to the occurrence of a rest period between the completion of the first layer and the nucleation of the second one, that is to restore the supersaturation conditions. At present, our data do not allow to unambiguously conclude whether the 2-LG nucleates on top (wedding cake structures WC) or underneath (inverted wedding cake structures IWC) the first one. For low CH4 flow (F=1 sccm) the graphene growth slows down. As a matter of fact, the growth rate at F=1 sccm (5.4x10 -3 -LG/min) is significantly smaller than half the rate at F=2 sccm (1.7x10 -2 -LG/min). Taking into account that the higher H2:CH4 ratio should increase the production rate of carbon growth species For the highest methane flows investigated (F≥5 sccm), we found the coexistence of uncovered, 1-, 2-and 3-LG regions on the Ge surface. In these growth conditions the increase of C adatom species concentration leads to a strong supersaturation on the Ge(100) surface. The production rate of carbon growth species by catalyzed methane decomposition is much larger than their total consumption rate allowing the further nucleation of graphene domains. We investigated the CVD growth of graphene on Ge(100) as a function of the methane flow, H2:CH4 flow ratio and deposition time. The combined analysis of the Raman, XPS and SEM/AFM data allowed us to tune the growth in order to obtain graphene nanoribbons, a layer by layer growth and multilayer graphene synthesis by simply varying the CH4 flow. A layer-bylayer growth regime occurred for F=2 sccm and R=100. Employing these "special" growth conditions we obtained the reliable and well controlled growth of graphene monolayer with average I2D/IG ratio larger than 3, a value exceeding the state of the art for graphene synthesis on Ge.