We describe and demonstrate a method by which the nonlinear piezoelectric properties of a piezoelectric material may be measured by detecting the force that it applies on a suspended micromechanical resonator at one of its mechanical resonance frequencies. Resonators are used in countless applications; this method could provide a means for better-characterizing material behaviors within real MEMS devices. Further, special devices can be designed to probe this nonlinear behavior at specific frequencies with enhanced signal sizes. The resonators used for this experiment are actuated using a 1-μm-thick layer of aluminum nitride. When driven at large amplitudes, the piezoelectric layer generates harmonics, which are measurable in the response of the resonator. In this experiment, we measured the second-order piezoelectric coefficient of aluminum nitride to be -(23.1 ± 14.1) × 10 -22 m/V 2 . Nonlinear materials and components are used in virtually all modern devices, and nonlinear effects can be found in every branch of science. Engineers often take great pains to avoid such nonlinearities, but they are nonetheless unavoidable-and often helpful-in many devices. In electronics, transistors and diodes are some of the most important components, yet they exhibit interesting nonlinear behavior that is useful for applications such as signal rectification and amplification One application in which nonlinearity is becoming increasingly important is in piezoelectric thin-film devices such as resonators In the case of piezoelectric materials, if a large electric field is applied, its strain may no longer vary linearly, which can lead to nonlinear phenomena such as second harmonic generation (SHG) Here, we show that it is possible to quantify the nonlinear piezoelectric properties by measuring the spectral behavior of a suspended micromechanical resonator at various electric field strengths. This method has the advantage that it can be used at any frequency at which the resonator can vibrate. Further, it can be performed using resonators that are fabricated for real systems or applications. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) resonators can be designed to have a wide operating range in the frequency spectrum or to have high-quality factor resonances. When driven at these resonances, the output signal of the devices can be as much as 10 million times larger than signals produced by off-resonance driving Piezoelectric materials provide a convenient method for applying highly-repeatable forces to the resonators. If a time-varying signal voltage is applied to the piezoelectric, the force that is applied to the resonator is generated by the center-of-mass (COM) motion of the piezoelectric layer. The magnitude of the applied force can be estimated beginning with the piezoelectric constitutive rela-tions. Using the Einstein summation convention, these are where S is the strain, s E relates to the elastic modulus at constant electric field, T is the stress, d is the piezoelectric coefficient, E is the electric field, D is the electric displacement field, ε T is the electric permittivity at constant stress, and subscripts i, j, k, and l denote Cartesian coordinate directions where 1 is along x, 2 is along y, and 3 is along z. To a good approximation, there is negligible stress in the driving electrode and strain in the plane of the piezoelectric film is zero. The force that the piezoelectric applies to the silicon structure can be calculated as, from which we obtain where m AlN is the mass of the AlN between the electrodes, m e is the mass of the top electrode, t 0 is the un-strained thickness of the AlN, and S z is the strain perpendicular to the film plane. In order to verify the accuracy of this forcing equation to linear order, we used COMSOL Multiphysics, a finite element simulation program, to analyze a simple 1-micron cube of aluminum nitride under single-frequency excitation potential and measured the reaction force at the base of the material. For a nonlinear piezoelectric coefficient, we can write (neglecting cross-terms) where we adopt the notation that exponents in parentheses denote the order of linearity, and exponents not in parentheses denote powers. For example, d 33 is the nthorder piezoelectric coefficient for strains in the z-direction given an electric field along the z-axis. For single-frequency sinusoidal driving, E z = (V 0 /t 0 ) sin (ωt) where V 0 is the amplitude of electric potential difference applied across the piezoelectric material, ω is the driving angular frequency, and t is time. For this applied electric field, the force applied to the resonator can be calculated by using the strain in equation (4) in equation ( At each order of nonlinearity n, this expression can be expanded in linear powers of sines and cosines that are spectrally located at integer multiples of the driving frequency. Further, for each value of n, the nonlinear forcing signal is only present at the nth harmonic and lower harmonics of the same parity (i.e., only at even or only at odd lower harmonics); the size of the nonlinearity's contribution is proportional to V n 0 . For complex resonators such as the ones used in our experiments, it is often convenient to one-dimensionalize their motion. This can be done using the equation of motion for a damped harmonic oscillator, where z is the effective position of the resonator, Q is the quality factor of the resonance mode, ω 0 is the resonance frequency, F (t) is the driving force, and m is the effective mass of the resonator mode. Taking the Fourier transform of equation ( where | F (ω)| is the magnitude of the Fourier-transformed applied force from equation As illustrated in Figure A signal can be applied to one set of the IDTs via the pad labeled "S1" or "S2", and the response of the resonator can be detected using the other. The applied signal applies a force to the suspended silicon structure via the inverse piezoelectric effect, causing it to vibrate as described above; the response of the resonator (i.e., the amplitude of its vibration) is measured at the other electrodes via the direct piezoelectric effect. The pads labeled "G" are used as ground references. In equation An experiment would require measurements over a range of driving amplitudes. Figure In order to make these measurements, we designed the In this experiment, the resonator is driven using a Rohde & Schwarz SMY01 signal generator, and the input and output voltages are simultaneously measured using an Agilent N9000A spectrum analyzer and a Stanford Research Systems SR844 lock-in amplifier, respectively. The input signal measurement is necessary in obtaining the true value of V 0 . The output signal is measured at frequency f while driving at frequency f , then separately while driving at frequency f /2. Simultaneously, the input signal is measured at both frequencies f and f /2. This allows us the quantify the sizes of the harmonic distortions from the signal generator and calibrate them out. After measuring the data, we obtain calibration fits to the "D:f,M:f" data via a polynomial in odd powers of V 0 , Next, using this calibration with the measured second harmonic produced by the signal generator, we remove the second harmonic signal contribution from the output "D:f/2,M:f" data. Measurements of the remaining signal are used to obtain the second-order nonlinear piezoelectric coefficient described in this text by fitting it to a FIG. polynomial in even powers of V 0 , Figures Equations ( where c n is a harmonic-dependent coefficient determined using equation During this experiment, we measured the second-order piezoelectric coefficient of aluminum nitride using two separate devices near their primary resonances. For the first device, we measured the constant to be -(26.3 ± 10.5) × 10 -22 m/V 2 ; and for the second device, we measured the constant to be -(17.7 ± 15.2) × 10 -22 m/V 2 . Combining all measurements for both devices, we estimate the constant to be -(23.1 ± 14.1) × 10 -22 m/V 2 . Though second-order dielectric nonlinearities in AlN have been well-studied While this method works best for measurements of the nonlinear piezoelectric coefficients at the suspended structure's mechanical resonance, off-resonance measurements are also possible. However, we find that, with our equipment used off-resonance, there is a significantly higher measurement uncertainty. In order to improve this method, we suggest using additional filtering on the input line to reduce the sizes of the harmonic distortions produced by the signal generator, such as the one used by Tashiro et. al We have successfully shown that it is possible to measure second-and higher-order nonlinear coefficients of piezoelectric materials my measuring the force the material applies to a micromechanical resonator. This method may be useful in characterizing the effects of fabrication processes and phenomena on the piezoelectric materials used in devices for real-world applications.