Phonon reflection/transmission at the interfaces plays a fundamental role in cryogenic particle detectors, in which the optimization of the phonon signal at the sensor (in case of phonon-mediated detectors) or the minimization of the heat transmission (when the detection occurs in the sensor itself) is of primary importance to improve sensitivity. Nevertheless the mechanisms governing the phonon physics at the interfaces are still not completely understood. The two more successful models, Acoustic Mismatch Model (AMM) and Diffuse Mismatch Model (DMM) are not able to explain all the accumulated experimental data, and the measurement of the transmission coefficients between the materials remains a challenge. Here, we use measurements of the athermal phonon flux in aluminium Kinetic Inductance Detectors (KID) deposited on silicon substrates following a particle interaction to validate a Monte Carlo (MC) phonon simulation. We apply the Mattis-Bardeen theory to derive the phonon pulse energy and timing from the KID signal and compare the results with the MC for specular (AMM) and diffuse (DMM) reflection, finding a remarkable good agreement for specular, while diffuse reflection is clearly disfavoured. For an aluminum film of 60 nm and a silicon substrate of 380 μm, we obtain transmission coefficients Si-Al in the range [0.3 -0.55] and Si-Teflon in the range [0.1 -0.15]. Phonon-mediated cryogenic detectors using massive absorbers are a mature technology extensively employed in rare event physics experiments, like neutrinoless double beta decay (0νDBD) searches Monte Carlo (MC) simulation of particles transport and interactions in matter is one of the basic ingredients for the design of a particle detector and the detection efficiency calculation. In particular the GEANT4 package A correct treatment of the phonon scattering/transmission at the interfaces is a main ingredient of the simulation when the sensitive area is a small fraction of the total detector surface. Nevertheless, phonon scattering at the interfaces is still an open question, and there is no general agreement about the model to describe the experimental data, being the most well established ones the acoustic mismatch model (AMM) and the diffuse mismatch model (DMM) In this work we apply the G4CMP package to model two prototypes of the CALDER project We apply the G4CMP package to a silicon wafer read by one or several KIDs. Comparing the simulation results with our data we found a notable agreement for the AMM model, and we are able to estimate the transmission coefficients at the interfaces Si-Al (T Si→Al ) and Si-Teflon. The results that we present here can be extended to other kind of detectors based on thin Al sensors. The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II presents a brief description of the main physics ingredients included in the MC code and the parameters used in our implementation. Section III describes the general aspects of our detectors, experimental setup, data analysis, and the specific experimental configurations simulated. The details of the MC simulation are outlined in Section IV, while in Section V we compare the MC results with the experimental data and make an estimation of the relevant parameters. Finally, we present the summary in Section VI. In this section we describe the basic phonon physics mechanisms implemented in the MC simulation, referring to In a phonon-mediated cryogenic detector, particles (optical photons in our case) hitting the absorber produce optical phonons that decay promptly to the acoustic branch, producing an athermal population of high energy. The interaction length of these energetic phonons is very short, so they propagate quasidiffusively, with numerous changes in direction and polarization mode as they decay to lower energy states. When the phonon energy drops sufficiently, its mean free path becomes larger than the dimensions of the crystal and it propagates following almost straight lines at the speed of sound in the material, a state that we call ballistic. If the dimensions of the sensor are small compared to the absorber size, as for CALDER detectors, ballistic phonons can undergo a large number of reflections at the substrate faces before reaching the KID, where they have a certain probability T Si→Al of being absorbed, or escaping detection (i.e., they are thermalized in the substrate or absorbed at the supports or the feedline). Phonon tracking in crystalline structures strongly differs from the usual particle propagation in GEANT code because The phonon propagation in the crystal is mainly governed by two processes: 1. isotopic scattering: when the substrate is composed of different isotopes, as it is usually the case, there is a disruption in the propagation path that causes the phonon to scatter off and change direction with no energy loss. The energy-dependent rate is modeled as R I ν 4 , where R I depends on the material (see Table 2. anharmonic decay: due to nonlinear terms in the elastic coupling between adjacent lattice ions, a phonon spontaneously splits into two (or more) lower frequency ones, with a rate that depends on the phonon frequency as R A ν 5 , where R A is a material-dependent constant (see Table As said before, there is not yet a complete understanding of the mechanisms that govern the phonon physics at the interfaces. Ideally phonons reflect and transmit conserving the energy and the component of k parallel to the interface, but polarization conversion can occur, being in general three reflected waves (trirefringence) and at most two transmitted ones (birefringence) KIDs operation principle is based on the properties of a superconducting film biased with AC (microwave) current. The inertia of Cooper pairs to momentum change produces an additional inductance, called kinetic inductance (L KI ), which depends on the density of Cooper pairs, and that can be measured embedding the superconductor in a resonant RLC circuit with resonant frequency ν 0 = 1/2π √ LC. An energy release larger than twice the superconductor gap ∆ (about 200 μeV for thin Al films) breaks Cooper pairs into quasiparticles, modifying both the residual resistance due to quasiparticles (the only dissipative term in the RLC resonant circuit) and the inductance due to Cooper pairs and changing the amplitude and phase of a microwave signal transmitted past the circuit. Slightly modifying the capacitance of every resonator we can make them resonate at close but different frequencies, and in that way many of them can be read with the same line. The detector used in this work follows a Lumped Element KID (LEKID) design KIDs are excited with a fixed-frequency signal typically in the few GHz range. After transmission through the device, the signal S 21 is amplified by a CITLF4 SiGe cryogenic low noise amplifier (with noise temperature T N ∼7 K) operated at 4 K and the rest of the electronics are at room temperature The signal transmitted through the feedline can be written as a function of the frequency ν as follows: where S 21 is the forward scattering amplitude in the standard scattering matrix representation, I and Q indicate real and imaginary part of S 21 and Q is the quality factor of the resonant circuit, which is given by the addition in parallel of the coupling quality factor Q c (that account for losses through the coupling) and the internal quality factor Q i (dissipation due to quasiparticles and all other losses), so that When ν sweeps around the resonance, the signal traces out a circle in the IQ plane of diameter equal to Q/Q c (see inset of Fig. Once the resonance is calibrated we choose the most sensitive frequency (or frequencies, in the case of reading several KIDs through the same line) and excite the resonators at an adequate power level Athermal phonons arrive to the KIDs with a characteristic time distribution that depends on the detector material and geometry. In general it can be modeled by two time constants, accounting for the pulse rise (τ ph rise ) and decay (τ ph ), so the number of phonons at the KID can be written as: When τ ph rise τ ph , as in the case of the detectors analyzed in this work, the expression 2 can be approximated by a single exponential with constant τ ph . In order to infer τ ph from the KID signal, we have to disentangle the contribution of other temporal constants: (1) at the KID phonons break Cooper pairs and generate quasiparticles with a probability given by the pair-breaking efficiency η pb (see Tab. I), which recombine again into Cooper pairs with lifetime τ qp . The recombination rate depends not only on superconductor properties, but also on the quasiparticle density, and consequently also on temperature and microwave power (P μw ) where Φ qp is the pulse integral and its expression is derived in the next section. As we explain in next section, we excite the substrate by a LED pulse whose duration T ex is of the order of few μs, so the final waveform results from the convolution of Eq. 3 with a rectangular function of length T ex . For every acquired signal we fit the δ φ pulse evolution to the pulse shape described above, fixing τ ring to the value corresponding to the measured Q factor. In this way we obtain τ ph that we compare with the MC results. Superimposed to the pulses of Fig. We can relate the energy release in the substrate E to the energy absorbed at every resonator E abs through an efficiency factor η, so that E abs = ηE. The efficiency can be factorized as η = η KID η pb , where η KID depends on the geometry of the detector and the transmission coefficients at the interface, and it is the parameter that we shall extract from the MC simulation, and η pb is the pair-breaking efficiency in Al, which we take as ∼0.57 where N 0 V is the single spin density of states at the Fermi level (1.72×10 10 eV -1 μm -3 for Al We study two different detector configurations with different KID characteristics and layout. The first prototype (P1 in the following) consists of a single KID lithographed on a 380 μm thick Si substrate with a size of 2×2 cm 2 . Fig. FIG. In the second prototype, that we label as P4 (see Fig. Compared to P1, P4 has smaller contact area between Si and Teflon, as it is held by only two supports at opposite edges in the middle of the substrate. The contact area at every support is about 3 mm 2 , so the total interface Si-Teflon is halved with respect to P1. In turn, the feedline is ∼6 times wider. We operate both prototypes as described at the beginning of this section. The first step is to select the excitation power P μw . High powers feature in general a better SNR, as the noise in our setup is dominated by the amplifier and goes with 1/ P μw , but as we raise P μw the resonances show an increasing distortion and the relationship of Eq. 4 is not longer valid For every prototype we measure the parameters that enter in Eq. 4 and report their values at the selected P μw in Table The detectors are illuminated on the back of the substrate by an optical fiber coupled to a fast warm LED (λ =400 nm). The LED equivalent energy is calibrated with a photomultiplier, and the calibration is checked at very low intensity by photon counting Poisson statistics We take O(2000) LED pulses for every configuration. In order to improve the SNR we apply a software low-pass filter with 100 kHz cut-off whose effect is included in the pulse fitting. Finally, we average the pulses and perform a fit as described in Sec. III A to obtain τ ph and η. We report the results for each KID in Table The G4CMP package simulates: (1) the generation of acoustic phonons and electron-hole pairs in a material after an energy deposition; (2) their propagation in the media, anisotropic according to the material elastic constants for phonons and driven by an electric field for the charge; (3) the two principal phonon scattering processes described in Sec. II with isotropic approximation; and (4) a simplified implementation of the reflection and transmission mechanisms at interfaces, in which the multirefringence is not considered: the phonon is transmitted through the boundary with a probability given by the transmission coefficient, or it is reflected back, following a specular reflection for the AMM model or a Lambertian one for DMM. So, in the current implementation no mode conversion occurs. In our simulation, as no electric field is applied to the detector, the charge is not taken into account and all the energy of the interaction goes to the phonon channel. Following a photon absorption in the Si substrate, acoustic phonons are generated isotropically along the incident particle track. The energy distribution of the primordial phonons is unknown, nevertheless their effects are wiped out after the quasidiffusion stage, so we take the Debye energy (∼62 meV in Si) as starting point and select the polarization L, FT or ST randomly according to the DOS in the material. The history of every phonon is followed recording its polarization, ω and k until one of the following conditions is verified: (1) it is absorbed in Al (KIDs or feedline) or Teflon; (2) its energy drops below 2∆; (3) a predefined number of reflections n max refl is reached. We simulate a simplified geometry of the detector with four main components: Si wafer, Teflon supports, the feedline and the KIDs, both made of Al (see Fig. A single simulation event starts with the generation of about 10 4 optical photons (λ =400 nm), uniformly distributed at the 4.66 mm diameter fiber spot, that are stopped in the first micron of the Si substrate at the opposite face to the KIDs. The spot is centered in the middle of the substrate in P4 simulation, while for P1 it is shifted 6 mm far from the KID in vertical direction, and the photons are distributed in time according to a square pulse of duration T ex (see Table For each fiber event in the wafer we construct the phonon pulse evolution for every time and integrate it to obtain the total energy absorbed in the simulation at every KID, that we denote as ∆E ph . Then, we scale with the number of tracked phonons ξ tr and the pair-breaking efficiency η pb to calculate the absorbed energy, and divide by E to obtain the efficiency in a single KID as Fig The choice for the n max refl parameter is not of great importance in the final results: for the configurations with low values of the transmission coefficients (T Si→Al ∼0.2, T Si→Tef ∼0.1), only 1-3% (0.1-0.4%) phonons undergo more than 200 (500) reflections. For values of T Si→Al and T Si→Tef around 0.4, the percentages are 0.5-1% (0.05-0.1%). We also study the amount of phonon absorption at every material as a function of phonon frequency and show the results in Fig. For P1, with one single KID, phonon pulses are faster and more energetic for larger T Si→Al values. When we increase T Si→Tef instead, they are also faster, but less energy is collected, as phonons are lost in Teflon. This rule no longer holds true when more than one KID is competing for the same en-ergy deposition, as it is the case of P4: the sensors far from the source (KID1 and KID4 in Fig. We obtain a consistent picture between data and simulation for both prototypes for AMM model, while our experimental data cannot be modelled considering only diffuse reflection, unless extreme values of the transmission coefficients are introduced. In the case of P1 (the most sensitive probe for the reflection model, as the energy deposition is far away from the KID), for the same transmission coefficients, the DMM model produce phonon pulses between 2 and 4 μs slower. This corresponds to between 10 and 20 times our experimental uncer-tainty. Our simulation with DMM model is not able to produce so fast an energetic phonon pulses as the ones we have measured for this setup, unless a transmission coefficient of almost 1 is considered for T Si→Al . The range of values of T Si→Al that best describe the experimental data is [0.30-0.55]. In the case of T Si→Tef , P1 data points to the region [0.1-0.15], nevertheless the P4 simulations do not impose a large constraint, as in general the whole T Si→Tef range agrees with the experimental point at 1σ error as a result of the reduced Si-Teflon interface. At a closer look, the AMM P4 simulation could be affected by a systematic bias: in the MC less energy is collected at the KIDs far from the source (KID1 and KID4) with respect to the measurement. This distance-dependent bias could suggest a deficiency of the model that appears when the number of phonon reflections is large. This could be due to the simplification of the reflection mechanisms in the simulation, that currently do not include mode conversion, or other phenomena non considered in the present implementation. For example, a slight dependence of the transmission coefficients with phonon frequency would result in distinct absorption for far and near KIDs, as the phonon frequency distribution is different (see Fig. It is worth noting that in general we expect the phonon transmission coefficient to be dependent on the thickness for thin films. The experimental data presented here correspond to an Al thickness of 60 nm, and so does the T Si→Al transmission coefficient that we have determined. Future measurements with different films will allow us to study this dependency. We have implemented a phonon MC simulation based on the G4CMP extension of the GEANT4 code and applied it to model phonon-mediated cryogenic detectors with thin Si absorbers and Al KID readout, clamped by Teflon supports to a dilution unit at about 20 mK. We have performed two different experiments with different geometries and KID layouts and we have compared the results with those of the MC simulations, considering two different reflection mechanisms at the interfaces (a specular reflection based on the AMM model and a diffuse one for the DMM model) and transmission coefficients spanning form [0.1-1] for the Si-Teflon and Si-Al interfaces. We found a good agreement for transmission coefficients Si-Al in the range [0.3-0.55] and Si-Tef in the range [0.1-0.15] for AMM model, while the simulation with diffuse reflection based on the DMM model does not provide a realistic description of our data. The Si-Al result is valid for an Al film with a thickness of 60 nm. We observe also a hint of a systematic bias in our simulation when the number of phonon reflections is large: simulated phonon pulses are less energetic than data. In the future we will further investigate this issue with larger detectors. The results that we have presented are applicable to other cryogenic detectors with thin Al sensors.