We report inelastic light scattering results on the stoichiometric and fully ordered superconductor CaKFe4As4 as a function of temperature and light polarization. In the energy range between 10 and 315 cm -1 (1.24 and 39.1 meV) we observe the particle-hole continuum above and below the superconducting transition temperature Tc and 7 of the 8 Raman active phonons. The main focus is placed on the analysis of the electronic excitations. Below Tc all three symmetries projected with in-plane polarizations display a redistribution of spectral weight characteristic for superconductivity. The energies of the pair-breaking peaks in A1g and B2g symmetry are in approximate agreement with the results from photoemission studies. In B1g symmetry the difference between normal and superconducting state is most pronounced, and the feature is shifted downwards with respect to those in A1g and B2g symmetry. The maximum peaking at 134 cm -1 (16.6 meV) has a substructure on the high-energy side. We interpret the peak at 134 cm -1 in terms of a collective Bardasis-Schrieffer (BS) mode and the substructure as a remainder of the pair-breaking feature on the electron bands. There is a very weak peak at 50 cm -1 (6.2 meV) which is tentatively assigned to another BS mode. CaKFe 4 As 4 is among the few iron-based compounds which are superconducting at high transition temperature T c at stoichiometry 1 since the Ca and K atoms form alternating intact layers as shown in Fig. These similarities include the electronic structure, in particular the Fermi surfaces [Fig. Since there is also nesting among the electron bands one can expect a competing pairing interaction with dwave symmetry as a subleading instability The bound state has its origin in a phase fluctuation of the condensate of Cooper pairs. The experimental identification of this excitation as a Bardasis-Schrieffer (BS) exciton rests on the shape of the line, its temperature dependence and the spectral weight transfer from the pairbreaking feature to the in-gap mode as described in detail in Refs. 9 and 10. Given its nearly clean gap and the high crystal quality, CaKFe 4 As 4 is an excellent candidate for scrutinizing the superconducting properties of hole doped 122 systems. We aim at answering the question as to wether or not subleading channels can also be observed in systems other than Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 and can be identified as generic. Calibrated Raman scattering equipment was used for the experiments. The sample was attached to the cold finger of a He-flow cryostat. For excitation a diodepumped solid state laser emitting at 575 nm (Coherent GENESIS MX-SLM 577-500) was used. The polarization of the incoming light was adjusted in a way that the light inside the sample had the proper polarization state. The absorbed power (inside the sample) was set at typically P a = 2 mW independent of polarization. By setting the polarizations of the incident and scattered photons the four symmetries A 1g , A 2g , B 1g , and B 2g of the D 4h space group can be accessed. For the symmetry assignment we use the 1 Fe unit cell [see Fig. The CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals were grown from the FeAs flux and characterized thoroughly as described by Meier and coworkers Fig. To this end we also plot the difference spectra, (orange in Fig. In this way the changes induced by superconductivity are highlighted. All spectra show the typical changes upon entering the superconducting state: (i) The opening of the gap induces a suppression of the intensity below a cross-over energy of Ω 0 = 125, 115, and 130 cm -1 for A 1g , B 1g , and B 2g symmetry, respectively. In this range ∆Rχ (Ω) (orange) is negative. (ii) The intensity piles up above Ω 0 due to a coherent superposition of pair-breaking and Bogoliubov quasiparticle excitations across the gap 2∆. The amplitude of the redistribution is small in A 1g and B 2g symmetry [Fig. The first striking observation is the nearly symmetryindependent cross-over energy Ω 0 where the normal (red) and superconducting (blue) spectra intersect each other or where ∆Rχ (Ω) changes sign. Yet, the intensity for Ω < Ω 0 does not vanish entirely as expected for a clean gap but is only reduced. No additional structures are observed in the A 1g and B 2g spectra while a weak hump appears at approximately 50 cm -1 [see Fig. For the discussion below we additionally plot in Fig. The main purpose of this section is a balanced discussion of the possible interpretations of the electronic Raman spectra presented in section III. Can the spectra be interpreted exclusively in terms of pair-breaking or are collective modes, similarly as in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , necessary for a more consistent explanation? Using yellow excitation we find a strong redistribution of spectral weight in B 1g symmetry similarly as in a simultaneous Raman study using red photons 17 (Note that B 1g and B 2g are interchanged in these studies.) With yellow photons the redistribution can be observed in all three symmetry channels. As already noticed earlier this difference in the experimental results may be traced back to orbital dependent resonance effects The highest pair-breaking energy in our study is observed in B 2g symmetry implying a maximal gap energy of 2∆ max ≈ 215 cm -1 . This energy corresponds to ∆ max = 13.3 meV slightly higher than the largest gaps derived for the β and δ bands, ∆ β,δ = 12 meV using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) The question arises whether ARPES and Raman results are compatible with the selection rules. As shown in Fig. Given that the single particle gap energies are by and large reproduced in the A 1g and B 2g spectra it is important to understand the B 1g spectra. As shown in Fig. There is only one alternative scenario which reconciles the results observed in the three Raman active symmetries and the ARPES results: The B 1g spectra do not directly reflect gap energies but rather are shifted downward by final state interaction as discussed for Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 in earlier work Following this reasoning we identify the maximum of the B 1g spectra at 135 cm -1 with a collective mode pulled off the maximal gap energy on the δ band due to a d x 2 -y 2 wave subleading interaction among the two electron bands predicted theoretically It is tempting to explain the faint peak close to 50 cm -1 (2 k B T c ) in terms of a second BS mode in a similar fashion as in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 . Difference spectra of the B1g Raman response for temperatures as indicated. The main peak exhibits a double structure (orange and blue arrows). A second hump is visible from 25 K down to 13 K (green arrow, see also the raw data in Fig. of the subdominant pairing channels, as proposed for Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 We investigated the recently discovered superconductor CaKFe 4 As 4 with inelastic light scattering as a function of photon polarisation and temperature. Using yellow light (575 nm) superconducting features were found in A 1g , B 1g and B 2g symmetry. A weak but well-defined pair-breaking feature is found at 215 cm -1 (corresponding to ∆ = 13.3 meV) in B 2g symmetry which is slightly above the largest gaps observed by ARPES for the β and the δ bands 3 and close to the energy Ω m where the normal and the superconducting spectra merge in all symmetry projections. This feature is also present in the A 1g spectra. In addition to the high-energy feature the A 1g intensity displays a plateau-like shape down to Ω (A1g) 0 = 125 cm -1 . Given the small discrepancies between the gap energies derived from the ARPES data and the Raman spectra one can conclude that the A 1g spectra reflect the entire range of gap energies of CaKFe 4 As 4 even though the individual gap energies cannot be resolved. In B 1g symmetry, the superconducting feature is centered at lower energy than in the two other symmetries. We interpret the sharp maximum at 135 cm -1 as a collective Bardasis-Schrieffer mode pulled off the maximal gap on the δ band similarly as in the sister compound Ba 0.65 K 0.35 Fe 2 As 2 . The shoulder at approximately 165 cm -1 is a remainder of the pair-breaking peak losing most of its intensity to the collective mode Using different combinations of light polarizations different parts of the Brillouin zone can be projected independently for particle-hole excitations (2) A1g ∝ cos(k x ) cos(k y ) which reflects the band structure better than the first order vertex because of the curvature of the hole and the electron bands γ A 1g x'y' B +A A1g which was found to be the most appropriate vertex for the FeAs systems 9,21 because of the opposite curvature of the electron and hole bands. For the experiments the samples were mounted on the cold finger in a way that the crystallographic axes match the laboratory system (xy). Because of the large angle of incidence, the incoming photons having polarization x or R have the same finite projection on the c-axis. Consequently, E g phonons, obeying xz and yz selection rules, are expected to appear in both RR and x y scattering configurations, whereas they are absent in xy configuration. in Fig. The strongest line that appears at 215 cm -1 in x y polarization is the out-of-phase c-axis Fe vibration having the proper B 1g symmetry in the crystallographic (2 Fe) unit cell. The in-phase c-axis vibrations of the As atoms appear at 66 and 188 cm -1 in the RR spectra. The line at 288 cm -1 corresponds to the in-phase c-axis vibrations of the Fe atoms. Three modes appear simultaneously with approximately the same intensity in RR and x y polarization both of which having the same finite projection of about 30% on the c-axis of the incoming photons inside the crystal and are tentatively identified as three of the four E g modes expected to be Raman-active in the P 4/mmm structure of CaKFe 4 As 4 . They are projected Since the sample lags slightly behind the sensor the indicated temperature is slightly higher and lower, respectively, between the curves. We derive Tc = 33.2 K and ∆Tc = 0.3 K. in zx and zy configuration thus have only approximately 10% of the full intensity. The mode at 232 cm -1 cannot be observed independently in the x y spectra since it is too close to the B 1g mode. We show an approximate decomposition in Fig. the extrapolated T c value. The width of the foot indicates ∆T c . Upon measuring χ m (T ) during cooling and heating with typical rates of ±1 K per min a small hysteresis of 0.1 . . . 0.2 K results. We use the average of the two individual T c values, T c = 33.21 K, as the sample's transition temperature. ∆T c = 0.3 K can be derived from the foot of χ (3) m (T ) above T c . The transition temperature is identical to that of Ref. 