Using finite-temperature phonon calculations and the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relations, we calculate ab initio the static dielectric constants of 78 semiconducting oxides and fluorides with cubic perovskite structures at 1000 K. We first compare our method with experimental measurements, and we find that it succeeds in describing the temperature dependence and the relative ordering of the static dielectric constant DC in the series of oxides BaTiO3, SrTiO3, KTaO3. We show that the effects of anharmonicity on the ion-clamped dielectric constant, on Born charges, and on phonon lifetimes, can be neglected in the framework of our high-throughput study. Based on the hightemperature phonon spectra, we find that the dispersion of DC is one order of magnitude larger amongst oxides than fluorides at 1000 K. We display the correlograms of the dielectric constants with simple structural descriptors, and we point out that DC is actually well correlated with the infinite-frequency dielectric constant ∞, even in those materials with phase transitions in which DC is strongly temperature-dependent. Capacitors for emerging power electronics -including those in avionics and automotive systems -must operate in specific temperature ranges, often outside ambient conditions. Perovskite materials have been widely used as ceramic dielectrics in capacitors, exhibiting different capacitances as a function of temperature. For example, BaTiO 3 has been used for ambient-condition applications since it has a Curie point close to room temperature, yielding high static dielectric constants. However, at higher temperatures, its lattice properties change, and capacitance drops. To optimize ceramic dielectrics for custom temperature ranges, it would be useful to perform high-throughput searches at finite temperatures. The static dielectric constant can be computed from first principles, e.g. using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) Here, we use finite-temperature lattice dynamics calculations to compute the static dielectric constant of 78 oxide and fluoride cubic perovskites at high temperature, directly from the temperature-dependent phonon spec- * ambroise.vanroekeghem@cea.fr tra. Our high-throughput methodology is particularly interesting for the search of new materials that could operate under specific conditions. In particular, with the recent development of sensors and electronics designed to operate close to the engine of airplanes or vehicles, the industry would benefit from compounds that are more adapted to high-temperature conditions, especially for use in capacitors We first describe the method, which is based on the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller (LST) relations The ionic contribution to the relative permittivity can be obtained from the generalized LST relations with DC the static dielectric constant, ∞ the ionclamped dielectric constant, and ω L and ω T the longwavelength longitudinal and transverse optical frequencies. The splitting between longitudinal (LO) and transverse (TO) modes, along with ∞ , can be obtained from DFPT as implemented for instance in VASP ( This interpolation also allows us to estimate the Curie temperature of those compounds. We obtain for BaTiO 3 : T c ≈ 270 K, for SrTiO 3 : T c ≈ 140 K and for KTaO 3 : T c ≈ 80 K. This difference of about 100 K compared to the experimental values corresponds to very tiny energy scales (less than 10 meV), and is comparable to what has been found in other studies Our results for the static dielectric constant are displayed in Fig. The Born charges and electronic dielectric constant ∞ are also modified by temperature, due to thermal expansion and to ionic displacements where ω L = ω L -iγ/2. We use the previously calculated value as the real part, and γ is evaluated from the lifetime of the corresponding phonon mode computed at the Γ point with almaBTE We now apply the same methodology to the set of 92 oxide and fluoride perovskites that we identified as mechanically stable at 1000 K in our previous work We list the stable compounds and their static dielectric constants at 1000 K, 1000 -and when they are also mechanically stable at 300 K, 300 -in Table Figure We delve into the question by computing the Spearman correlograms of the static dielectric constant at 1000 K DC with ∞ , and with several simple descriptors of the cubic perovskite structure ABX 3 : the masses of atoms A and B, their position in the periodic table, their electronegativity and Pettifor scales, their ionic radii, the lattice parameter of the compound and its electronic band gap. This is shown in Fig. Interestingly, the ionic radius of atom A and the electronic band gap have significant negative correlation with the static dielectric constant. This has indeed been observed empirically based on experimental data In conclusion, we have shown that the temperaturedependence of the static dielectric constant can be calculated from first principles with reasonable agreement with experiment over a large temperature range, simply taking into account the temperature-dependence of Table Figure the phonon spectrum and ground-state properties. In particular, we have evaluated quantitatively the effects of anharmonicity on the ion-clamped dielectric constant and Born charges, as well as the inclusion of lifetime effects in the generalized Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relations. Then, we have conducted a high-throughput study of the high-temperature static dielectric constant in oxide and fluoride cubic perovskites. We observed that the rank of the static dielectric constant at high temperature is already well described by the ion-clamped value, and mostly linked to the ionic radius of atom A of the perovskite ABX 3 . These findings bring coherence to the puzzling correlations between ground-state calculations and temperature-dependent experimental measurements that have been found in previous high-throughput stud-ies of the dielectric constant. We hope that our study will motivate high-throughput computational search of dielectric materials for specific applications in harsh temperature conditions. Figure 