Polycrystalline samples of Er1-xHoxNiSb (x = 0, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 1) were characterized by means of x-ray powder diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and optical metallography. The results proved the formation of half-Heusler alloys in the entire composition range. Their electrical transport properties (resistivity, thermoelectric power) were studied in the temperature interval 350-1000 K. The measured electrical resistivity spanned between 5 and 25 m. The maximum thermopower of 50-65 V/K was observed at temperatures 500-650 K. Replacing Ho for Er resulted in a non-monotonous variation of the thermoelectric power factor (PF = S 2 /). The largest PF of 4.6 WcmK -2 was found at 660 K for Er0.5Ho0.5NiSb. This value is distinctly larger than PF determined for the terminal phases ErNiSb and HoNiSb. Thermoelectric materials attract much attention of material scientists due to a variety of potential applications, from precision cooling through waste heat recovery, up to autonomous power suppliers without moving parts. Half-Heusler phases have been recognized as prospective thermoelectric materials for moderate-temperature range. So far, the main research focus has been put on d-electron compounds with general formula T IV (Ni, Co)(Sb, Sn), where T IV is an element from the fourth group of the Periodic Table -------------------------------- Polycrystalline specimens from the Er1-xHoxNiSb series (x = 0, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 1) were synthesized by single-step arc melting performed under argon atmosphere. Purity of starting materials were 99.9 % for erbium and holmium, 99.99 % for nickel, and 99.999 % for antimony. Due to high vapor pressure of antimony additional amount (6 wt.%) of Sb was added beforehand with respect to the ideal composition. The specimens were re-melted and flipped over five times to promote homogeneity. The products were examined by powder X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using an Xpert Pro PANanalytical diffractometer. Rietveld analysis was carried out with FullProf software Fig. The temperature dependencies of the electrical resistivity of the Er1-xHoxNiSb samples are displayed in Fig. As can be inferred from Fig. Fig. The temperature variations of the power factor, PF = S 2 /, calculated for the Er1-xHoxNiSb samples are presented in Fig. The half-Heusler compounds ErNiSb and HoNiSb were found to exhibit a full mutual solubility. The prepared alloys Er1-xHoxNiSb appeared almost single-phase with the cubic lattice parameter obeying the Vegard's law for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.However, sizable nonstoichiometry was detected in a form of Ni-atom deficiency in the main half-Heusler phase (up to 20 at.%). The electrical transport in the Er1-xHoxNiSb samples was described by a model comprising parallel semiconducting-and metallic-like charge transfer channels. The substitution of Ho for Er was found to moderately affect the thermoelectric properties of the alloys. Nevertheless, the power factor determined for Er0.5Ho0.5NiSb was larger by about 20% (at 660 K) than its magnitude for ErNiSb. In the next step of the research, one should check if the intentionally introduced disorder on the rare-earth atom site brings about sizable reduction in the heat conductivity of the Er1-xHoxNiSb alloys and hence significant improvement in the thermoelectric performance of the system studied.