Hydrogen exhibits qualitatively different charge states depending on the host material, as nicely explained by the state-of-the-art impurity-state calculation. Motivated by a recent experiment [Nature 546, 124 (2017)], we show that the complex oxide SrCoO2.5 represents an interesting example, in which the interstitial H appears as a deep-level center according to the commonly-used transition level calculation, but no bound electron can be found around the impurity. Via a combination of charge difference analysis, density of states projection and constraint magnetization calculation, it turns out that the H-doped electron is spontaneously trapped by a nonunique Co ion and is fully spin-polarized by the onsite Hund's rule coupling. Consequently, the doped system remains insulating, whereas the antiferromagnetic exchange is slightly perturbed locally. The brownmillerite SrCoO 2.5 is known to be a hightemperature antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator (T N > 500 K), reducing from the perovskite SrCoO 3 ferromagnetic (FM) metal (T c ∼ 250 K) via a long-range ordering of 0.5 oxygen vacancies per formula unit Despite a number of studies on SrCoO 2.5+δ (0 ≤ δ ≤ 0.5) Here, we aim to present a theoretical understanding of the role of interstitial hydrogen in SrCoO 2.5 . Based on first-principles calculations, we show that the inserted hydrogen acts as an electron donor, but the doped electron is not mobile. Instead, it is spontaneously trapped around a Co site, reducing the local Co valence state from +3 to +2. Due to the multivalent nature of Co ions, this Co 2+ state is stable. The consequences are: (a) no impurity state is introduced around the band edge; and (b) the AFM order is slightly perturbed locally. These re-FIG. sults not only put forth a theoretical basis to understand the experimental observations on HSrCoO 2.5 , but also shed new light on the impurity calculation methodology when strongly-correlated electrons are involved. First-principles calculations are performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The crystal structure of SrCoO 2.5 is shown in FIG. We note that some ambiguity remains in the experimentally refined structure data, primarily implying slight differences in the arrangement of the CoO 4 tetrahedra To simulate hydrogen doping, we construct a supercell containing 32 Sr, 80 O and 32 Co atoms, and introduce one H within, corresponding to a low H-concentration case (marked by the red dot in FIG. We first determine the most stable H position. Previous study suggests that the ions under liquid gating are preferably inserted into the hollow channels We then calculate the electronic band structures before and after H doping. This gap value is larger than the previous DFT+U results, which varied the onsite Coulomb repulsion U from 3 to 5 eV It is surprising to find that after H doping, the bandedge properties barely change [FIG. A widely-used calculation method However, a second thought alerts that a clean band gap after H-doping is distinct from what a deep-level impurity typically manifests. For example, interstitial H is known to be a deep-level impurity in MgO Then, how could such a large spin splitting at least of the size of the band gap occur? This puzzle is resolved by noticing that the doped electron is trapped by a Co ion instead of the interstitial H. Consequently, the strong Hund's rule coupling of the 3d orbitals polarize the electron spin. In specific, given that the 6 d-electrons of a Co 3+ form a high-spin state, the spin of the trapped electron is enforced to lie in antiparallel, effectively giving rise to a Co 2+ S = 3/2 state. Figure We can further confirm from the atomic projected density of states (PDOS) that the doped electron is absorbed into a Co 3+ forming a Co 2+ , while the other Co 3+ ions are not affected. We first reproduce the PDOS of Co in stoichiometric SrCoO 2.5 and HSrCoO 2.5 In conclusion, we show that interstitial H in the AFM insulator SrCoO 2.5 is an electron donor, but the kinetic energy of the doped electron is quenched by the multivalent Co ion. In this view, the robust insulating gap observed in the H 1-δ SrCoO 2.5 sample can be understood. Also, as long as δ = 0 or 1, the difference between the Co 3 + and Co 2 + magnetic moment will give rise to some FM signals. Nevertheless, we should point out that the present calculation cannot provide a quantitative explanation on the ∼125 K magnetic transition experimentally observed in H 1-δ SrCoO 2.5 