Multiferroic materials are potential to be applied in novel magnetoelectric devices, for example, highdensity non-volatile storage. Last decades, research on multiferroic materials was focused on threedimensional (3D) materials. However, 3D materials suffer from the dangling bonds and quantum tunneling in the nano-scale thin films. Two-dimensional (2D) materials might provide an elegant solution to these problems, and thus are highly on demand. Using first-principles calculations, we predict ferromagnetism and driven ferroelectricity in the monolayer and even a few-layers of CuCrP2S6. Although the total energy of the ferroelectric phase of monolayer is higher than that of the antiferroelectric phase, the ferroelectric phases can be realized by applying a large electric field. Besides the degrees of freedoms in the common multiferroic materials, the valley degree of freedom is also polarized according to our calculations. The spins, electric dipoles and valleys are coupled with each other as shown in the computational results. In experiment, we observe the out-of-plane ferroelectricity in a few-layer CuCrP2S6 (approximately 13 nm thick) at room temperature. 2D ferromagnetism of fewlayers is inferred from magnetic hysteresis loops of the massively stacked nanosheets at 10 K. The experimental observations support our calculation very well. Our findings may provide a series of 2D materials for further device applications. Multiferroic materials are materials exhibiting two or more primary ferroic properties and are promising for potential applications in the non-volatile storage devices controlled by an external electric field. Previous researches are mainly focused on the three-dimensional (3D) materials, such as perovskites BiFeO3. In this work, by using first-principles calculations we predict that 2D CuCrP2S6 is type-I multiferroic candidate (or a ferromagnetically ferroelectric material), where the ferromagnetic and ferroelectric polarization stems from Cr and Cu elements, respectively. We firstly focus on the properties of CuCrP2S6 monolayer. In the optimized structure, Cu atoms have two distinct sites, leading to two possible phases. We label this phase as antiferroelectric phase. The displacement distance of the Cu cation between ferroelectric and antiferroelectric phases is about 2.65 Ả and Born effective charge of Cu cation is approximately +1.2e. It should be noted that the electric dipole is approximately vertical to the ab plane. Our calculations of nudged elastic band (Fig. Further investigation suggests that the electric dipoles, spins and momentum-retreated degrees of freedom, for example, valleys discussed in the next paragraph, are bridged by spin-orbit coupling () d P S  -  . The parameter  is the coupling strength, and d is the electric dipole characterizing ferroelectricity. P is the quasi momentum, and S is the spin index, which is closely related to the intrinsic magnetization. The magneto-electric coupling is proportional to the momentum-resolved SOC in different bands by a constant. The integration over all bands and momentums is proportional to the total energy of SOC. SOC shows a nonzero contribution to the target system, and the integration of magneto-electric coupling is nonzero. Thus, the spins are locked with electric dipoles to some degree. When the electric dipole is reversed, the crystal field is changed, and the easy magnetization direction is reversed by an external electric field. Hence, the spins can flip in a monolayer without any an external magnetic field due to the unidirectional anisotropy. The illustration is given in Fig. The different band gaps of different valleys in ferroelectric phase are analogues to the energy splitting in ferromagnetic phase, and the difference in the band gaps is called Zeeman-type valley splitting. More information and detail definition can be found in previous work. The valley degree of freedom is strongly coupled to the electric and magnetic polarization according to the expression of the spin-dipole-valley coupling ()  -  d P S , where P can characterize valley centers here. To obtain a general conclusion, we use the spins in the (111) direction to conduct the calculations (Fig. It is worthy to stress that the roles of dipole, spin and valley are not equal. The energy to reverse valley, spin and dipole is different. Switching a dipole means that the crystal field is changed, and the energy needed to reverse a dipole is ~100 meV/f.u. Switching a spin involves in the energy of magnetocrystalline anisotropy, and the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy is usually ~1 meV/f.u. In fact, valley is a slave, although many reports think valley is a degree of freedom. Thus, we can use electric field to control both magnetic moment and valley. It is hard to use magnetic field to control dipole only through the SOC, but the magnetic field can control the valley. The bulk materials or nanosheets of few-layers can be viewed as stacked monolayers. The intralayer-antiferroelectric bulk is the most stable state according to calculations. The energy of ferroelectric bulk directly stacked by ferroelectric layers is 41 meV/f.u. lower than the energy of interlayer-antiferroelectric bulk. Thus, the ferroelectric stacking is easier to obtain than interlayer-antiferroelectric stacking. In fewlayers, there are many kinds of possible stacking types for ferroelectric layers. The energy difference between different stacking types of ferroelectric layers is much smaller than the barrier from the ferroelectric phase to antiferroeletric phase in a monolayer. If we can polarize every layer by an external field, the ferroelectric stacking would be favored. Thus, stacking types can't depolarize the electric dipole. Many of them are ferroelectric or ferrielectric according to our calculations. Some examples of optimized structures of few-layers are given in Fig. Bulk (or 3D) CuCrP2S6 is antiferromagnetic, because the spins are oppositely aligned in neighboring layers no matter the bulk is ferroelectric or antiferroelectric. The calculated antiferromagnetic energy is about 1.5 meV/f.u. lower than that of the ferromagnetic state. The interlayer exchanging energy is much smaller than intralayer exchanging energy (13 meV/f.u.). Thus, intralayer magnetic ordering is more robust than interlayer magnetic ordering. The magnetization cannot be canceled in the nanosheets of odd layers. Even in nanosheets of even layers, ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic phases possibly exist. According to our calculations, 4-layers can be ferromagnetic, and the magnetic configuration is shown in Fig. The last but not the least, similar materials are predicted in the series of ABP2X6 mainly including AgVP2Se6, CuCrxIn(1-x) P2Se6 and CuVP2S6. Monolayer AgVP2Se6 has ferromagnetic ferroelectricity and a pair of valley pseudospins. The presence of ferroelectric polarization under an external electric field is in good accordance with our theoretical model. It should be emphasized that the electric polarization is observed at room temperature, and the polarization is out of the ab plane. Before measuring magnetic properties in nanosheets, we characterize the magnetism of a thick flake (~ 1 μm thick). The result of the flake is similar to the previous bulk result despite of some differences. No magnetic hysteresis loop is observed, and the magnetization versus the magnetic field is a linear function. But as we stated in the theoretical part, it can show intrinsic intra-layer ferromagnetism when thickness decreases. The measurement of micro magnetic properties of monolayer and few-layer nanosheets at very low temperature (below 31 K) is still a challenge due to the weak signal and the difficulty to measure in-plane magnetization. To enhance the signal, used the grinding flakes, which we take it as a set of nanosheets with different thickness ranging from few to several hundred nanometers. The magnetization versus decreasing temperature, and hysteresis loop at 10 K are plotted in Fig. and (b), respectively. When the temperature is very low, the interlayer antiferromagnetic interaction would be favored, although it is relatively weaker than the intralayer ferromagnetism. Hence, the magnetization induced by magnetic field increases with increasing temperature below 31K, since the effective exchange interaction is weakened by thermal noise. It shows a cusp at Neel temperature (31K). The cusp at 31K is broader compared to bulk material, since the sample consists of nanosheets with different thicknesses and orientation. When the temperature crosses the Curie temperature of intralayer layer ferromagnetism (64K, which is the temperature point that has largest dM/dT), a sharp declination of total magnetization to almost zero is observed due to phase transition. The magnetic hysteresis loop at 10 K obviously shows ferromagnetic characteristics after subtracting the linear background, including antiferromagnetism, paramagnetism, diamagnetism. Owing to random orientation of the nanosheets, magnetoelectric coupling is not observed in the stacked nanosheets. Some possible evidences for magnetoelectric coupling in the thick oriented flake is discussed in the part of characterization of bulk in the supplementary materials. Besides, we also observe a weak hysteresis loop on the measurement of in-plane magnetization of exfoliated nanosheets versus magnetic field by magneto-optic Kerr effect (see Fig. nanosheets. The multiferroicity refers to the ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity of the monolayer. We further point out the polarized valley degree of this material can be a new kind of ferocity from the calculation results. In this work, we do not give experimental evidences for polarized valleys due to the difficulty in applying voltage vertical to the nanosheets when measuring the photoluminescence spectrum. Further efforts should be devoted to the synthesize and experimental characterization of monolayers at low temperature, since the multiferroicity of monolayer is much more robust and obvious than that of few-layers. Micro magneto-optical Kerr microscope and PFM cooled by liquid Helium are suitable setups for future characterization. Calculation details: First-principles calculations are performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) in the basis set of the projector augmented waves. The cutoff energy is set as 400 eV. During the calculations of monolayers, a vacuum space larger than 15 Å is applied to decouple the periodic interaction. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerh (PBE) functional is used to treat the exchange and correlation. The geometry and ions are fully relaxed to obtain a reasonable structure until all forces on every atom are smaller than 0.01 eV/Ả. Dense k-point meshes of 11 7 1  and11 7 5  are used for monolayers and bulks, respectively. The effective Hubbard U is tested, and DFT+U has no significant effect on the results of ferromagnetic ferroelectricity but has an influence on the valleys of the conductance band. DFT+U has no significant effect on the valleys of the valence band, and thus the valley-contrast transports are sound in case of p-doping. Material preparation: The flakes of CuCrP2S6 are prepared by placing the corresponding elements of stoichiometric ratio in an Al2O3 crucible with a cover, which is then placed in an evacuated silica tubes. The tube is kept at 973K for two weeks. Magneto-optical Kerr effect measurement is conducted at 5K on the exfoliated nanosheets sitting on a heavily doped Si substrate. The optical configuration is set up to measure the in-plane magnetization.