Very recently, we have introduced correlation consistent effective core potentials (ccECPs) derived from many-body approaches with the main target being their use in explicitly correlated methods, while still usable in mainstream approaches. The ccECPs are based on reproducing excitation energies for a subset of valence states, namely, achieving near-isospectrality between the original and pseudo Hamiltonians. In addition, binding curves of dimer molecules were used for refinement and overall improvement of transferability over a range of bond lengths. Here we apply similar ideas to the 2nd row elements and study several aspects of the constructions in order to find the high accuracy solutions within the chosen ccECP forms with 3s, 3p valence space (Ne-core). Our new constructions exhibit accurate low-lying atomic excitations and equilibrium molecular bonds (on average within ≈ 0.03 eV and 3 m Å), however, the errors for Al and Si oxide molecules at short bond lengths are notably larger for both ours and existing effective core potentials. Assuming this limitation, our ccECPs show a systematic balance between the criteria of atomic spectra accuracy and transferability for molecular bonds. In order to provide another option with much higher uniform accuracy, we also construct He-core ccECPs for the whole 2nd row with typical discrepancies of ≈ 0.01 eV or smaller. The effective core potential (ECP) approximation has been vital in electronic structure calculations for several decades. An ECP is used to replace an atom's core (nucleus and tightly bound electrons) and is constructed to mimic the original core's effects on the valence electrons. This approximation provides important benefits such as the removal of large energy scales associated with the core electrons while simultaneously enabling the implicit incorporation of the core's relativistic effects. It generates smoother charge densities around the nucleus which, for instance, allows the use of much smaller plane wave basis cutoff energies or less extensive gaussian basis sets. Consequently, in many cases, the availability of accurate ECPs can be the deciding factor for whether a calculation is even feasible or not. Given that the scope and accuracy of many-body electronic structure methods are continually increasing (true for both stochastic and basis set approaches, see Historically, ECPs have generally been formulated within effective mean-field (singleparticle) theories where the concept of core-valence partitioning follows rather naturally. A number of approaches have been established in the Density Functional Theory (DFT) Although generating valence-only Hamiltonians is more straightforward in an effective oneparticle setting, the performance of such ECPs within many-body theories is not guaranteed and can lead to results of mixed quality Remarkably, for the first row, we found that it was possible to derive ECPs that show significant improvements in various valence properties at the CCSD(T) level of theory when compared with existing ECP tables or the all-electron uncorrelated-core (UC) approximation where excitations out of the core are suppressed. Quite surprisingly this was achieved with simple, "minimal", non-divergent ECP parameterizations, i.e., with very few gaussians per nonlocal channel. In order to maintain the simplicity and direct connection of the ECP to the original Hamiltonian, the solution was formulated as an inverse problem. Namely, we searched for an effective Hamiltonian operator that reproduces a given set of many-body eigenenergies and eigenstates, outside the core region, as closely as possible. Not surprisingly, this can lead to an ill-conditioned problem (high sensitivity to inputs) and/or a complicated optimization landscape with many near-degenerate minima. Consequently, such optimizations can be rather difficult. Such difficulties can be understood conceptually, for instance, if one considers the well-known example from the spectral theory that two operators with different domains can have the same spectrum, i.e., they can be exactly isospectral. This non-uniqueness suggests that the problem requires adequate and proper constraining in order to arrive at a desirable solution with a reasonable amount of effort. For the B, C, N, O and S elements, we were able to accomplish just that and produced ECPs for these atoms that exceed the accuracy of existing tabulated ECPs and that have led to significant improvements in transferability. We also aimed to construct ECPs that are simple and can be employed in a variety of electronic structure packages and methods, i.e., as widely applicable as possible. To this end, we chose a well-established form This form leads to one-particle orbitals that also behave quadratically at the origin which makes their expansion in gaussians more efficient. Additionally, the smooth form provides computational savings for quantum Monte Carlo by reducing fluctuations. Another aspect of our recently constructed ECPs was to probe for the transferability in bonds both near and out of the equilibrium configurations, having in mind, for example, high-pressure applications in future. Therefore we monitored discrepancies of dimer binding curves including short bond lengths up to the dissociation limit, where the binding energy goes to zero for the compressed bond. Note that this limit is particularly challenging since it directly probes whether the ECP correctly mimics the (missing) core charge at short lengths. In cases where larger errors were present, we included the dimer into the construction as an additional constraint which improved the quality of the resulting ECPs. Indeed, we found that the key molecular properties were more accurately reproduced in this way. As an independent probe of transferability, we then tested hydride and oxide molecules. Further benchmarks and testing will come from future applications for systems where all-electron correlated calculations can be carried out. In the present work, we extend our previous collection of correlation-consistent ECPs to include the entire 2nd row of elements Na through Ar (following the convention that H and He comprise the zeroth row). For these elements, we have further improved and modified the methodology used in generating the ECPs which we describe in more detail in what follows. The constructed ECPs that we present here are not meant to be definitive. It is clear that with more elaborate forms, say, with a larger number of free parameters, the accuracy might still improved. Another consideration is that different applications might require further refinement or even new constructions. For example, alkaline elements have nominally large cores and one or two valence electrons. Clearly, there are applications where this would not provide an accurate replacement of the all-electron Hamiltonian (high pressures) and the inclusion of the outermost shell from the core to the valence space might be needed. This implies that one needs more options to guarantee the accuracy in various physical or chemical applications. Therefore keeping track of updates and any new constructions, as well as maintaining benchmark sets is an important part of providing clear choices and validations for future use of ECPs. The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we discuss the different components of a number of atomic energy gaps of a variety of tabulated 2nd row ECPs and how this affects their agreement with all-electron gaps at the many-body level as well as how this motivated the particular construction we use for the ECPs presented in this work. We outline this construction in section III. In section IV, we describe the particular parameterization we use for our ECPs. Section V outlines the scheme we followed to construct the ECPs' corresponding valence basis sets. In section VI, we share our results and present our ECPs together with several existing ones for comparison and highlight the shortcomings of Ne-core ECPs in particular settings (short polar bonds) and therefore, in addition, present He-core ECPs for the entire 2nd row that significantly improve the accuracy of ECPs with Ne-core partitioning and serve also as benchmarks for comparisons. In section VII, we give our concluding remarks. We have looked in a more quantitative manner at the contributions from valence-valence correlation energies as well as Hartree-Fock (HF) energies for a variety of atomic excitations among a testbed of tabulated ECPs. This provides additional insights into how various components of the energy are modified and respond to ECP differences (form, parameterization, etc.) which ultimately enabled us to improve our ECP construction scheme and helped to improve their overall performance. Specifically, for a number of tabulated ECPs, we have analyzed the errors (relative to relativistic all-electron results) of the HF and correlation contributions to the CCSD(T) spectral energies for the Si and P atoms and we have looked at how the errors for these energy components change between different ECPs. Relativity in all-electron calculations was included through the 10th-order Douglas-Kroll-Hess Hamiltonian for both HF and CCSD(T) approaches. In Figs. where ∆E s represents the energy gap between a given state and the ground state, and where VV corr is the valence-valence correlation energy. In these figures, the spread (represented by the shaded areas) are bounded by the maximum discrepancy (upper bound) and minimum discrepancy (lower bound) among the various ECPs. For the ECP cases, the valence-valence correlation is taken to be the fully correlated CCSD(T) energy of a particular state. For the all-electron case, the valence-valence correlation is taken to be the UC CCSD(T) correlation energy of a particular state. There are several observations that can be gleaned from these plots. The first is that the ECPs' correlation energies are on average larger than the corresponding all-electron valenceonly correlated values with the increase varying between 0 and 0.15 eV. This has been known FIG. STU and increased smoothness of ECP (pseudo)orbitals since this increases the probability for unlike spin pairs of electrons to encounter each other, thus increasing the correlation energy. However, the next striking feature is the rigidity of the correlated energy differences across various ECPs, regardless of construction, whether it shows singular or bounded/smooth behavior of local and nonlocal terms at the origin or other details. Essentially the ECP correlation energies are almost invariant to the the form or the construction of ECP, typically within 0.02 eV or less. Consequently, the largest differences between ECPs for atomic spectra come from fluctuations that originate in the HF component of energy differences. Finally, the third point is that aiming for atomic spectra accuracy better than 0.1 eV requires the HF component to "compensate" for the rigid correlation contribution component for a number of states. Given this rigidity of ECP correlations, we incorporate mean-field data into the construction of the 2nd row ECPs along with many-body data in order to avoid large meanfield biases which we found helps to improve transferability (shown below in section V). In the following section we give the specifics of the procedure we use to construct the ECPs. The strategy that we employ to generate our ECPs is a combination of many-body energy consistency and single-body norm conservation. We provide the details of each and how they are combined to form our full objective function in this section. In order to account for correlation when generating our ECPs, we have employed a spinunrestricted CCSD(T) energy consistency scheme as part of our full objective function. The details of this scheme are as follows: For a given atom, we first generate a large number of all-electron reference atomic states which includes various ionizations and spin-multiplicities. The states are calculated with the fully correlated (both core and valence electrons) spinunrestricted CCSD(T) method. We account for relativity by using the 10th order Douglas-Kroll-Hess Hamiltonian where s labels a given atomic state and ∆E s is the energy gap between the state and the neutral ground state and "ECP" and "AE" label the ECP and all-electron gaps, respectively. The energetics from all-electron and ECP were calculated with the Molpro quantum chemistry package We chose not to use the E 2 objective function exclusively when training our ECPs given that in doing so we observed an overall large increase in error of the HF gaps and subsequently poorer transferability when calculating potential energy surfaces of diatomic molecules (dimers and oxides) at the CCSD(T) level of theory. We suspect this is due to the rigidity in the ECP correlation energies as outlined in section II, namely, in order to reduce the total error of the CCSD(T) gap, the magnitude of the HF error increases to compensate the error from the more rigid correlations. We observed that reaching small gap errors at the many-body level at the full expense of the HF gap errors showed tendencies to increase transferability errors. In fact, the best results came from a balance between the errors in correlation and HF components. In addition, significant variational freedom inside the core is proved to be helpful and we have therefore included a single-body norm conservation into our objective function, as outlined in the next subsection, in order to strike this balance. In order to maintain accuracy at the HF level of theory, we employed a norm conservation scheme as another component of our full objective function. We have taken a strategy similar to what has been used in previous works . The norm-conserving objective function is then formed as where we also include the errors in the orbital eigenvalues l . This procedure is similar to what is generally done in norm-conserving schemes, however, we allow the core more freedom by not matching it to a particular functional form but rather focus on matching the quantities mentioned. For the elements Al-Ar we took reference s and p orbitals from the atom's neutral ground state and took the reference d orbital from the p → d excitation. For Na and Mg, we took the single-valence doublet states as the reference in each channel. To form our full objective function, O 2 , we take E 2 and N 2 as a linear combination, where w 0 is a chosen weight, typically taken as 5 × 10 -2 . To construct our ECP, we vary its parameters until O 2 is minimized. The value of w 0 is chosen so as to strike a balance between the accuracy of the many-body and single-body properties of the ECP -or viewed in another way, we are allowing a violation of single-body norm conservation in order to achieve higher accuracies on the many-body spectral properties. When using the conventional Ne-core and 3s3p valence, the transferability of the ECPs in particular environments was observed to be less than satisfying. This is particularly true for compressed polar bonds (as will be shown). In order to reach high many-body and single-body accuracies in these regimes as well, we have also generated He-core ECPs for all of the second row atoms. Though, more expensive than their Ne-core counterparts the Hecore ECPs still provide a non-negligible computational savings when considering their use in quantum Monte Carlo which scales with atomic number as O(Z 5.5-6.5 ) and within planewave codes where calculations with the full Coulomb potential are not feasible. For these smallcore ECPs, the optimization procedure was nearly identical, except that we took the neutral ground states for all references in the norm-conserving component and we generated the cutoff radii from the semi-core orbitals. In this case, for each angular momentum channel, the cutoff radius was taken as the inner most finite extremum of rφ AE l . We then used these radii as the match points of the norm, value and slope of the valence orbitals while also matching their eigenvalues. Furthermore, we found that a much larger weight could be used on the UCCSD(T) spectral component (two or three orders of magnitude) than the weight used for the Ne-core ECPs without introducing a significant negative impact in transferability. This is due to a much smaller discrepancy in the correlation energies (valence and semi-core electrons) between the He-core and all-electron cases. We have applied the construction outlined in this section to all the second row atoms, Na-Ar. For all optimizations, we have used the DONLP2 solver of Spellucci The parameter values of our ccECPs for all atoms and all core sizes are shared in Tables I and II and are also available at the website in Ref. The ECPs we have constructed have the following form where r i is the radial distance of electron i from the core's origin and l max is chosen to be the maximum occupied angular momentum channel from the ground state core. The non-local terms include lm-th angular momentum projectors, |lm lm|. The local potential, V loc , is taken to be where Z eff = Z -Z core is the pseudo-atom's total core charge. We fix Z eff α loc,1 , while n loc,1 = 1, n loc,2 = 3, so that V loc (r) is finite everywhere and its first derivative vanishes at the origin. Similarly, the set of non-local potentials, {V l }, are parameterized by where the powers {n l,k }, are all equal to 2. Except for β loc,1 and β loc,2 , which are fixed as given above, the Greek letter parameters are all varied in the minimization of our objective function. For an initial round of optimization, for V loc and all V l 's, we set the number of gaussian terms to one. For a given Ne-core ECP, we included 1-2 more gaussians in these channels for additional flexibility if further optimization rounds were required to reach agreement within roughly 0.05-0.1 eV of the low-lying all-electron many-body spectrum. Pushing the accuracies further, generally led to significant mean-field errors for reasons discussed in section II. In the case of the He-core ECPs, we again only included one gaussian term in these functions initially. However, for these ECPs further terms were added until we observed agreement with all-electron data within roughly the chemical accuracy window. This simple form keeps the volume of the parameter space as small as practically possible and therefore helps to simplify the optimization problem. For each atom and each core size, we have generated a corresponding basis set. The general recipe that we followed to generate the basis sets (similar to Ref. To generate the basis sets for the He-core ECPs, we have minimized the atomic groundstate CCSD(T) energy for all atoms. The basis sets for the Ne-core ECPs minimize the atomic ground-state CCSD(T) energy for the atoms Al through Ar and the dimer groundstate CCSD(T) energy for the atoms Na and Mg. For a given basis set, we start by generating contractions, one for each occupied HF ground-state orbital, by starting from a set of primitives and optimizing the exponents until the ground-state HF energy is minimized. The resulting exponents are then taken as the contraction primitives whose coefficients are taken to be the ground-state HF expansion coefficients. We take the same contractions for each VDZ, VTZ, VQZ and V5Z basis. For a given basis, we append additional even-tempered uncontracted primitives following the correlation-consistent scheme In addition to these basis sets, we have also generated augmented varieties which follow the same scheme, but include an additional even-tempered diffuse primitive into each symmetry channel. All of our basis sets are shared at the website given in Ref. For all 2nd row atoms, we share in Tables III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII,IX and X the all-electron CCSD(T) valence ionization potentials and (if bound) the electron affinity along with the discrepancies of the same quantities from various core approximations which includes allelectron UC approximation, a number of previously tabulated ECPs We also share the discrepancies from all-electron UCCSD(T) potential energy surfaces for one or two diatomic molecules for all the atoms in Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10. For the cases of oxides, we utilized our previously published oxygen ECP For argonium, we used a well-tuned unpublished hydrogen ECP for all cases other than uncorrelated core. Our ECP parameter sets are shared in Tables II and II. In the following subsections, we provide a discussion for each pseudoatom's atomic and molecular accuracies, in turn, and summarize the results. In the final subsection, we share a comparison of the mean absolute deviations of the binding parameters of the molecules presented in this work between our ECPs and the all-electron UC approximation as well as the other tabulated ECPs we've benchmarked against in this work to provide a more global picture of the accuracy of our potentials. In this section we also present total atomic energy components of our ECPs along with their core radii for future reference. A. Sodium In the case of sodium, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table In the case of our He-core ECP, the agreement with the all-electron atom is better still and for each quantity, the errors are at sub meV scales. For the Na 2 and NaO molecules, the accuracies of both of our core partitions are also quite high with our Ne-core and He-core ECPs being within 0.05 eV and 0.01 eV of the all-electron UCCSD(T) result over the full range of geometries, respectively. For magnesium, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table In the case of the MgO molecule, our Ne-core ECP shows better agreement with all-electron UCCSD(T) at shorter atomic separations than both UC and previously tabulated ECPs and at equilibrium, the agreement is within chemical accuracy. Our He-core ECP improves upon this further, with errors less than 0.01 eV across all geometries plotted. TABLE IV: All-electron UCCSD(T) ionization potentials for Mg along with the errors from uncorrelated core (UC) and ECPs. The uncontracted aug-cc-pCV5Z basis was used for all calculations. All values in eV. See Tab. III for further description. Exp For aluminum, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table V and Fig. However, in the case of the He-core, we observed errors less than a hundredth of an eV. The Al 2 molecule is described well by both core partitions, both being within chemical accuracy scales. For the AlO molecule, similar to previously tabulated ECPs, our Ne-core ECP is overbound by tenths of eV as the molecule is compressed towards dissociation. This potentially signifies a limitation of this particular choice of core for this type of environment, namely, compressed polar bonds. We suspect that key contributors to the error in this regime are a breakdown of the assumed point-charge interactions of the cores and also the neglect core-valence overlaps For silicon, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table In the case of the silicon dimer, both core partitions perform very well and their errors at the UCCSD(T) level are no more than about 0.02 eV. The SiO molecule shows similar and profound discrepancies for the Ne-core ECP as was seen in AlO. At short atomic separations, the pseudo-molecule is severely overbound for all tested ECPs including our Ne-core partition. Interestingly, at equilibrium, the agreement for our ECP and some others is much better and is within chemical accuracy. For our He-core ECP, the errors are significantly reduced and we observe chemical accuracy agreement across all geometries plotted. On this element, it is clearly visible that atomic spectrum is not sufficient to assess the overall quality of the ECPs. Seemingly, BFD, TN, and STU have somewhat smaller energy discrepancies than our Ne-core ECP. However, molecular calculations reveal lower or even significantly lower transferability. In fact, our Ne-core ECP is on par with SBKJC that however is unbounded (1/r 2 terms) so that our variational freedom is then significantly lower in comparison. b Reference For phosphorous, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table VII and Fig. For the case of P 2 , both core partitions perform well with the Ne-core ECP obtaining maximum errors that are only marginally larger than chemical accuracy and the He-core ECP's errors being a factor of 2-3 smaller still. The results from PO are also quite good for both partitions. At equilibrium, both He-and Ne-core ECPs show errors no more than about 0.03 eV. For our He-core ECP, this level of accuracy is maintained as the bond is compressed, however, the Ne-core ECP at these shorter separations begins to overbind. Note that our constructions compete in overall optimality with SBKJC while having smaller variational freedom in bounded potentials. In addition, the molecular results show rather nonsystematic behavior for STU ECPs that are different (underbinding) from the rest of the row (typically, overbinding). For sulfur, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table VIII and Fig. Exp b Reference For chlorine, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in table IX and figure Our construction, however, led to He-and Ne-core ECPs that reproduce the all-electron Cl 2 and ClO potential energy surfaces quite well -where both large and small core ECPs remain well within chemical accuracy for the full range of geometries. To provide another TABLE VIII: All-electron (AE) UCCSD(T) valence ionization potentials and electron affinity of S along with the errors from uncorrelated core (UC) and ECPs. The uncontracted aug-cc-pCV5Z basis was used for all calculations. All values in eV. See Tab. V for further description. Exp b Reference For argon, the atomic and molecular results of our Ne-core and He-core ECPs are shared in Table X and Fig. The non-local raddi have implications primarily related to efficiency of QMC calculations as further explained elsewhere The atomic spectra and Tab. XI show that apart from the inherent bias for a few short polar bonds our constructions show consistent accuracy in both atomic and molecular calculations and offer close to an optimal balance overall. Our results, somewhat unexpectedly, are on par with (or in a few cases significantly improve upon) the ECPs from the SBKJC table. Except for the Na atom (which is a bit special having only one valence electron), SBKJC ECPs appear to represent perhaps the most systematic consistency among the tested previous constructions. Note that the SBKJC ECPs are not bound at the nucleus, diverging as 1/r 2 in the repulsive channels and as -Z eff /r in the local channel. Due to our choice of the ccECP form with bounded potentials and minimized radial extent of the nonlocal terms (although not explicitly enforced) for several elements we hit a comparably optimal point as has been achieved in SBKJC table before. In some cases, we were able to actually find significantly better compromises. As mentioned before, we note that Ne-core ECPs for atoms such as Na and Mg with one or two valence electrons might prove to have only limited applicability in some bonding environments where shallow core states contribute to the chemical effects (for example, in compounds at high pressures). It is also clear that core polarization and relaxation potentials On the other hand, since we report here on the existing limits of the Ne-core ECPs in their current forms, we have decided to provide another option for high accuracy calculations that offer a significant boost in accuracy and eliminate many compromises mentioned above. To this end, we constructed high accuracy He-core ECPs that significantly decrease the discrepancies with all-electron relativistic calculations. The gain is by an order of magnitude or more, with typical errors of 0.001-0.005 eV on the atomic side and ≈ 0.01 eV for molecular systems. Obviously, these operators imply additional cost that is most pronounced in stochastic methods due to the increase of total energies and fluctuations. Note that some of that is compensated from much smaller effective core radius of nonlocal terms Overall, we believe that the constructed ECPs provide both new insights as well as practical new options for high accuracy valence-only calculations. Supplementary material contains further information including very accurate CCSD(T) total energies extrapolated to the complete basis set limit (better than 1 mHa accuracy) for atomic states and relativistic CCSD(T) molecular potential energy surfaces and binding parameters from all-electron calculations as well as the discrepancies from all core approximations considered in this work Input and output files for the calculations performed in this study are available and maintained at the Materials Data Facility See supplementary material for additional calculated properties of our ccECPs including total energy components of various atomic states and the potential energy surfaces of the molecules considered in this work along with experimental binding properties. a Reference a Reference a Reference a Reference a Reference In this work, we offer several new advances and insights into the construction of correlation consistent ECPs and apply this to the construction of potentials for the 2nd row elements.