In the framework of the suggested in In the previous paper with extreme grain size ) , ( 0 T d  at PD value ε and temperature T, for which the maximum of the FS ) , (   , σ m (ε) = σ 0 (ε) + αmG√ 6√2 π m 0 ε b•1.59363 d 0 (ε,T)(1+ε) 3 (e 1.59363 -1) -1 2 . (2) In the relationships (1), 2 π 6√2εb (1 + ε) 3 (3) that one allows to refine the values of 0 m in accordance with experimental data for ) ( k in various CG materials and to formulate the model in terms of the constant , now in whole region of diameter d. We introduce in the paper a quasi-particle interpretation for the quanta of PD energy to be equal to the energy e L d E of unit dislocation to be necessary for appearance of a dislocation (or nanopore within suggested in , for different sizes of grain of single-mode homogeneous PC aggregate with only the single (crystallite) phase and study its hardening and pre-fracture stages. Finally, the inclu-1 e-mail: reshet@ispms.tsc.ru 2 Note, e.g. the dependence of were considered for Pb in We use the notations and conventions of the paper In the framework of Louis de Broglie corpuscular-wave hypothesis the minimal part of energy, e L d E , of PD should possesses by the properties of a particle and wave. The latter means that the energy of such quasi-particle, conditionally called as "dislocon", (as the quantum of PD energy): ħω = E d L e + W, for creating (or changing) of 0D (zero-dimensional) or 1D defect cannot be less than ħω red = E d L e , thus determining the "red" border of frequency. For instance, for α-Fe it equals for ε=0: ω red (α-Fe)=5,99˖10 15 s -1 and for a lower frequency a dislocon in α-Fe does not arise, therefore not generating (or not changing) a generalized dislocation in the linear form as for massless particles being subject to the Bose-Einstein statistic (as for the acoustic phonons in Debye approximation): ω = v d k (p = ħk) and for with the speed of propagation of dislocon in the medium: tude as the speed of sound (v s =5,93 ˖10 3 м/с), to be related to harmonic (phonon) oscillations of CL, but not to its local destruction. However, as we will show, the choice: v d = M(0)v s makes by closed to the correct one the interpretation of the dislocon as the composite quasi-particle consisting from acoustic phonons, which were formed when the bond between atoms is broken (e.g., among A and A ́ on the Fig. At the thermodynamic quasi-equilibrium state for fixed value ε 3 of residual PD in each crystallite the quasi-equilibrium process of emission and absorption of the dislocons is established (see Ref. with periodic boundary conditions: . Hence, on the length of deformable part of the volume: , in k-space there is one allowed value of k and the number of modes in the unit of k-length is equal to: . The total number of modes bounded in the limits of thin ring from the radius k to radius (k+dk), with account for the pairing of the dislocations and polyhedral parameter 0 m is evaluated as: where it was taken into account that dislocons (phonons) are localized only in the zone of localized deformation, i.e. in the plastically deformed part of linear volume: ( ) 1 ). The only those from them, for which the frequency: ω ≥ ω red give the possibility of creation of a dislocation (nanopore). The bandwidth of the frequencies for such dislocons should be extremely narrow: ω(ε) -ω red ≪ ω red and 3 In fact, at constant quasi-static deformation rate there is no thermodynamic equilibrium state for any of the crystallites in the PC sample, but we have argued in the footnote 4 in in the framework of Einstein proposal we naturally assume for the dislocons, that all frequencies for them coincide with ω red , that corresponds to the insertion of Dirac δ-function in ( An allowance for the model isotropy of crystallite distribution in the PC sample leads to the coincidence of Implementation of the generalized Hall-Petch law for α-Fe, Cu, Al, Ni, α-Ti, Zr. In order to determine the values of the constant m 0 (3) let us use the known experimental values for HP coefficient ) 002 , 0 ( k for (poly)crystalline single-mode samples with BCC, FCC and HCP CL from the Table for crystallite phase of the polycrystalline aggregates of α-Fe, Cu, Al, Ni, α-Ti, Zr with closely-packed randomly oriented grains being homogeneous with respect to its size (single-modesamples) at T=300K are presented on the Fig. According to Fig. Temperature dependence of yield strength and extreme grain sizes for Al. Because of with a growth of the temperature the value of the shear module (within the same phase of the material with linear temperature coefficient for the shear modulus G  , e.g. for Al: correspond to the former substructure being decreased and (b, d) being increased with grows of T, whereas for the latter one it corresponds the explicit dependence from temperature in the relations (1), is absent in the literature and it is necessary to replenish it. For instance, the results of molecular dynamics simulation for Cu ) contradicts to the established displacement law (2). However, one should be stressed, that the derivation of ( ence of the equilibrium probabilities distribution: given by the Eq.( its ratio is given by: and in view of the approximation for the right-hand side , where a decreasing of the root, ' T T , suppresses the grows of the first multiplier, e.g. for Al in the limits An experimental estimation of the grows we leave out of the paper's scope. However, we note that twinning (as forming of 2D-defects) may be as well considered in terms of the clusters of partial dislocations (see chapter 23 in decreases with grows of T, whereas 4 Therefore, we may think that analytically the twinning influence into the deformation hardening is already taken into account the dislocations forming them. 5 An approximate estimation for ) ( ) . From the extremity of 1) a displacement of the extremal size value d 0 (ε, T) (22) to the large grains region 2) an increase of FS σ(ε), including the maximum σ m (ε) (23), with a grows of T in the NC region in single-mode PC materials for d < d 1 ≈ 3d 0 , and a decrease for d > d Stress-strain curves for crystallite phase of α-Fe. Backofen-Considére criterion. A dependence of ) ( (1) together with stress-strain curve plot ) (    (Fig. The stress-strain curves of the dependence ) , , ( (1) for the pure crystalline phase of the equilibrium PC α-Fe sample at T=300K for various average grain sizes are shown on the Fig. d, nm 0,05 0,1 0,2 0,5 1 2 5 10 20 30 10 6 0,009 0,012 0,017 0,027 0,038 0,054 0,081 0,107 0,133 0,144 10 5 0,028 0,039 0,055 0,086 0,122 0,169 0,256 0,338 0,420 0,456 10 3 0,273 0,386 0,545 0,856 The extreme value of the quantity of PD, m  , under quasi-static loading follows from an approximate solution ) ( 0  y of the transcendental equation in the figure brackets Where a root m  is chosen in the range of the form (1) the limit with account for ( the solutions of ( . This value was not experimentally observed in the NC region, is close to the theoretical ultimate stress and is determined by the peculiarities of the model. Among the peculiarities one may select a single-mode property of the crystallites, not accounting for the second phase (using the terminology of Ref. Overcoming of the above peculiarities is based, first, on the natural assumptions that an input from the second phase should be add additively to equilibrium means the absence of an explicit contribution from the boundary grains (GB) into hardening). Second, with increasing of an accumulated PD ε, a volume of intergrain regions is increased with changing of the second phase contents, and therefore the porous structure therein is increased, that leads on the final stage to appearance of cracks and destruction of the sample, as well as for sub-microcrystalline and NC materials this phase provides the slipping through pores of grains (or groups of grains) for sufficiently small PD, that it is by a previously unaccounted softening factor. We take into account the contribution from the GB in to the total stress of the sample by means of subtracting the stress in the porous part of the second phase of the aggregate with a coefficient of proportionality . Discontinuity of the sample in areas of grain boundaries implies a necessity of an negative input from pores into total ) ( in dependence from average size of such pores, being increased with accumulation of PD ε. Let's consider pores as the formal crystallites of average sizes P d of the same materials. Such model of two-phase system reminds one from the composite models variants ) ( , with a some constant , which takes into account the average distance between grains and highly depends on a preparation of the GB states. The constant n, as well appears, in general, by a function from average size, d, of the crystallites. The part of the volume of GB grows with decreasing of the crystallite diameter d, that means an increasing of a softening factor. The modified model, which takes into account for GB, including theirs pores structure, leads to the following form of dependence for the phase of the equilibrium integral flow stress: , with absence of the grains from the second phase (i.e. with n=m) the FS of homogeneous two-phase polycrystalline material follows from the equations ( where a constant ) ( 0   is extracted from the first and second phases of the PC sample. For α-Fe, when n=60 (that corresponds to smaller-angle grain boundaries in the coarse-grain limit, but not in the NC region) the stress-strain curves for large d (the plots 1 and 2 on the Fig. In the paper the quasi-particle interpretation of the quantization of the energy of crystallite of PC aggregate under PD is given. Within this interpretation the quantum of energy of unit dislocation, condition-ally called as the dislocon, appears by the composite (short-lived) particle consisting from the acoustic phonons surrounding two atoms (at the moment of time of breaking the bond between the atoms and creating of a nanopore), which leave the nodes of the crystal lattice under PD. This idea allows one to come analytically to the description and evolution of the Chernov-Luders macroband of PD in connection with observed acoustic emission the property: d 0 (ε, T 1 ) > d 0 (ε, T 2 ) for T 1 < T 2 , is opposite to one marked by item 2) in the Introduction of Ref.