We investigate the effects of crystal lattice vibrations on the dispersion of plasmons. The loss function of the homogeneous electron gas (HEG) in two and three dimensions is evaluated numerically in presence of electronic coupling to an optical phonon mode. Our calculations are based on many-body perturbation theory for the dielectric function as formulated by the Hedin-Baym equations in the Fan-Migdal approximation. The coupling to phonons broadens the spectral signatures of plasmons in the electron-energy loss spectrum (EELS) and it induces the decay of plasmons on timescales shorter than 1 ps. Our results further reveal the formation of a kink in the plasmon dispersion of the 2D HEG, which marks the onset of plasmon-phonon scattering. Overall, these features constitute a fingerprint of plasmon-phonon coupling in the EELS of simple metals. It is shown that these effects may be accounted for by resorting to a simplified treatment of the electron-phonon interaction which is amenable to first-principles calculations. The coupling between electrons and crystal lattice vibrations (phonons) affects pervasively the quantum behaviour of condensed matter. Plasmonics, for instance, employs plasmons and surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) to manipulate lightmatter interactions at the nano-scale, and it has proven successful in an interdisciplinary area of applications, encompassing, e.g., photovoltaics, A plasmon is excited at momenta q and frequencies ω pl which correspond to zeros of the macroscopic dielectric function. The manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we report the Hedin-Baym equations for the dielectric function and the procedure followed for their solution in the Fan-Migdal approximation. Numerical results for the 3D HEG are presented in Sec. III, whereas Sec. IV illustrates the two-dimensional case. In Sec. V the accuracy of approximate procedures to account for electron-phonon coupling effects in the evaluation of the dielectric function are discussed. Finally, concluding remarks are presented in Sec. VI. Many-body perturbation theory provides a suitable framework to investigate the effects of the electronphonon interaction on the plasmon dispersions of metals. Hedin's equations for the single-particle Green function constitute an exact formulation of the manybody problem under the assumption that the nuclei are fixed at their equilibrium position (clamped-nuclei approximation). We concentrate on the electron-phonon interaction, and thus ignore the effects of the electron-electron interaction beyond the singleparticle picture by neglecting the electronic part of the screened interaction W e in the self-energy Σ. Within these approximations, and considering the Fourier transform of the Hedin-Baym equations to momentum and frequency, the defining equation for the dielectric function of the coupled electron-phonon system may be rewritten as: where ǫ k are the single-particle energies of noninteracting electrons, g ν kq the electron-phonon coupling matrix elements, ν and ω qν the phonon-mode index and energy, and D ν 0 (q, ω) = 2ω qν [ω 2 -ω 2 qν ] -1 the noninteracting Green function for the ν-th phonon. Σ M is the Fan-Migdal electron self-energy due to electronphonon interaction, and it is derived following standard field-theoretic approaches. One may promptly verify that the combination of the Dyson equation with Eq. ( where the quantity ∆Σ(k, q, ω, ω , sometimes denoted as electron-hole self-energy Equation ( Generally, the inclusion of dynamical self-energy effects is expected to influence single-particle states by (i) renormalizing their energy due to the interaction with phonons; (ii) introducing an imaginary energy component that reflects the emergence of finite lifetime effects; (iii) leading to non-trivial dynamical (frequencydependent) structures in the spectral function. In the context of photoemission spectroscopy, the aspects (i-iii) have been thoroughly characterized via first-principles calculations and experiments, and they are known to underpin the formation of photoemission kinks, 2 the emergence of polaronic satellites close to the band edges, In the clumped-nuclei approximation, whereby electron-phonon coupling is ignored, the inclusion of dynamical effects through the GW self-energy in the evaluation of the dielectric function may result in an unphysical renormalization of the intensity of calculated optical spectra if vertex corrections are neglected. We account for the effects of electron-phonon interaction in the dielectric function through the numerical solution of Eqs. (1)- (5). We consider first a three-dimensional (3D) homogeneous electron gas with energy-momentum dispersion relations ǫ k = 2 k 2 2m * , where m * is the effective mass. In the following we set m * = 0.2 m e , a representative value for describing carriers at the band edges of doped semiconductors. The dielectric function in Eq. ( A quantitative estimation of the effects of phonons on the characteristic timescales of plasmon damping, is provided by the plasmon lifetime, which can be expressed as: Im P (q, ω pl q ) [∂Re P (q, ω)/∂ω] ω=ω pl q -1 . ( Through the evaluation of Eq. ( If the coupling to phonons is neglected, electron-hole scattering is the sole decay pathway that plasmons may undergo. Correspondingly, the plasmon linewidth is infinitesimal for q < q L c , and the lifetime infinite. The broadening of the plasmon peak in Fig. We now proceed to discuss general features of plasmonphonon interaction in the 2D HEG. We consider again r s = 4 and 16, which in 2D correspond to carrier concentrations of 5 • 10 15 and 1.2 • 10 15 cm -2 , respectively. The dielectric function is evaluated considering the 2D Fourier transform of the Coulomb interaction v(q) = 2πe 2 /qε 0 . The loss function evaluated in absence of coupling to phonons is reported in Fig. When the electron-phonon interaction is switched on, the loss function of the 2D HEG, illustrated in Fig. which electron-phonon coupling is neglected. Conversely, for ω pl > ω ph the effects of electron-phonon coupling on the plasmon dispersions is two-fold: (i) the plasmon peak is broadened by finite lifetime effects, (ii) the plasmon energy is renormalized and the corresponding peak is broadened. The combination of (i) and (ii) leads to the formation of a kink in the plasmon dispersion of 2D metals, in close analogy to the kink induced in the photoemission spectrum of solids by electron-phonon interaction. The values of q ph c and q L c are illustrated in Fig. First-principles calculations of the polarization in the Fan-Migdal approximation based on the solution of Eq. ( where we introduced the dynamical renormalization λ and the scattering time τ functions: α 2 F is the Eliashberg spectral function and it is defined as: where the sum extends over all phonon modes ν and momenta q. The electron-phonon coupling strength is given by: with N F being the density of states at the Fermi energy. If we consider an Einstein model for the phonon dispersion with energy ω ph and isotropic electron-phonon matrix elements ḡ, the electron-phonon coupling strength and the Eliashberg spectral function simplify to λ q = ḡ2 /ω ph and α 2 F (ω) = ḡ2 δ(ω -ω ph )/2. Correspondingly, τ and λ can be evaluated analytically from Eqs. ( The resulting scattering rate τ E and dynamical renormalization λ E for the Einstein model are shown in Fig. We have investigated the influence of the electronphonon interaction on the dissipation of plasmons in metals based on the solution of the Hedin-Baym equations for the dielectric function in the Fan-Migdal approximation. We have reported calculations of the loss function of the HEG in 2D and 3D and discussed the general features induced by electron-phonon coupling in the plasmon dispersion for carrier densities representative of metals and heavily-doped semiconductors. The coupling to phonons in 3D leads primarily to a broadening of the plasmon peak and to finite-lifetime effects. In addition to these signatures of plasmon-phonon coupling, our loss-function calculation for 2D systems also indicate the emergence of a kink in the plasmon dispersion -in close analogy to the kinks in photoemission spectroscopy -which arises from the coupling to a longitudinal optical phonon mode. In conclusion, these results call for further work to investigate compensation effects arising from the inclusion of vertex corrections, 