Tailored Pt nanoparticle catalysts are promising candidates to accelerate the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells. However, the search for active nanoparticle catalysts is hindered by laborious effort of experimental synthesis and measurements. On the other hand, DFT-based approaches are still time consuming and often not efficient. In this study, we introduce a computational model which enables rapid catalytic activity calculation of unstrained pure Pt nanoparticle electrocatalysts. The generic setup of the computational model is based on DFT results and experimental data obtained worldwide over the past ca 20 years; whereas, importantly, the computational model dispenses with DFT calculations during runtime. This realizes feasible and sharply reduced computation effort in comparison to theoretical approaches where DFT calculations must be performed for each nanoparticle individually. Regarding particle size effects on Pt nanoparticles, experimental catalytic mass activities from previous studies are accurately reproduced by our computational model. Shedding light on the parameter space of particle size effects, this study enables predictions beyond available experiments: Our computational model identifies potential enhancement in mass activity up to 190% over the experimentally detected maximum. Importantly, the rapid activity calculation enabled by our computational model may pave the way for extensive nanoparticle screening to expedite the search for improved electrocatalysts. Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are suitable devices for versatile stationary and portable energy solutions. Those have been proven simple descriptors for catalytic activities of various reactions. Note, however, that the difference between two adsorption energies does not depend on the gas-phase reference used, as long as the reference is identical. For details on the DFT calculations we refer the reader to our Supporting Information. The evaluation of coordination for all involved sites exposes fundamental linear dependence between OH-adsorption energies and CN , which we present in Figure As shown in Figure Hence, one should notice that there is no discrepancy between the fact that Pt alloys and pure Pt surfaces are used to construct the resulting volcano plot in Figure In this study, the nanoparticle catalysts are modeled by quasi-spherical shapes such as those exemplified in Figure The applicability of the computational model is further compared with experimental data. the catalytic activity as shown in Figure Furthermore, it is important to note that the steep decrease in experimental activity around 2 nm in Figure Perez-Alonso et al. compared the experimental results with an earlier theoretical study However, the precision in nanoparticle size has not been taken into account in this DFT approach. Consequently, experimental and theoretical approaches still need to be brought in quantitative agreement. Remarkably, this has been achieved in the present computational model by explicit consideration of size distribution and absolute units, which constitutes a step forward compared to previous studies. Furthermore, such quantitative agreement with experimental data ascertains that spherical nanoparticles serve as the appropriate model structures in order to simulate real nanoparticle catalysts. The activity analysis of our computational model enables interesting nanoparticle size predictions with enhanced activity performance. Exploring the nanoparticle size effect at the maximum level of detail, we produced the contour plot in Figure The experimental dataset from Figure (2.0±0.1) nm and (2.9±0.1) nm, respectively, compared to the highest experimental mass activity in Figure To conclude, we have presented a computational model which enables rapid activity calculation of 3D Pt unstrained nanoparticle catalysts. In line with experiments, DFT studies show a linear scaling relation between OH-adsorption energies and generalized coordination numbers for Pt. We capitalize here on this crucial result to provide a link between the generalized coordination numbers and experimentally measured ORR catalytic activities. Making use of fundamental geometrical considerations, the presented computational model comprises the capability to determine nanoparticle mass activities in absolute units of A/mg, without the need for a reference to e.g. Pt(111). In this way, expensive DFT calculations are omitted during runtime realizing sharply reduced and feasible computation times in comparison to theoretical approaches which are based exclusively on DFT. The applicability of our computational model was tested on two experimental datasets involving particle size effects. Remarkably, the computational model accurately reproduces the experimental trends. Regarding the absolute units, the mass activities in both experiments differ considerably by one order of magnitude. Nonetheless, quantitative agreement in absolute units has been precisely observed between the computational model and one experimental dataset. Besides the capability to capture experimental activities on a highly accurate level, this study gives rise to predictions beyond currently available experiments. Promising nanoparticles, which harbor high mass activities, are predicted for nanoparticles sizes near 1 nm, 2 nm and 3 nm with size distributions below 0.2 nm. It is important to note that this complete nanoparticle size effect study was carried out within only few hours by means of the presented computational model. Thus, we believe that rapid nanoparticle activity calculation paves the way for high-throughput nanoparticle activity screening, which may strongly expedite the search for innovative catalysts in future studies. Figure The DFT total energies to make Figure We used only the gamma point distribution for nanoparticles, whereas the k-point samplings for extended surfaces appear elsewhere. Nanoparticles were calculated without dipole corrections in cubic boxes in which the shortest average distance between periodically repeated images was ∼ 10 Å. We used k B T = 0.2eV for the slab and nanoparticle calculations, and extrapolated the energies at T = 0K. The DFT adsorption energies of * OH were calculated as where * is a free adsorption site. The gas-phase reference (OH) was calculated in cubic boxes of 3375 Å 3 using the gamma point only and k B T = 0.001 eV . In this study, nanoparticle catalysts of quasi-spherical shape are investigated. Besides the nanoparticles with relatively small diameters presented in Figure In this section, we present the setup of our computational model in more details. First, we focus on the derivation of the fundamental volcano between experimental activities and CN in Figure The DFT analysis presented in Figure between OH-adsorption energies relative to OH in the gas phase and the generalized coordinatiuon number (gCN) CN . In addition, experimental activities versus experimental OH-binding energies (given relatively to the OH-binding energy on the Pt(111) surface) are provided from literature and presented in Figure The scale of CN is appropriately renormalized by the gCN of surface atoms on Pt(111) which is given as CN P t(111) = 7.5. The resultant volcano plot, showing experimental activities versus CN , is presented in Figure The associated volcano-shaped activity trend is fitted by the function which consists of an increasing and a decreasing exponential function where a > 0 and c < The peak of the volcano is given by the intersection of the functions A 1 and A 2 at CN p . Therefore, five fit parameters a, b, c, d and CN p are taken into account. The fit yields the functions A 2 (CN ) = exp(-4.96 CN + 42.18) , which are provided in the inset in Figure For activity calculation, the gCNs of all N N P nanoparticle atoms i are evaluated. Using Eq. 5, nanoparticle activities j relN P , given relatively to the activity of one surface atom on Pt(111), are obtained by where CN (i) denotes the gCN at nanoparticle atom i according to the definition in Eq. 1. The two involved Heaviside step functions set the activity contribution of nanoparticle sites with CN (i) < 7.5 or CN (i) > 8.3 to zero as discussed in the text. Such far, catalytic activities j relN P relative to Pt(111) are introduced. In the remainder of this section, we discuss the methodology to yield activities and mass activities in absolute units instead. This approach is based on the experimental insight where the specific activity of the Pt(111) surface, expressed by the kinetic current density, has been measured to yield j P t(111) = 2 mA/cm 2 P t . Thus, employing the above-discussed relative catalytic activities j relN P , absolute catalytic activities (expressed in absolute units of A) are calculated by j N P = j P t(111) d P t(111) j relN P ≈ 1.331 × 10 -18 A j relN P . The mass of one Pt atom is given by m P t = 195.084 u = 195.084 x 1.661 * 10 -21 mg. Hence, catalytic mass activities are obtained by j mN P = j N P m P t N N P ≈ 4.107 A/mg P t N N P j relN P (13) in absolute units of A/mg P t . Here, we outline the above introduced methodology of our computational model by explicitly calculating the mass activity of the nanoparticle with 5 nm diameter. This nanoparticle is illustrated in Figure Thus, Eq. 10, which yields catalytic activities relative to one surface atom on Pt(111), can be calculated as ≈ 0.50 A/mg P t (18) for the nanoparticle with 5 nm diameter. CN A1(CN) = exp[3.14CN 23.40] A2(CN) = exp[ 4.96CN + 42.18] Peak (A1(CNp) = A2(CNp)) at CNp = 8.10 d) OH / V Experimental activity at 0.9 V vs RHE relative to Pt(111)