We report the successful growth of epitaxial thin films of FeSe 1-x S x with x ≤ 0.43 via pulsed laser deposition. As S content increases, the nematic transition temperature, T s , decreases systematically and the superconducting transition temperature, T c , shows a gradual decrease even when x exceeds the nematic end point (NEP), similar to bulk samples. A new kink anomaly was observed in the ρ-T curves for films with large x, which is likely due to a magnetic transition. The obtained phase diagram of FeSe 1-x S x thin films is in contrast to that of FeSe 1-y Te y films, which shows a rapid increase of T c at the NEP. Our results demonstrate that the relation between the nematic order and the superconductivity is not universal in the FeSe system, suggesting that the nematic transition does not play a primary role in the superconductivity in these materials. 1 One of the current problems in the field of superconductivity is the role of electronic nematicity in superconductivity of iron based materials. An iron chalcogenide superconductor, FeSe Therefore, FeSe is considered to be one of the most suitable materials for investigating the relation between the nematicity and the superconductivity in iron based superconductors. Intense studies have been done on the chemical substitution of Se by isovalent S in FeSe , in particular since a growth technique of FeSe single crystals by vapor transport was established On the contrary, other isovalent substitution by Te results in a rather different behavior. Although it is well-known that bulk samples of FeSe 1-y Te y are not available in the composition region of 0.1 ≤ y ≤ 0.4 because of phase separation We have grown FeSe 1-y Te y films on two substrates, CaF 2 and LaAlO 3 (LAO), and the two phase diagrams obtained for the two different substrates show qualitatively the same behavior: the Te substitution decreases the nematic transition temperature, and T c increases drastically just after the disappearance of the nematic transition There are two possibilities for the difference in the behavior of T c between bulk FeSe 1-x S x and FeSe 1-y Te y thin films: difference between S and Te or between bulk and film. To judge which is true, it is important to grow FeSe 1-x S x thin films and to obtain their phase diagram. For instance, FeSe 1-x S x thin films may exhibit a T c jump at the NEP as well as the FeSe 1-y Te y films. Another unsatisfactory feature in the phase diagram of the bulk FeSe 1-x S x is that the composition range where systematic single-crystalline samples are available is very small. It is difficult to obtain samples with x > 0.2 by the chemical vapor transport technique. Although quite recently the growth of single crystalline samples with x > 0.2 has been reported by a hydrothermal method In this letter, we report the successful growth of superconducting FeSe 1-x S x films with x ≤ 0.43. As x increases, T s decreases, and T c shows a gradual decrease even at the NEP. In addition, samples with large x values shows a rapid increase of the resistivity with a kink at low temperatures, indicative of a magnetic transition, which is not observed for bulk samples at ambient pressure. In spite of the presence of the new phase transition, the behaviors of T c and T s are similar to those of bulk samples. Considering the difference in the phase diagrams between FeSe 1-x S x and FeSe 1-y Te y films, most probable interpretation of our results is that the role of nematicity in superconductivity is not universal in iron chalcogenides. All the FeSe 1-x S x thin films were grown by a pulsed laser deposition method using a KrF laser The electrical resistivity of the films was measured using a physical property measurement system (PPMS) from 2 to 300 K. Figure Figure FeSe 1-x S x films with large S content show another clear kink behavior at low temperatures, below which the resistivity increases on cooling. The abrupt increase of the resistivity at low temperatures is very similar to what was observed in FeSe and FeSe 1-x S x bulk samples under hydrostatic pressure at an antiferromagnetic transition temperature Figure One is that the new phase does not affect T c . The other is that the new phase suppress the superconductivity. In the former case, we expect that T c remains unchanged when the new phase is suppressed in some way, while in the latter case, we expect the increase of T c at the NEP when the new phase is killed. We consider that the latter case is unlikely because the composition dependence of T c of the FeSe 1-x S x films is very similar to those of bulk crystals. Thus the new phase observed below T * may not affect the superconductivity. Further studies are needed in order to reveal the nature of this new phase transition and to elucidate the reason why it has no impact on superconductivity. Once the phase diagram of FeSe 1-x S x films was obtained, we compare the phase diagram to that of FeSe 1-y Te y films. As was described earlier, FeSe 1-y Te y shows the rapid enhancement in T c when x exceeds the NEP In conclusion, we have succeeded in growing superconducting FeSe 1-x S x thin films with x ≤ 0.43 on LAO substrates. As S content increases T s decrease and the nematic state disappeared at x ∼ 0.18. T c gradually decreases with increasing x and no abrupt increase in T c was observed at the NEP. The behaviors of T s and T c are very similar to those of bulk samples, while another phase transition was observed in film samples with large S content. The difference in the behavior of T c between FeSe 1-x S x and FeSe 1-y Te y , which shows an abrupt enhancement in T c after the disappearance of the nematic state, suggests that the nematicity does not play a primary role in the superconductivity of these materials. We would like to thank K. Ueno at the University of Tokyo for the X-ray measurements. We also thank S. Komiya at Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry for the composition analysis of the films. 