Recently, we studied the effect of hexagonal sinusoidal textures on the reflective properties of perovskite-silicon tandem solar cells using the finite element method (FEM). We saw that such nanotextures, applied to the perovskite top cell, can strongly increase the current density utilization from 91% for the optimized planar reference to 98% for the best nanotextured device (period 500 nm and peak-to-valley height 500 nm), where 100% refers to the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit. * In this manuscript we elaborate on some numerical details of that work: we validate an assumption based on the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit, we present a convergence study for simulations with the finite-element method, and we compare different configurations for sinusoidal nanotextures. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction silicon solar cells, which are by far the most dominant photovoltaic technology, is theoretically limited to 29.4%. (3) all interfaces on top of the perovskite layer are textured. The fully textured device showed the strongest antireflective effect. We chose a nanotexture period of 500 nm, for which the reflective losses can be reduced by more than 2 mA/cm 2 with respect to the planar reference in a current-matched tandem device, leading to a maximal achievable current density exceeding 20.2 mA/cm, which translates to a potential PCE increase of about 1.4% (absolute). For these results the peakto-valley height of the nanotexture is 250 nm. We also demonstrated perovskite layers, which were spin-coated onto a sinusoidally nanotextured substrate. According to these results, configuration (2) currently seems most feasible for experimental realization. For this configuration the maximal achievable current density is still about 19.7 mA/cm 2 in a current-matched tandem device, which is 0.5 mA/cm 2 higher than for the flat reference, equivalent to a potential PCE increase of 0.7% (absolute). In this manuscript we explain some details of the work presented in Ref. 4 in more depth. After explaining the numerical methods in Section 2, we elaborate on these topics in Section 3: (1) checking the validity of applying the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit for light trapping in the silicon subcell; (2) a convergence study for the mesh dimensions and used degree of polynomials in the FEM dimension; and (3) comparing different configurations of the hexagonal nanotexture. Figure The layer stacks with planar perovskite top cells, which we discuss in Section 3.1, were simulated with GenPro4. This program is developed at Delft University of Technology and can combine wave optics for coherent thin layers and ray optics for thick incoherent layers. The hexagonal sinusoidal nanotextures can be described with the equation where the structure phase φ allows us to shape the hexagonal texture. Setting = 0 leads to what we call a positive cosine ("+cos") structure whereas φ = π shapes the negative cosine ("-cos") structure, which is illustrated in Fig. For the structure phases used in this work we have H(0) = H(π) = 9 8 . The function is scaled to our desired period P, which is the side length of the rhombus-shaped unit cell, with the substitutions The aspect ratio a is defined as a = h/P; small or big values of a lead to rather flat or steep textures, respectively. Note that we only considered negative cosine structures in Ref. 4. In the FEM simulations presented in Ref. 4 we treated the Si layer as an infinitely thick layer represented by a perfectly matched layer (PML). For estimating the absorption in a 160 μm-thick Si layer with perfect light trapping, we multiplied the absorption for the infinite Si layer A ∞ Si (equivalent to the transmission into this layer) with a factor arising from the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit, 20 L and n Si are the layer thickness and the real part of the refractive index of silicon, respectively. Further, we assumed the absorption of all other layers to be unaffected; the difference between the absorption in the infinite Si layer and the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit was added to the reflectivity R, In order to validate the accuracy of this approach, we compared the absorption spectra of the following two cases to each other: first, a flat perovskite-silicon solar cells with an infinitely thick Si layer [see Fig. Figure In the Tiedje case, only the light which passes the ITO layer on its way from air into silicon contributes to the absorption in ITO. In conrast, in the pyramidal case also the light reflected back from the silicon rear side contributes to the absorption in ITO. In addition, the pyramids on the rear scatter the light leading to a prolonged light path and hence increased absorption in all the layers. In the pyramidal case about 0.34 mA/cm 2 are absorbed in the intermediate ITO layer, mainly arising from the long wavelengths. In the Tiedje case, around 0.10 mA/cm 2 are absorbed in that layer, the corresponding absorption area is hardly visible in Fig. In summary we can say that our approximation based on the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit is well suited to estimating the Si absorption that would be present in a realistic solar cell stack with a pyramidal back reflector. Although this limit slightly overestimates the absorption compared to the more realistic case, the difference is small enough that the estimate remains useful. This validates the use of this estimate in Ref. 4. On the other hand, this estimate should not be used to estimate how losses are distributed among parasitic absorption and reflection. Since parasitic absorption at the rear side is neglected and light reflected from the rear side does not contribute to parasitic losses in the top cell (note that this light cannot contribute to absorption in the perovskite layer due to that layer being non-absorbing at these wavelengths). In order to determine the accuracy of the FEM results a convergence study was performed. For regions without strong singularities the error of FEM simulations is expected to be proportional to (h/λ ) p . In order to determine the required order p, a targeted numerical precision should be given. Figure Hence, the numerical precision of 10 -3 , which we used in Ref. 4, leads to a sufficient level of accuracy for solar cell simulations. Figure In contrast the thickness of perovskite layer in the positive cosine structure initially increases more rapidly than in the case of the negative cosine before decreasing for aspect ratios up to 0.5. This suggests that positive cosine texture focuses more light inside the perovskite layer, increasing absorption and thereby necessitating a lower thickness for current matching. However this effect leads to an overall lower increase in the matched current compared to the negative cosine texture. Therefore the negative cosine structure, utilized in Ref. 4, is preferred for light management in perovskite Si tandem solar cells. We explained three details of the work presented in Ref. 4 in more depth. (1) We checked the validity of using the Tiedje-Yablonovitch limit for light trapping in the silicon subcell and saw that this estimate works well for the Si absorption but strongly underestimates the reflection in the long wavelength regime, because parasitic absorption in the other layers is strongly underestimated. (2) A convergence study for the mesh dimensions and finite element polynomial degree showed that the chosen settings lead to highly accurate results. (3) Comparing different configurations of the hexagonal nanotextures showed a similar trend as in earlier work (Ref. 5). In order to improve the simulation quality of solar cells with periodically nanotextured structures and thick Si wafers, the coherent FEM simulations need to be coupled to approaches, which can treat thick layers incoherently. Such approaches are for example OPTOS 23 or GenPro4. 