The hybrid nanostructures of nitrogen doped carbon materials and nonprecious transition metals are among the most promising electrocatalysts to replace noble metal catalysts for renewable energy applications. However, the fundamental principles governing the catalytic activity of such hybrid materials remain elusive. Herein, we systematically explore the electrocatalytic properties of transition metals, transition metal oxides and carbides substrates covered by nitrogen-doped graphitic sheets for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Our first-principles calculations show that the graphitic sheet is prominently activated by the nitrogen doping and the coordinate bond with metal (compound) substrate through intralayer and interlayer charge transfer. Such hybrid materials can provide optimal binding capability for HER catalysis with Tafel barrier down to 1.0 eV. The HER activity can be correlated to the C p z band center, which is in turn governed by the electronic coupling strength between the graphitic sheet and metal substrate, thus paving a way to rational design of graphitic carbon/transition metal hybrid electrocatalysts of high performance. Aggravated energy and environmental crisis has stimulated intensive research on exploiting clean and renewable energy sources Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is the cathodic half reaction of water splitting and plays a pivotal role on the efficiency of electrolyzers Owing to their abundant sources, tunable compositions and versatile structures, heteroatom-doped carbon materials have generated tremendous research interests as promising electrocatalysts. Essentially, the differences in electronegativity and atomic size between the heteroatoms and carbon can polarize the adjacent carbon atoms and give rise to catalytic activity. Based on first-principles calculations combined with proof-of-concept experiments, Qiao et al. established a HER activity trend for B, N, O, P and S doped graphene However, for most of the nonmetallic atom doped carbon materials, their HER activity is still unsatisfactory with regard to Pt group metals Hybridizing carbon materials and transition metals (compounds) can induce synergistic effects and remarkably boost the electrocatalytic performance of the composite materials. Particularly, covering carbon layers over metal surfaces does not only gain prominent catalytic activity via interfacial charge transfer, but also protect metals from dissolution in the acidic environment. To this end, a variety of core-shell structures of graphitic carbon materials and transition metals have been synthesized, such as Fe and Co nanoparticles embedded in N-doped carbon nanotubes CoNi and FeCo nanoalloy encapsulated by N-doped graphene shells Here we exploit a series of transition metals (Co, Fe), transition metal oxides (Co 3 O 4 , Fe 3 O 4 ) and transition metal carbides (TiC, WC, VC) covered by N-doped graphitic sheets for HER catalysis. In previous experiments, these transition metals (compounds) have been hybridized with graphitic carbon materials and exhibit enhanced electrocatalytic activity for HER, oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction Spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out by the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) respectively. The on-site charge transfer was evaluated by the Bader charge analysis We considered a series of transition metals (TM), transition metal oxides (TMO) and carbides (TMC), including Co(111), Co 3 O 4 (111), Fe 3 O 4 (111), TiC(111) and VC(111) of the fcc phase, Fe(110) of the bcc phase, and WC(0001) surfaces of the hcp phase. For simplicity, we adopted monolayer graphene supported by these metals (compounds) to model the graphitic carbon/transition metal hybrid materials. The transition metal (compound) substrates were mimicked by slab models with 3~8 atomic layers, vacuum space of 16 Å thickness in vertical direction and 10~15 Å for the lateral dimensions. The in-plane lattices of transition metals (compounds) were slightly compressed or stretched to fit that of graphene, giving lattice mismatch of 1~5% (see Table where The kinetic barrier and transition state for H* desorption and H 2 formation were simulated by the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method We start from examining the HER activity of freestanding N-doped graphene (hereafter denoted as NG). The graphitic sheet binds weakly with H* species. The C atoms adjacent to the N dopant provide the strongest binding strength; however, ΔG H* is still too high (0.67 eV) for HER catalysis (Fig. where E total , E NG and E sub are the energies of the NG/Co hybrid system, freestanding doped graphene and standalone Co(111) substrate, respectively; N c is the number of C atoms in the graphitic sheet. As shown by Table Differential charge densities show prominent electron accumulation in the interfacial region, signifying the coordinate bond between the graphitic sheet and the underlying metal atoms (Fig. The binding capability of the NG/Co hybrids is remarkably enhanced with ΔG H* lower than that of freestanding N-doped graphene by up to 0.54 eV. The H* binding strength highly depends on the chemical environment of C sites. Generally speaking, the C atoms adjacent to the dopants and on the hollow site of Co substrate provide the strongest H* binding (site 1 in Fig. Optimum binding strength for HER catalysis can be achieved in these hybrid systems with ΔG H* = 0.13 eV, rather competitive to that of Pt (ΔG H* = -0.09 eV from our calculations, see Fig. The binding properties of N-doped graphene on various substrates are presented in Table where D(E) is the DOS of C p z band at a given energy E. Fig. Note that the NG/WC system is a little deviated from the linear relation between ε pz and ΔG H* in Fig. Moreover, the N dopants in the graphitic sheet induce electron redistributions, which together with the interfacial charge transfer dictate the binding strength of various C sites within a hybrid system. The C atoms carrying less electrons provide stronger H* binding, as illustrated by Fig. Therefore, by choosing appropriate metal (compound) substrates coorperated with N-doping, it is possible to modulate the electronic states and electron density distributions of the graphitic carbon materials, and ultimately achieving the optimal surface binding properties for HER catalysis. To further evaluate the catalytic performance of these NG/metal hybrid systems, we calculated the kinetic barriers for two adsorbed H* species on the active sites of NG/Co, NG/Fe, NG/WC and NG/VC to form a H 2 molecule under the Tafel mechanism. The transition states involve two adjacent H atoms staying above the carbon surfaces at about 1.1 Å vertical distance (Fig. In summary, we systematically investigate the electrocatalytic properties of 4 (111), Fe 3 O 4 (111), TiC(111), VC(111) and WC(0001) substrates, as displayed by Fig. 1 (hereafter denoted as NG/Fe, NG/Co 3 O 4 , NG/Fe 3 O 4 , NG/TiC, NG/VC and NG/WC, respectively).