Large magneto-electric effect in multi-ferroics and topological protection against decays of excited magnetic skyrmions are an ideal setting for detecting radiative emission of neutrino pair (RENP). We propose a new RENP scheme using multi-ferroic magnetic skyrmion condensates in order to determine the absolute neutrino mass including the mass hierarchy patterns, the type of neutrino mass (Majorana vs Dirac), one of CP violation parameters, and to detect relic 1.9 K cosmic neutrino. We critically examine the possibility of feasible experiments, and show what are required as good targets for neutrino physics. Introduction The discovery of neutrino oscillation Atomic targets are better suited than nuclear targets to answer these questions, since available energy differences < O In the present work we propose to solve the de-coherence problem in solids by a topology protection. A series of recent experiments in condensed matter physics discovered topologically stable magnetic skyrmions in a variety of magnetic systems We use in the present work the natural unit such that = c = k B = 1 to simplify theoretical formulas. In this unit 1 eV = 1/(1.97 × 10 -5 cm) = 3/(1.97 × 10 -15 sec) and 1 K = 0.086 meV. Neutrino pair emission from atomic electron occurs with a hamiltonian density, ν † i σν j • e † σe, neutrino-pair spin times electron spin S = σ/2, written in terms of field operators (with G F = 1.17×10 -5 GeV -2 the Fermi coupling constant) using the energy conservation ǫ g +ω = ǫ e -E i -E j to eliminate the neutrino pair energy i in favor of the photon energy ω. We shall give an example of states, |e , |n , |g later. The summed bracket quantity in eq.( where M , P are magnetization and electric polarization of target medium, respectively, assumed to be uniform in crystals. A large product M P may emerge in multi-ferroic materials, objects in which both ferro-electric and ferro(or anti-ferro)-magnetic orders co-exist RENP spectrum There are six distinct pair thresholds denoted by (ij) at ω ij = ǫ eg -m i -m j [11], rate rises being determined by neutrino mass mixing parameters, including CP violating phases. Distinction of Majorana from Dirac neutrinos becomes possible by exploiting the very nature of Majorana particle being its own anti-particle; ν i = νi . Theoretical prediction of Majorana-pair production is governed by anti-symmetric wave functions of two identical fermions, which gives spectra different from Dirac-pair of distinguishable neutrino and anti-neutrino For spectrum calculation recall that the neutrino helicity and the momentum ( p i ) are summed due to their detection being impossible, to give the neutrino phase space integral, including the Pauli blocking of relic neutrinos, where f i = 1/(e p i /T 0 + 1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function of , expressed in terms of integration variables x, y, a, b, with T 0 = 1.9 K the relic neutrino temperature The differential spectrum rate is given by θ is the photon emission angle measured from P -direction, and φ is the photon linear polarization ( e) angle from the plane made of P and photon wave vector such that P • e = P sin θ cos φ. Note that except the average value ǭn in h(ω) of eq.( Before we discuss a specific target example of spectrum shapes, we demonstrate importance of relic neutrino effects in Fig( Most magnetic skyrmions appear in metals, but recently, insulating multi-ferroic skyrmion lattice (SkL) has been discovered in Cu 2 OSeO 3 as its host We illustrate numerical results of calculated RENP spectral shapes in Fig( Rate increase with the level spacing ǫ eg is dramatic: the total rate increases with a high power of ǫ eg ∝ ǫ 7 eg if ǫ ne < ǫ eg , as numerically confirmed. Hence it is critically important to find more insulating skyrmions of larger energy gaps to achieve larger rates. Or one should find more appropriate excited levels in Cu 2 OSeO 3 , for instance 150 meV or a slightly higher. We assume that both the excited initial lattice state and the final one in RENP are topologically stable with skyrmion condensates. Difference (including the vanishing one) of topological quantum numbers is transfered to those of emitted particles, since the overlap of wave functions of emitted particles and emitting atoms is very small. This becomes possible if three unit vectors n i or RENP particles carry a topological integer value of d 2 r n 1 • ∂ x n 2 × ∂ y n 3 /4π. Three spin vectors n i can be in the same plane: the neutrino pair is emitted perpendicular to each other with their spins almost (exactly for the Relic effect:MD IH,1,5meV,eg 10meV Figure massless case) along emitted directions and photon polarization out of the emission plane, corresponding to θ = π/2, φ = 0 in the rate formula. This restriction gives a reduction of neutrino phase space integration by some amount, but within a tolerable range of reduction. The topological conservation law, on the other hand, restricts possible modes and configurations of QED backgrounds. The major QED background is three photon emission, with polarization constraints similar to the RENP case. Although the QED background has much larger rates than RENP, specified characteristics of background events helps much to reject backgrounds from the RENP signal. In the rate estimate given above, we took modest P, M, N values of target Cu 2 OSeO 3 . There are a few rooms for improvements if we use better targets (yet to be identified): (1) larger gaps, for instance ǫ eg = 2.9 eV = 100 times Cu 2 OSeO 3 value gives 10 14 larger rate, (2) increase of 10 3 larger P to 200μC/m 2 gives 10 6 larger rate, (3) decrease of spin density N by 10 gives 10 2 . There exist multi-ferroics without skyrmion structure satisfying requirements, (2) and (3). Taken altogether, (1) ∼ (3) increase the rate by 10 22 , presumably in the feasibility range of order 0.5 sec -1 . On theoretical fronts there are a number of works to be done: (1) DFT calculation of excited skyrmions to search for a level spacing ǫ eg = a few times 100 meV (the best sensitivity to neutrino mass determination expected), (2) detailed study of QED background rejection including effects of topology protection. In summary, multi-ferroic skyrmions provide the unique opportunity of unraveling the conundrum of neutrinos deeply related to physics beyond the standard theory and fundamental problems of cosmology.