We study optical pumping of resident electron spins under resonant excitation of trions in ntype CdTe/(Cd,Mg)Te quantum wells subject to a transverse magnetic field. In contrast to the comprehensively used time-resolved pump-probe techniques with polarimetric detection, we exploit here a single beam configuration in which the time-integrated intensity of the excitation laser light transmitted through the quantum wells is detected. The transmitted intensity reflects the bleaching of light absorption due to optical pumping of the resident electron spins and can be used to evaluate the Larmor precession frequency of the optically oriented carriers and their spin relaxation time. Application of the magnetic field leads to depolarization of the electron spin ensemble so that the Hanle effect is observed. Excitation with a periodic sequence of laser pulses leads to optical pumping in the rotating frame if the Larmor precession frequency is synchronized with the pulse repetition rate. This is manifested by the appearance of Hanle curves every 3.36 or 44.2 mT for pulse repetition rates of 75.8 or 999 MHz, respectively. From the experimental data we evaluate the g factor of |g| = 1.61 and the spin relaxation time of 14 ns for the optically pumped resident electrons, in agreement with previous time-resolved pump-probe studies. The non-equilibrium spin dynamics in semiconductor nanostructures attract particular interest due to possible applications in spintronic devices s . However, the evaluation of the spin lifetime from Hanle curve requires precise knowledge of the g factor. Significant advancements in optical control of spin states and enhanced insight into the underlying dynamics have been achieved by means of time-resolved techniques such as pump-probe Faraday/Kerr rotation In this work we demonstrate an alternative approach for the investigation of spin dynamics in semiconductors based on resonant optical pumping of resident electrons. In detail, a single laser beam tuned in resonance with the charged exciton (trion) transition in a semiconductor quantum well is used for spin pumping of resident electrons in their ground state. The absorption of the very same laser beam is used to monitor the electron spin polarization. The application of an external magnetic field in Voigt geometry leads to depolarization of the electron spin ensemble so that the Hanle effect is observed. Interestingly, Hanle peaks appear not only at B = 0, but also around magnetic fields corresponding to the resonance condition Ω L = 2πnf (n is an integer), when a pulsed laser source with a relatively high repetition rate (f ≫ τ -1 s ) is used. The observations can be treated as optical pumping in the rotating frame, where the frequency of rotation corresponds to f or higher harmonics thereof. Our approach resembles experiments performed by Bell and Bloom in atomic systems The studied sample (reference number #031901B) was grown by molecular-beam epitaxy on a (001) GaAs substrate with a Cd 0.78 Mg 0.22 Te buffer of 4.4 μm thickness. The intrinsic heterostructure comprises five 20 nm thick CdTe quantum well (QW) layers separated by 105 nm wide Cd 0.78 Mg 0.22 Te barriers. The barriers are thick enough to exclude electronic coupling between the QWs. The resident electrons in the QWs are provided by iodine donors in 15 nm wide barrier regions which are located at a distance of 20 nm from the QWs. The structure sequence was covered by a 110 nm Cd 0.78 Mg 0.22 Te cap layer. The sample was mounted on a sapphire disk and the GaAs substrate was removed chemically in order to perform transmission experiments. The transmission spectrum of the sample at T = 2 K is presented in Fig. The generation of trions through resonant excitation depends on the light polarization and the spin polarization of the resident electron ensemble. Only spin up electrons | ↑ are selectively excited through pumping with σ + polarized photons. The excited spin up X - | ⇑↑↓ can subsequently decay either radiatively through the same channel or, after a hole spin-flip process to | ⇓↑↓ , by emitting a σ -photon. The latter is responsible for creating spin down electrons. Hence, for repetitive resonant excitation of trions with σ + polarized light, a non-equilibrium state with more spin down than spin up electrons, i.e. optical pumping, is established In an external magnetic field B oriented along the xaxis the equation of motion for the spin density of the resident electrons S reads where P = (0, 0, P ) is the spin pumping term, τ s is the spin relaxation time of the resident electrons, and Ω = (Ω L , 0, 0) defines the Larmor precession of S around the external magnetic field where G = (G + + G -)/2 is the optical generation rate, which is proportional to the laser intensity is the circular polarization degree of the exciting light, τ T 0 is the trion lifetime, and τ T s is the trion spin relaxation time. The rates G + and G -correspond to the contributions from the σ + and σ -polarized light components. Equation 1 is valid for low pumping rates P τ s ≪ n e /2, i.e. when the spin polarization is small and no saturation effects are observed The second term on the right hand side of Eq. (3) determines the spin dependent part of the absorption due to optical pumping. For σ + polarized light (ρ c > 0), the optical pumping leads to negative spin polarization S z < 0, while in the opposite case σ -excitation (ρ c < 0) leads to S z > 0. Therefore, for circularly polarized light the transmitted light intensity is always increased due to bleaching of the absorption, while for linearly polarized excitation there is no optical pumping (S z = 0) and the transmitted intensity is minimum. Note that the changes in transmission are determined by the degree of circular polarization of the incident laser light but do not depend on the sign of polarization. The difference in the transmitted light intensity, ∆T , for circularly (ρ c = ±1) and linearly polarized (ρ c = 0) light is given by: ∆T ∝ |S z |I. The steady state solution of Eq. ( For excitation with a pulsed laser source the excitation rate becomes time dependent where G 0 is proportional to the time-integrated laser intensity I. Using Eq. ( where S z0 is given by Eq. ( The factor 1/2 on the right hand in Eq. ( experiments were performed using three different tunable Ti:Saphir lasers: (i) a continuous wave (cw) laser (T&D Scan, Tekhnoscan); (ii) a self mode-locked picosecond oscillator (Mira 900D, Coherent) with a repetition rate of f = 75.8 MHz, a spectral width of 0.9 nm and a pulse duration of about 2 ps; (iii) a self mode-locked femtosecond oscillator (Gigajet 20c, Laser Quantum) with f = 999 MHz, a spectral width of 30 nm and a pulse duration of 50 fs. The latter laser was used in combination with a pulse shaper which reduces the spectral width of the pulses down to 0.7 nm and correspondingly increases the duration to several ps. The sample was placed in a liquid helium bath cryostat with a variable temperature inset and kept at a temperature of T = 2 K. An external magnetic field B of up to 700 mT was applied by an electromagnet in the Voigt geometry, e.g. parallel to the quantum well plane. The photon energy of the exciting light was tuned to the trion resonance and the transmitted light intensity was measured with a photodiode (see Fig. In order to detect the difference in absorption caused by the optical pumping of resident electron spins, the laser light was modulated between linear and circular polarization with a photo-elastic modulator (PEM) at frequency ν ≈ 50 kHz (see Fig The magnetic field dependencies of the differential transmission ∆T measured with cw excitation for different photon energies ω are shown in Fig. The Hanle curves measured for cw and pulsed excitation are summarized in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a new experimental approach for investigation of the spin dynamics in semiconductor nanostructures. It is based on optical pumping of resident electron spins in the rotating frame using a periodic sequence of laser pulses with a high repetition rate and simultaneously measuring the transmitted intensity which monitors the spin polarization of the electron ensemble. In contrast to cw excitation, the Hanle effect appears at every magnetic field at which the Larmor precession frequency is synchronized with the pulse repetition rate. This allows one to determine the key parameters of the spin dynamics, i.e. the g factor of the optically pumped carriers and their spin relaxation time. The sequence of multiple Hanle curves can be used to evaluate the spin relaxation times across a large range of magnetic fields. In particular, this relatively simple approach can be efficiently used for the investigation of dynamic nuclear polarization which changes the Larmor precession frequency of conduction band electrons.