We present a detailed analysis of the role of native point defects in the antiferromagnetic (AFM) phases of bulk chromium nitride (CrN). We perform first-principles calculations using local spindensity approximation, including local interaction effects (LSDA+U), to study the two lowest energy AFM models expected to describe the low-temperature phase of the material. We study the formation energies, lattice deformations and electronic and magnetic structure introduced by native point defects. We find that, as expected, nitrogen vacancies are the most likely defect present in the material at low temperatures. Nitrogen vacancies present different charged states in the cubic AFM model, exhibiting two transition energies, which could be measurable by thermometry experiments and could help identify the AFM structure in a sample. These vacancies also result in partial spin polarization of the induced impurity band, which would have interesting consequences in transport experiments. Other point defects have also signature electronic and magnetic structure that could be identified in scanning probe experiments. Antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials exhibit an interesting long-range order that sets in below a characteristic temperature known as the Néel scale, T N . In this regime, there is an alternating pattern for the magnetic moment orientation throughout the crystal that results in a zero net macroscopic magnetization and is robust to external magnetic and electric fields. Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) represent a large family of materials that play a significant role in many technological applications. They are characterized by high hardness, corrosion resistance and unusual electrical properties that make them useful, [010] ). The energetic difference between these two configurations is small and it is therefore likely that both phases would appear in thin film experiments. A recent study of thin films of CrN grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) detected the phase transition between the cubic paramagnet and the orthorhombic AF M As mentioned, the presence of N vacancies and the accompanying carrier doping may have important roles in understanding the disagreements in resistivity measurements, and previous studies have indeed focused on this effect in CrN. Zhang et al. A related issue that has not received much attention is the effect of vacancies and other point defects on the magnetic structure and response of CrN crystals. As the atomic arrangement and magnetic structure are closely intertwined in this material, it would be of interest to study how defects modify not only the charge but magnetic moment profiles. Such effects would not only be observable by local probes, such as STM and spin-polarized STM, but are also likely to affect the electromagnetic response that is now being used to control the distribution of magnetic moments in AFM materials. We carry out density functional theory (DFT) calculations in the local spin density approximation as included in the Quantum Espresso package. [110] structural model, and U = 5 eV for the AF M 1 [010] arrangement. These choices represent low values of U that achieve similar energy gaps in both models. We have performed calculations in a 64 atom unit cell (2 × 2 × 2 cubic cells with 8 atoms each), with Brillouin zone sampling using 4 × 4 × 4 k-point meshes and with an energy cutoff of 410 eV. The defects are created by either adding or removing the appropriate atom in the supercell, and performing full structural relaxation with a force convergence threshold of 10 -4 a.u. (atomic units). This allows us to analyze the accompanying deformations of the lattice structure as well as the energetics and spatial distribution of the associated charge and spin distribution of the defect state. We have specifically studied different native point defects, with the simplest being the nitrogen (V N ) and chromium vacancies (V Cr ). We also consider antisite defects, replacing the atom of one species with the other, which we denote as anti-N (A N , where N is in a Cr site) and anti-Cr (A Cr , for Cr in an N site). Lastly, we also consider different interstitial defects, I N or I Cr , with the corresponding impurity placed in a previously hollow location. We have attempted to obtain all these point defects for both AFM models; however, it was not possible to reach convergence for A Cr in the AF M 1 [010] structure. A similar situation was found for I N in the AF M Finding equilibrium structures of different defects indicates the possibility of generating such configurations in real crystals, as the energetics are important in de-termining abundance under different growth conditions. Knowing the formation energy of neutral species is crucial, although charged states are possible. For the latter, theoretical evaluation must also consider the electrostatic contributions, with obvious different energy costs for different charged states. To this end, Freysoldt et al. where the total energy of the bulk supercell, E DF T bulk , is subtracted from the cell containing the point defect E DF T def+bulk . The next term includes the electrostatic interaction of the lattice of charged defects generated by the periodic boundary conditions. ∆V represents a constant alignment potential added to correct the long and short-range potential between defects of charge q. In the next term, μ s represents the chemical potential for each reservoir for the species involved. For CrN we use the ground state energy of a N 2 molecule, and an AFM bulk Cr crystal as the individual points of reference. Likewise, the Fermi energy E F (measured from the valence band maximum ε vbm ) is the electronic chemical potential. Notice the approach requires knowledge of the dielectric constant , to properly screen the charged defects. We estimate by applying a sawtooth potential to a slab of material and calculating the ratio between external and internal potential slopes; As we will see below, the nature of the point defect changes the electronic structure in a variety of ways and the entire set of properties of the material. The formation energies were evaluated using the scheme developed by Freysoldt et al., [010] structure. Our calculations indicate that only the V N vacancies in this cubic model have charged states within a reasonable range of the Fermi level. Figure Table For the AF M 1 [010] structure, the nitrogen vacancy produces significantly smaller displacements ( 0.2%), reflecting the low energies of formation, with slight differences among Cr atoms, depending on their local magnetic moment projection. The Cr(↑) neighbors move away from the defect site, while the Cr(↓) atoms move inwards slightly. Meanwhile, the nearest N atoms move closer to the defect by 0.002 Å. Chromium vacancies produce larger deformations, with inward displacements of all neighboring N atoms and opposite spin Cr sites. The A N defects produce motion of all neighbor Cr atoms towards the defect, as well as significant displacement of the neighbor N atoms. In contrast, the I N defect pushes the neighbors away, with especially large shifts for the nearest N atoms. It is interesting to see that in nearly all defects the magnetic moments on the Cr atoms seem to play a role on the cell distortions, reflecting the coupling of magnetic and lattice structure in this material. In the AF M 2 [110] model, the V N defects produce similar distortions as in the AF M 1 [010] structure. However, V Cr vacancies produce equal distortions towards the defect for both orientations of the magnetic moment, and a slight shift in the opposite direction for the neighbor N atoms. The anti-N defect produces a large shift (≈ 10% of the unperturbed separation) of the spin-up Cr atoms towards it, arising from the fact that the Cr atom removed was in that direction. A related situation occurs for the A Cr defect, as Cr atoms of the same spin direction as the atom added show significant shifts towards the defect, and only a slight shift away for opposite-spin Cr atoms. As we will illustrate below, even the relatively small shifts produced by the V N and V Cr defects in these crystals result in significant charge and spinful redistributions with unique characteristics. In this section we analyze changes in the electronic structure introduced by the various defects in different AFM model structures. For this purpose we calculate the partial density of states (PDOS) for the atoms close to the point defect. We emphasize that the results here are for a single defect in a 64 atom supercell, corresponding to 3.1% concentration. We have verified, however, that results are fully converged, and that especially for the neutral vacancy species, the defect interactions across supercells is negligible. As the AF M 1 [010] model is characterized by a cubic symmetric structure, its PDOS in the pristine case exhibits spin-symmetric results-even as the magnetic arrangement reduces that somewhat-see Fig. Introduction of a nitrogen vacancy in the supercell has the lowest energy of formation, as discussed above. As seen in Fig. In the case of V Cr , symmetrically surrounded by nearest neighbors nitrogen atoms, the vacancy produces an enhancement of p-orbitals near the Fermi level with no net spin polarization (as shown in Fig. The A N defect strongly suppresses p-orbitals near the Fermi level, as additional p bonds are created around the defect. In contrast, I N represents an interesting case, being the only point defect that distorts the orbital distribution on the neighbors while preserving spin-polarization symmetry. It also shows symmetry among d zy and d dxy orbitals. The pristine AF M 2 [110] model displays lower orbital symmetry overall, as seen in Fig. To complement the PDOS information, Fig. In addition to the changes seen in the PDOS, all point defects are seen to disturb the ideal AFM ordering of the pristine crystal in either of the two models we explored. The presence of different defects results often in a net magnetic moment for the supercell even when the added or removed atom has no magnetic moment. Moreover, defects are seen to induce different spatial patters of local spin polarization in the unit cell. In Fig. For the orthorhombic cell, AF M 2 [110] , we show the corresponding spin polarization on the (001) plane in Fig. We should comment that although we are analyzing point defects in the bulk, similar charge and spin polarization would likely be found near crystal surfaces. As such, some of these spatial characteristics and spin polarization could be identified by scanning probes, such as a spin polarized scanning tunneling microscope. Analysis of the defect symmetries and spin polarizations they induce would help identify the appropriate atomic AFM model in a specific sample. We have analyzed the presence of native point defects on two microscopic AFM models of CrN, widely believed to describe the low temperature phase of the crystal. The formation energies, including corrections to avoid supercell artifacts, have been evaluated for the different defects. We have found, as suspected from general considerations, that the N vacancy defects are indeed those with the lowest formation energies, and therefore likely to appear in crystals in either of the AFM models. We further determine that only the N vacancies in the cubic AFM model should exhibit charged states, showing two possible transitions (to +1 and -1 charge states) within a reasonable doping range. We have found that such vacancies produce orbital restructuring near the Fermi level, providing significant self-doping which would affect the resistivity in real samples and may exhibit partial spin polarization of the impurity-created band. The formation energy values for neutral and charged species provide predictions that could be verified from thermometry experiments. Identification of these transitions would further assist in the identification of the AFM model present in a specific thin film sample. We trust this would contribute to clarify disagreements among several studies. The changes in PDOS induced by defects have also been shown to carry interesting local structure in magnetic moment polarizations. The symmetries of these spin clouds reflect the underlying crystal symmetries and should be detectable with the use of spin polarized scanning tunneling spectroscopy. We trust our results would motivate further theoretical and experimental explorations of the microscopic details of point defects in this interesting system. We also hope that these results would contribute towards clarifying some of the controversial characteristics of CrN thin films.