Covalently functionalizing mechanical exfoliated monolayer and bilayer graphenides with λ-iodanes led to the discovery that the monolayers supported on a SiO 2 substrate are considerably more reactive than bilayers as demonstrated by statistical Raman spectroscopy/microscopy. Supported by DFT calculations we show that ditopic addend binding leads to much more stable products than the corresponding monotopic reactions due to much lower lattice strain of the reactions products. The chemical nature of the substrate (graphene versus SiO 2 ) plays a crucial role. The systematic exploration of the general principles of graphene functionalization will allow the tuning of the pro-cessibility and the properties, which is the key for the devel-opment of technological applications of this 2D nano material. In this regard, the investigation and establishment of functionalization sequences on graphene deposited on substrates constitutes a very attractive scenario, since in contrast to bulk chemistry well defined conditions for the chemical transformations themselves and a very straightforward product analysis are provided. In this study we consider three possible reaction scenarios for the chemical nature of the substrate surface (surface functionalities): a) the substrate surface is inert and only one-sided (monotopic) additions are possible With the purpose to address the question of a monotopic versus a ditopic functionalization scenario and to investigate the different reactivity of mono-and bilayer graphene, we mechanically exfoliated graphene and obtained one distinct flake which exhibits a monolayer area adjacent to a bilayer region. This flake was reductively activated by the addition of a blue solution of solvated NaK 3 in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) (G A , Scheme 1) -experimental conditions see ESI. In order to investigate the reaction product, we applied statistical Raman spectroscopy (SRS) and microscopy (SRM) In order to ensure that functionalization is only due to the depicted covalent binding of the electrophile or surface functionalities of the substrate, we also carried out an in situ characterization (under strict inert gas conditions) of an activated mono/bilayer graphene flake by means of SRM. The corresponding I D /I G ratio map (Figure For a better understanding of the nature of the functionalization in the case of graphene deposited on a substrate and for a comparison of the results obtained in the bulk functionalization scenario, we also applied temperature-dependent Raman spectroscopy on our samples (Figure For a deeper understanding of the reactivity patterns we performed theoretical calculations on the DFT level (for details see ESI). For this purpose, the binding energy of the addends was calculated by taking the energy difference between functionalized and unfunctionalized graphene mono-and bilayers and the radical species. For single addends the binding energy represents the strength of the C-C bond which is formed upon covalent bond formation. To simplify the calculations, a methyl instead of the 4-(tert-butyl)phenyl group was used. Since the methyl group is the smallest organic unit to form C-C bonds with graphene, a lower limit for the proximity effects will be obtained when the degree of functionalization is increased in the calculations. For a single methyl group on a freestanding graphene monolayer (Figure Theoretically, this limitation might be overcome at higher degrees of bilayer functionalization, when several interlayer C-C bonds could mutually stabilize each other. Indeed, for a functionalization degree of 50 % or 100 %, stable structures with interlayer C-C bonds are found in the geometry optimization (Figure In conclusion, we have discovered that the reductive functionalization of monolayer graphene on a substrate leads to a higher degree of functionalization than the corresponding functionalization of bilayer graphene. Significantly, the chemical reactivity of the graphene monolayer supporting substrate plays a critical role. A reactive substrate can stabilize intial adducts by saturating dangling bonds antaratopic to external addends. This pathway is absent if the substrate is inert, as exemplified in bilayer graphene involving a graphene buffer layer. Our experimental results are nicely corroborated by theoretical DFT calculations. If exclusively supratopic additions are possible, a very high amount of strain energy on the C-lattice accumulates continuously. This limits the maximum amount of addend binding considerably. As a consequence, much lower degrees of functionalization can be expected compared with ditopic reactions allowing also for antaratopic addend binding. Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out with the plane-wave code PWscf of the Quantum Espresso software package, For bulk Ni we obtained a lattice constant of 3.521 Å with our DFT/PBE setup (using spinpolarized calculations for the ferromagnetic ground state), which deviated only by +0.2% from the experimental value at 0 K of 3.516 Å. The Ni(111) substrate was modeled by periodically repeated slabs with a thickness of 3 atomic layers. The theoretical bulk lattice constant was used for the lateral extension of the unit cells and the repeated images of the slabs were separated by a vacuum region of about 10 Å. In the geometry optimizations the bottom layer of the slab was kept fixed and only the upper two layers were allowed to relax. Graphene and Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene layers were added at ontop positions of the Ni substrate in order to allow the formation of chemical bonds between C and Ni atoms. The degree of graphene functionalization by methyl groups was changed by using different unit cell sizes. Specifically, we used (2 × 2), (√3 × √3) and (2 × 1) cells with one methyl group and a (2 × 1) cell with two methyl groups for representing graphene functionalizations of 25%, 33%, 50% and 100%, respectively. Binding energies (representing the strength of the C-C bond of a methyl group bound to a graphene layer) were calculated by taking the energy difference between the sum of the energy of the structure without methyl group and the methyl radical and the energy of the final structure with the methyl group attached to the mono-or bilayer graphene layers. The atomic configurations and the binding energies for methyl groups on free-standing graphene and Ni-supported mono-and bilayer graphene in the limit of high surface functionalization are summarized in Figure 