Current state of the art devices for detecting and manipulating Majorana fermions commonly consist of networks of Majorana wires and tunnel junctions. We study a key ingredient of these networks -a topological Josephson junction with charging energy -and pinpoint crucial features for device implementation. The phase dependent tunneling term contains both the usual 2π-periodic Josephson term and a 4π-periodic Majorana tunneling term representing the coupling between Majoranas on both sides of the junction. In non-topological junctions when the charging energy is small compared to the Josephson tunneling scale the low energy physics is described by 2π phase slips. By contrast, in a topological junction, due to the 4π periodicity of the tunneling term it is usually expected that only 4π phase slips are possible while 2π phase slips are suppressed. However, we find that if the ratio between the strengths of the Majorana assisted tunneling and the Josephson tunneling is small, as is likely to be the case for many setups, 2π phase slips occur and may even dominate the low energy physics. In this limit one can view the 4π phase slips as a pair of 2π phase slips with arbitrarily large separation. We provide an effective descriptions of the system in terms of 2π and 4π phase slips valid for all values of the tunneling ratio. Comparing the spectrum of the effective models with numerical simulations we determine the cross-over between the 4π phase slip regime to 2π phase slip dominated regime. We also discuss the role of the charging energy as well as the implications of our results on the dissipative phase transitions expected in such a system. In recent years, extensive scientific efforts have been invested to understand, realize and manipulate topological states in condensed matter. In a superconductor, the charge is conjugate to the order parameter phase and charging effects induce quantum phase fluctuations. In this work, we develop a theory for the effect of charging induced quantum fluctuations in the low energy spectrum of a topological Josephson junction, valid for any ratio of the single particle and the Cooper pair tunneling. Our results show that a description of the low energy physics of the topological junction in terms of 4π phase slips alone may be insufficient if the strength of the 4π periodic tunneling is small. In the presence of both 2π and 4π periodic components of the tunneling current, the potential energy of the junction as a function of the phase difference between the superconductors, θ, may have one or two minima in [0, 4π) (see Figs. We treat the appearance of phase slips in the topological Josephson junction in two ways. First, we calculate the phase slip probability using a semiclassical method. In this case, a path integral between a state with θ = 0 in the distant past and θ = 4π in the distant future describes the phase slip process. With Majorana assisted tunneling, the junction Lagrangian corresponds to the double-sine-Gordon model which presents a 4π instanton. We calculate the phase slip probability up to Gaussian fluctuations around this instanton. In the small Majorana tunneling regime we assume dominance of 2π phase slips and calculate their probability using a method for asymmetric barriers This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we give a small review of the effects of charging induced phase fluctuations in Josephson junctions. This is followed by a qualitative discussion of the effects of phase fluctuations for different regimes of a topological Josephson junction in Sec. III. The main results are stated in Sec. IV where we introduce low energy effective models of topological Josephson junctions. In Sec. VI we discuss the implications of our results on the dissipative phase transition. Our conclusions are stated in Sec. VII. We begin with a quick review of the effects of small phase fluctuations in a non-topological junction. The junction consists of a weak link between two superconductors with a junction capacitance C described by the Hamiltonian where E J is the Josephson energy associated with the tunneling of Cooper pairs between the two superconductors, E C = e 2 /(2C), the charging energy of the weak link and n g the offset charge. The operator n measures the charge and the operator θ, measures the phase difference between the superconductors. To simplify the comparison with the following sections, we measure n (and n g ) in units of the electron charge e, rather than in the more conventional units of 2e. The commutation relation, [ θ, n] = 2i, therefore follows. Several examples of superconducting circuits, such as the ones used in the Cooper pair box In the basis of phase eigenstates, the wave-function Ψ(θ) = θ|Ψ describing the Josephson junction follows the equation respecting the boundary condition The dependence of the system on the offset charge n g can be transferred from the Schrödinger's equation to the boundary condition via Ψ(θ) → e ingθ/2 Ψ(θ) which results in, The above equations can be solved using Mathieu functions. Nonetheless, expansions for different parameter regimes have been developed to provide more intuition. Since we are interested in studying phase fluctuations, we focus on the E C E J limit. This corresponds to the regime of interest of transmon qubits When E C E J the potential energy -E J cos θ dominates the energy of the system. Around the potential energy minima, at θ = 2πj with integer j, equation 3a can be mapped onto an harmonic oscillator having frequency ω = √ 8E J E C . The low energy levels of the Josephson junction therefore correspond to harmonic oscillator levels. Deep inside the potential well, these harmonic oscillations do not depend on the boundary conditions given by Eq. 3b. To find the junction dependence on n g , we need to account for quantum tunneling between the different potential minima. Denoting the amplitude for quantum tunneling between the mth harmonic oscillator level of one of the potential minima and its nearest neighbors by ν m , it is possible to write an effective tight-binding Hamiltonian for the junction: Here a † m,j is the creation operator for mth level of an harmonic oscillator around 2πj, and m = ω(m + 1/2) the energy of the a level. The tight-binding Hamiltonian in Eq. 4 is diagonalized using the operators a m,k = j e -ikj a m,j : Comparing with Eq. 3b leads to the identification k = πn g , which allows us to conclude that for E C E J the dispersion of the mth level of the junction is given by which holds when ν m ω. The tunneling amplitudes ν m can be calculated using semi-classical methods. Here we briefly outline the calculation for the lowest energy level corresponding to the the phase slip probability ν 0 . We use the dilute instanton gas approximation in the path integral imaginary time formalism (see e.g. Ref. 44). In this formalism, the amplitude to propagate from 0 to 2π during an imaginary time interval of length 2L is written as a weighted sum over all the paths that start at 0 at time τ = -L and end at 2π at τ = L: where is commonly known as the sine-Gordon Lagrangian which is related to the Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 through a Legendre transform. For L → ∞ the classical solution is a 2π-kink also referred to as an instanton. It is given by θ cl 2π (τ ) = 4 arctan e ω(τ -τ0) where ω = √ E J E C / coincides with the frequency of harmonic oscillations around the 2πj minima. Conversely, the model also has a classical solution with θ(-∞) = 2π and θ(∞) = 0 known as an antikink. In the dilute instanton gas approximation, the path integration of Eq. 7 is done over combinations of kinks and anti-kinks and Gaussian fluctuations around them. Furthermore, it is assumed that the kinks and anti-kinks are separated enough (in imaginary time) that the interactions between them are negligible. This yields the result where 2 ω/E C = 8E J /E C is the action of a 2π kink. To test the validity of Eq. 9 we ask whether the gas of kinks and anti-kinks is in fact dilute. This can be done by comparing the width of the kinks, 2/ω, with the expected average separation among them, /ν 0 . The gas is dilute, and Eq. 9 is self-consistent, as long as ν 0 ω/2, which is satisfied for E J E C . This formalism can be extended to calculate the n gdependence of higher levels through the use of periodic instantons (see e.g. Ref. 45). The decision to focus on ν 0 was made for the sake of simplicity. In a topological junction, the two superconductors coupled by the junction each present a Majorana mode close to the the junction. We denote these by γ 1 and γ 2 , and ignore the other two Majorana modes which are far from the junction. The coupling of these Majorana modes adds a 4π periodic term to the tunneling current where iγ 1 γ 2 is the parity of the fermionic mode caused by the hybridization the Majorana modes on both sides of the junction. A physical realization of the above phenomenological model is possible using a Majorana Cooper pair box, such as the one studied in Ref. 46. In order to achieve the desired phase dominated limit the Majorana Cooper pair box could be shunted by a larger capacitance, as is done in transmon qubits If the local parity is conserved, the operator iγ 1 γ 2 in Eq. 10 can be substituted by either one of its two eigenvalues ±1. Without loss of generality, from now on we assume iγ 1 γ 2 = 1. As long as the local parity is conserved, our results do not rest on this assumption. As in the previous section, after a charge translation the wave-function in phase basis follows an n g independent Schrödinger's equation (11a) and a boundary condition As in the non-topological case, when E C is small compared to the tunneling E J and E M the energy is dominated by the tunneling terms which we refer to as "the potential". We therefore expect the ground state wave function to be concentrated around the potential minima. In the topological Josephson junction, the competition between the pair and single particle tunneling creates two different regimes depending whether the junction potential has a single minimum or a two minima for 0 ≤ θ < 4π. When E M /(8E J ) > 1, the junction potential has a single minimum in the [0, 4π) interval. Hence, the potential is minimized when θ = 4πm with m an integer, and all the minima are degenerate. The frequency of harmonic oscillations around these minima, obtained by expanding Eq. 11a around these values, is . This is exemplified in Fig. On the other hand, if E M /(8E J ) < 1, the junction potential has two minima in the [0, 4π) interval. Hence, the potential has two kinds of minima with two different frequencies for harmonic oscillations around them: θ = 4πm with frequency In addition to the effects discussed in the previous paragraph, changing E C may also change the tunneling processes that contribute to each energy level. This is shown in Figs. In this section, we will discuss two different effective models for the junction ground-state: one in which only oscillations between 4πm minima contribute and one in which oscillations around all 2πm minima contribute to the ground-state. We calculate the effective hopping parameters of each model and discuss their regions of validity. We can write an effective Hamiltonian for the groundstate of the junction as a combination of harmonic oscillations around 4πj plus hopping between such minima: where ω the frequency of harmonic oscillations around the minima at 4πj and is given by ω Accounting for the boundary condition, Eq. 11b, results in the following ground-state energy dispersion This model gives an effective description of the system in the single-minimum regime and in the double-minimum regime for small enough E C (see Fig. The tunneling amplitude ν 4π can be calculated following the procedure outlined in Sec. II. The imaginary time Lagrangian of the topological junction, is known as the double sine-Gordon Lagrangian and its semi-classical dynamics have been widely studied. The imaginary time separation of the two 2π kinks, 2R/ω, is set by the ratio of E M and 8E J as R is given by: The 4π DSG kink is depicted in Fig. Using the dilute instanton gas approximation, as before, we find where is an increasing function with f (0) = 2 and f (∞) = 4. With the appropriate modifications, this result is in agreement with the result found by Ref. 48 in a of statistical mechanics context. A more detailed derivation of how Eq. 16 is obtained is shown in Appendix A 1. When E M → 0, ν 4π presents a square root divergence, i.e. ν 4π ∼ 1/ √ E M . This divergence has two physical interpretations. First, it is indicative of a resonance in tunneling The restoration of the 2π translation symmetry for E M → 0 diminishes the range of the validity of the calculated expression for ν 4π . This can be seen by noting that the dilute instanton gas approximation breaks down when E M → 0: the width of the 4π kinks (2 + 2R)/ω diverges as -log E M whereas the average separation between the kinks /ν 4π goes to zero as √ E M . The assumption that the width of the 4π kinks is much smaller than the average separation between the kinks fails for E M → 0. We address this problem in the next subsection. In order to derive a semiclassical expression whose validity extends to smaller E M /E J ratios we account for a higher order of fluctuations in the direction of the emergent translational mode. The result of Ref. 51 can be written in terms of R as: where F (R) is a numerical factor bounded by 2/5 ≤ F (R) ≤ 1 and given by and In the above expressions, 2r/ω corresponds to the fluctuating distance between the two kinks and S R (r) is an r-dependent effective action which is minimized at r = R. For more details on how this expression is obtained, see Appendix A 2 and Ref. 51. To the best of our knowledge, a closed form expression for I (R, α) does not exist. Nonetheless, we can find approximate expressions for I (R, α) for small and large R. For small R, the greatest contribution to I (R, α) comes from the r values around R. A saddle point approximation of the integral I (R, α) results in This is a good approximation to I (R, α) if e 2R 16α (see Appendix A 2). Substituting this in Eq. 17a gives the expression for ν 4π obtained without including corrections due to the emergent translational mode, i.e. Eq. 16. Hence, Eq. 16 is valid when E M /(8E J ) E C /(4 ω). When R is large, the integral is dominated by the linear large r behavior of S R (r). In Appendix B 2, we find that for 16α 2 e 2R This leads to ν 4π ≈ ν lr 4π with when In the above equation, f 1 (x) and f 2 (x) are order 1 numerical factors which decrease with x; their exact form can be found in Appendix B 2. Note that according to the above calculations ν 4π diverges for E M → 0 as 1/E M . If the junction parameters are such that there are additional (local) minima at 2πm with m odd and oscillations around those minima contribute to the ground-state (see e.g. Fig. where ν 2π corresponds to tunneling amplitude between potential minima separated by 2π. The energies n are given by: The dispersion of Eq. 21 is ( The hopping ν 2π can be calculated using the formula proposed by Ref. 38 for the tunneling through an asymmetric potential. Without loss of generality, we can focus on calculating the amplitude for tunneling between 0 and 2π. The minimum at 0 and the minimum at 2π are separated by a barrier which is largest at θ max . Following Ref. 38 we define two potentials symmetric around θ max , V L (θ) and V R (θ), such that V L (θ) (V R (θ)) is equal to the junction potential for 0 < θ < θ max (θ max < θ < 2π). Then ν 2π can be written as: where ν s , s = L, R, is the probability for tunneling from 0 to 2π through the potential V s and with V max = V (θ max ). The above expression for ν 2π clearly breaks down when o ≥ V max ; at that point the zero point motion of the shallow minimum becomes larger than the potential barrier. The approximations leading to the above expression for ν 2π start failing before this point. For our model of a topological Josephson junction, θ max and V max are given by: And the θ max -symmetric potentials V L and V R are well approximated by which leads to the following tunneling amplitudes: with For E M → 0 the dispersion in Eq. 23 becomes This is the expected result for the E M → 0 limit, as it corresponds to the breaking of the symmetry between the minima at even and odd multiples of 2π "folding" the n g -Brillouin zone. We also note that for ν 2π | oe | the lowest of the two bands becomes This dispersion would be equivalent to the dispersion found for the 4π phase slip model ( The image that emerges from the results in this section and the previous energetic considerations is as follows. Given a junction with fixed E M and E J values, it is always possible to find E C small enough such that the junction is well described by 4π QPS. On the other hand, given E C we can always find a E M small enough so 2π QPS are still present in the system. The range of E C values in which the junction can be fully described by 4π QPS processes shrinks to 0 when E M → 0. To further clarify the range of parameters in which each picture is valid, we compare the different effective models for the topological Josephson junction with numerical result. The spectrum of Eq. 10 is obtained numerically by truncating the Hilbert space in the number basis, where the Hamiltonian becomes The numerical results shown in this paper are obtained by taking the sum in the above equation from n = -N to n = N with N = 10 4 . Comparisons between E gs (n g ) for the topological Josephson junction predicted by the effective models discussed previously and numerical results are shown in Fig. The results above indicate that the presence of local minima at odd multiples of 2π in the junction potential lead to a ground-state wave-function weight at odd multiples of 2π if E C is large enough. A question that arises is whether the presence of local minima in the potential guarantees that there will be a large enough E C such that the ground-state wave function is peaked at odd multiples of 2π. This can be answered by looking at the dominant charging energy limit. For E M = E J = 0, the eigenstates of the junction have a well defined particle number n and their energies are given by E C (n -n g ) 2 . In the gauge where Ψ(θ + 4π) = Ψ(θ), the phase space wave-functions of such states are given by Ψ(θ) = e -ilθ/2 with integer l. If E M , E J E C the eigenstates of the junction can be found perturbatively from the well defined number states. To first order in perturbation theory, the ground-state of the junction for n g ∈ (-1/2, 1/2) is given by the unnormalized wave function . ( The above wave-function will be peaked at 2π if |Ψ gs (θ)| has a local maximum at this point. For simplicity, we focus on n g = 0. In this case, Since E M E C and E J E C then Ψ gs (θ) = |Ψ gs (θ)|. Looking at the derivatives of Ψ gs at θ = 2π, we find that 2π is a minimum of Ψ gs when E M /(2E J ) > 1 and a maximum when E M /(2E J ) < 1. Therefore, the n g = 0 ground-state wave-function is peaked around odd multiples of 2π if E M /(2E J ) < 1. We see then that for 2E J < E M < 8E J and n g = 0, the ground-state wave-function does not peak around odd multiples of 2π despite the junction having local potential minima there. Moreover, the wave-function weight around odd multiples of 2π is highest for integer values of n g . This can be intuitively understood by noticing that the wave-function weight around odd multiples of 2π for half-integer n g is strongly suppressed as a result of the degeneracy between the two nearby n states. Therefore, for any given n g the ground-state wave-function does not peak around odd multiples of 2π if 2E J < E M . Then the presence of local minima in the potential does not guarantee that there will be a large enough value of E C to cause a ground-state wave-function peak at odd multiples of 2π. In the above we found that for any ration of E M < 8E J one might find both 4π and 2π phase slips, depending on the strength of the phase fluctuations given by E C . Therefore, the scenario of 4π phase slips only is bound to fail for some value of E C . We have estimated the value of E C above which 2π phase slips dominate in the following way. First we have evaluated the 4π phase slip probability ν 4π using a double sine-Gordon model. Well below the cross-over line in Fig. It is interesting to discuss the implications of our results on the dissipative transition that is expected in this system. An important caveat of using the dissipative phase transition as a mechanism for detecting Majorana modes is that the dissipation induced by quasi-particle tunneling also reduces the critical resistance of non-topological Josephson junctions by a factor of 4. Furthermore, the effects of dissipation induced by quasi-particle tunneling in non-topological Josephson junctions are dependent on the ratio between the Josephson coupling and the charging energy. The difference in the effects of 4π periodic vs. quasiparticle tunneling in the dissipative transition is unclear. However, the effects on the charge offset dispersion are clearly different. While both kinds of single particle tunneling turn the system from 2π periodic to 4π periodic, the Majorana assisted tunneling opens up a gap (see Eq. 23), while the quasi-particle tunneling does not Finally, another important issue to consider is the effect of quasi-particle poisoning in this system. Since instanton techniques tend to be useful to describe systems coupled to external environments We studied the effects of phase fluctuations induced by charging effects in a simple model of a topological Josephson junction. Our model considers both single particle tunneling and pair tunneling, which are, respectively, 4π and 2π periodic with respect to the superconducting phase difference across the junction. We found that when the single particle tunneling is a small component of the total tunneling current there are two possible ways to describe the ground-state of the junction: 1) in terms of 4π QPS or 2) in terms of coupled 2π QPS. We found the tunneling amplitudes for both effective descriptions and compared them to numerical results to determine the range of parameter in which each description is appropriate. We note that in a real junction one may not have control over the relative strength of E M and E J and therefore observing 2π phase slips does not necessarily imply that the junction isn't topological. However, if the junction is indeed topological and phase fluctuations can be reduced through capacitance (reducing E C ), 2π phase slips will be suppressed revealing the topological nature of the junction. In addition, we discussed the possible implications that our results have for the dissipative phase transition expected in this system. As was previously found by Ref. 35, when the ground-state of the junction is described by 4π QPS we expect the critical resistance needed to make the junction superconducting to be 4 times smaller than the critical resistance needed to make a non-topological junction superconducting. In the regime where tunneling processes between minima separated by 2π are still present in the system, we expect the critical transition to be somewhere between these two critical values. Given that increasing the charging energy of the junction may change the tunneling processes present in the system, our results also point towards a charging energy dependence of the critical resistance for the dissipative transition. Several questions regarding the dissipative transition, particularly in relation to quasi-particle tunneling, remain unanswered. In the future, we will use the formalism developed in this work to obtain a quantitative description of this transition. It would also be interesting to pinpoint the relation between the results presented in this work and the dominant charging energy limit. with N a normalization constant. However, the above expression in not well defined since the operator D contains a zero mode, λ 0 , which leads to a divergence in F . The time τ 0 at which the kink solution is centered is arbitrary which leads to D∂ τ θ cl = 0; i.e. the zero mode is a consequence of the time-translational invariance of the system. To deal with this divergence, we use the Fadeev-Popov method to transform the χ 0 integration to a τ 0 integration. The Fadeev-Popov method consists of inserting 1 = dτ 0 ∂χ 0 ∂τ 0 (χ 0 = 0) δ(χ 0 ), (A16) into the expression for F given by Eq. A15: The Jacobian ∂χ0 ∂τ0 (χ 0 = 0) can be found rewriting the path θ so that fluctuations in the direction of the zero mode are traded for an explicit τ 0 dependence: Comparing the above expression for the path with that of Eq. A5 leads to Furthermore, we note that the constraint χ 0 = 0 corresponds to τ 0 = 0 so we obtain: We know ∂ τ θ cl ∝ y 0 (τ ) since D∂ τ θ cl = 0. The proportionality constant can be found using the following expression: which stems from the fact that θ cl (τ ) minimizes the action (Eq. A6). We use this to find f (0): The appropriate boundaries of integration for τ 0 are -L and L since τ takes values in the interval (-L, L). We then obtain where n indicates the product over the eigenvalues taking out the zero eigenvalue. The normalization constant can be conveniently expressed in terms of the sum over harmonic fluctuations around 0 or 4π. If we define The normalization constant N can be written as where λ 0 n are the eigenvalues of the differential operator D 0 . F 0 , the fluctuation contribution to the imaginary time harmonic oscillator propagator, is readily available in the literature (see e.g. Ref. 44). For L → ∞ its leading contribution is Our expression for F currently includes a ratio between the products of eigenvalues of the operators D 0 and D: which can be evaluated using the Gelfand-Yaglom formula. Following Ref. 44 we have where η is defined by the asymptotic behavior of the classical solution: To the leading order the amplitude to propagate from 0 to 4π in an imaginary time interval 2L is then: However, the leading order contribution is not enough to obtain the level splitting. It is possible to obtain a more precise expression for the amplitude using the dilute instanton gas approximation. Under the dilute instanton gas approximation, we sum over paths consisting of combinations of kinks and antikinks and quadratic fluctuations around them, i.e. where ν n = ±1 (+ for kinks and -for anti-kinks) and n ν n = 1. The approximation consist of considering that the centers of the kinks and anti-kinks, i.e. τ n are sufficiently spread out to make kink-kink interactions negligible. The obtained result is The spectral representation of the amplitude in Eq. A1 is Considering two groundstate levels of harmonic oscillators with frequency ω and mass M , one centered around 0 and other around 4π, which can tunnel to each other with amplitude ν, we have In the above expression ψ 0 (θ) and ψ 4π (θ) are the groundstate wavefunctions of harmonic oscillators centered around 0 and 4π, respectively, e.g. The amplitude, Eq. A1, for such system would then be (0, -L|4π, L) = M ω π e -Lω sinh (2Lν/ ) . (A38) Comparing Eq. A34 and Eq. A38 allows us to conclude For the kink in Eq. A7 we have: Substituting the values of M , ω and R from Eq. A4 we obtain 2. Emergent translational mode correction for the 4π phase slip amplitude. Here, we follow the procedure outlined in Ref. 51 to introduce corrections to the previously found expression for ν 4π . This section then follows the work done in Ref. 51 closely. We include the calculation here for clarity as the work in Ref. 51 was done in the context of classical statistical mechanics. We also note that Ref. 51 claims, incorrectly, that this procedure leads to a non-divergent expression. Here, we find otherwise. When E M → 0, the expression for ν found in A 1 diverges. This occurs because one of the eigenmodes of the operator D, which we will call λ 1 approaches 0 when E M → 0. Physically, the two 2π kinks decouple turning the distance between the two 2π kinks 2R into another translation mode. We must then have For R = r we recover the classical solution, i.e. σ(τ, R) = θ cl (τ ) . We should note that Eq. A44, and thefore the rest this appendix, relies on y 1 ≈ ∂ R (θ cl ). This is a valid assumption when R > 1.25. with I(R, α) defined by Eq. 17c. Our final expression for ν is which corresponds to the expression in the main text Eq. 17 since F (R) = 2 cosh R/g(R). Appendix B: Approximate expressions for I (R, α) Taking r = R + y/ αS R (R) we can write the saddle point expansion of I (R, α) as In the above equation the p n (y, R) are odd/even polynomials in y when n is even/odd, and the C n (R) are functions of R which can be expressed in terms of derivatives of S R (r) and 1 -4r 2 csch 2 2r evaluated at r = R. The expression for I (R, α) in Eq. 18 corresponds to the first term in the above saddle point expansion; therefore, it is a valid approximation if 1/(αS R (R)) 1. The function 1/S R (R) diverges for R → 0 and for R → ∞ making the approximation for both small and large R. However, since Eq. 17 was obtained to address the large R divergence, we only need to find the upper R limit for the validity of Eq. 18. Since Eq. 18 is valid when e 2R 16α. This condition makes the tunneling expression of Eq. 16 valid for E M /(8E J ) E C /(4 ω) To find an approximate expression for I (R, α) in the large R limit, we note that S R (r) grows linearly with r for large r. Furthermore, the slope of the large r linear behavior as R increases. This means that, when R is large, the largest contribution to I (R, α) will come from the large r linear behavior. We start by writing the following large r expansions: and we obtain: The approximation is valid when 16α 2 e -2R 1. For R given by Eq. 15b and α = ω/E C this is equivalent to E M /(8E J ) 0.25E 2 C /( ω) 2 . For I (R, α) ≈ I 0 (R, α) we obtain