Valley degrees of freedom, providing a novel way to increase capacity and efficiency of information processing, have become an important instrument for photonics. Experimental studies on photonic topological valley kink states at interfaces between regions with opposite valley-Chern numbers have attracted much attention, however, were restricted to zigzag-type interfaces, largely limiting their applications such as geometry-dependent topological channel intersections. Here, we experimentally demonstrate and manipulate valley kink states at generic interfaces in subwavelength substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. We verify the robustness of the kink states by measuring transmissions of the kink states through twisted interfaces and interfaces with disorders. Based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we realize several topological channel intersections where photonic transport paths are related to geometries of the intersections. In comparison to those in previous works, the present valley photonic crystals have subwavelength thicknesses and excellent self-consistent electrical shielding, which are perfectly compatible with conventional substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. Our work opens a door to manipulate photonic valley pseudo-spins in substrate-integrated circuitry with robustness, easy access, and lightweight. Topological photonics, which studies topological states of photons, has attracted much attention in the past decade topologically-protected refraction Recent studies have revealed a class of topological interface states that emerge at interfaces between regions with opposite valley-Chern numbers, also known as topological valley kink states In this work, we demonstrate experimentally valley-polarized topological kink states at generic interfaces in subwavelength substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. We verify the robustness of the topological kink states by measuring transmissions of kink states through twisted interfaces and interfaces with disorders. Based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we demonstrate topological channel intersections where photonic transport paths are determined by geometries of the intersections. Besides, in comparison to the previous valley photonic crystals (VPCs) The designed VPC consists of a hexagonal-lattice of triangular scatterers placed in a copper parallel plate waveguide, which is loaded with a dielectric material with relative permittivity 2.4 (see Fig. (see Supplementary Note 2). When the rotation angle is θ=0°, there are a pair of Dirac points at K and K' points in the first Brillouin zone at a frequency of 14.39 GHz (see Fig. The field patterns of the upper and lower bands at K and K' points are shown in Fig. Note 3). The band topology around K valley can be described by an effective massive Dirac Hamiltonian where σ z = ±1 represent φ + and φ -states, respectively, which carry opposite valleys; q ⃗ = (q x , q y ) is wavevector derivation from K point; and m is an effective mass term determined by the bandgap size. In parallel, the band topology around K' point is described by a different Hamiltonian, H K ′ = -H K , as guaranteed by the time-reversal symmetry preserved in our system. These Hamiltonians indicate the nontrivial Berry curvatures around the K and K' point. Integrating the Berry curvature around K (K') valley gives a half-integer valley-Chern number The rotation angle θ controls the Dirac mass terms and the corresponding valley-Chern number (see Fig. To verify the above statements, we numerically calculate two elementary types of interfaces. The first type is the previously-studied zigzag interfaces The second type is armchair interfaces (Figs. It is well-known that conventional photonic crystal waveguides suffer considerable reflection loss when electromagnetic waves propagate through sharp bending corners We further confirm the robust transport of topological kink state by introducing certain disorders into VPCs around the interfaces. As shown in Fig. Besides, we perform additional simulations to demonstrate the robustness of the valley kink states against different kinds of disorders (see Supplementary Note 9). Finally, based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we realize photonic geometry-dependent topological channel intersections, where energy transport paths are related to geometries of the intersections (see the lower panel), within the photonic bandgap frequency window. Similar phenomena have also been observed for a channel intersection with solely armchair interfaces (Figs. We thus experimentally demonstrate and manipulate topological valley kink states at generic interfaces in subwavelength substrate-integrated photonic circuitry. Such valley kink states are robust against some types of disorders and sharp bends, as we verified both experimentally and numerically. Based on the valley kink states at generic interfaces, we realize topological channel intersections where photonic transport paths are related to geometries of the intersections. Moreover, in comparison to the previous VPCs, our substrate-integrated VPCs show subwavelength thicknesses and excellent self-consistent electrical shielding, which are perfectly compatible with the conventional substrate-integrated waveguide circuitry. The present design provides a possibility for a complete topological waveguide circuitry, including passive, active, or nonplanar components and even antennas, to be fabricated and integrated on the same substrate using standard printed circuits board techniques. Our studies add new freedom, namely, topology, beyond the conventional freedoms, i.e., wave-vector, phase, and polarization, to the substrate-integrated circuitry, and may work as an alternative integration platform with low cost, easy access, and light weight. 