Reliable simulations of correlated quantum systems, including hightemperature superconductors and frustrated magnets, are increasingly desired nowadays to further understanding of essential features in such systems. Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) is a unique numerically-exact and intrinsically-unbiased method to simulate interacting quantum many-body systems. More importantly, when QMC simulations are free from the notorious fermion-sign problem, they can reliably simulate interacting quantum models with large system size and low temperature to reveal low-energy physics such as spontaneously-broken symmetries and universal quantum critical behaviors. Here, we concisely review recent progresses made in developing new sign-problem-free QMC algorithms, including those employing Majorana representation and those utilizing hot-spot physics. We also discuss applications of these novel sign-problem-free QMC algorithms in simulations of various interesting quantum many-body models. Finally, we discuss possible future directions of designing sign-problem-free QMC methods. Understanding physical properties of interacting quantum many-body systems with strong correlations is of central importance in modern condensed matter physics (1-3) as well as in related fields such as nuclear physics (4) and quantum chromodynamics The Monte Carlo method was originally proposed to study classical systems, the basic idea of which is stochastic sampling of the classical configurations whose stochastic probabilities are the Boltzmann weights in the partition function where the trace is over the system's whole Hilbert space which grows exponentially with system size. Directly obtaining the quantum partition function for an interacting manybody system is usually neither feasible nor necessary. One key step in QMC simulations is to map such quantum partition function into a summation of classical Boltzmann weights Z = c w(c); which c labels classical configurations defined in a certain way. For instance, utilizing the spirit of path integral, the quantum partition function can be expressed as a sum over all possible world-line configurations c with statistical weight w(c). This observation is the foundation of a typical QMC algorithm, namely world-line QMC One straightforward way of dealing with the minus sign in Boltzmann weights is to employ the absolute value of Boltzmann weight |w(c)| as probability of sampling. The expectation value of an observable represented by the operator Ô can be computed as follows: where w(c) = sign(c)|w(c)|; namely sign(c) labels the sign of w(c). This procedure allows QMC can be implemented even when the Boltzmann weights in question are not positive-definite. However, the configurations with negative sign and positive sign nearly cancel with each other such that sign |w| is exponentially small with the system size; this results in exponentially large statistical errors in evaluating the observable Ô . To be more explicit, we illustrate this using the world-line representation. In the world-line algorithm, the sign average sign |w| decays exponentially with the system's particle number N and inverse temperature β: sign |w| = exp(-N β∆f ), where ∆f > 0 represents the free energy density difference between the fermionic quantum system under consideration and the corresponding bosonic one Fortunately, it is still possible that the fermion-sign problem can be circumvented in specific quantum models by designing appropriate QMC algorithms. The fermion-sign problem generically appears in QMC simulations of fermionic systems by world-line algorithm. To avoid the sign problem and simulate quantum models more efficiently, various fermionic QMC methods other than the world-line one for quantum lattice models Here we shall mainly focus on the DQMC. In the DQMC algorithm, fermion-sign problems may be solved for certain quantum models because one can sum the weights of a subset of fermion-exchange processes into a matrix determinant which could be positive-definite. The first DQMC approach of simulating interacting fermion models was proposed in 1981 by Blankenbecler, Scalapino, and Sugar (BSS) where ∆τ = β/Nτ and Ĥ = Ĥ0 + ĤI with Ĥ0 representing the non-interacting part and ĤI the four-fermion interactions. Typically, the non-interacting part can be written as Ĥ0 = c † H0c = c † i H0(i, j)cj, where c † i are fermion creation operators with i labeling a collection of relevant indices such as site, spin, and orbital; and H0 is a matrix. The errors caused by the Suruki-Trotter decomposition is proportional to ∆τ 2 , and can therefore be made sufficiently small by decreasing the time slice ∆τ . The standard Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) decomposition, which is based on the Gaussian integral, can be applied to decouple fourfermions interactions ĤI : exp(-∆τ ĤI ) = φn exp[-∆τ ĥ(φn)], where ĥ(φn) = c † h(φn)c represent quadratic fermion operators with the matrix h(φn) depending on the configurations of auxiliary fields φn at imaginary time τn = n∆τ . Note that the spatial (such as site and bond) dependence of φn is implicit here. Finally, tracing out fermions can be done because only quadratic fermion operators appear in the exponentials, which gives rise to a determinant which depends on the auxiliary-field configurations: where Ĥ(n) = Ĥ0 + ĥ(φn) is the decomposed Hamiltonian at imaginary time τn which implicitly depends on φn. Here {φn} represent all possible auxiliary-field configurations on the space-time lattice. It is advantageous in various ways to map the quantum partition function into a summation of matrix determinants over classical auxiliary-field configurations as shown above. Most importantly, although the determinant in Eq. ( It is remarkable to witness the enormous progresses achieved in recent years in solving the fermion-sign problem in QMC simulations of fermionic many-body models. In this review, we discuss the recent developments of sign-problem-free QMC methods and their applications in simulations of interacting fermionic models. We shall mainly focus on recent developments in and applications of DQMC algorithms. The rest of this review is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we review the recent developments of fermion-sign-free QMC simulation in the framework of employing Kramers time-reversal symmetry (TRS). In Sec. 3, we discuss the novel ideas of solving fermion-sign problem by employing the Majorana representation of fermions and the Majorana TRS. We shall also discuss a large class of interesting models whose fermion-sign problems have been solved using the Majorana representation and Majorana TRS. In Sec. 4, we focus on the classification of sign-problem-free symmetry classes in DQMC. In Sec. 5, we briefly review the recent developments of solving fermion-sign problem in other algorithms such as continuous-time QMC Even though a general solution of the fermion-sign problem in QMC is NP-hard, many specific models have been successfully identified to be sign-problem-free. As mentioned in the introduction above, appropriate factorization of Boltzmann weights may solve fermionsign problem in DQMC. Utilizing this approach, many models with interesting features have been investigated by sign-problem-free QMC simulations, including the attractive Hubbard model However, it is certainly not guaranteed that all the Boltzmann weights can be explicitly factorized into two symmetric parts which are real even when the system is at half-filling. For instance, adding a finite Rashba spin-orbit coupling into the attractive Hubbard model would ruin the factorization of the Boltzmann weight into a spin-up part and a spin-down part. Consequently, a more general approach solving fermion-sign problem in QMC was desired. In Ref. Theorem: For a set of square matrices H(n), if there exists an anti-unitary operator T with the eigenvalues of the matrix B = I + n e -∆τ H(n) always appear in complex conjugate pairs. Moreover, the determinant of B is positive definite because det(B) = i |λi| 2 > 0. Here we shall not review the detailed proof of the theorem [see Ref. In the past several years, there has been a surge of sign-problem-free QMC studies of strongly correlated systems. QMC simulations which are sign-problem-free using the Kramers timereversal principle have been recently especially employed to investigate quantum critical fluctuations as well as superconductivity induced by those fluctuations in cuprate or ironbased superconducting materials Several years ago, Berg, Metlitski, and Sachdev proposed to study critical antiferromagnetic fluctuations in metals by performing sign-problem-free QMC simulations of a different but low-energy equivalent model which describes the lattice model with two electron bands designed to mimic the AF phase transition in electron-doped cuprates with one electron band: where ) creates an electron in the α = x or y-band on site i with spin polarization s =↑ or ↓, φi denotes the AF fluctuation boson on site i, τ is imaginary time, and β is inverse temperature. The parameter r is used to tune the AF phase transition. The band structure using the parameters in Ref. The Kramers time-reversal principle has achieved many successes in rendering sign-problemfree in complex-fermion quantum Monte Carlo during the past decades. However, the requirements of both Kramers TRS with T 2 = -1 and particle-number conservation prevent the applications of this principle to more general quantum lattice models. As the minimum dimension of the projective representation satisfying T 2 = -1 is two, it is thus challenging to apply the principle of Kramers TRS to those models of fermions without internal degree of freedoms such as orbital or spin. For instance, the fermion-sign problem in models of spinless (or spin-polarized) fermions cannot be directly solved in the framework of Kramers TRS. Moreover, the requirement of particle-number conservation makes it difficult to apply this principle to the models which explicitly break charge conservation. In order to resolve these intrinsic difficulties, Li, Jiang, and Yao proposed in Ref. We begin by introducing the basic idea of Majorana QMC. One important motivation of proposing the Majorana QMC was to solve fermion-sign problem in spinless fermionic models To explicitly illustrate how the fermion-sign problem can be solved by Majorana QMC, we consider the spinless-fermion model H = H0 + HI as an example: where c † i creates a spinless fermion (or spin-polarized electron) on site i, ni = c † i ci is the density operator, t denotes nearest-neighbor (NN) hopping amplitude, and V > 0 labels NN density-density interactive interaction. The Hamiltonian can be defined on any bipartite lattice and the generalization to longer range interactions is straightforward. To solve fermion-sign problem of this model, the Hamiltonian above can be expressed in terms of Majorana fermions with two species because each complex fermion can be rewritten as two Majorana fermions: where γ α i (α = 1, 2) are Majorana fermions satisfying {γ α i , γ α j } = 2δααδij. After rewriting the Hamiltonian in Majorana representation and performing the standard procedure of Suruki-Trotter decomposition, the interaction Hint can be decoupled by a HS transformation: where ∆τ is the imaginary time slice in the Suruki-Trotter decomposition, λ = cosh -1 [e V ∆τ /2 ], and σij = ±1 represent auxiliary fields on the NN bond ij . Note that the HS transformation above is performed in the hopping channel of Majorana fermions, which is a key step for solving the fermion-sign problem. (In conventional complex-fermion QMC, the HS transformation in density channels would encounter fermion-sign problem). When the system is at half-filling, in terms of Majorana fermions the non-interacting part of the Hamiltonian is given by H0 = -t 4 ij (iγ 1 i γ 1 j + iγ 2 i γ 2 j ). As a consequence, both free Hamiltonian H0 and the decoupled form of the interacting part are the sum of two separate parts, each of which involves only one species of Majorana fermions. Therefore, the Boltzmann weight W ({σ}) depending on the auxiliary field configuration {σ} can be written as the product of two factors, where the factor Wα({σ}) is obtained by tracing out Majorana component α (α = 1, 2). It is explicitly given by where γα = (γ α ) T = (γ α 1 , • • • , γ α N ) and h α (n) is a N ×N matrix (N is the number of lattice sites) whose (ij)-matrix element is given by h for ij being NN sites and 0 others. Note that the trace of exponential bilinear Majorana fermions is the square root of a determinant rather that the determinant itself, which is due to the fact that a Majorana fermion carries only half the degree of freedom of a complex fermion. It is worthy to note that there is sign ambiguity when taking a square root from the above, similar to the case of taking a Pfaffian as a square root of a determinant. Consequently, an additional condition is needed to be sign-problem free. The key observation is that the Majorana Hamiltonian after the HS transformation respects a TRS, which is defined as T = GK with K being complex conjugation and G being a unitary transformation. Specifically, under the unitary transformation G: Consequently, the decomposed quadratic Hamiltonian respects the Majorana TRS T . Because of this Majorana TRS, we obtain such that the product of two factors is positive definite: This proves that fermion-sign problem in such class of models consisting of spinless fermions can be solved by TRS in Majorana representation. Note that the Majorana time-reversal principle for sign-problem-free QMC is quite general, not limited to models of spinless fermions. It is straightforward to generalize this Majorana approach to solve fermion-sign problem in more general models such as systems consisting spin-1 2 electrons (97) and SU(N ) fermions (98). We have shown that fermion-sign problem in the Majorana QMC can be solved by utilizing the Majorana time-reversal principle. Due to the intrinsic properties of Majorana fermions, sign-problem-free models in Majorana QMC include, but are not limited to, two unique classes of models which are normally sign-problematic in complex-fermion QMC. Models in the first class often describe systems of spinless fermions or fermions with odd numbers of species (flavors), whereas models in the second class are interacting models breaking particlenumber conservation such as interacting models with explicit pairing terms. Through simulating these novel sign-problem-free models, exotic phases and phenomena have been firmly revealed, including emergent supersymmetry (SUSY) and fermion-induced quantum critical points (FIQCP). In the following, we shall discuss applications of Majorana QMC to sign-problem-free models which exhibit novel physical properties. Majarana QMC was first applied in Ref. Majorana QMC was also applied to investigate interacting models of SU(N ) models, especially those with odd N . For instance, Majorana QMC simulations of interacting models of SU(N ) fermions on the honeycomb lattice at half-filling revealed an exotic QCP dubbed as FIQCP in Ref. In Majorana-based QMC, fermion-sign problem can be solved for certain models without particle-number conservation. It is therefore natural to apply Majorana QMC algorithm to investigate interacting effects in superconductors, namely Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians with interactions. In Ref. (113), sign-problem-free Majorana QMC was applied to study whether spacetime supersymmetry emerges at the edge quantum critical points induced by interactions in a 2D time-reversal invariant (TRI) topological superconductor. In Ref. (114), it was argued by Grover, Sheng, and Vishwanath from RG analysis that 1+1D spacetime SUSY emerges at the edge QCP of spontaneous TRS breaking on the edge of 2D topological superconductors. To test possible existence of an edge QCP and associated emergent SUSY in a 2D lattice model, we introduce the following minimal model of interacting TRS topological SC in Ref. ( where the noninteracting part above represents a BdG description of 2D TRI topological superconductors with ∆ ↑ (∆ ↓ ) denoting p+ip (p-ip) pairing between two spin-up (spin-down) electrons. Importantly, after an appropriate HS transformation the decoupled Hamiltonian satisfies the Majorana time-reversal principle such that Majorana QMC simulations are free from the fermion-sign problem. As is revealed by large-scaled QMC simulations in Ref. (113), when the interaction U increases spontaneous TRS breaking occurs on the edge at a critical value U edge c while the system's bulk remains gapped. Moreover, various evidences of emergent spacetime SUSY at this edge QCP were obtained. For instance, several critical exponents obtained from QMC are consistent with the exact values associated with the putative N = 1 SUSY in 1+1D. More importantly, sufficiently close to the edge QCP, the masses of fermion and boson are found to be equal to each other within error-bar, which is a hallmark of emergent SUSY. It is the first intrinsically-unbiased numerical study of a 2D lattice model revealing evidences of emergent SUSY at its edge QCP. More recently, signproblem-free QMC simulations in Majorana representation in Ref. (115) obtained convincing evidences of emergent N =2 2+1D SUSY, proposed theoretically in Refs. In addition to examples discussed above, a number of other interesting models have been investigated through sign-problem-free Majorana QMC. For instance, Majorana QMC was employed to study the ground-state stability of charge-4e superconductivity We have shown that fermion-sign problem may be solved by using TRS of the HS transformation in complex fermion representation as well as in Majorana representation. In order to have a deeper understanding of fermion-sign problem as well as design more general sign-problem-free models exhibiting interesting physics, it is desirable to find a fundamental guiding principle for sign-problem-free algorithms. In Ref. (126), Li, Jiang, and Yao proposed to classify sign-free and sign-problematic models in QMC according the the set of anti-unitary (loosely called "time-reversal" hereafter) symmetries in Majorana representation that all the decomposed Hamiltonians Hn respect. The idea of employing anti-commuting TR (or anti-unitary) symmetries in Majorana representation to classify fermion-sign problem of random Majorana bilinear operators is, in spirit, similar to the one used by Kitaev in obtaining a "periodic table" classification of topological insulators and topological superconductors (127). Since Majorana fermion operators are real, a Majorana-time-reversal symmetry can be represented by T ± = U ± K, where (T ± ) 2 = ±1 and U ± is a real orthogonal matrix satisfying (U ± ) T = ±U ± . The decomposed Hamiltonian ĥτn = γ T hnγ expressed in Majorana representation may be classified systematically according to the maximal set of anti-commuting Majorana TRS , where m is the number of TRS in a symmetry class and pi = ±. Because of possible sign choices of pi = ±, there are totally m + 1 distinct symmetry classes for each m. In the following, we shall show whether a given symmetry class is sign-problem-free or sign-problematic. rived. Because Q is anti-symmetric, namely Q T = -Q, one can construct a charge operator Q = γ T (iQ)γ such that [ Q, ĥn] = 0. It is clear that the combination of time-reversal T - 1 and charge-conservation Q in this symmetry class is equivalent to the Kramers-symmetry since [T - 1 , iQ] = 0 and (T - 1 ) 2 = -1. The absence of fermion-sign-problem has been shown according to the observation of the complex conjugate pairs in eigenvalues in Ref. For By systematically classifying fully random matrices according to the set of anti-commuting Majorana TR symmetries, it has been rigorously shown that there are two and only two fundamental sign-problem-free symmetry classes. However, it is possible that certain lower symmetry classes with special non-symmetry conditions may be sign-problem-free. For instance, in Ref. (128), Majorana reflection positivity (129, 130) condition was insightfully added to the symmetry class {T + } to solve fermion-sign problem. Reflection positivity was initially introduced in quantum field theory and has many applications in quantum many-body problems. Employing the method of spin reflection positivity, Lieb proved the uniqueness of the ground state of Hubbard model at half-filling (131). The requirement of reflection positivity puts strong constraints on the sign structure of ground state wave function (132) which is intimately related to fermion-sign problem in QMC. It is therefore natural to connect reflection positivity to fermion-sign problems in QMC simulations. Firstly, we briefly discuss Majorana reflection positivity. The operator Ô is reflection positive if it satisfies the condition: Tr[ Qθ( Q) Ô] ≥ 0 for any operator Q spanned in Majorana spaces, where θ is Majorana reflection operation. Obviously, the positivity of this quantity is useful in solving fermion-sign problem in QMC simulation. For the generic form of Boltzmann weight in DQMC: W = Tr Nτ n=1 e ∆τ Ĥ(n) , where Ĥ(n) = γ T H(n)γ is the bilinear Majorana operator after HS decomposition, it was shown in Ref. (128) that W is positive-definite if all the matrices H(n) satisfy the following Majorana reflection positivity condition: where An and Bn are N × N matrices with An being anti-symmetric and Bn being positive semi-definite. See Ref. (128) for the details of the proof. Note that the requirement of Bn being positive semi-definite cannot be guaranteed by any symmetries. In other words, this reflection-positivity criterion of being sign-problem-free in Majorana QMC goes beyond the symmetry principle of solving fermion-sign problem discussed in previous sections. The Hamiltonian Ĥ(n) = γ T H(n)γ in Eq. ( The algorithm of DQMC utilizes discretization of imaginary time by Suruki-Trotter decomposition, which inevitably introduces a Trotter error which is order of (∆τ ) 2 and can be made sufficiently small by decreasing ∆τ . About two decades ago, a novel algorithm distinct from Trotter-discretizing imaginary time was proposed. This new algorithm directly samples the diagrammatic expansions and was therefore called as diagrammatic QMC where SI = 2 ), H0 is non-interacting Hamiltonian of spinless fermionic model, Ô 0 = T Tr[e -βH 0 Ô], and Z0 = Tr[e βH 0 ]. Employing Wick's theorem, one can express the expectation values in terms of the determinant of noninteracting Green's function matrix. In general, the Boltzmann weight (-1) n n! S n I 0 is not positive definite for a generic SI such that fermion-sign problem will appear in QMC simulations. Similar to DQMC, fermion-sign problem may be avoided in CTQMC for specific models such as Anderson model at half-filling by utilizing spin degree of freedoms. Recently, using the novel idea of fermion bag (135-137), fermion-sign problem in the spinless fermionic model at half-filling can be solved by the observation that the sign (-1) n is compensated by the sign of determinant in Eq. ( It turns out that fermion-sign problem in certain class of models, including spineless fermionic t-V model, can be solved in both DQMC by Majorana algorithm and in CTQMC by fermion bag algorithm. For such class of models, one may ask if the solutions of fermionsign problem in DQMC and in CTQMC can be understood in a unified way. Indeed, in Ref. In both DQMC and CTQMC, if the decoupled Hamiltonians involving auxiliary fields satisfy the split orthogonal group condition above, the QMC simulations are sign-problem-free. In this regard, split orthogonal group could help unifying solutions of fermion-sign problems in DQMC and CTQMC when the decomposed Hamiltonian respects particle-number conservations. In other words, models which are in the sign-problem-free Majorana class and which are sign-problem-free using Majorana reflection positivity can go beyond the split orthogonal group algorithm as they do not require particle-number conservation. Besides efforts towards solving fermion-sign problem in broader classes of models, many important technical progresses of QMC algorithms have been made in recent years. For instance, Iazzi et al. developed a highly efficient CTQMC algorithm (139), the computational time of which scales linearly with inverse temperature. In Ref. (140), Wang et al. develop the corresponding zero-temperature version of the algorithm. Efficient approaches of computing Renyi entanglemental entropy and fidelity susceptibility, which are useful to identify quantum phases and phase transitions, have been developed based on CTQMC algorithms (141, 142). The fermion-sign problem is one of the most important problems in theoretical physics, any (partial) solution of which could lead to a great leap forward in understanding strongly correlated systems. We have concisely reviewed recent progresses in solving fermion-sign problem in fermionic QMC as well as their applications to interesting fermionic models. Although the recent developments of solving fermion-sign problem can only be applied to models with certain conditions, we believe that novel ideas involved in these approaches could open up more inspiring directions in the future. For instance, TRSs in Majorana representations have been introduced to solve fermion-sign problem. We believe that generalizing the timereversal principle in Majorana representation to more general symmetries or to other novel representation is a challenging and interesting direction to pursue. Furthermore, utilizing the combinations of symmetry principles and novel mathematical techniques, such as reflection positivity, to solve fermion-sign problem in QMC simulations is another promising direction. More recently, intrinsic connections between fermion-sign problem and gravitational anomaly have been discussed in an insightful work (143). We believe that establishing deep connections between fermion-sign problems and other aspects of physics is also a subject of great importance. Understanding of fermion-sign problem in QMC simulations is far from complete, both in the level of mathematics and physics. We expect that more powerful mathematical tools and novel physical insights will be introduced to help us understand fermion-sign problem as well as physics of interacting quantum many-body systems. www.annualreviews.org •