Photocarrier transport and extraction in GaAsSb/GaAsN type-II quantum well superlattices are investigated by means of inelastic quantum transport calculations based on the non-equilibrium Green's function formalism. Evaluation of the local density of states and of the spectral current flow enables the identification of different regimes for carrier localization, transport, and extraction as a function of configurational parameters. These include the number of periods, the thicknesses of the individual layers in one period, the built-in electric field, and the temperature of operation. The results for the carrier extraction efficiency are related to experimental data for different symmetric GaAsSb/GaAsN type-II quantum well superlattice solar cell devices and provide a qualitative explanation for the experimentally observed dependence of photovoltaic device performance on period thickness. Multi-junction solar cells enable photovoltaic solar energy conversion efficiencies beyond 46% 1 due to enhanced utilization of the solar spectrum and the reduction of thermalization losses a) Electronic mail: u.aeberhard@fz-juelich.de FIG. Measured external quantum efficiency for GaAsSb/GaAsN QWSL solar cells with period thicknesses of 12 nm (SL-II12) and 6 nm (SL-II6), respectively. Comparison of the data at short circuit (V = 0 V) and at large reverse bias (V = -3 V), where all of the photogenerated carriers are extracted, reveals a massive deterioration of the extraction efficiency for the thick period, which points at configurationdependent transport issues. Here, we perform such an analysis by means of rigorous simulation of photocarrier transport in GaAsSb/GaAsN QWSL structures with varying thicknesses of the GaAsSb and GaAsN layers. Our approach relies on steadystate quantum-kinetic theory in the shape of the nonequilibrium Green's function formalism (NEGF) as adopted for the description of photovoltaic device operation in nanostructure-based solar cell devices Conventionally, the properties of SL structures are analyzed based on models assuming perfect periodicity and flat band conditions. The appropriateness of both assumptions for the finite systems under consideration will be assessed in the following. Figure The 1D density of states (1D-DOS) is shown for increasing number of SL periods, revealing a fast convergence of the miniband width, but features related to the finite size of the structure remain up to very large systems. For comparison, we also plot the 1D-DOS of the perfectly periodic SL, which is evaluated by D 1D (E) = 2{∂ qz ε n (q z )} -1 /π| qz(εn=E) using the longitudinal SL dispersion ε n (q z ) for n = 1 as obtained from solving the Schrödinger equation for the same effective mass Hamiltonian, but with periodic boundary conditions. There is a close agreement between finite and infinite system DOS for the band width, however, some discrepancies remain in shape and asymmetry of the DOS inside the band. In order to investigate localization and transport of photogenerated charge carriers in finite SL structures with different period thicknesses, we evaluate the (1D) LDOS -corresponding to the integrand of the formula for the 1D-DOS -and the spectral current density Figure Formally, the carrier extraction efficiency is defined as the ratio of carrier extraction and generation rates, which can be expressed as η ext = J sc /J gen , where J sc is the short circuit current and J gen = q dz G(z) the generation current obtained from the local generation rate G. For mesoscopic extension of the active device region as considered here, incomplete extraction is ex-pected only for very low carrier lifetime, as induced by the presence of fast non-radiative recombination channels. As the description of non-radiative recombination as part of a complete NEGF treatment of photovoltaic devices is still at an early stage Since thermally activated escape has been identified as an important extraction mechanism at larger period thicknesses, it is instructive to consider the temperature dependence of the extraction efficiency. The results shown in Fig. In principle, the thicknesses of GaAsSb and GaAsN layers can be varied independently (under the constraint of observing the strain-balancing condition), which offers a wider parameter space for the design of optimized superlattice solar cell structures. Application of our model and simulation approach to the parameter space spanned by d GaAsSb/GaAsN ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6} nm identifies configurations with thin GaAsSb and thick GaAsN layers as ideal combination exhibiting high photocarrier extraction efficiency at low effective band gap values, as can be inferred from Figs. 8(a) and 8(b). In conclusion, we performed quantum-kinetic simulations of photocarrier generation, transport and recombi-FIG. nation in GaAsSb/GaAsN type-II SL solar cells which shed light on the carrier extraction mechanism in dependence of the geometrical configuration, built-in field and temperature. The experimental observation of a dramatic drop in carrier extraction efficiency from 6 nm to 12 nm period thickness is explained by the transition in the dominant electron transport regime from quasiballistic or band-like transport to sequential tunneling accompanied by phonon-assisted thermal escape. Improved carrier extraction efficiency at similar effective band gap as in the symmetric 12-nm period structure is predicted for asymmetric configurations with reduced GaAsSb layer thickness. The approach demonstrated here may thus serve as a valuable tool in the computational design of superlattice solar cells. In future work, it could for instance be used to explore compositions with effective band gaps closer to the target value for the application in multijunction devices. For a comprehensive assessment of the impact of SL configuration on the photovoltaic device performance, in addition to the intrinsinc absorber under uniform field, the contact regions subject to sizable band bending will need to be considered as well, as they might affect carrier extraction, similar as observed, e.g., in simulations of quantum dot SL absorbers 