Band alignment between two materials is of fundamental importance for multitude of applications. However, density functional theory (DFT) either underestimates the bandgap -as is the case with local density approximation (LDA) or generalized gradient approximation (GGA) -or is highly computationally demanding, as is the case with hybrid-functional methods. The latter can become prohibitive in electronic-structure calculations of supercells which describe quantum wells. We propose to apply the DFT+U method, with U for each atomic shell being treated as set of tuning parameters, to automatically fit the bulk bandgap and the lattice constant, and then use thus obtained U parameters in large supercell calculations to determine the band alignment. We apply this procedure to InP/In 0.5 Ga 0.5 As, In 0.5 Ga 0.5 As/In 0.5 Al 0.5 As and InP/In 0.5 Al 0.5 As quantum wells, and obtain good agreement with experimental results. Although this procedure requires some experimental input, it provides both meaningful valence and conduction band offsets while, crucially, lattice relaxation is taken into account. The computational cost of this procedure is comparable to that of LDA. We believe that this is a practical procedure that can be useful for providing accurate estimate of band alignments between more complicated alloys. Band alignment between two materials is crucial for many industrial applications, such as light-emitting diodes and diode lasers 1 , field-effect transistors 2 , photovoltaics 3 , photocatalysts One serious difficulty of DFT is that it underestimates the bandgap when using standard local density approximation (LDA) or generalized gradient approximation (GGA) exchangecorrelation functionals. When using GGA or LDA to determine the band alignment, only the valence band offset (VBO) can be directly determined by the calculation with acceptable accuracy; the conduction band offset (CBO) is inferred from the experimental bandgap of the bulk materials In this paper, we re-examine DFT+U as a practical "black-box" method for the determination of the band alignment between two semiconductors. The U values of the bulk material are determined completely automatically by an optimization procedure which adjusts them until the calculation reproduces i) the experimental bandgap and ii) the lattice parameters. The same U values are then used in the superlattice calculations. This procedure is semi-empirical, in the sense that some experimental inputs are needed. However, it takes the interface strain into account and results in accurate VBO and CBO, while using minimalistic basis sets and computational resources comparable to those required by LDA or GGA functionals. We apply this procedure to In 0.5 Ga 0.5 As/InP (denoted as InGaAs/InP below) and In 0.5 Ga 0.5 As/In 0.5 Al 0.5 As (InGaAs/InAlAs) superlattices, with varying InGaAs widths. All alloys studied here are lattice-matched to InP. The change of the band alignment is quantitatively consistent with the reported experiments, and bandgaps of the full superlattice are consistent with photo-luminescent (PL) measurements. The same procedure is applied to InP/InAlAs to test transitivity In the main part of this work we used the SIESTA package 30 . The pseudopotential input files were downloaded from the SIESTA website. In and Ga pseudopotentials were generated with 4d (In) and 3d (Ga) electrons included in the valence. We used single-ζ + polarization shell (SZP) basis sets, which were optimized in a bulk setup (such as GaAs or InP) using the Optimizer tool from the SIESTA package For the bulk calculation we used conventional unit cells and 7 × 7 × 7 Monkhorst-Pack k-point sampling. All materials considered in this work have zinc-blend structures. For alloy materials such as InGaAs we also used the conventional unit cell. The same unit cells were replicated to construct the interface supercells. We did not use virtual crystal approximation (VCA) or coherent potential approximation (CPA) where j, k are orbital indices and ρ is the electronic single-particle density matrix. The parameter U for each orbital can in principle be computed ab initio In this work we used the DFT+U approach where U values were fitted in a systematic way. Given a bulk crystal structure we enable U for each valence atomic orbital, except for semicore orbitals such as 4d in In, which are completely filled and lie very deeply in the valence band of the materials we study here. We then apply the simplex method as implemented in the Optimizer tool from the SIESTA package to minimize an objective function: Here U denotes set of all values of U j , j being a combined index for an atomic species and n,l quantum numbers, E g and a i denote bandgap and lattice vectors respectively and superscript "exp" denotes experimental values. w g and w a are weights, which we chose to be 0.33 eV -2 and 0.67 Å-2 . For a given U, the full lattice relaxation followed by a bandgap computation is performed. We would like to make a few remarks. i) The minimization is deemed sufficient when f (U) 10 -3 because of experimental uncertainties. ii) Here U are treated as free parameters, which are not only aimed at correcting deficiencies of the PBE functional but also serve as a finite basis set correction We consider band alignments between InGaAs and InP, and between InGaAs and InAlAs. In both cases InGaAs is the "well" material which has a bandgap of 0.82eV; InP and InAlAs serve as the "barrier" materials whose bandgaps are around 1.4 eV. All three materials have lattice constants of 5.86 Å, lattice matched to InP. The band diagram of a quantum well or a superlattice is illustrated in Fig. To determine the band alignment, superlattices of (InGaAs) n /(InP) 10 , (InGaAs) n /(InAlAs) 10 , and (InAlAs) 10 /(InP) 10 are used, with the conventional zinc blende unit cell serving as the basic building block. As illustrated in Fig. We conclude this section by summarizing the experimental results of two classes of III-V zinc-blend alloys. The first class is Ga x In 1-x As y P 1-y , whose lattice constant is given by (3) The bulk bandgaps are Eq. ( The second class of alloys is In 1-x-y Ga x Al y As. The physical quantities can be parametrized as 41 P (In 1-x-y Ga x Al y As) = P (InAs)(1 -x -y) + P (GaAs)x + P (AlAs)y Using the bulk data summarized in Ref. The bulk bandgap is obtained from E InGaAlAs (In The U values for InP, InGaAs, and InAlAs are given in Table There are two other trends clearly visible in Table As InP and InAlAs have similar bandgaps and lattice constants, our calculations show that InGaAs/InP has the larger VBO and the smaller CBO, whereas InGaAs/InAlAs has the larger CBO and the smaller VBO. This trend is consistent with the experiments. Generally, the VBO/CBO values depend only weakly on the quantum well width. The bandgap, however, displays an observable dependence on quantum well width, and will be discussed in Section III C in terms of photoluminescent measurements. To check the transitivity of the proposed procedure, we compute the band alignment using (InAlAs) 10 /(InP) 10 , as shown in Fig. To further test the calculations, we prepared quantum wells of 4nm, 5nm and 6nm In-GaAs as well as 30nm InP, and perform the PL measurements. The superlattice is grown using the standard MOCVD (Metal-Organic Chemical Vapour Deposition) method. The PL experiments were carried out at 300 K. The results are shown in Fig. In this paper, we demonstrate that DFT calculations using DFT+U can be an efficient way to determine the band alignments between two alloys. The full procedure can be divided into two steps. The first step is to determine U values of a bulk alloy by automatically optimizing atomic orbital-specific values of U so that the experimental bandgap and the lattice constant agree with the values obtained in the simulation. The second step is to use these fitted U values in a superlattice calculation (with lattice relaxation), and the valence and conduction band offsets are then determined from the projected DOS away from the interface. We apply this procedure to InGaAs/InP, InGaAs/InAlAs, and InAlAs/InP, and are able to For alloys that are lattice matched to InP (5.86 Å) where x + y = 0.47, i.e., In 0.53 Ga 0.47-y Al y As, the bandgap fitted from Ref.