We combine ultrafast electron diffraction and time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy measurements to unravel the connection between structure and electronic transport properties during the photoinduced insulator-metal transitions in vanadium dioxide. We determine the structure of the metastable monoclinic metal phase, which exhibits anti-ferroelectric charge order arising from a thermally activated, orbital-selective phase transition in the electron system. The relative contribution of this photoinduced monoclinic metal (which has no equilibrium analog) and the photoinduced rutile metal (known from the equilibrium phase diagram) to the time and pump-fluence dependent multi-phase character of the film is established, as is the respective impact of these two distinct phase transitions on the observed changes in terahertz conductivity. Our results represent an important new example of how light can control the properties of strongly correlated materials and elucidate that multimodal experiements are essential when seeking a detailed connection between ultrafast changes in optical-electronic properties and lattice structure in complex materials. The insulator-metal transition (IMT) in vanadium dioxide (VO 2 ) is a benchmark problem in condensed matter physics Photoexcitation using ultrafast laser pulses has provided another route to initiate the transition between the insulating and metallic phases of VO 2 since it was discovered that the IMT occurs very rapidly following femtosecond laser excitation with sufficient fluence Recently, ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) and midinfrared spectroscopy were combined to show that there are two distinct photo-induced IMTs in M 1 VO 2 UED measurements of pulsed laser deposited VO 2 films (50 nm) reveal rich pump-fluence dependent dynamics up to the damage threshold of ∼40 mJ/cm 2 (35 fs, 800 nm, f rep = 50 -200 Hz). Figure Complementary TRTS measurements were performed on the same samples under identical excitation conditions to determine the associated changes in the time-dependent complex conductivity, σ(ω, τ ) (see Fig. Since its discovery Figure In Fig. We have established that there are two qualitatively distinct ultrafast photo-induced phase transtions in vanadium dioxide. The pump-fluence dependence of the sample response, specifically the heterogenous character of the film following photoexcitation (due to both M 1 → M and M 1 → R transformations) and the corresponding changes in conductivity, is addressed in this section. UED intensities report on the fluence dependence of both structural phase transitions (Fig. We denote F R as the phase volume fraction for the R phase and F M for the M phase. The results of the model are shown in Fig. We obtain quantitatively consistent results for the fluence dependence of the transient conductivity obtained by TRTS, firmly establishing a link between the differential structure and differential electronic response. ) conductivity terms. The ∆σ fast 1 component corresponds to the conductivity response associated with the transition from M 1 → R as it increases steadily with fluence in accordance with F R shown in Fig. The M 1 → R and M 1 → M transitions exhibit qualitatively different kinetic behaviour as evidenced by the fluence dependence of the time constants τ fast and τ slow obtained from both UED and TRTS (Fig. where ∆S ‡ is the entropy of activation. We take the values of τ slow for the (200) peak shown in Fig. We have demonstrated that photoexcitation of M 1 VO 2 yields a complex, heterogenous, multiphase film whose structure and properties are both time and fluence dependent. The character of the fluence depedent transformation is summarized in Fig. Non-thermal melting as a route to the control of material structure and properties with femtosecond laser excitation has been known for some time and there are examples in several material classes. Much more novel is the (M 1 → M) which has no equilibrium analog and represents a new direction for using optical excitation to control the properties of strongly correlated materials. The M 1 → M is thermally activated and does not involve a significant lattice structural component, representing a phase transition in the electron system alone. Our results are consistent with the recent computations of He and Millis The combination of UED and TRTS measurements also makes it possible to address the question of a structural bottleneck associated with the photoinduced IMT in M 1 VO 2 . Here we definitively show that the timescale associated with the IMT, i.e. the timescale associated with the emergence of metallic conductivity similar to that of the equilibrium metallic phase, is determined by that of the structural phase transitions (Fig. In conclusion, we have combined UED and TRTS measurements of VO 2 and decoupled the concurrent structural phase transitions along with their contribution to the multiphase heterogeneity of the sample following photoexcitation. We have shown that the monoclinc metal phase is the product of a thermally activated transition in the electron system, which provides a new avenue for the optical control of strongly correlated material properties. The monoclinic metal phase is described by a free energy minimum and the associated IMT is driven by electron temperature with an activation energy of EA = 304 ± 109 meV. The occupancy of the dxz orbital changes from partial to full filling during this process. The monoclinic-rutile structural IMT has a barrier which is removed when the threshold fluence of ∼ 9 mJ/cm 2 is reached leading to an increase in the V-V distance (removal of dimerization). The VO samples were deposited by pulsed laser deposition and grown to a thickness of 50 nm on top of a 40 nm SiN x substrate. The sample area is 250 μm by 250 μm and is formed by silicon aperture over the substrate. Details of the deposition process can be found in Hendaoui et al. The ultrafast electron diffraction measurements are carried at ∼ 300 K in transmission mode with 90 keV RFcompressed electron pulses which have a bunch charge of ∼ 0.1 pC. The sample and the beamline are under high-vacuum (∼ 10 -7 mBar). The compression cavity is driven by a ∼ 2.998 GHz (40 × f rep-oscillator ) phaselocked harmonic tone of the oscillator pulse train and is detuning-compensated by active phase correction at 1 kHz Time-resolved multi-terahertz spectroscopy experiments are based on two-color laser plasma generation of single cycle, broadband THz pulses and air-biased coherent detection providing a spectral range from 0.5-30 THz and temporal resolution of ≈ 40 fs. The THz spectrometer is driven by 35 fs duration, 795 nm pulses from an amplified Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser operating at 250 Hz repetition rate to allow for sample recovery between shots. The pump spot size was ∼ 700 μm which was at least 4 times the size of the THz pulse for the lowest frequencies analyzed here (2 THz). Experiments were performed in transmission at the focus of the THz pulse. The peak THz field strengths estimated to be < 50 kV/cm, and under dry air purge gas conditions. At these field strengths no non-linear response of VO 2 is expected 