We report the optical excitation-dependent output photocurrent characteristics of GaNbased polariton diode lasers operated under reverse-bias at room temperature. The photocurrent demonstrates a non-linear enhancement at an incident optical power of ~ 1.6 mW, which is approximately equivalent to the value of polariton lasing threshold observed when the diodes are operated under forward bias conditions. This is explained in the framework of an Auger-like process of excitonic dissociation into its constituent electron-hole pairs, which can be stimulated by the occupation of the polariton lasing states. The observed effect is a remarkable manifestation of the bosonic final state stimulation in polariton lasers. A model based on the coupled kinetic equations for the free carriers, the excitonic reservoir and the polariton condensate shows a good agreement to the experimental data. A polariton laser is one of the most important outcomes of the research field of Polaritonics: physics of strongly coupled light-matter systems Photocurrent measurements on polariton devices have been previously reported Photocurrent spectra recorded from a reverse-biased microcavity diode can directly map the polariton dispersion characteristics The present devices are identical to the polariton diode lasers characterized and reported by us previously To start with, let us recall some of the previously reported polariton lasing characteristics. The devices are characterized by a cavity photon-to-exciton detuning  ranging from -4 to -13 meV, and a strong coupling in the microcavity characterized by a Rabi splitting of ~ 33.9 to ~ 35.5 meV. The microcavity quality factor Q and the cavity mode lifetime C were found to vary from ~ 1700 to ~ 2100, and from ~ 0.3 ps to ~ 0.4 ps, respectively. The polariton laser thresholds varied from ~ 125 A/cm 2 to ~ 375 A/cm 2 It was also observed that the emission is unpolarized below the nonlinear threshold and is linearly polarized above it with a maximum polarization of ∼ 22%. Conventional cavity mode-mediated photon lasing was also observed in one of the polariton laser devices at an injected current density of ~ 36.8 kA/cm 2 Optical excitation-dependent photocurrent measurements are performed at room temperature on the polariton lasers under a very small reverse bias (see Supplemental Material values. We would like to emphasize that these currents are the true reverse currents flowing through the diodes, originating from photo-generated carriers which diffuse to the depletion region, wherein they are accelerated and are finally collected at the ohmic contacts of the device. Thus, our measurements are different from those reported by Brodbeck et al. In Eq. ( WO > WJ. The optically pumped reservoir is also replenished by the Auger-like process. Here we leave the spatial degree of freedom beyond the scope of consideration assuming the homogeneous pumps. We also ignore the spin degree of freedom for simplicity. The steady-state solutions we are interested in are found from: First, we consider the effect of the electrical pumping only, assuming PO=0. To be able to analyze the measured data of Device 2 in Fig. Next, we theoretically study optically triggered polariton lasing in Device 2, by analyzing the measured data in Fig. Finally, we theoretically consider the situation when both the optical and electrical pumps are present. Since the relaxation to the exciton (X) reservoir from the "optical" reservoir of carriers is faster than that from the "electronic" reservoir, WO >> WJ, the former pumps the X reservoir more efficiently. At the same time, it empties more quickly. Figure This particular configuration, i.e., of using normal incidence pulsed excitation has been motivated by our desire to study the device in the context of a more realistic practical situation; it is more convenient to excite a diode at normal incidence to its facets as opposed to any other particular fixed angle of incidence. Further, the combination of the ~ 9 meV (half-width at half maximum) laser tail, along with the angular divergence of the incident beam, should also excite some of the higher energy lower-polariton states. It is certainly probable that stimulated scattering from higher energy states along the lower-polariton dispersion to the ground state should be possible in the present configuration, assuming that the ground state occupation number is greater than unity, above a certain excitation value. The Figure The strong coupling characteristics of a GaN-based device, similar to those which have discussed in the main text and the Supplemental Material, are discussed here for completeness. This particular device has also been fully characterized in one of our previous publications [RS2]. The angle-resolved electroluminescence data, which are discussed in the present section, have been previously reported in the Supplementary Materials of Refs. The rate equations ( As discussed in Section 1 of the Supplemental Material, the light source used to excite the exciton-polariton device is the relatively broadband frequency-doubled output of a Ti: 