Hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) mono and multilayers are promising hosts for room temperature single photon emitters (SPEs). In this work we explore high energy (~ MeV) electron irradiation as a means to generate stable SPEs in hBN. We investigate four types of exfoliated hBN flakes -namely, high purity multilayers, isotopically pure hBN, carbon rich hBN multilayers and monolayered material -and find that electron irradiation increases emitter concentrations dramatically in all samples. Furthermore, the engineered emitters are located throughout hBN flakes (not only at flake edges or grain boundaries), and do not require activation by high temperature annealing of the host material after electron exposure. Our results provide important insights into controlled formation of hBN SPEs and may aid in identification of their crystallographic origin. Solid state materials capable of hosting optically active single photon emitters (SPEs) are highly sought after for applications in quantum nanophotonics and quantum information processing In this work, we investigate the effects of high energy (2 MeV) electron irradiation Four different types of samples were prepared; multilayer hBN flakes from high purity hBN (purchased from HQ Graphene), multilayer flakes from carbon-enriched hBN, multilayer flakes made from isotopically-enriched Boron-10 (99.2% 10 B) and hBN monolayers (purchased from Graphene Supermarket) that were grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD). High-purity flakes purchased from HQ graphene were synthesised by reacting fused boric acid with urea to form B2O3.xNH3 and then heated further in ammonia to 900 °C. The product was further heated in a nitrogen atmosphere at 1500 °C, allowing it to crystallize on a substrate surface. The isotopically-enriched 10 B flakes were grown with a high purity Ni-Cr metal mix with enriched 10 B powder in an alumina boat at 1550 °C for 24 hrs under an atmosphere of forming gas and nitrogen in a 1:4 ratio. It was subsequently cooled at a rate of 1°C/hr until 1500 °C, whereby it was quenched to room temperature. This sample is referred to as B10 in the manuscript. The multilayer samples were mechanically exfoliated with scotch tape onto silicon substrates and baked at 450 o C in air to remove residual adhesives and other unwanted carbonaceous material. Monolayer hBN grown on Cu foil by CVD was cut into small squares and transferred onto Si substrates. The foils were then coated with PMMA to provide a platform to facilitate adhesion of the sample. The PMMA film containing the monolayer was then undercut by chemical etching of the Cu substrate with iron nitrate, leaving the polymer layer floating above. The film was transferred to a silicon substrate and heated to 120 °C for 20 minutes to promote adhesion, before being washed with acetone to dissociate the polymer. Electron irradiation was performed with a Cockcroft-Walton 2 MV 60 kW electron accelerator. The samples were wrapped in Al foil and placed on a water-cooled Cu plate for the irradiation process. The cooling ensured that the sample temperature was kept fixed at approximately room temperature (~25 °C) during electron processing. Irradiation was performed at atmospheric conditions. The as-prepared samples were irradiated at 2 MeV with a fluence of 1 x 10 15 /cm 2 for all hBN samples. The irradiated samples were characterized using a home-built confocal PL setup with a 532 nm excitation laser. Details of the apparatus have been provided elsewhere To further investigate the effects of high energy electron irradiation, we compared hBN samples grown in the presence of carbon (i.e. BN doped to a C concentration of ~10 19 cm -3 ) and samples grown under standard conditions but using the 10 B isotope. The isotope is not important for our experiments as we do not study spin or phononic effects. However, this sample serves as a useful reference material to the high purity hBN, since the atomic structures of the emitters and the roles of impurities are uncertain. PL spectra of emitters found in these flakes exhibit characteristics that are similar to the ones in the high purity hBN. Figure Cryogenic PL measurements were performed on emitters in electron-irradiated flakes to see whether the ZPLs approach spectrometer-limited resolution and have the potential to be used for advanced quantum optics experiments To conclude, we studied the effect of MeV electron irradiation on SPEs in hBN. Our results conclusively show that MeV irradiation can greatly enhance the formation of SPEs in hBN, without the necessity for a further annealing step. We also showed that upon irradiation, the emitters can form in the flat areas of the hBN flake. Finally, our work showed a similar distribution of emitters in carbon rich hBN and high purity hBN, therefore suggesting carbon may not be involved in the crystallographic structure of the defects. Our results are promising to develop a reliable procedure for engineering SPEs in hBN and unveiling their crystallographic structure.