Pt electrocatalytic nanoparticles were deposited onto hybrid carriers composed of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) -transition metal hexacyanoferrate (Prussian Blue -PB) and the resulting system's electrochemical activity was investigated during oxygen reduction reaction in acidic solution. The Prussian Blue -utilizing and Pt nanoparticle-containing materials were characterized using transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and electrochemical diagnostic techniques such as cyclic voltammetry and rotating ring-disk voltammetry. Application of rGO carriers modified with Prussian Blue as matrices (supports) for Pt catalytic centers does not change practically the potential of electroreduction of oxygen in 0.5 mol dm -3 H 2 SO 4 (under rotating disk voltammetric conditions) relative to the behavior of the analogous PB-free system. What is even more important that, due to the presence of the polynuclear cyanoferrate modifier, the amounts of the undesirable hydrogen peroxide intermediate are significantly decreased (at ring in the rotating ring-disk voltammetry). The results are consistent with the bifunctional mechanism in which oxygen reduction is initiated at Pt centers and the hydrogen peroxide intermediate is reductively decomposed at reactive PB-modified rGO supports. Proton Exchange Fuel Cells have been viewed as suitable power sources candidates for stationary and vehicle propulsion due to their high efficiency, high energy density and low temperature energy conversion. The reactions in fuel cells invariably involve oxygen reduction at the cathode side. It should be note that oxygen reduction reaction, in the context of energy, is the challenging reaction due to their rate limiting steps in the process of getting energy from fuel. The sluggish oxygen reduction has still a hugely affect on losing efficiency, the power output and lifetime of the fuel cells The use of a suitable supporting material enables a high dispersion of metal nanoparticles onto its surface, which is particularly important with expensive noble metal catalysts, such as Pt and Pd. The appropriate supporting materials should be characterized by the following features: high surface area, corrosion resistance, and a stable surface to prevent the nanoparticles' agglomeration. A number of various supports have been extensively studied as high oxidation resistant materials, namely, graphitized carbon In consequence, the oxidation process leads to the formation of large particles, resulting in a decrease in the fuel cell's performance Such new catalysts also have to characterized by a minimum formation of H 2 O 2 because free radicals that are produced from the breakdown of H 2 O 2 have a detrimental effect on the polymer membranes -Nafions in fuel cell In the present work, we explore the ability of Prussian Blue structures to effectively decompose, i.e. reduce readily at fairly high potentials (in acid medium) hydrogen peroxide that typically appears as undesirable intermediate during reduction of oxygen in fuel cells. When Prussian Blue structures are combined with a catalyst of moderate activity, such as rGO supported Pt nanoparticles, a highly reactive composite system for the oxygen reduction is produced All chemicals were commercial materials of the highest available purity and were used as received. In this study, a commercial graphite powder (ACROS ORGANICS) was used. Graphene oxide (GO) was prepared using modified Hummers method. In this process, 10 g of graphite powder was added to 230 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid (98 wt.%) and stirred for to the mixture and the temperature was kept below 10oC in an ice bath. Then the mixture was slowly heated up to ~33oC and was controlled so as not to exceed 35oC for 2 hours under stirring. In the next step, 100 mL of water was added to the mixture and the temperature reached ~120oC. Finally, the mixture was treated with 10 mL of H 2 O 2 (30 wt.%). Obtained slurry was kept in an ultrasonic bath for 1 hour. For purification, the slurry was filtered using ceramic membranes with 0,2 micron pore size and washed with deionized water in order to remove the by-products of the synthesis till the pH of the filtrate reached 6.5. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) was obtained by adding 10 mL of 50% hydrazine water solution to 100 mL of 0,5 wt.% GO water dispersion. The mixture was heated up to 100oC and kept under stirring for 2h. After reduction, the product was filtered using polyethersulfone (PES) filter with 0,8 μm pore size. Solutions were prepared from triply-distilled subsequently-deionized water. They were deaerated (using argon) or saturated with oxygen for at least 20 min prior to the electrochemical experiment. Experiments were conducted at room temperature (20 ± 0.5 C). For the preparation of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) modified Prussian Blue and supported Pt (rGOPB/Pt) materials. The hybrid material (rGO modified PB) was produced as follows. A known amount of rGO (200 mg) was dispersed in 6 cm 3 solution of Prussian Blue (that had been obtained by mixing a solution 2 mmol dm -3 K 3 [Fe(CN) 6 ], 2 mmol dm -3 FeCl 3 , and 50 mmol dm -3 EDTA). Formation of PB nanostructure on rGO occurred through the sol-gel aggregation aging process. After 24 h mixing the following suspension was centrifuged and dried at 300 O C for 2 h. The obtained support hybrid material (PB-modified rGO) was used to fabricated Pt nanoparticles. In Rotating disk electrode (RDE) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) voltammetric measurements were accomplished using a variable speed rotator (Pine Instruments, USA). The electrode assembly utilized a glassy carbon disk and a Pt ring. The electrodes were polished with successively finer grade aqueous alumina slurries (grain size, 5-0.05 μm) on a Buehler polishing cloth. In the RRDE measurements, the radius of the disk electrode was 2.5 mm, and the inner and outer radii of the ring electrode were 3.25 and 3.75 mm, respectively. The collection efficiency of the RRDE assembly was determined from the ratio of ring and disk currents (at various rotation rates) using the argon-saturated 0.005 mol dm -3 K 3 [Fe(CN) 6 ] + 0.01 mol dm -3 K 2 SO 4 solution To produce an suspension of PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles, a known amount (5 mg) of the catalyst was dispersed in 1 ml of 2-propanol and Nafion (20% by weight) as solvent and binder, respectively. The following suspension was subjected to magnetic stirring for 24 h. As a rule, 2 μl aliquot of the appropriate suspension was introduced onto the surface of a glassy carbon disk electrode (geometric area, 0.2 cm 2 ), and the suspension was air-dried at room temperature. Typical loadings of supports were in the range 10 μg cm -2 . As a rule the catalytic films were activated by performing 25 full voltammetric potential cycles in the potential range from 0 to 1 V (at 50 mV s-1) until steady-state currents were observed. The systems were systematically characterized to obtain information on particle morphology, composition, and crystal structure by various techniques, such as High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM), Energy Dispersion Spectroscopy (EDS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The HR-TEM measurements were performed using an instrument with an accelerating voltage of 200 keV with EDS analysis (Bruker Quantax 400, SEM-EDS). Samples for TEM measurements were prepared by depositing drops of diluted colloidal solutions of nanoparticles onto 400-mesh copper grids that supported a Formvar film (Agar Scientific); they were dried under ambient laboratory conditions (temperature, 22 1 °C) for 24 h prior to TEM analysis. The crystallographic phase analysis was carried out by XRD using a Bruker D8 Discover system operated with a Cu X-ray tube (1.5406 Å) and Vantec (linear) detector (k = 1.5406 Å). The lattice parameter value and particle size were obtained from the position and the full-width at halfmaximum (FWHM) of the (220) peak. The X-ray diffraction examination was performed to confirm the presence as well as to obtain the information about the crystalline structure of the proposed electrocatalysts. Figure The size of metal particles roughly estimated from HR-TEM images of ca. 7 nm, which is in god agreement with the XRD results. The inter-planar spacing 0.3940 nm ( The representative RDE voltamograms recorded at different rotation rates (ranging from 400 to 2500 rpm) for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at catalytic layers containing PBmodified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles are illustrated in Fig. In order to extract kinetic information, the RDE curves were analyzed using the Levich and Koutecki-Levich plots (Fig. RDE voltammetric limiting-current densities (jlim) can be expressed as follows where j L is given by the Levich equation (in which the convective diffusion component is proportional to square root of rotation rate), k is the rate constant for the catalytic reaction in homogeneous units, C film is the surface concentration of the electrocatalyst, and C Ox is the bulk concentration of oxygen (1.1 mmol dm -3 In the context of electrocatalysts for cathode for fuel cells an important issue is the degree of formation of the hydrogen peroxide intermediate during ORR in the presence and absence of Prussian Blue. In this case we have performed rotating ring-disk electrode (RDDE) measurements in which the catalytic nanoparticles were deposited onto disk electrodes. The responses recorded (upon application of the oxidative potential of 1.2 V vs RHE) at the ring Pt electrode are consistent with the view that formation of hydrogen peroxide intermediate have significantly decreased following PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (Fig. The overall number of electrons exchanged per O 2 molecule (n) was calculated as a function of the potential using the RRDE voltammetric data of Fig. The corresponding number of transferred electron (n) per oxygen molecule involved in the oxygen reduction was estimated to be as follows: (A) 3.8-3.95, and (B) 3.9-3.95, for the oxygen reduction at Pt/rGO nanoparticles, and PB-modified rGO supported Pt nanoparticles (Fig. On the basis of our RRDE diagnostic experiments it can be concluded that modification of rGO (support material) with ultra-thin layers of Prussian Blue results in the activation of Pt towards oxygen reduction. The phenomenon can originate from the properties of PB and its ability to catalyze reduction of hydrogen peroxide intermediate. The production of hydrogen peroxide has been found to be relatively low as measured by RRDE. Specific interactions between PB and support material (reduced graphene oxide -rGO), though not documented as yet, cannot be either excluded. Further research is along this line. with deionized water. Their composition of the final material was as follows: Pt 20% and rGO/PB 80% (by mass). The diameters of PB-modified rGO supports Pt nanoparticles were approximately 20 and 2 nm, respectively.