Manipulating physical properties using the spin degree of freedom constitutes a major part of modern condensed matter physics and is very important for spintronics devices. Using the newly discovered two dimensional van der Waals ferromagnetic CrI3 as a prototypic material, we theoretically demonstrated a giant magneto band-structure (GMB) effect whereby a change of magnetization direction significantly modifies the electronic band structure. Our density functional theory calculations and model analysis reveal that rotating the magnetic moment of CrI3 from out-of-plane to in-plane causes a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition, inducing a magnetic field controlled photoluminescence. Moreover, our results show a significant change of Fermi surface with different magnetization directions, giving rise to giant anisotropic magnetoresistance. Additionally, the spin reorientation is found to modify the topological states. Given that a variety of properties are determined by band structures, our predicted GMB effect in CrI3 opens a new paradigm for spintronics applications. Novel electronic phases in solid state materials can be driven by the spin degree of freedom due to the delicate interplay between spin, orbital, charge and lattice degrees of freedom. Since the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) Hamiltonian term ξL • S depends on the spin direction, electronic band structure may change when the spin direction is changed by an external magnetic field, said magneto band-structure (MB) effect. The MB effect can make spin direction a very useful knob to engineer the band structure and physical properties, in addition to the spin-order controlled properties. Although the importance of MB is very evident and efforts have been made to explore traditional ferromagnetic materials, it is frustrating that most of the ferromagnetic materials have too weak MB effect to produce interesting properties and functionalities. We use a 2D three-p-orbital (p x , p y , and p z ) toy model to illustrate the GMB effect. This model is described by Hamiltonian H = H 0 (k) + ( ) σ(θ, φ) describes an exchange splitting λ with magnetization oriented along a specific direction (θ, φ) and σ(θ, φ) is the vector of Pauli matrices. The last term is SOC and the coefficient ξ is the coupling strength. For a 2D ferromagnetic material, it is natural to define the out-of-plane direction as z-direction and in-plane as (x, y). The ferromagnetic exchange interaction upshifts spin down channel to higher unoccupied states. Meanwhile, the |p z↑ ⟩ orbital (↑ means spin up) is split off by 2D confinement effect. Therefore, we mainly focus on |p x↑ ⟩ and |p y↑ ⟩ orbitals. We first consider a situation where the spin is oriented along out-of-plane direction (M//c). In this case, we have ⟨p x↑ |L • S|p y↑ ⟩ = -i. As a result, the Hamiltonian has some nonzero off-diagonal terms and the bands at Γ become nondegenerate. A splitting energy of ∼200 meV is found at Γ point when ξ = 100 meV is used for calculation (see Figure Switching a magnetic moment from easy axis (M//c) to hard axis (M//a) will cost magnetic anisotropic energy (MAE). The MAE is defined as ∆E = E → -E ↑ , where E → (E ↑ ) is the total energy when the magnetic moment is oriented along in-plane (out-of-plane) direction. Integrating over all k points in the first Brillouin zone (BZ), the total energy is obtained, E = ∑ ∫ ε i (k)f(ε i -ε F )dk BZ i , where f(ε i -ε F ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. ε i and ε F are energy of i-th band and Fermi level, respectively. As indicated by our toy model, we propose three criteria for discovering GMB materials: i) magnetically coupled electrons to obtain the collective behavior; ii) strong SOC to induce nonequivalent electronic behavior for different spin orientations; and iii) a reduced symmetry which has large crystalline anisotropy to maximize SOC anisotropy. These criteria suggest that the most promising candidate is a ferromagnetic material with strong SOC and high crystalline anisotropy. An intuitive candidate is a 2D ferromagnetic material Excitingly, the newly discovered 2D ferromagnet of monolayer CrI3 Owing to octahedral symmetry, the five d-orbitals (d xy , d xz , d yz , d x 2 -y 2 , d 3z 2 -r 2 ) of Cr are split into three t2g orbitals and two eg orbitals. Three d-electrons (3d 3 ) of Cr 3+ ion occupy the half-filled t2g orbitals and eg orbitals are empty. One of the remarkable changes of electronic band structures is a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition when the magnetization is changed from M//c to M//a. In the case of M//c, the monolayer CrI3 is a semiconductor with a direct gap of 0.91 eV, as shown in Figure We propose that such a transition can be easily observed by measuring the photoluminescence. For a direct bandgap material, the electrons that are stimulated to CBM can directly relax to VBM without involving phonon interaction. Therefore, a strong photoluminescence is expected. On the other hand, the photoluminescence will be greatly suppressed for an indirect bandgap material. This significant difference in photoluminescence can be attested by measuring the photoluminescence under external magnetic field. Recently, Seyler et al. has reported circularly polarized photoluminescence in monolayer CrI3 under linearly polarized excitation, indicating effective probe of magnetic order by photoluminescence. Similar with conventional semiconductor such as Si, 2D semiconducting materials can also be doped with vacancies or substitutional impurities. Here, we employ rigid band shift to investigate the tuning of Fermi surface with spin reorientation in a doped monolayer CrI3. Figure 