We use resonant and non-resonant X-ray diffraction measurements in combination with firstprinciples electronic structure calculations and Monte Carlo simulations to study the relationship between crystal structure and multiferroic orders in the orthorhombic perovskite manganites, o-RMnO3 (R is a rare-earth cation or Y). In particular, we focus on how the internal lattice parameters (Mn-O bond lengths and Mn-O-Mn bond angles) evolve under chemical pressure and epitaxial strain, and the effect of these structural variations on the microscopic exchange interactions and long-range magnetic order. We show that chemical pressure and epitaxial strain are accommodated differently by the crystal lattice of o-RMnO3, which is key for understanding the difference in magnetic properties between bulk samples and strained films. Finally, we discuss the effects of these differences in the magnetism on the electric polarization in o-RMnO3. The last two decades have seen major activity in the study of magnetoelectric multiferroics, an exciting class of materials that exhibit ferroelectric polarization alongside magnetic order. Interest in these materials largely stems from the possibility of controlling one order using the stimulus that usually controls the other, offering great potential for development of novel multifunctional devices 1,2 . Among single phase multiferroics, interesting candidates for future technological applications are those in which ferroelectricity is induced by inversionsymmetry-breaking magnetic order (multiferroics of type II) The orthorhombic RMnO 3 (o-RMnO 3 ), in which R is a rare-earth cation or Y, are prototypical representatives of type II multiferroics. It was discovered in 2003 In this work, we present a systematic study of the relationship between the crystal lattice and the magnetism in o-RMnO 3 using X-ray diffraction measurements, density functional theory (DFT) and Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. We focus specifically on how the microscopic exchange interactions can be varied by controlling the crystal lattice using chemical pressure or epitaxial strain and how these variations affect the long-range magnetic order. First, we employ non-resonant and resonant X-ray diffraction measurements to determine the lattice parameters and magnetic modulation vectors, respectively, in a set of epitaxially strained o-RMnO 3 films. We show that the magnetic modulation vectors in highly strained films can differ significantly from those in bulk samples and relaxed films having the same R cation. Next, we use DFT to calculate the internal coordinates for the experimentally reported crystal structures of several o-RMnO 3 bulk samples (from the literature) and films (both from the literature and our new measurements) and analyze how the internal lattice parameters evolve across the series. We find that chemical pressure affects primarily the Mn-O-Mn bond angles, while epitaxial strain is accommodated by changes in the Mn-O bond lengths. To study the magnetism, we employ a model Hamiltonian which includes Heisenberg, biquadratic and four-spin ring exchange couplings, as well as Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) and single-ion anisotropy (SIA). We extract the exchange couplings and anisotropy constants by mapping the results of DFT calculations onto this model Hamiltonian and analyze how they are affected by the structural variations in bulk samples and films of o-RMnO 3 . We show that variations of the Mn-O-Mn bond angles caused by chemical pressure have a strong effect on the in-plane nearest-neighboring (NN) Heisenberg exchange while all the other couplings stay almost constant with changing R. In turn, changes in the Mn-O bond lengths caused by epitaxial strain affect both inplane and inter-plane NN Heisenberg couplings as well as next-nearest-neighboring (NNN) couplings and higher order exchanges. Then we use the calculated exchanges and anisotropies in a series of Monte Carlo simulations to determine the magnetic ground states and corresponding magnetic modulation vectors q b . The latter are then compared to experimental values reported in the literature and obtained in this work through resonant X-ray diffraction measurements. We show that for most bulk and strained systems our model Hamiltonian and calculated couplings reproduce well the experimentally reported values of q b . Moreover, we find that unconventional H-AFM and I-AFM orders can be stabilized in the strained films of o-LuMnO 3 . Finally, we discuss the nature of the ferroelectricity that is induced in bulk and strained o-RMnO 3 by the magnetic phases obtained in our MC simulations. This article is organized as follows: In Sec. II A we describe the crystal structure and its relation to microscopic exchange interactions in o-RMnO 3 . In Sec. II B we introduce the magnetoelectric phase diagram of bulk o-RMnO 3 and summarize the literature data on studies of the magnetic and ferroelectric properties of o-RMnO 3 under hydrostatic pressure and epitaxial strain. In Sec. III we present the details of the experimental procedure and the results of our X-ray diffraction measurements. Then, in Sec. IV we introduce the magnetic model Hamiltonian which is used to describe the magnetism in o-RMnO 3 and summarize the details of our DFT and MC simulations. In Sec. V we present the results of our theoretical study of the evolution of internal lattice parameters in bulk and films of o-RMnO 3 . In Sec. VI A we present the calculated exchange couplings and anisotropies for all considered o-RMnO 3 samples. In Sec. VI B we show which magnetic phases are stabilized in MC simulations using the calculated exchange coupling and anisotropy constants for the considered o-RMnO 3 samples. In Sec. VII we present the electric polarizations calculated for several representative bulk and strained o-RMnO 3 using the magnetic phases obtained in our MC simulations. Finally, in Sec. VIII we summarize the main results of our investigation. The o-RMnO 3 have P bnm (#62) symmetry and differ from the perfect cubic perovskites by the presence of Jahn-Teller (JT) distortions of the MnO 6 octahedra where s, m and l are the lengths of short, medium and long Mn-O bonds in the MnO 6 octahedron. The cooperative character of the JT distortions leads to an ordering of the occupied e g orbitals with θ i = -θ j on the NN Mn sites i and j within the ab planes, and θ i = θ j along the c direction. The GFO distortion in o-RMnO 3 reduces the unit cell volume and so is larger for R cations with smaller radii. This distortion reduces the Mn-O-Mn bond angles and decreases the lengths of the O(1)-O(2) bridges within the ab planes (see Fig. The magnetic ground state in o-RMnO 3 is defined by the network of competing exchange couplings between the spins on NN and NNN Mn sites. Each superexchange interaction contains contributions from both e g and t 2g orbitals mediated by the p states of O anions. The crystal structure plays an important role in defining the relative strength of NN and NNN exchange couplings as well as the contributions from e g and t 2g states to each coupling. Indeed, for interactions within the ab planes, the presence of the e g orbital ordering described above leads to superexchange between an occupied e g orbital on one Mn site with an empty e g orbital on the NN Mn site through the p σ states of O (see Fig. The interplay between lattice and spin degrees of freedom described in Sec. II A manifests in the magnetic phase diagram of bulk o-RMnO 3 (see Fig. The microscopic mechanism that drives this evolution of magnetism in bulk o-RMnO 3 is still debated. It was initially considered in terms of competing Heisenberg exchange interactions between NN and NNN Mn 3+ spins within the ab planes: the relative strengths of these interactions are directly affected by the increasing GFO distortion (decreasing Mn-O-Mn bond angles) Understanding the interplay between ferroelectricity and magnetism has been a central motivator for studying this family of materials. IC spiral and E-AFM orders break inversion symmetry and induce an electric polarization in o-RMnO 3 , making them type II multiferroics. For the spiral orders, the electric polarization is usually treated as an effect arising from spin-orbit coupling and is explained in terms of the spin-current model Recent experimental studies have demonstrated that structural modifications due to hydrostatic pressure or epitaxial strain can stabilize magnetic phases in o-RMnO 3 that are different from those that are stable in unperturbed bulk samples. Moreover, the electric polarization in such structurally modified samples can be significantly larger than in bulk samples. For example, the magnetic order in o-TbMnO 3 evolves under high pressure from a spiral to the E-AFM state From all the literature data summarized above, it is clear that both magnetism and ferroelectricity in o-RMnO 3 can be manipulated by structural variations, such as hydrostatic or chemical pressure or epitaxial strain. Since the ferroelectricity in these materials is governed by magnetism, an understanding of the relationship between the crystal lattice and magnetic orders is of primary importance for potential optimization of their multiferroic properties. As a basis for studying the effects of epitaxial strain on the relationship between the lattice and magnetic order, we measured the lattice parameters and magnetic modulation vectors of a selection of epitaxially grown films. These were grown by pulsed laser deposition using stoichiometric ceramic targets of the corresponding hexagonal RMnO 3 materials. Further growth details are found in Ref. 41. A full list of films discussed here is available in Table Non-resonant X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to measure lattice constants to high precision using the Surface Diffraction end station of the Materials Science beam line of the Swiss Light Source (SLS) Resonant X-ray diffraction (RXD) experiments were conducted to probe antiferromagnetic order. These were done using the RESOXS UHV diffraction end station 57 at the SIM beam line 58 of the SLS. Photon energies used correspond to the Mn L 3 absorption edge using π-polarized incident light (electric field in the scattering plane). Data were taken at 10 K. Scattered intensities were collected using an IRD AXUV100 photodiode. Scans were conducted along the [010] direction of reciprocal space, following the (0,q b ,0) magnetic reflection. This reflection provides a direct and unequivocal measure of the modulation parameter q b . In Fig. In order to accurately describe the complex magnetic phase diagram of the o-RMnO 3 series (see Sec. II B), we employ the following spin model Hamiltonian: where The first term, H Heis (Eq. 4), is a Heisenberg Hamiltonian, where J ij are exchange interactions between spins S i and S j on Mn sites i and j, respectively. A H Heis including only AFM J c and J b and FM J ab (see Fig. The second term, H BQ (Eq. 5), describes the biquadratic exchange interactions between spins S i and S j . It has been demonstrated that the biquadratic couplings between NN spins within the ab planes, B ab , are crucial for establishment of E-AFM order The third term, H 4sp (Eq. 6), corresponds to the fourspin ring exchange couplings, which arise from consecutive electron hoppings between the NN Mn ions forming four-site plaquettes. We recently showed that the energies of different magnetic orders calculated using DFT for several o-RMnO 3 cannot be accurately fitted to the isotropic spin Hamiltonian including only Heisenberg and biquadratic exchanges, and the four-spin ring terms need to be included to provide an accurate description of the magnetism The fourth term, H SIA (Eq. 7), is a single ion anisotropy which sets the magnetic easy axis along the b direction. The fifth term, H DM (Eq. 8), describes the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions. We consider DM vectors, D ij , which are defined both for Mn-O-Mn bonds along the c direction and within the ab planes All density functional calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) based on the projector-augmented plane wave (PAW) method of DFT Monte Carlo simulations performed in this work are based on the Metropolis algorithm 66 combined with overrelaxation moves First we calculate how the o-RMnO 3 crystal structure evolves under chemical pressure and epitaxial strain. We start by considering bulk o-RMnO 3 and analyze how the internal lattice parameters vary with the radius of the R cation. For this purpose we consider several representatives of the o-RMnO 3 series (namely R=Gd, Tb, Ho, Er, Yb and Lu) and fully optimize their lattice parameters and internal coordinates using DFT, with the experimentally reported structures as the starting point In the next step, we investigate the effects of strain on the crystal structure of o-RMnO 3 . For this we consider a set of [010]-oriented o-RMnO 3 films (with the same R as in the bulk samples described previously in this section) grown epitaxially on YAlO 3 substrates. The experimen-tal lattice parameters of the o-GdMnO 3 and o-TbMnO 3 films are taken from Refs. 22 and 74 and for the other films we use values measured in this work. The lattice mismatch between the film and the substrate results in either compressive or tensile strain in the ac planes: For o-GdMnO 3 and o-TbMnO 3 films the a and c lattice constants are strongly compressed compared to the corresponding bulk values, which in turn leads to an increase in b; in o-YbMnO 3 and the two o-LuMnO 3 films (26 nm and 104 nm) the effect is oppositea and c are increased and b is reduced; in o-ErMnO 3 the a lattice constant is compressed, while b and c are increased. For comparison we also consider a o-HoMnO 3 film grown on a NdGaO 3 substrate, for which the a and c lattice constants of the film are extended and b is significantly reduced. To simulate the epitaxially strained films, we constrain the lengths l str i (i = a, c) of the a and c lattice constants to the values: where l bulk i is the corresponding lattice parameter of the relaxed bulk crystal structure described above and ǫ i is the experimental strain applied to the ith lattice constant. Then we use DFT to optimize the length of the b lattice parameter, which is perpendicular to the substrate, and the ionic positions. In Fig. Next, to check whether the effect of compressive strain can be different in systems with small unit cell volume, we simulated two hypothetical films of o-LuMnO 3 in which we artificially compressed the a and c axes of the fully optimized bulk crystal structure by the same amount as they expanded in the experimentally studied tensile strained o-LuMnO 3 films (26 nm and 104 nm) described above. These hypothetical films will be called inv26 and inv104, respectively, in the following. The obtained lattice parameters for the inv26 and inv104 o-LuMnO 3 films are also shown in Fig. To understand how these lattice variations affect the orbital ordering in o-RMnO 3 , we estimate the orbital mixing angles θ using Eq. 2 and our optimized values of s, m and l Mn-O bond lengths for all considered bulk samples and films of o-RMnO 3 . The calculated θ are presented in Fig. Thus we see that chemical pressure and epitaxial strain are accommodated by the crystal structure of o-RMnO 3 in different ways. In particular, the former leads to a change in the Mn-O-Mn bond angles (GFO distortion) while the latter affects mostly the Mn-O bond lengths (JT distortion) in the opposite way for compressive and tensile cases. Variation of the JT distortion in o-RMnO 3 films changes their orbital ordering compared to bulk samples. Since the magnetism in the o-RMnO 3 is closely related to the magnitudes of the JT and GFO distortions (as described in detail in Sec. II A), the fact that the chemical pressure and epitaxial strain affect these distortions differently can be key to understanding of distinct magnetic (and, therefore, ferroelectric) properties of bulk and strained films of o-RMnO 3 . In order to develop better insight into how these structural variations due to chemical pressure and epitaxial strain affect the magnetic properties of o-RMnO 3 , we analyze their effects on the microscopic exchange interactions. We extract all the considered Heisenberg, biquadratic and four-spin ring exchanges as well as the parameters of DMI and SIA (see Sec. IV A and Fig. One can see that the decreasing radius of the R cation from Gd to Lu (resulting in the reduction of the Mn-O-Mn bond angles) in bulk o-RMnO 3 , leads to a drastic decrease in the absolute value of the FM NN Heisenberg exchange J ab from -7.04 meV in o-GdMnO 3 to -2.20 meV in o-LuMnO 3 (Fig. Next, we perform similar calculations of the exchange coupling and anisotropy constants for the films of o-RMnO 3 to determine how they are influenced by the structural variations caused by epitaxial strain. The resulting couplings are presented in Fig. Thus we demonstrated that the microscopic exchange interactions in o-RMnO 3 evolve differently under chemical pressure and epitaxial strain. Specifically, the substitution of smaller R in bulk o-RMnO 3 results in an increased GFO distortion and leads to the reduction of the NN in-plane Heisenberg coupling J ab and a slight increase in the NNN coupling J b , while all the other couplings are almost constant across the series of the bulk samples. On the other hand, the change in the Mn-O bond lengths caused by epitaxial strain affects strongly both in-plane and inter-plane NN Heisenberg exchanges, and leads to a smaller variation of other coupling constants (NNN Heisenberg, biquadratic and four-spin ring exchanges). The changes are clearly different for compressive and tensile strain. The evolution of each coupling depends on whether the structure and, consequently, the Mn-O bond lengths are expanded or reduced in the relevant direction. In the next step we perform a series of Monte Carlo simulations using the calculated exchange couplings and anisotropy constants for bulk samples and strained films of o-RMnO 3 to determine their ground state magnetic phases. This also serves as a check of how well the model Hamiltonian of Eq. 3 reproduces the experimentally measured magnetism in these systems. First, we consider bulk o-RMnO 3 and determine the magnetic ground states for the systems with R=Gd, Tb, Ho, Er, Yb and Lu using the exchange coupling and anisotropy constants listed in Table IV of the Supplemental materials. Since the methods which we use to calculate these constants allow an uncertainty in their values of up to ±10-25% (see our previous work for details, Ref. 35), we take the lower boundary of this uncertainty range and check whether the experimentally observed magnetic ground states can be reproduced for all systems within this range of parameters. For that purpose we perform for each compound a set of MC simulations in which one of the exchange couplings (J c , J ab , J a , J diag , J b , J 3nn , K ab , K c , B ab , B c , γ ab , γ c ) or anisotropy (A) presented in Table ErMnO 3 as well (see our previous work for the details, Ref. 35). This can explain the contradictory experimental reports of the magnetic and ferroelectric properties of the o-RMnO 3 that are on the border between spiral and E-AFM phases in the magnetic phase diagram described in Sec. II B. Next, we perform the same analysis for the strained films of o-RMnO 3 . The modulation vectors of the ground state magnetic phases obtained in our MC simulations and the corresponding experimental values are presented in Fig. To double check the results of our MC simulations for the films of o-LuMnO 3 (26 nm and 104 nm) in which unconventional H-AFM or I-AFM orders were obtained as the lowest energy states, and to clarify whether one of these states might be favored in these systems by, for example, exchange striction or another distortion of the electronic density, we perform the following analysis: We construct a 1×2×2 supercell for each film (the theoretically optimized unit cell is doubled along b and c direc- Then we calculate the energies of these with their corresponding magnetic orders. The results are presented in Table Finally, in order to understand how the chemical pressure and epitaxial strain affects the electric polarization in o-RMnO 3 , and to check whether the presence of the magnetic phases which were obtained in our MC simulations can resolve the contradictions in the reported measured values of P , we perform the following analysis: We consider bulk and strained films of o-GdMnO 3 , o-ErMnO 3 and o-LuMnO 3 (for the latter both experimentally studied and hypothetical inv26 and inv104 films). For each system we construct 1×2×2 supercells by doubling the theoretically optimized unit cells along the b and c axes, and relax the ionic positions within these supercells imposing E-AFM, I-AFM and H-AFM orders. Then we perform Berry phase calculations using these relaxed structures with the corresponding magnetic orders imposed. The obtained polarizations, with the supercell in which the positions were relaxed with A-AFM order taken as the reference high-symmetry structure, are summarized in Table Our calculated P values induced by H-AFM order are aligned along the c axis and their amplitudes are at least an order of magnitude smaller than those induced by E-AFM order. While the absolute values of P are less affected by structural modifications compared to the E-AFM case, the fractional changes are equally dependent. This direction of P, has to our knowledge been experimentally observed only in systems with spiral magnetic orders (o-TbMnO ), in bulk samples of o-HoMnO 3 In conclusion, in spite of the fact that our DFT calculations correctly capture the various magnetic orderings in o-RMnO 3 films and bulk samples, we are not able to reproduce the experimentally reported ferroelectric polarizations in many cases. The wide spread in the reported values of ferroelectric polarizations in different samples of o-RMnO 3 , the consistently low values for E-AFM bulk crystals, as well as the similar values across the series of o-RMnO 3 films remain unexplained. In summary, we studied the effects of chemical pressure and epitaxial strain on the crystal structure and multiferroic orders of the o-RMnO 3 series using X-ray diffraction measurement techniques (XRD and RXD), first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations. In our RXD measurements we observed that the magnetic modulation vectors q b measured for o-RMnO 3 films can differ significantly from those of bulk samples. To clarify the origin of this difference we used DFT to deter-mine how the lattice parameters evolve in the o-RMnO 3 series, for both bulk and thin-film samples. We then studied the effect of these lattice variations on the microscopic exchange interactions. We found that reducing the radius of the R cation in bulk o-RMnO 3 leads to decreasing Mn-O-Mn bond angles within the ab planes and along the c axis, while the Mn-O bond lengths stay almost constant throughout the series, with only the l bonds decreasing slightly. In contrast, strain primarily affects the Mn-O bond lengths relative to the corresponding bulk samples, with bond angles varying under strain only in the samples with the smallest unit cell volumes. Next, we showed that reduction of the Mn-O-Mn bond angles due to decreasing R-cation radius in bulk o-RMnO 3 leads to a significant decrease in the absolute value of NN Heisenberg in-plane exchange J ab (see Fig. In our Monte Carlo simulations we determined the magnetic ground states of the model Hamiltonian of Eq. 3 for bulk and strained o-RMnO 3 using the extracted exchange coupling and anisotropy constants, and found that the calculated modulation vectors agree well with the available experimental data. We showed that in those bulk o-RMnO 3 on the boundary between IC spiral and E-AFM states in the magnetic phase diagram (Fig. Finally, we used DFT to analyze how the electric polarization would evolve in bulk and strain o-RMnO 3 if it were induced by one of the magnetic phases which we obtained in our MC simulations. The values of P calculated on imposing E-AFM order were significantly larger than the experimentally measured values for both bulk and films of o-RMnO 3 , and in the latter case is highly strain dependent, increasing with tensile strain along the a and c directions and vice versa. This behavior, however, has not been reported experimentally, where measured P values are similar for both compressively and tensile strained films. We find that the P values calculated with I-AFM order imposed are closest to those measured experimentally. However, in our MC and DFT calculations I-AFM is the lowest energy phase only in the tensile strained films of o-LuMnO 3 . Therefore, our findings cannot fully resolve the puzzling behavior of P in o-RMnO 3 .