Wannier tight-binding models are effective models constructed from first-principles calculations. As such, they bridge a gap between the accuracy of first-principles calculations and the computational simplicity of effective models. In this work, we extend the existing methodology of creating Wannier tight-binding models from first-principles calculations by introducing the symmetrization post-processing step, which enables the production of Wannier-like models that respect the symmetries of the considered crystal. Furthermore, we implement automatic workflows, which allow for producing a large number of tight-binding models for large classes of chemically and structurally similar compounds, or materials subject to external influence such as strain. As a particular illustration, these workflows are applied to strained III-V semiconductor materials. These results can be used for further study of topological phase transitions in III-V quantum wells. A significant part of materials science is devoted to the problem of finding the electronic structure of a given material. As a result, numerous computational techniques have been developed to study this problem. These techniques can roughly be classified into two kinds: Firstprinciples methods solve the problem using the fundamental physical principles and properties of atoms comprising the material. For weakly-interacting systems, density functional theory (DFT) In contrast, empirical methods aim to capture the relevant physical properties using a simplified model. Such models are usually matched to known properties of the material, which can be obtained from either experiments or first-principles calculations. An example of such an empirical method is given by the tight-binding approximation, which describes a material as a set of localized orbitals and predefined electron hopping terms between them. While the first-principles methods typically have superior accuracy, empirical methods are often used due to their lower computational cost. In particular, calculations of complex device geometries are often inaccessible to a direct first-principles study. As such, the construction of reliable empirical models is of significant importance. And the technique of creating Wannier tightbinding models In recent years, high-throughput techniques made a profound impact in various fields of materials science In this paper, we introduce steps for addressing two standardly known problems of using Wannier90 In Sec. II, we review the general process of calculating the Wannier tight-binding models by means of Wan-nier90 and explain the proposed and implemented symmetrization and automatic energy window choice procedures. Sec. III describes how these procedures are used for the development of an automated workflow using the AiiDA In this section, we describe the process of generating symmetrized Wannier-like tight-binding (SWTB) models. First, we give a short description of the method for creating Wannier tight-binding models (WTB) as introduced in the works of Refs. Tight-binding models represent a common way to describe crystalline systems in a computationally cheap way. The material is described as a system of localized orbitals with positions t i in the unit cell, and hopping terms H ij [R] between the j-th orbital in the unit cell at location R and the i-th orbital in the home unit cell R = 0. From these parameters, the matrix Hamiltonian can be written as [16] (R+tj -ti) . ( For the case of spinful systems, we choose the indices i, j to include the spin index for simplicity. The Wannier tight-binding (WTB) method utilizes localized Wannier functions as basis orbitals to capture the compound's physics. These basis Wannier functions are obtained from first-principles simulations. This procedure is based on the work of Refs. In a first step, the Bloch wave-functions ψ n,k calculated by the first-principles code are disentangled to obtain M wave-functions, where M is the target number of basis Wannier functions in WTB. For selecting the Bloch wave-functions which are involved in this procedure, one needs to choose an outer energy window. Optionally, an inner energy window can be chosen. States inside this inner window will be preserved by the disentanglement. An optimization routine is performed to select the M states such that the "change of character" Ω I (defined in Ref. As a second (optional) step, another optimization is performed to find a unitary transformation such that the resulting Wannier functions are maximally localized An important feature of tight-binding models, especially for studying topological effects, is that they preserve certain crystal symmetries. For a given symmetry group G, the symmetry constraint on the Hamiltonian matrix is given by where D k (g) is the k-dependent representation of the symmetry g from the group G. We define the k -independent part D(g) of the representation as where α g is the translation vector of the symmetry. For a Hamiltonian which does not fulfill these symmetry constraints, we define the symmetrized Hamiltonian as the group average This procedure projects the Hamiltonian onto the symmetric subspace, meaning that the modified Hamiltonian respects Eq. ( It is important to note that the eigenstates and eigenvalues of the symmetrized Hamiltonian may differ significantly from those of the non-symmetrized Hamiltonian. In fact, for an anti-symmetric initial Hamiltonian, meaning that for some symmetry g, the symmetrized result vanishes completely. However, given a Hamiltonian which almost respects the symmetry, this technique can effectively eliminate small symmetry-breaking terms. In the context of tight-binding models, this symmetrization technique can only straightforwardly be applied when the underlying basis set is symmetric. If the tight-binding basis contains an orbital |α centered around the position r, it must also contain g|α centered around gr for all symmetries g ∈ G. For example, if the model for a material which has C x 4 symmetry contains a p x orbital at the origin, it must also contain a p y orbital at the origin. For Wannier tight-binding models, this means that the technique can generally only be applied when the step of maximally localizing the Wannier functions is omitted, and pre-defined atomic orbitals are used. When this condition is met however, the method can be applied for both unitary and anti-unitary symmetries, as well as non-symmorphic symmetry groups. To apply the group average to tight-binding models, it is convenient to rewrite Eq. 4 directly in terms of the hopping matrices H[R] (see App. B for derivation): where S g is the real-space rotation matrix of the symmetry g, T ml ij = S g (t m -t l ) -t j -t i , and the indices m, l only go over values for which T ml ij is a lattice vector. Note that we use the k -independent part D(g) of the representation here. Fig. To determine the matrix representations D(g), we use the fact that Wannier90 allows one to manually choose the trial orbitals |g m . As a result, the basis after the disentanglement procedure corresponds to the chosen orbitals, up to some numerical error. Since the behavior of the basis orbitals under symmetries is known, D(g) can be determined in this way. For the treatment of spin, we use the rotation matrices as given in ref. Another approach to obtaining symmetric tightbinding models is to use the site-symmetry mode implemented in Wannier90 As described above, an important parameter in running Wannier90 is the choice of the so-called energy windows Some values of the energy windows cannot produce a tight-binding model, for example if the outer window contains less than M bands. As a result, finding appropriate energy windows is a constrained, four-dimensional optimization problem. The Nelder-Mead (downhill simplex) algorithm The AiiDA In this section, we describe the implementation of the Wannier tight-binding extraction scheme as an AiiDA workflow. This automation enables the application to the study of strain effects (described in Section IV). Special care has been taken to design the workflow in a modular way, which enables re-using parts of the workflow for purposes other than tight-binding extraction. We first discuss these design principles, before showing how they are applied in the tight-binding workflows. The code for the AiiDA workflows is available in the open-source aiida-tbextraction package, and provided as supplementary material. The basic principle of modular workflow design is to split up a single monolithic workflow into minimal subworkflows or calculations that perform exactly one task. For example, the tight-binding model created by Wan-nier90 is post-processed by parsing it to an HDF5 format, followed by optionally changing the order of the basis and symmetrizing the model. While this could easily be implemented in a single script, splitting these three steps up into separate calculations allows separately re-using each of the steps. More complex workflows are created by combining multiple sub-workflows into a logical unit at a higher abstraction level. Inputs to the sub-workflow are either forwarded directly from the input to the parent workflow or created within the parent workflow. Similarly, outputs from the sub-workflow can either be forwarded to be an output of the parent workflow or consumed directly to guide the further execution of the parent workflow. Since a complex workflow can consist of multiple layers of wrapped sub-workflows, this modular approach is maintainable only if the overhead of forwarding input and output is minimal. Following the single responsibility principle, a parent workflow should not have to change if an input or output parameter of a sub-workflow changes, unless it directly interacts with this parameter. To achieve this, a syntax is needed to specify that a parent workflow will inherit inputs or outputs of a subworkflow, without explicitly listing each parameter. In AiiDA, such a feature is available in the newly-introduced expose functionality, as described in Appendix C. The modular architecture improves not only the reusability, but also the flexibility of workflows. Often, a given part of a workflow could be performed in different ways. For example, many different codes can perform the first-principles calculations in the tight-binding extraction workflows. Additionally, one might want to add steps such as relaxation or cut-off energy convergence. To allow for this, the parent workflow can allow for dynamically selecting a workflow for performing a given task by passing it as an input Having discussed the design principles for modular workflows, we now show how these are applied to create a workflow for the construction of tight-binding models. This workflow is implemented in the OptimizeFirst-PrinciplesTightBinding class as sketched in Fig. Since different first-principles codes can produce the input files required by Wannier90, FirstPrinciples-RunBase defines only the minimum interface needed to perform this task. As described in the previous section, a workflow that implements this interface for a specific first-principles code can then be chosen dynamically. As a result, the subsequent parts of the workflow are independent of which first-principles code is used. The WindowSearch workflow performs the Nelder-Mead algorithm for finding the optimal energy window. Because optimization schemes are useful outside of this specific application, we implemented the Nelder-Mead method in a general way. The OptimizationWorkChain, defined in the aiida-optimize module, can be used to solve generic optimization problems in the context of AiiDA workflows. It requires two inputs: A workflow which defines the function to be optimized, and an engine that implements the optimization method. Consequently, changing the whole workflow to use a different optimization method would be a simple matter of using a different engine. Because AiiDA workflows need to be able to stop and re-start after any given step, the engine is written in an object-oriented instead of a procedural way. While this complicates implementing the Nelder-Mead method, it allows for serializing and storing the state of the engine. The function which is optimized by the OptimizationWorkChain is implemented in the Run-Window workflow. It again consists of two parts: TightBindingCalculation creates the tight-binding model itself, and ModelEvaluationBase evaluates the quality of the model. The first step in the Tight-BindingCalculation workflow is to run Wannier90 on the given input parameters. In a second step, the Wannier90 output is parsed and converted into the TBmodels For the evaluation of the tight-binding model, we again use an abstract interface class, ModelEvaluationBase. While for the purposes of this paper we used the average difference of band energies (Eq. ( The quest for Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in condensed matter systems has recently attracted a lot of interest Highly accurate first-principles methods, using hybrid functionals Realistic simulations of heterostructures require a correct treatment of strains at interfaces. In the k.p and the ETB method this is usually done by strain-dependent parameter sets. However, often the symmetries are not broken correctly. In this context, the Wannier or Wannierlike tight-binding models can offer a significant improvement by accurately representing the first-principles wavefunction and correctly capturing the effect of strain. As a demonstration of the AiiDA workflows, we construct SWTB models for the III-V semiconductors InSb, InAs and GaSb. Including spin-orbit coupling (SOC), we require only 14 basis functions, namely s and p orbitals centered on the In/Ga atom, and p orbitals centered on the As/Sb atom. The popular sp 3 d 5 s * ETB models on the other hand require 40 To account for strain, we construct tight-binding models with biaxial (001), ( To automatically extract tight-binding models for different strain directions and strengths, we define an additional workflow, OptimizeStrainedFirstPrinciples-TightBinding, as shown in Fig. In the first step of generating the SWTB we need to carry out a first-principles calculation of the bulk semiconductor structure. We performed all first-principles calculations using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) utilizing projector augmented-wave (PAW) basis sets InAs, GaSb and InSb crystallize in the zincblende structure with space group T 2 d (no. 216). For the unstrained structures we perform the first-principles calculation with the experimental lattice constant a at 300K, that is a InAs = 6.058 Å, a GaSb = 6.096 Å, a InSb = 6.479 Å, from ref. To get optimal results from the Wannier90 code in conjunction with VASP the numerical phases are random, turning symmetries off generally results in more localized Wannier functions after the projection step. The interface for running first-principles calculations in the tight-binding extraction workflow is defined in the FirstPrinciplesRunBase class (see Section III B). Here, we describe the specific sub-class used to implement these calculations with VASP Using the AiiDA workflow, we obtained tight-binding models for strains in the range of ±4%, in steps of 0.5%. However, it is sometimes useful to have a finer control over the strain value without having to run additional first-principles calculations. A common way of obtaining this is by linear interpolation of the hopping parameters. Given two strain values s 1 and s 2 , for which the hopping parameter H si [R] are known, the hopping parameters for an unknown s * can be calculated as where Since this method assumes that the hopping parameters are a linear function of strain value, it becomes unreliable when s * is too far away from s 1 and s 2 . For this reason, we compared a tight-binding model for InSb with 2% biaxial (001) strain obtained from linear interpolation of 1% and 3% strain models with one calculated directly from first-principles. Figure To validate the tight-binding models obtained using the aiida-tbextraction workflows, several material parameters were calculated. Table The effect of the energy window optimization is shown in Table Finally, the effect of strain on the energy levels at high- symmetry points is shown in Fig. In the supplementary materials of this paper, an export of the AiiDA database is given We have implemented a workflow for an automatic construction of Wannier tight-binding models from firstprinciples calculations. Building on the known procedure for calculating these models, we introduced a post-processing step to symmetrize the models, and an optimization of the energy windows used for disentanglement. These workflows are implemented in the aiida-tbextraction package, which is a free and opensource plugin for the AiiDA framework. As a test case, tight-binding models for strained III-V semiconductor materials were calculated. These results should enable device simulations for Majorana designs and other quantum devices. The workflows have been implemented in a modular and extensible way. As a result, they can be used as building blocks for further improvements in automating the process of generating Wannier tight-binding models. Possible directions include extending the number of firstprinciples codes which are compatible with the plugin, adding different fitness criteria for the energy window optimization, and further minimizing the number of tunable parameters. For example, the need for choosing initial trial orbitals could be eliminated either by using another optimization step, or by utilizing the method of Ref. where A is the operation which acts upon k when g is applied. Since this is true for all k and r, A = ±(S T g ) -1 , (B10) and thus For the next step, we treat the unitary and anti-unitary cases separately for clarity. In the anti-unitary case, we get [Sg(R+tm-t l )] D k mj (g -1 ). When applying Eq. (B2), it is important to note that the representation of the inverse is given by = e iαg.k U g K -1 = KU † g e -iαg.k (B15) = e iαg.k KU † g = e iαg.k D(g -1 ). In the distorted system, the position of the atoms also changes with the strain tensor. In the unstrained InAs, GaSb and InSb system, the cation is located in the (0, 0, 0) site and the anion is located at τ =(1/4, 1/4, 1/4) in primitive lattice vectors. In Cartesian coordinates, τ changes by the following 