The recently discovered (Rb,Cs)EuFe 4 As 4 compounds exhibit an unusual combination of superconductivity (T c ∼ 35 K) and ferromagnetism (T m ∼ 15 K). We have performed a series of x-ray diffraction, ac magnetic susceptibility, dc magnetization, and electrical resistivity measurements on both RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 to pressures as high as ∼ 30 GPa. We find that the superconductivity onset is suppressed monotonically by pressure while the magnetic transition is enhanced at initial rates of dT m /dP ∼ 1.7 K/GPa and 1.5 K/GPa for RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 respectively. Near 7 GPa, T c onset and T m become comparable. At higher pressures, signatures of bulk superconductivity gradually disappear. Room temperature x-ray diffraction measurements suggest the onset of a transition from tetragonal (T) to a half collapsed-tetragonal (hcT) phase at ∼ 10 GPa (RbEuFe 4 As 4 ) and ∼ 12 GPa (CsEuFe 4 As 4 ). The ability to tune T c and T m into coincidence with relatively modest pressures highlights (Rb,Cs)EuFe 4 As 4 compounds as ideal systems to study the interplay of superconductivity and ferromagnetism. The iron-based superconductors crystallize in several closely related crystal structures. The most recently discovered of these is the so-called "1144" structure type, which was reported for compounds with the formula AeAFe 4 As 4 , where Ae = Ca or Sr and A = K, Rb, or Cs The Eu variants of the 1144 structure exhibit an unusual coexistence of superconductivity (T c ∼ 35 K) and what is nominally ferromagnetism (T m ∼ 15 K). The large ordered moment of ∼ 6.5 μ B per formula unit is consistent with magnetism deriving from Eu 2+ ions It is thought that superconductivity and magnetism are able to coexist in these compounds because of a weak coupling between the Eu planes and the FeAs planes. Weak coupling between superconductivity and the Eu magnetism is confirmed by the fact that nonmagnetic CaRbFe 4 As 4 Experiments aimed at tuning the superconducting and magnetic transitions via pressure, chemical substitution, and applied magnetic fields have played a central role in our understanding of magnetic superconductors To date, there appear to be only two reports of chemical substitution experiments on (Rb,Cs)EuFe 4 As 4 compounds. In addition to the Eu → Ca, substitution study described above High pressure experiments have the potential to tune T c and T m without introducing intrinsic disorder. In this paper we report a series of high pressure measurements on polycrystalline samples of both RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 . Using a combination of x-ray diffraction, dc magnetization, ac magnetic susceptibility, and electrical resistivity measurements, we have mapped the phase diagrams of both compounds to pressures as high as ∼ 30 GPa Polycrystalline samples of RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 were synthesized as previously reported Angle-dispersive x-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments on RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 powder samples were carried out at beamline 13BM-C (PX ∧ 2), Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory For the diffraction measurements, high pressure was achieved in Mao-type symmetric DACs with c-BN seats to allow access to high diffraction angles. Two experimental runs were performed on CsEuFe 4 As 4 . In the first run, a pair of diamond anvils with 600 μm culet were used up to 11.1 GPa. A Re gasket was pre-indented from 250 μm initial thickness to 85 μm. During the second run, a pair of 500 μm diamond anvils with Re gasket thickness of 80 μm were used to achieve pressures up to 28.1 GPa. A single experimental run was performed on the RbEuFe 4 As 4 sample, using diamond anvils of 500 μm culet up to 29.7 GPa. The Re gasket was pre-indented to 78 μm and a hole of 260 μm was EDM drilled. All XRD experiments were carried out at room temperature. The pressure is cross checked with solid Ne diffraction peaks above 5 GPa using the equation of state from Ref. High-pressure dc-magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design MPMS using a miniaturized Tozer-type turnbuckle DAC The ac-magnetic susceptibility measurements were performed using a balanced-primary/secondary-coil system that has been described elsewhere For the resistivity measurements, small pieces of sample with dimensions of about 70 μm×70 μm×10 μm were cut from a larger piece of polycrystal for each of the measurements. The measurements were carried out in a OmniDAC gas-membrane-driven diamond anvil cell from Almax-EasyLab. The cell was placed inside a custom, continuous-flow cryostat built by Oxford Instruments. Optical access to the cell for visual observation and measurement of the ruby manometer is provided through windows at the bottom of the cryostat and an optical fiber entering via a feed-through at the top. One of the diamonds used was a designer-diamond anvil containing eight symmetrically arranged, deposited-tungsten microprobes encapsulated in high-quality-homoepitaxial diamond Representative XRD patterns are shown in Fig. With further increase of pressure, anomalous compression is evidenced by the negative compressibility of a and a gradual collapse of the c lattice constant evidenced by a change in the slope of c vs P . These features are also visible in the c/a ratio plotted in the lower panels of Fig. In the case of the RbEuFe 4 As 4 data, we see two anomalies in the lattice constant vs pressure data. This is most clearly visible in the a vs P data, where a begins to increase at ∼ 10 GPa, passes through a maximum and then again begins to increase with pressure near 20 GPa. These two features may be connected with a sequence of transitions from tetragonal (T) to half-collapsed (hcT) starting at 10 GPa, followed by a transition from hcT to fully collapsed tetragonal (cT) starting at 20 GPa. In the case of CsEuFe 4 As 4 , the data suggest that the transition to the hcT phase begins at 12 GPa, while an eventual cT phase likely appears at a pressure somewhere above 30 GPa. Figure The measurements indicate a shielding fraction of ∼ 45%, which is consistent with the relatively large size of the ferromagnetic anomaly compared to the superconducting drop. We note that the exact volume of the tiny, irregularly shaped sample is difficult to estimate precisely and the error in this calibration could be as large as ∼ 50%. The type-II nature of the superconductivity is evident from the smaller magnitude of the diamagnetic drop in χ for the FC measurements compared to the ZFC measurements. As pressure increases, the magnetic transition moves to higher temperature and the diamagnetic signal at T c moves to lower temperature and becomes smaller. Somewhere between 4.0 and 4.7 GPa clear signatures of the superconducting transition vanish. Extrapolation of the two transition temperatures suggests that they do not meet until ∼ 7 GPa. The disappearance of the superconducting signal at a somewhat lower pressure might be due to substantial flux pinning on cooling through the superconducting transition when T m is just below T c . Figure While the interpretation of χ ′ is simple, the interpretation of χ ′ 3 is less straightforward. It is known that the shape of the χ ′ 3 transition can have a complicated dependence on measurement conditions. Analysis of the frequency dependence of χ ′ 3 can provide insight into the flux dynamics of the material Having established the approximate shielding fraction and relationship between first and third harmonic signals, we now turn to the high-pressure ac susceptibility results. Figure Figure Figure Despite the issues described above, the resistivity data show clear trends that allow us to track both T c and T m as a function of pressure. For both compounds T c decreases smoothly with pressure. The drop in the resistance above T c becomes smaller at higher pressures and eventually vanishes. Once the signatures of superconductivity vanish, another weaker anomaly appears in the resistivity. This feature moves to higher temperature and becomes more pronounced with increasing pressure. At lower pressures in particular, the weaker anomaly is difficult to see in the raw resistivity data (Fig. Combining the data from six different pressure runs, consisting of magnetic or resistivity measurements at more than 90 different pressures, together with the roomtemperature x-ray diffraction data, we arrive at the phase diagrams presented in Figure The criteria for the superconducting onset temperature is given by the intersection of linear fits to the data just above and just below the the onset of the transition. Magnetic ordering temperatures, T m , are determined using the peak in χ (Figs. For some of the measurements, the sample was annealed at room temperature at high pressure, while for other measurements pressure application occurred at low temperature and the sample was maintained at ∼ 60 -70 K throughout the course of the experiment (see key to Fig. Among 1144 materials, to date, only CaKFe 4 As 4 appears to have been the subject of a study under applied pressure Another interesting question is whether the initial T→hcT transition corresponds to As-As bonds developing across the Eu layer or, alternatively, across the Rb/Cs layer. Analysis of our x-ray data has not allowed us to unambiguously choose between these possibilities. Comparison with the behavior of other 122 compounds at high pressure Yu et al. In summary, we find that both RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 exhibit very similar phase diagrams under pressure. X-ray diffraction measurements suggest a transition to a half-collapsed tetragonal phase at pressures of 10 GPa and 12 GPa for RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 , respectively. For RbEuFe 4 As 4 , an additional structural transition to a fully collapsed tetragonal phase may occur at 20 GPa. For both materials, the magnetic transition temperature, T m , increases with pressure while the superconducting transition temperature T c decreases. The two transitions coincide near a critical pressure P c ∼ 7 GPa, indicating that a crossover from FMS to SFM occurs prior to the onset of the tetragonal → half-collapsedtetragonal transition. The relatively modest pressures required to tune this crossover make AEuFe 4 As 4 compounds a very interesting system to further explore the interplay of superconductivity and (local moment) magnetism in a clean, stoichiometric material. The present measurements have been performed using polycrystalline samples which show somewhat broad transitions. Recently, single crystalline specimens 