This paper investigates the dynamic properties of one, two and three-dimensional tensegrity-based periodic structures introduced in [1], which are here termed as tensegrity beams, plates and solids, respectively. We study their linear wave propagation properties and show that in each case, these properties can be significantly altered by the prestrain in the cables. As the prestrain is varied, we observe jumps in the wave velocities at two critical prestrain values, which define transitions between the three distinct phases of these structural assemblies. At low cable prestrains, the wave speeds are zero as the lattices have zero effective stiffness. At moderate prestrains, the wave speed is nonzero and finally, at prestrain levels where the bars buckle, the wave speed decreases to a lower value. Dispersion analysis on these beams, plates and solids reveal unique properties such as very low wave velocities compared to their constituent material and the existence of flat bands at low frequencies. Furthermore, we find that shear waves travel faster than longitudinal waves in tensegrity solids in a range of cable prestrains. Finally, we verify the key observations through detailed numerical simulations on finite tensegrity solids. Artificially engineered lattices have been the subject of extensive research over the past decade due to their unique static and dynamic properties Tensegrity structures are meta-structures composed of an assembly of prestressed bars and cables, connected in such a way that the cables (bars) are in tension (compression) and the structure is in equilibrium without any external force Developing a periodic tensegrity lattice is a nontrivial task since most of the tensegrity structures lack translation symmetry and cannot tessellate a 3D domain. There have been a few notable examples in the past decade for developing tensegritybased beams and plates In this letter, we investigate the dynamic properties of tensegrity based 1D, 2D and 3D periodic structures introduced in The outline of this letter is as follows: In Sec. 2 we briefly describe the lattice unit cell and our modeling methodology. Section 3 presents dispersion diagrams and wave speeds at low frequencies under a range of cable prestrains, illustrating the unique dynamics of these lattices. Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Sec. 4. The tensegrity structure employed as the building block for the tensegrity beams, plates and solids is described in detail in A key feature of tensegrity structures is that the level of tension (compression) can be varied by varying the member prestrain, characterized here by a cable prestrain parameter λ. It is defined with respect to our canonical unit cell, which is a purely geometric entity as illustrated in Fig. The bars and cables are modeled as beams made of linear elastic materials, capable of undergoing large deformations. We use an equivalent spring mass model for each beam, where the spring stiffness and masses are chosen to match the axial stiffness, total mass and mass moment of inertia, and buckling load of the continuum beam. Each beam comprises of 4 point masses, with each mass having three translational degrees of freedom. The mass at each node is simply the sum of the end mass of all the bars and cables meeting there. Details of the model are presented in To analyze the linear wave propagation response, Figure After we conduct a dispersion analysis on a single unit cell of the periodic tensegrity lattice. Periodic boundary conditions are imposed relating the displacements on the nodes at the two opposite square facets at the boundary of the unit cell, illustrated by the same color in Fig. All the calculations in this letter are done with material properties for bars and cables corresponding to titanium with density 4480 kg/m 3 and Young's modulus 100 GPa. The bar and cable diameters are taken to be 2.3 cm and 1.15 cm, respectively, while the length of the canonical unit cell is 1.26 m. The frequencies are normalized by a reference frequency ω r = c 0 /a, where a is the magnitude of the lattice vector and c 0 = E/ρ is the longitudinal wave speed in the bulk material comprising the tensegrity structure. The non-dimensional frequency is thus given by Ω = ω/ω r . This choice of normalization ensures that the dispersion diagrams are valid for tensegrity lattice made of any linear elastic material and over any length scale where linear elasticity assumptions are valid, provided that the relative geometric dimensions of the cable and bar diameters with respect to the unit cell length a are the same. Although we study only one geometric configuration, we believe these results are representative of a wide range of cable and bar dimensions. The dispersion analyses of tensegrity based beams, plates and solids are presented for different levels of cable prestrain λ. We examine the low frequency (long wavelength) propagation of acoustic modes through the lattice and contrast their behavior with waves in conventional bulk media. Note that due to the presence of free surfaces (faces) in tensegrity beams and plates, the strain in the various cables (and thus bars), lying in the interior or on a free surface, may be different in the reference configuration. As the prestrain increases (decrease in λ), the bars experience increasing compression and eventually all the bars buckle. To illustrate qualitative differences between the cases when the bars are unbuckled and buckled in the equilibrium configuration, we present dispersion diagrams for two prestrain levels λ: one where bars are unbuckled (λ = λ u = 0.993) and another where all the bars buckle (λ = λ b = 0.988). It is worth emphasizing that a post-buckled dynamic analysis is possible due to the unique ability of our lattice to be stable and support loads even after the bars buckle Let us make a technical remark on the mechanics of a buckled bar. In each bar, there is a U (1) gauge freedom in the choice of the buckling plane, i.e., the transverse displacement of a buckled bar can be in any direction orthogonal to its axis. Let us consider a local coordinate system with the x-axis along the centerline and the y-axis along the transverse displacement direction. The quasistatic response of the post-buckled beam (and hence lattice) is gauge independent as the transverse (y direction) force (and stiffness) in the plane of buckling is the same as that normal to this plane (i.e.,along z). However, under dynamic excitation, this gauge invariance is broken as the force in the transverse direction (y) is nonzero while it is zero in the out of plane (z) direction. Thus our post-buckled results will depend on the choice of our gauge for the buckled configuration of each bar. Our numerical simulations showed that this choice does not significantly influence the dispersion results at low frequencies and long wavelengths (wavevector κ → 0). At large wavevectors κ and high frequencies, there are small variations in the dispersion behavior. In this work, we choose a gauge such that the beams always buckle in the local xy plane, with x being along the direction v of the line joining the two end points and y given by the unit vector along e 3 × v, with e 3 being the unit vector along the global z direction. The tensegrity beam is obtained by tesselating the unit cell in Fig. Figure We now turn attention to analyzing the dynamic behavior of tensegrity plate lattices obtained by tesselating the unit cell in Fig. The first mode is analogous to an A 0 Lamb mode in a conventional plate and is antisymmetric about the plate midplane. The second acoustic mode is symmetric about the plate midplane, analogous to the S 0 Lamb wavemode while the third acoustic mode has an inplane shear mode shape, analogous to SH modes in plates. Similar to a conventional plate, the A 0 -like mode has the lowest wave speed, followed by the S 0 -like mode and the in-plane shear mode. Figure Let us analyze the effect of cable prestrain on the wave speeds to quantify the difference in behavior when the bars are pre-and post-buckled. Figure Let us now look at the wave speeds in all directions to understand anisotropy in the lattice response to a point excitation. For each wavevector κ = (κ x , κ y ) near 0 and mode m with frequency Ω m , we compute the group velocity c = (c g,x , c g,y ) in each direction by approximating ∂Ω m /∂κ, i.e., the components of the group velocity are c g,x = Ω m /κ x and c g,y = Ω m /κ y . The variation with direction is obtained by simply setting κ = κ(cos θ, sin θ) and spanning θ in [0, 2π]. κ is chosen to be sufficiently small to get the wave speeds at low frequency. Figure Figure Let us now analyze the dynamic behavior of tensegrity solids obtained by tesselating its unit cell (Fig Figure Figures The three key aspects of dispersion analysis in tensegrity solids: faster shear than pressure waves at low prestrains, flipping to conventional behavior with faster pressure waves and the flat bands acting as stopbands for shear waves are verified by numerical simulations on finite lattices. Details are presented in the accompanying Supplementary Materials. Thus the dynamic response of our tensegrity solids can change significantly as the bars buckle due to the cable prestrain. Tensegrity-based periodic media offer unique opportunities for tunable wave propagation by varying the cable prestrain. In this letter, we presented a linear wave propagation analysis of tensegritybased beams, plates and solids. Dispersion analysis is used to investigate the dynamic response of these structural units and it shows a significant change in their long wavelength acoustic mode wave speeds as a function of the cable prestrain. Three distinct stages are identified: at low prestrain levels, the wave speeds are zero as the structure has zero stiffness; at moderate prestrain levels when the bars are under compression but not buckled, the wave speed is nonzero and finally, at prestrain levels where the bars have buckled, the wave speed is distinct. Sharp transitions in wave speeds are observed between the three stages, analogous to phase transitions in a solid. Our tensegrity solids are observed to support an unusual dynamic property of faster shear waves than pressure waves in all directions in the second stage. In the post-buckled regime, additional zero frequency modes and soft modes having flat dispersion bands are observed in all the three structural units. A collection of these flat bands essentially acts as stop bands for shear excitations and opens new avenues in achieving low frequency bandgaps. In summary, the unique post-buckling stability of these lattices allows for exploiting these sharp effective phase transitions to get qualitatively distinct dynamic behaviors as the bars buckle.