A theoretical investigation of magnetic relaxation processes in single domain particles driven by colored noise is presented. Two approaches are considered; the Landau-Lifshitz-Miyazaki-Seki equation, which is a Langevin dynamics model based on the introduction of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck correlated noise into the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation and a Generalized Master Equation approach whereby the ordinary Master Equation is modified through the introduction of an explicit memory kernel. It is found that colored noise is likely to become important for high anisotropy materials where the characteristic system time, in this case the inverse Larmor precession frequency, becomes comparable to the correlation time. When the escape time is much longer than the correlation time, the relaxation profile of the spin has a similar exponential form to the ordinary LLG equation, while for low barrier heights and intermediate damping, for which the correlation time is a sizable fraction of the escape time, an unusual bi-exponential decay is predicted as a characteristic of colored noise. At very high damping and correlation times, the time profile of the spins exhibits a more complicated, noisy trajectory. Thermally-activated magnetization reversal over an anisotropic energy barrier is the driving force for switching in magnetic materials. Theoretical understanding was first developed by Néel 1 based on the transition state theory (TST) leading to an Arrhenius-like relaxation time proportional to exp(E B /k B T ) where E B is the energy barrier, k B the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. Brown 2 provided further insight through the construction of the Langevin equation for the problem by the introduction of white-noise fields into the Landau-Lifshitz equation with Gilbert damping, leading to the stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation, An expression for the relaxation time of thermally-driven escape over the energy barrier is then found through the lowest eigenvalue of the corresponding Fokker-Planck equation (FPE) governing the time-evolution of the probability density function of the magnetization orientation. The route to the Arrhenius-like relaxation time expression is one of two directions leading from the Langevin equation. The second, Langevin Dynamics (LD) approach is the direct numerical solution of the Langevin equation The LLG equation for a single spin takes the wellknown form where α is the phenomenological damping constant, γ = 1.76 Thermal fluctuations are necessary to incorporate the deviations of a particular spin from the average trajectory. This is done via the formal inclusion of random fields in the LLG equation. In order to realize the Fluctuation-Dissipation theorem for this system, these thermal fields must also be proportional to the same phenomenological damping constant, α that occurs in the damping. The moments of the thermal field are then given by where i, j label the spin components. In all numerical simulations, we interpret the stochastic equation in the Stratonovich sense and employ the Heun method An implicit assumption of this approach is the presence of white noise, which exists in the zero correlation time limit for some physical noise process with a well-defined correlation time. Such a colored noise may be implemented for a magnetic system through the use of the Landau-Lifshitz-Miyazaki-Seki pair of Langevin equations, which take the form where τ c is the correlation time and χ is a spin-bath coupling which is related to the phenomenological damping parameter as α = γχτ c in the limit of small correlation times. The autocorrelation of the white noise field, R, is given by This pair of Langevin equations leads to a frequencydependent damping of the spin together with an exponentially correlated noise term in the spin-only space, τc is the exponential memory kernel. For completeness, additional background on the LLMS Langevin equation and colored noise is included in Appendix A. An alternative approach to the Langevin equation is the discrete orientation approximation, whereby, in the limit of large barriers, the detailed dynamics are replaced by phenomenological rate equations describing transitions between the minima of the magnetic potential. We may augment this description by the introduction of a memory kernel into the rates, thus replacing the master equation description with a generalized master equation which explicitly incorporates the retardation effect into the rate equations. Here we investigate the introduction of colored noise into the calculation of escape rates. This leads to significant effects for materials with large magnetocrystalline anisotropy energies, including the prediction of bi-exponential behavior at intermediate damping, when the characteristic time of the relaxation process becomes comparable to the heat bath correlation time. The paper is organized as follows. We first outline thermally activated escape times for single nanoparticles, followed by an introduction of colored noise into the Langevin formalism via the LLMS equations. We then derive the relaxation profile from the non-Markovian generalized extension of the rate equation, followed by a systematic investigation of the effects of the barrier height and correlation times on the relaxation profile from LLMS simulations. We will investigate here the effect that colored noise has on the dynamics of the thermal escape problem for a magnetic nanoparticle. The spin Hamiltonian of the system contains both an applied field and anisotropy term, taking the form where K is the anisotropy constant and V is the particle volume. For the escape problem we have a spin energy potential of the form + sin ψ sin θ cos φ) , where θ, φ are respectively the polar and azimuthal components of the spin in spherical coordinates, σ = KV /k B T is the reduced barrier height parameter, h = H/2σ is the reduced field, β = (k B T ) -1 and ψ is the angle between the easy-axis and the applied field. This potential has a bistable character under the condition than the critical applied field value, h < h c (ψ) = ((cos 2/3 ψ + sin 2/3 ψ) -3/213 , in which case there are local and global minima in the north and south polar regions, with an equatorial saddle point between them. We are then interested in the calculation of the characteristic escape time of a spin initialized in one such minimum. For the special case of aligned field and easy axis, for which ψ = 0 the potential is In this case the escape time takes the Arrhenius form, where the barrier energy, E B , is proportional to the anisotropy energy, leading to an escape time where f 0 is the attempt frequency, the frequency of Larmor gyromagnetic precession at the bottom of the well. We investigate the escape time in the colored and white noise cases through repeated numerical integration of the Langevin equations for a spin initialized in a potential minimum. An important consideration for such simulations is the choice of initial and switching condition for the spin. We will initialize the spins with the Boltzmann distribution at the bottom of the well in order to avoid inconsistencies at low damping, while the switching condition is chosen such that S z < -0.5, with the spin initialized in the positive z-direction, so that the spin is sufficiently deep in the well such that it has escaped. A. System time τs vs. τc characteristic bath time. For the uniaxial escape problem the external field in the LLMS will consist of an external applied part and an anisotropy contribution the magnitude of the anisotropic contribution depends on the orientation of the spin and is given by • z where z is the direction of easy magnetization and k u is the anisotropy energy. To gain intuition into the relevant timescales for the relaxation problem, we will assume the uniaxial case in the following, where the external field is applied along the same direction as the easy axis, such that both fields only have components in the z-direction. We note that the anisotropic field contribution varies with the projection of the spin on to the easy-axis as The largest field magnitude and consequently the fastest timescale of the problem is set by the value for which the anisotropic field contribution is at its largest, which is when the spin and the easy-axis precisely coalign. For any other orientation, the field will be smaller and the timescale of oscillation hence slower. We may then take the spin-only Langevin equation, and proceed to scale this equation by the maximum anisotropy field value. Defining the system time for the spin as We may scale the time variable in the Langevin equation so that the system time is removed by taking ζ = τ s t. Then we have The autocorrelation of the noise is similarly transformed to become where τ s /τ c = τ and D = D/τ s = χτ k B T /μ s . We can then write the coupling as χ = χ/H k , and absorb the H k factor into the diffusion constant for the thermal field. Since the thermal fields are given by η (20) In the case that τ ≪ 1 and τ c ≪ τ s , the memory kernels appearing in the noise and damping terms are reduced to delta functions and the white noise behavior is restored. Additionally the bath coupling and the strength of the thermal fluctuations are reduced by the anisotropy field, so that in the event of a very large anisotropy the precessional dynamics of the spin dominate the thermal and damping parts. We then conclude that the condition τ c (γH k ) -1 dictates whether the effect of correlations are relevant in the system dynamics in the high barrier limit. This prediction is borne out in numerical simulations of the LLMS equation. Figure Figure Crucially, it is found that the Arrhenius behavior of the escape rate is recovered from LLMS simulations in the limit of large barrier height. In figure In the high damping case, we see that the escape rates begin to converge as the temperature tends towards zero. As the escape time between the wells becomes much longer than the bath correlation time, the detailed dynamics of the spin within the well becomes less relevant. At low damping, the LLMS and LLG appear not to converge even at the larger barrier heights considered here. We attribute this difference to the difference in damping regimes and the physically distinct mechanisms involved in the escape process between the two regimes. Escape at high damping is mediated by thermal fluctu- ations, which liberate the bound spin. In the limit of vanishing temperature the infrequency of thermal oscillations of sufficient energy dominate the escape behavior and the escape rates converge. In contrast, the energy-controlled diffusion regime is characterized by the almost-free precessional motion of the spin in the well. In the highly correlated case, the simple damping is replaced with a frequency-dependent damping, an effect which increases the overall effective damping. In the limit T → 0, this inhibits the escape rate between the wells by decreasing the rate at which the spin is able to attain a trajectory with sufficient escape energy. The master equation is a phenomenological set of firstorder differential rate equations for a multi-level system, which takes the form where n i is a probability vector representing the probability that the system is in one of a discrete set of states, and i, j label those discrete states, while the matrix of coefficients Γ i,j dictates the transition rate from state i to the state j of the system. The dynamics of the thermally-assisted escape problem in a magnetic system may be approximated by such a master equation under the condition that the energy barrier is large compared to the thermal energy, σ > 1, but not too large such that it would inhibit inter-well transitions. This approximation to the Langevin dynamics is called the discrete orientation approximation. The spin orientations are assumed to be restricted only to the 2 minima of the potential energy dictated by the spin Hamiltonian. The time evolution of the occupation of each state follows from Eq. 21, where i, j = 1, 2. The transition matrix elements follow from the applied field, anisotropy and temperature. In particular, we will assume a fixed applied field, such that the transition rates are constant in time and the matrix takes the form In the uniaxial case these rates are given by κ 1→2 = , where σ and h are the reduced barrier height and applied field, respectively. The time evolution of the population of the state n 1 is then explicitly given by The time-evolution of the magnetization follows from the individual rates for the two wells, where the magnetization is given by m(t) = n 1 (t) -n 2 (t) and is subject to the normalization condition n 1 (t) + n 2 (t) = 1. The differential equation for the magnetization is then where Γ 1 = κ 12 + κ 21 and Γ 2 = κ 12 -κ 21 . This is the same form as the rate for the individual wells, Eq. 23. For an initial magnetization m 0 = n 1 (t = 0) -n 2 (t = 0), the magnetization as a function of time is a simple exponential, which tends to the value In the long-time limit, the steady state magnetization corresponding to the difference in the transition rates between the wells, if κ 2→1 > κ 1→2 , the transition rate into well 1 is greater than the rate out, and we have a positive magnetization, as expected. The non-Markovian extension of the master equation formalism is what is called a generalized master equation. Under this model, the set of i × j rates represented in the transition matrix in Eq. 21 are promoted to a set of i × j memory kernels for the transitions between the wells i, j, replacing the set of first-order differential equations with a set of integro-differential equations for the population of each well, We will consider the simplified case where Γ ij are the same constant transition rates considered in the Markovian master equations, now modified by a simple exponential kernel over the recent population of the well. The integro-differential expression for the magnetization then becomes (29) Where we note that for the exponential kernel, K(t) = e -t/Θ Θ , the uncorrelated form of the master equation is recovered in the limit of vanishing correlation time, lim Θ→0 K(t) = δ(t). The Laplace transform of this equation is where K(ω) = L(K(t)) is the Laplace transform of the memory kernel, we then have After inserting the expression for the Laplace transform of the kernel we find Finally we solve for the time-dependence of the magnetization by taking the inverse Laplace transform, (34) we note that this bears a strong resemblance to the Markovian expression, Eq. 25, with the exponential being replaced by the function φ(t), which is where β = √ 1 -4Γ 1 Θ. In the limit t → ∞, the value of the magnetization again tends to -Γ2 Γ1 . To see that this agrees with the uncorrelated solution for small correlation times, we may expand β in Θ for small Θ, hence β = 1 -2Γ 1 Θ, inserting into the magnetization it becomes As Θ → 0, β → 1, and only the second term in the expression for the magnetization remains, m(t) = e -Γ1t , so the small correlation time limit of the spin evolution agrees with the non Markovian master equation. Finally, we note that the solution for the magnetization breaks down into two regimes. First, we note that the expression for β depends only on the product of the correlation time, Θ, and the rate Γ 1 , and not on their specific individual values. We may then discuss the behavior of the model in terms of only the ratio parameter 1 , which gives the ratio of the well correlation time to the escape time. Rewriting the Eq.35 for the spin vs time, which may be simplified in terms of hyperbolic trigonometric functions, For smaller R < 1 4 , we have a real value of β = √ 1 -4R, and the time-dependence of the spin corresponds to Eq. 38. In Figure In the case that R > where b = √ 4R -1. We note that the solutions take the form of damped oscillations which tends toward the equilibrium value of the magnetization. However, these solutions are unphysical as the occupation in individual wells may become less than 0 for these values. This is not surprising, as for longer correlation times the generalized master equation will overestimate the population in each well and generate a time evolution which will continue to reduce the population of a well, even when that well is presently empty. It is also unclear what it would mean for the correlation time of the well population to exceed or be on the order of the overall escape time, as this would imply that the timescale over which the spin population is correlated exceeds the overall escape time for the system, which is itself determined by changes in the individual well populations. We may now directly compare the magnetic relaxation profiles calculated from explicit numerical integration of Eqs. 5, 6 at various barrier heights, damping and correlation times, to the biexponential decay predicted by the generalized master equation. In all of the present simulations we again use simulation parameters comparable to the Co nanoparticle of volume V = 8 × 10 -27 m 3 , anisotropy energy density K = 4.2 × 10 5 J/m 3 giving an anisotropy energy KV = 1.12 × 10 21 J, and a magnetic moment μ s = 1.12 × 10 -20 J/T , while no external applied field is assumed, H ext = 0. The spins are initialized in the equilibrium Boltzmann distribution in one of the minima of the potential energy, according to the distribution P (θ) ∝ sin(θ) exp(-k u /k B T sin 2 (θ)). To ensure that the noise is equilibrated with the spin at the correct temperature, the noise is initially set to η i,j,k = 0, and is then evolved in the presence of the equilibrium distribution in the well until they come into thermal equilibrium. The initial condition of the noise is important, as, for example, a choice of η(t = 0) = 0, will result in a field which quickly aligns with the spins in the potential minimum and give an unphysical increase in the well population from equilibrium at short times. The time-evolution of the magnetization, M (t) = S z (i) is then plotted, normalized by the initial remanent magnetization inside of the well, M r = M (0). In Figure Figure In the intermediate-to-high damping and high damping regimes, the behavior of the magnetization becomes much more interesting and departs from the LLG. In particular, for a relatively small barrier of σ = 2, α = 0.5 and a correlation time again of the order of the inverse Larmor frequency. In this case the ratio of the escape to the correlation time is τ c /τ = 9.4×10 -12 s/1.48×10 -10 s ≈ 0.06. The influence of the spin correlation is now visible in the relaxation profile of the escape, as shown in Figure Finally, for very long correlation times and high damping, the correlation time remains a sizable fraction of the escape time. However the biexponential behavior is no longer evident as shown in figure We have investigated thermal relaxation in magnetic nanoparticles introducing colored noise. Two models are considered. The first is an approach based on the numerical solution of the Landau-Lifshitz-Miyazaki-Seki (LLMS) model, which replaces the white noise approximation associated with the use of LLB-equation based models. Due to computational requirements the LLMS approach is useful for relatively short timescales, consequently a second approach is derived based on a generalized master equation approach involving the introduction of a memory kernel. We find that the importance of colored noise is determined by the ratio of the correlation time τ c to the characteristic system time τ s = (γH k ) -1 , which is essentially the Larmor precession time. Consequently correlated noise should become important for materials with large magnetic anisotropy such as SmCo 5 where the characteristic time approaches femtoseconds. Both models, the LLMS-based approach and the master equation, although derived for different timescales, exhibit an unusual bi-exponential decay of the magnetization, which represents an interesting signature of the presence of colored noise.