Motivated by the recent experimentally observed manifestations of the quantum critical point fluctuations in the thermodynamic properties of multiband superconductors, we derive a general expression for the Josephson current of various junctions between two superconductors in the phase of superconductivity coexistence with the spin-density-wave. We demonstrate that the critical current peaks at the quantum critical point that separates pure and mixed superconducting phases. We argue that our results are generic and, in particular, can be adopted to explain the recent observations of a nonmonotonic dependence of the supercurrent on the external pressure in the heavy fermion superconductor CeRhIn 5 , and on the chemical doping in iron-based superconductors such as Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 . Competition of electronic pairing correlations in multiband metals leads to a formation of different long-range orderings most prominently in the form of superconductivity, itinerant magnetism, and various possible forms of density-waves. In some instances these collective electronic phases may coexist over the extended parts of the phase diagram. In particular, despite being different at the microscopic level, cuprates, iron-pnictides, and heavy-fermion compounds exhibit qualitatively similar global features at the level of phase diagram with dome-shaped superconductivity as a function of an experimental control parameter such as chemical doping or pressure (see reviews A magnetic QCP without superconductivity has been extensively studied Since gapped SC state expels quasiparticle degrees of freedom and makes it difficult to probe quantum critical behavior of electronic response functions, the question arises of whether a native observable to superconducting state, such as supercurrent, can provide an effective diagnostic for competing orders under superconducting dome. In this paper we give an affirmative answer to that question. One of our main results is that maximal current of the Josephson weak link between two pnictide superconductors peaks at the QCP of optimaldoping and a similar peak occurs in the thermodynamic critical current of a bulk sample. It is important to mention here that the early works on Josephson currents in iron-pnictides focused primarily on the issues of phase-sensitive probe that could reveal the pairing symmetry of the underlying order parameter and elucidate the nature of the induced anomalous proximity effect To study the essential physics of the Josephsonic probe in the context of competing orders it will be sufficient to adopt the simplest minimal two-band model for the interplay between itinerant SDW and s ± -wave SC which is written in the basis of two flavor of fermions that correspond to electron and hole pockets of the two-band model. Three sets of Pauli matrices { ρi , σi , τi } are needed to describe Gorkov-Nambu, spin, and band sub-spaces. The expression for the disorder potential in this basis reads where summation goes over the impurities at random locations R l . The first term in this expression describes the scattering within each band, while the second term scatters quasiparticles between the two bands. The self-energy due to the scattering of the quasiparticles on disorder potential can be found by the standard methods of the many-body theory. At the level of the self-consistent Born approximation we find the following self-energy where are the intraband and interband scattering rates that are proportional to the impurity concentration n imp , the total quasiparticle density of states at the Fermi energy ν F , and strength of the disorder potential U. The integration in Eq. ( where we adopted the following notation σ+ = ( σ1 + i σ2 )/2. By combining Eqs. ( , which is the bare critical temperature of SC state in the absence of disorder and SDW. The T sc (M) line defines the part of superconducting dome that emerges from the preexisting SDW order. The T sdw (∆) line separates mixed and pure phases, and terminates at the QCP for an optimal doping level of Γ 0 /(2πT c0 ) ≈ 0.057. This model was successfully used in the past to describe the main qualitative features of the doping-dependence for the specific heat jump where Ĝs(a) = [ Ĝ(iω n , v x , x) ± Ĝ(iω n , -v x , x)]/2, Ĝs± (0) = [ Ĝs (+0) ± G s (-0)]/2, and R = 1 -D is the reflection coefficient from the interface. Provided that one knows the solution to Eq. ( Im Tr[τ 0 ρ3 σ0 Ĝa (iω n , v F sin φ, 0)] sin φ dφ 2π (8) In realistic contacts scattering is rather described by a continuous transmission distribution ρ(D) than by discrete transmission eigenvalues D. It is thus of practical importance to find an averaged Josephson current. There are several generic contact types that have been discussed in the literature in the context of mesoscopic transport. Their distributions are described by the function of the form The case with the power exponent α = 1/2 corresponds to two ballistic connectors with equal conductances in series The case with α = 1 corresponds to a diffusive connector It is important to realize that Eq. ( ) These functions from the left/right (l/r) side of the junction can be computed separately by employing the method of finding the auxiliary solutions to the quasiclassical equations (see Ref. In this formula ∆ j should be understood as absolute values of the gaps whereas the global phase difference χ across the junction was accounted explicitly. Equation where R N is the normal state resistance of the junction, χ is the global phase difference of superconducting order parameters across the junction, and the phase-dependent parameter is Integration over D can be completed in elementary functions for all the cases under consideration. At zero-temperature, the remaining Matsubara sum can be converted into an integral, 2πT ω n → dω, that also can be computed analytically in the case of a symmetric contact with identical order parameters on both sides of the junction. For this case specifically we can compactly write the current with m = M/∆, J 0 = c α ∆/eR N , the numerical coefficients c α for α = 1/2, 1, 3/2 are all of the order of unity, and f α are universal dimensionless functions whose explicit expressions read , , The corresponding current-phase relationships are plotted in Fig. Our model allows to study doping evolution of the current across the entire range of parameters that define the phase diagram. The results are shown on Fig. The general formula in Eq. ( We presented results for the critical Josephson current and current-phase relationship of pnictide superconductor junctions with the focus on the coexistence region of superconducting and spin-density wave order. We studied several types of junctions and used generic circuit-theory boundary conditions within the underlying semiclassical Eilenberger approach. Our main result concerns the doping dependence of the maximal attainable current that exhibits a peak that is correlated with the location of the quantum critical point hidden under the dome of superconductivity. This makes Josephsonic response to be an effective diagnostic of competing orders in addition to experimental techniques that exploit measurements of the magnetic penetration depth at low temperatures. A few comments are in order in relation to the results we presented in this paper. We performed calculations at the mean field level and the peak of the critical current has a cusp dependence at it maximum [see Fig. We also comment on the relevance of our theory to recent experiments and directions for further developments. The results presented in this work are perhaps the most relevant in the context of thermodynamic J c measurements in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 Thermodynamic critical current has been recently mea-sured in the bulk sample of CeRhIn 5 In the heavy-fermion case J c peaks at the critical pressure where antiferromagnetic line ends inside superconducting dome. In the cuprate case, J c peaks on a critical hole doping where the pseudogap boundary line projects to T = 0. Obviously these critical currents differ from the maxim current of the weak link in a Josephson junction, yet we argue that all of them will exhibit the same feature of having a peak at the optimal value of the control parameter that separates SC and the mixed phase with other competing order. This can be understood in our model as well in the context of FeSCs. Indeed, for simplicity of argument consider a part of the phase diagram in the proximity to T sc (M). Near that line SC order parameter is small, and Ginzburg-Landau expansion is justified. The difference to a conventional case is that quadratic and quartic coefficients of this expansion in powers of ∆ will vary strongly with M as SC emerges from preexisting magnetic state. Then one can consider a supercurrent carrying state and follow the textbook procedure As a concluding remark we wish to mention that it is of conceptual theoretical interest to study hybrid circuits of FeSCs with inhomogeneous doping were an optimally doped superconducting film of iron-pnictide is proximitized on the surface of a parent material that is in a magnetic SDW phase. In this multilayered structure a proximity induced superconductivity may develop in nonsuperconducting part of the device. Conversely, an inverse proximity effect is possible where SDW order may penetrate inside the superconducting part of the device. The system is rather unique, as the use of the same parent compound with different doping should form nearly perfect interface between superconducting and magnetic phases. The extended Eilenberger formalism developed in this paper is exactly tailored to tackle such problems and should generate further developments and applications.