Quantum spin-Hall insulators (QSHIs), i.e., two-dimensional topological insulators (TIs) with a symmetry-protected band inversion, have attracted considerable scientific interest in recent years. In this work, we have computed the topological Z 2 invariant for 220 functionalized honeycomb lattices that are isoelectronic to functionalized graphene. Besides confirming the TI character of well-known materials such as functionalized stanene, our study identifies 45 yet unreported QSHIs. We applied a compressed-sensing approach to identify a physically meaningful descriptor for the Z 2 invariant that only depends on the properties of the material's constituent atoms. This enables us to draw a "map of materials", in which metals, trivial insulators, and QSHI form distinct regions. This analysis yields fundamental insights in the mechanisms driving topological transitions. The transferability of the identified model is explicitly demonstrated for an additional set of honeycomb lattices with different functionalizations that are not part of the original set of 220 graphene-type materials used to identify the descriptor. In this class, we predict 74 more novel QSHIs that have not been reported in literature yet. In the last decade, the experimental realization of graphene and of topological insulators has fueled interest in the fundamental physics and possible applications that are hosted in linear band crossings. In fact, the crossing of energy bands in condensed matter has been investigated since the very early applications of formulation of quantum mechanics to periodic solids of the Berry connection A A A(k k k) and Berry curvature F F F(k k k) So far, the computational search for new QSHIs has been a numerically costly trial-and-error process that required to compute the Z 2 invariant for each individual compound In this work, we focus on functionalized 2D honeycomb-lattice materials In a first step, we investigate the topological character of 220 functionalized 2D honeycomb-lattice materials ABX 2 (see Fig. identify 35 QSHIs (34% of all QSHIs), for which the TI character depends on the actual functionalization (mostly iodides). These functionalization-dependent (FD) QSHIs with topological band gaps between 5 meV and 1 eV include 30 compounds that have not yet been reported in literature, e.g., AlNBr 2 and GaAsI 2 . Quite surprisingly, these TIs consist of relatively light elements with low SOC in the honeycomb lattice; they are however functionalized with relatively heavy atoms with strong SOC, which further substantiates that the topological transition is driven by the functionalization. To identify descriptors that can a priori classify (i.e, the descriptor depends only on properties of the -isolated -atomic species constituting the material) functionalized 2D honeycomb-lattice materials in metals, trivial insulators, and QSHIs, we employed the SISSO (sure independence screening and sparsifying operator) approach recently developed by Ouyang et al. First, a pool of about 10 7 different potential descriptors D n is constructed by analytically combining the properties of the free atoms A, B and X computed with SOC (namely, the eigenvalues of the highest-occupied and lowest-unoccupied Kohn-Sham states ho and lu , the atomic number Z, the electron affinity EA, the ionization potential IP, and the size r s , r p , and r d of the s, p, and d orbitals, i.e., the radii where the radial probability density of the valence s, p, and d orbitals are maximal. See Supp. Mat. for a full list including the values.). Second, this compressed-sensing-based technique identifies which low-dimensional combination of these descriptors represents the classification best, i.e., minimizes the overlap (or maximizes the separation) For the remaining 20% of compounds, i.e., the so called "test" set used to validate the model, we find that all materials with a very well defined structural and topological character are correctly classified. Only ZnOCl 2 and AlNBr 2 , which are both FD-QSHIs with minute band gaps (≤ 15 meV after SOC) at the verge of a topological transition to a trivial insulator or metal, respectively, are not correctly classified. This shows that the found descriptor, which exhibits a predictive ability greater than 95%, is robust and transferable, i.e., not limited to the original training set used to identify D 1 and D 2 As shown in Fig. Trivial insulators (white) occur for values of D 2 larger than the line connecting β 1 and β 2 , while for materials lying below that line we find metals (cyan) in the region D 1 < α 2 and FD-QSHIs (red) for α 2 < D 1 < α 1 . Note that D 1 and D 2 do not only clearly discriminate between metals, insulators, and QSHIs, but also separate FI-QSHIs from FD-QSHIs. The descriptor of components D 1 and D 2 does not only numerically and graphically sort the functionalized graphene-like materials, but also captures which atomic properties are relevant "actuators" for the topological phase transition. To understand this, it is necessary to clarify the character of the electronic states involved in the band inversion at Γ, as schematically sketched in Fig. How the individual actuators present in the descriptor (D 1 , D 2 ) influence the topological transition, can be qualitatively understood from their influence on ∆ sp . As shown in Fig. For light, strongly bound AB compounds such as BN and C 2 (small values of Z A + Z B in D 1 and r s,A + r p,B in D 2 ), only strongly electronegative atoms X (large values of EA X IP X ) form a chemical bonding with AB, thus realizing a trivial insulators. Less electronegative functionalizations only physisorb via van-der-Waals interactions with AB, thus resulting in a metallic compound even after SOC. In this case, we also observe a structural transition from the so called low-buckled (LB) to the high-buckled structure To showcase that the gained insights and identified descriptors are transferable, we have computed D 1 and D 2 for 140 less common honeycomb ABX 2 compounds (AB from groups V-V and IV-VI functionalized with a group VI element for X). For these compounds, the identified descriptor predicts 20 FI-QSHIs, 54 FD-QSHIs, 42 trivial insulators and 24 metals, as shown in Fig. 