We have studied the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR), the magnetoresistance within the plane transverse to the current flow, of Pt/Co bilayers. We find that the SMR increases with increasing Co thickness: the effective spin Hall angle for bilayers with thick Co exceeds the reported values of Pt when a conventional drift-diffusion model is used. An extended model including spin transport within the Co layer cannot account for the large SMR. To identify its origin, contributions from other sources are studied. For most bilayers, the SMR increases with decreasing temperature and increasing magnetic field, indicating that magnon-related effects in the Co layer play little role. Without the Pt layer, we do not observe the large SMR found for the Pt/Co bilayers with thick Co. Implementing the effect of the so-called interface magnetoresistance and the textured induced anisotropic scattering cannot account for the Co thickness dependent SMR. Since the large SMR is present for W/Co but its magnitude reduces in W/CoFeB, we infer its origin is associated with a particular property of Co. The spin Hall effect The spin current generated by the spin Hall effect can in turn influence the charge current The magnetoresistance (MR) of heterostructures that include Pt/Co bilayer has been under focus recently. A MR that scales with the inverse of the Co layer thickness has been reported in Pt/Co/Pt trilayers Here we report on a systematic study of the MR in Pt/Co bilayers. We show that an anomalously large SMR emerges in Pt/Co bilayers: the SMR increases with increasing Co thickness and the extracted effective spin Hall angle for such structures exceeds the expected value of Pt. An extended drift diffusion model that includes spin current generation and diffusion in the Co layer cannot account for the anomalous SMR. The SMR increases with decreasing temperature and increasing magnetic field for thick Co bilayers, suggesting that magnon-related effects in the Co layer has little influence on the enhancement of the SMR. The large SMR diminishes for films without the Pt layer; it is also found for W/Co but the effect is reduced for W/CoFeB. We thus infer that there is a process in Co that causes the SMR to increase with increasing Co thickness. Samples are grown on silicon substrates coated with 100 nm thick oxide using RF magnetron sputtering. The film structure is sub.|0.5 Ta|d N Pt|t F Co|2 MgO|1 Ta (units of the thickness is nm). The inset of Fig. The MR of the Pt/Co bilayers are shown in Fig. For a given Co thickness, the characteristics of the Pt thickness dependence of ΔR 456 is similar to what has been reported previously in similar systems where l N is the spin diffusion length of the HM layer. l N and q SH are the fitting parameters and the resulting fitted curves are shown in Fig. 3(a). The agreement between the experimental results and Eq. ( In Fig. The estimated q SH does not seem to saturate with Co thickness of ~7 nm and the maximum value obtained at t Co ~7 nm exceeds the effective spin Hall angle of Pt reported thus far Since the SMR increases with increasing Co thickness, one may consider spin current generation within the Co layer via excitations of magnons. Magnon is the main carrier of spin current in ferromagnetic insulators (FI) and causes the spin Seebeck effect in HM/FI structures 34 . Any magnon related effect, however, will be suppressed by application of large magnetic field or by lowering the measurement temperature where . G MIX is the spin mixing conductance of the HM/FM interface, q F , q AH , l F and P are the spin Hall angle, anomalous Hall angle, spin diffusion length and spin polarization of the FM layer. The first and second terms of the right-hand side of Eq. ( Representative values of the calculated R IJK are shown in the supplementary material (Fig. In the calculations, the spin Hall angle of Pt is set to one of the largest values reported thus far (θ >? ~0.2) 30 , the anomalous Hall angle is obtained from the measurements (the largest value of the Pt/Co bilayers is ~0.03, see Fig. We have also studied the MR within the x-z plane which provides information on the so-called anisotropic interface magnetoresistance We fit the g dependence of R XX using a sinusoidal function R "" = R $ 1 - ΔR j56 is plotted as a function of Co thickness (t Co ) in Fig. Although the microscopic mechanism is not clear, one may assume (see Supplementary material for the derivation). Here we have also subtracted ΔR 456 for films with d Pt =0, which is denoted as ∆R 456 lm . ∆R 456 lm is not related to SMR and is likely associated with the textured induced anisotropic scattering (also referred to as the geometrical size effect 27 ). In Fig. Furthermore, ΔR 456 of Ta/Co bilayers (i.e. the case when d Pt =0) shows a much reduced ΔR 456 compared to that of W/Co bilayers. Since Ta and W are both amorphous-like 9 , the texture of the Co layer is expected to be similar for the two bilayers. We thus infer that the texture of the Co film has little to do with the large ΔR 456 . It is possible that the spin orbit coupling at the interface may be different for the three HM layers (Pt, W and Ta), as manifested by the difference in the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction In summary, we have studied the Pt and Co thickness dependence of spin Hall magnetoresistance), the magnetoresistance within the plane transverse to the current flow, in Pt/Co bilayers. We find SMR that increases with increasing Co thickness, which cannot be fully accounted for even if the anomalous Hall and spin Hall effects of the Co layer are considered. Other effects that may contribute to the MR are evaluated to assess their influence on the SMR. We find that the so-called anisotropic interface magnetoresistance and the magnetoresistance due to texture induced anisotropic scattering cannot describe the large SMR observed here. Further investigation is required to clarify the origin of the SMR in HM/Co bilayers. The following topics are included in the supplementary material: description on how the thickness dependent resistivity is obtained, additional experimental results on the anomalous Hall resistance of Pt/Co bilayers and SMR of W/Co and W/CoFeB bilayers, model calculations of the SMR using the drift-diffusion model, and description of how IMR is extracted. x-z (%) Co thickness (nm) Pt (nm) R +,-calculated using Eq. ( 