The tunability of topological surface states and controllable opening of the Dirac gap are of great importance to the application of topological materials. In topological crystalline insulators (TCIs), crystal symmetry and topology of electronic bands intertwine to create topological surface states and thus the Dirac gap can be modulated by symmetry breaking structural changes of lattice. By transport measurement on heterostructures composed of p-type topological crystalline insulator SnTe and n-type conventional semiconductor PbTe, here we show a giant linear magnetoresistance (up to 2150% under 14 T at 2 K) induced by the Dirac Fermions at the PbTe/SnTe interface. In contrast, PbTe/SnTe samples grown at elevated temperature exhibit a cubic-to-rhombohedral structural phase transition of SnTe lattice below 100 K and weak antilocalization effect. Such distinctive magneto-resistance behavior is attributed to the broken mirror symmetry and gapping of topological surface states. Our work provides a promising application for future magneto-electronics and spintronics based on TCI heterostructures. Topological crystalline insulators (TCIs) are a new topological phase of matter whose topological invariant and conducting boundary states originate from the crystal lattice symmetry Compared with TIs, the rich interplay between topology, crystal symmetry and electronic structure in TCIs The narrow gap semiconductor SnTe with rock salt structure was the first theoretically predicted TCI and its TSS was expected to exist on highly symmetrical crystal surfaces such as {001}, {110} and {111} In doped SnTe nanoplates Here, we presented a systematic investigation on the magnetotransport behavior of the PbTe/SnTe heterostructures grown on SrTiO3(111) (STO) and demonstrated a striking change of magnetoresistance (MR) due to the structural change in SnTe lattice. For SnTe crystal, it is well known that there is a transition from cubic to rhombohedral lattice structure around 100 K and this transition shifts to lower temperatures at higher hole carrier densities The epitaxial PbTe/SnTe heterostructures with bottom PbTe layer and top SnTe layer (structural schematic shown in Fig. Nonsaturating LMR observed in various novel material systems has attracted long lasting research interest. Early experiments on metals with open Fermi surface (e.g. Bi In PbTe/SnTe samples with lower hole density and interface diffusion, two effects that critically affect the electronic properties of the sample are expected. First, it has been established that a cubic-to-rhombohedral structure phase transition occurs in SnTe with low hole density below 100 K, and the transition temperature decreases with increasing hole density. Eventually, the transition temperature drops to zero at hole density > ~10 21 /cm 3 In conclusion, we have systematically investigated the magneto-transport properties of PbTe/SnTe heterostructures grown at different substrate temperatures that affect the interface quality. We find that PbTe/SnTe heterostructures with sharp interface and high hole densities display p-to-n transition and a giant LMR at low temperatures related to the gapless TSS with high mobility at the interface between TCI SnTe and band insulator PbTe. On the other hand, in PbTe/SnTe structures with significant interface diffusion and low hole densities, low mobility p-type conduction is observed throughout the whole temperature range and only weak MR is exhibited at low temperatures. The presence of cubic-to-rhombohedral structure phase transition in the latter category of PbTe/SnTe structures strongly suggest the important role of broken lattice mirror symmetry in the disappearance of giant LMR and high mobility TSSs transport in these samples. Here σ xx indicates the longitude component of conductivity and the superscript 2D indicates that the equation is valid for a two-dimensional conducting sheet. α represents a coefficient related to the number of coherent transport channels. e is the electronic charge.  is Planck's constant divided by 2π. B is the magnetic field perpendicular to the 2D plane. l Φ is the phase coherent length. As shown in Fig. t