Ab initio calculations have been successfully used for evaluating lattice dynamical properties of solids within the (quasi-)harmonic approximation (i.e., assuming non-interacting phonons with infinite lifetimes), but it remains difficult to treat anharmonicity in all but the simplest compounds. We detail a systematic information theory based approach to deriving ab initio anharmonic force constants: compressive sensing lattice dynamics (CSLD). The non-negligible terms that are necessary to reproduce the first-principles calculated interatomic forces are automatically selected by minimizing the 1 norm (sum of absolute values) of the scaled force constants. By using efficient sampling of the configuration space using a modest number of atomic configurations with quasi-random displacements, CSLD is well suited for deriving accurate anharmonic potentials for complex multicomponent compounds with large unit cells. We demonstrate the power and generality of CSLD by calculating the phonon lifetimes and thermal transport properties of Type-I Si clathrates. The dynamics of atomic vibrations plays a central role in the structural, thermodynamic, and transport properties of crystalline solids at finite temperature. The quantum theory of lattice dynamics (LD) can be traced back to the pioneering Einstein 1 and Debye models Faced with the challenge of direct computation of the higher-order anharmonic terms, various alternatives to circumventing the Taylor expansion of the PES have been developed. The self-consistent phonon (SCPH) approximation The basic theory of lattice dynamics is well known, and comprehensive treatment can be found in classical textbooks, e.g., in Ref. 58. Here we outline the theory in an abstract, cluster-based form that is completely general in terms of expansion orders and crystal lattice symmetry, easy to keep track of, systematically improvable, and well suited for a numeric approach. This helps us manage the staggering numerical complexity that is inevitable if one desires to account for high-order anharmonicity. More importantly, the formulation makes it possible to extend the LD model to encompass additional degrees of freedom, such as alloying, magnetism, and charge disorder. We start by Taylor-expanding the Born-Oppenheimer potential energy E of a crystalline solid in atomic displacements: where E 0 is the total energy of a reference structure with zero displacements, a ≡ {a, i} is a composite index for atom (lattice site) a and Cartesian direction i (= 1-3), u a = r a,i -r 0 a,i is the displacement of the atomic position r a relative to the reference position r 0 a . The secondorder expansion coefficients Φ ab ≡ Φ ij (ab) = ∂ 2 E/∂u a ∂u b determine the phonon dispersion in the harmonic approximation, and Φ abc ≡ Φ ijk (abc) = ∂ 3 E/∂u a ∂u b ∂u c is the third-order anharmonic force constant tensor (FCT). In general, an order-n FCT is defined as ( The linear term Φ a is absent when the reference structure represents mechanical equilibrium. The Einstein summation convention over repeated indices is implied. Systematic calculation or fitting of the higher-order anharmonic terms is challenging due to a combinatorial explosion in the number of tensors Φ(a 1 • • • a n ) with increasing order n and maximum distance between the sites {a 1 , . . . , a n }, as well as the number of elements 3 n in an order-n tensor. To reduce the complexity and truncate Eq. ( where α is a cluster comprised of n lattice sites {a 1 . . . a n }, I ≡ {i 1 . . . i n } are the corresponding Cartesian indices, and the summation over repeated indices is implied. The FCT Φ I (α) and displacement polynomial u α I ≡ k u a k i k are now referenced in this compact notation. To avoid double counting, here the order in which to reference α has to be unambiguous, e.g. pre-determined by natural ordering of indices without loss of generality. We call α a proper cluster if it contains no duplicate sites (as used in the cluster expansion model As the Taylor expansion coefficients of the crystal potential energy, force constants have to satisfy some physical constraints, namely derivative commutativity, space group symme-try, and translational and rotational invariance. According to Schwarz's theorem, the FCTs as partial derivatives defined by Eq. ( For instance, it is well known that an improper pair FCT satisfies Φ xy (a, a) = Φ yx (a, a), i.e., it is a symmetric matrix. This has significant impact on the functional form of the long-range electrostatic contributions to the force constants, as discussed in Ref. 57. In a crystalline solid, the potential energy is invariant under the operations of the crystal space group S. As a consequence, FCTs of cluster α and its mapping ŝα under a symmetry operator ŝ are linearly related by a 3 n × 3 n matrix Γ: To see this, first consider a proper cluster with a certain pre-determined ordering, α = {a 1 . . . a n }. In Cartesian coordinates, operation ŝ consists of an orthogonal transformation by a 3 × 3 matrix γ, followed by a translation τ : It maps α one-to-one into {ŝa 1 . . . ŝa n }, which is in general not ordered, but rather a permutation of the ordered α ≡ ŝα = {a 1 , . . . , a n }, which can be referenced from the former by a j = ŝa π(j) , where π is an indexing function. For clarity, here we simplify the labels: u j ≡ u a j . After ŝ, the displacement at the site j of α is The potential energy of the original cluster is After transformation it becomes where we changed summation indices. Comparing the above expressions, the following must hold: or Since the matrix γ of symmetry operation ŝ is orthogonal, Γ is therefore also orthogonal. Additionally, if cluster α is improper, π is not unique but rather allows arbitrary permutations of the indices belonging to any repeated site. Taking into account the commutativity relation in Eq. (4), the above derivation obviously holds for improper clusters. In particular, the FCTs remain unchanged under translations by integer combinations of lattice vectors b k (γ = 1, Γ = 1): We divide the set of all clusters of lattice sites into orbits under the space group S. The orbit of cluster α is defined as the set of clusters into which α can be transformed by S: Given the linear relationship in Eq. ( where the first summation is over all representative α ∈ A/S and the second one over clusters in the orbit Sα. Given a representative cluster α, the FCT may be further simplified. We define the isotropy group S α as the subset of S that maps α to itself: For instance, S α of an improper site cluster α = {a, . . . , a} is identical to the point group of site a. According to Eq. ( As a simple example, consider pair interactions in a periodic crystal with one lattice site per unit cell. Each site is at the center of inversion, and hence each pair is transformed onto itself upon inversion followed by a translation with τ = -R, where R is the lattice vector pointing from the origin to the second vertex of the pair. Since such an operation permutes the vertices of the pair, application of Eq. ( This also holds in multicomponent crystals for pair interactions between equivalent lattice sites which are at the center of inversion and separated by a lattice vector. Consider as another example the FCT Φ(a, . . . , a) in diamond cubic silicon with point group 43m and rock-salt NaCl with point group m 3m. The non-zero elements are shown in Table According to the Noether's theorem, translational invariance of the Hamiltonian accounts for the conservation of linear momentum. Irrespective of the lattice type, the invariance of the total energy upon an arbitrary, uniform translation of the crystal leads to the acoustic sum rule (ASR) for the pair force constants: which states that the FCT of the improper pair cluster on lattice site a can be obtained by summing up the FCTs of all proper pairs {a, b}. The ASR can be generalized to any order as: for arbitrary lattice sites b, c, • • • and cartesian indices I. Similar to Eq. ( where any cluster {a, b • • • } is identified as related to a representative cluster α ∈ A/S by the operator ŝ. This constitutes yet another set of linear symmetry constraints on the FCTs. In analogy to the above discussion, conservation of the angular momentum requires rotational invariance of the total Hamiltonian, which can also be expressed as linear constraints on the FCTs. However, rotational invariance involves force constants of different order in the same equation and is difficult to implement numerically. In this work, we do not impose rotational invariance constraints explicitly, relying instead on the fact that the DFT calculations themselves are rotationally invariant and should result in a Taylor expansion that obeys the rotational symmetry to a good accuracy. As discussed previously, invariance with respect to translation by a lattice vector in Eq. ( where the matrix B contains the above mentioned (possibly redundant) constraints. For example, Eq. ( Note that Eqs. ( The basis vectors of the null-space of matrix B in Eq. ( where C is a N Φ ×N φ matrix. More details on this procedure can be found in Appendix B. It allows us to impose the physical constraints exactly, without having to check the numerical accuracy of, e.g., the ASR. As an example, consider a minimal model of anharmonic lattice dynamics for silicon. It consists of nearest neighbor interactions with two symmetrically distinct pairs {aa} and {ab} and two anharmonic triplets {aaa} and {aab}, where the lattice sites are a = (000) and There are only two independent harmonic parameters and three anharmonic ones: where ijk is the Levi-Civita function and φ k 's are the final independent parameters we seek. Obviously Φ(aa) and Φ(aaa) are consistent with Table In order to calculate the FCTs, we take advantage of the force-displacement relationship. The force F a on lattice site a in direction i can be obtained from taking the derivative of Eq. ( The forces on the left hand side can be obtained from first-principles calculations according to the Hellmann-Feynman theorem using any general-purpose DFT code for a set of atomic configurations in a supercell, similar to the direct method for harmonic force constants. The so-called sensing (or correlation) matrix A of dimension N F × N Φ is calculated from atomic displacements according to Considering the independent parameters from Eq. ( and the sensing matrix A for independent variables φ is N F × N φ dimensional. Once the desired φ is obtained, any FCT can be found using Eqs. ( Alternatively, the linear equation to fit the total energy is, according to Eq. ( This was done for CSLD phonon calculations in δ-Pu 42 when accurate forces were not available. The anharmonic force constants can be directly used to calculate phonon lifetimes and thermal properties (e.g., lattice thermal conductivity) in weakly anharmonic materials using the perturbation theory (PT) and the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE), as discussed in Sec. II F below. In cases of strong anharmonicity when the accuracy of PT+BTE starts to break down, one may wish to use multi-scale modeling techniques such as classical Monte Carlo (MC) or molecular dynamics (MD). In these cases, using a simple Taylor expansion of the PES as the Hamiltonian for the MC and MD simulations may lead to numerical problems with lattice stability. In this section, we discuss the cause of these stability issues and outline a practical solution. First, the Taylor expansion is accurate only within a limited range of displacements, while in highly anharmonic crystals atoms commonly experience very large (a few 10% of the NN distance) deviations from the equilibrium positions. This is seen by considering the onedimensional Taylor expansion for the Morse potential that is sometimes used to model the interatomic interaction in a diatomic molecule; the results are shown in Fig. When the displacement is large enough with energy ∆E, the expansion may completely break down, with probability proportional to e -∆E/k B T . This probability increases quickly at high temperature, making a conventional Taylor expansion intrinsically problematic for multi-scale modeling. Second, to improve the accuracy and applicable displacement range by increasing the maximum expansion order n max is computationally demanding. In spite of our numerically and algorithmically optimized implementation, we currently find it difficult to go beyond the 6th order. The next even order FCT contains 3 8 = 6561 elements, and the transformation matrix Γ is 3 8 × 3 8 -dimensional, taking more than 300 Megabytes of memory as a doubleprecision matrix (though a sparse representation would cost substantially less). The sensing matrix A, which is generally dense, can leave an even larger memory footprint. Since the number of clusters also explodes quickly with order n, one rapidly runs out of computer memory. In this work, we have chosen to truncate all Taylor expansions at n max = 6 to keep the computations manageable, even though our formalism and implementation allow for higher orders. This choice is found to be more than sufficient for the weakly anharmonic systems like Si and NaCl at temperatures up to 600 K. In strongly anharmonic materials such as the thermoelectric compound Cu 12 Sb 4 S 13 (tetrahedrite), where E LD is the normal Taylor expansion of Eq. ( where p l and l are the l-th single-variable basis function and the corresponding coefficient, respectively, and r 0 is the equilibrium bond length. In this work Legendre polynomials are used as basis functions. The correlation matrix A FF between force components and coefficients { } can be written for each training structure and appended to the LD correlation matrix in Eq. ( The main advantage of this optional step is that we gain some knowledge of high-order anharmonicity by adding only a few coefficients l rather than 3 n FCT elements. In MC or MD simulations, the pair potential is continuously extrapolated outside a reasonable range with a functional form E ab (r) ∼ 1/r m where m = 1 for bond stretching and m = 6 for compression: , where for continuity e <(>) = l p l (∓1) -x <(>) /(r 0 ∓ r c ) m , and There appears to be a drawback with this hybrid LD-FF approach: since the Taylor expansion is based on a complete basis set, inclusion of another set of basis functions might be counter-productive because the obtained φ and coefficients are no longer uniquely determined. Indeed, the combined series of Eq. ( show that this combined LD-FF expansion can sustain accurate and robust MD simulation of Cu 12 Sb 4 S 13 for very long durations. A classical MD program (LMD) with Eq. ( In HNEMD, the equations of motion are modified so that the force on lattice site a is given by where F a is the unmodified force calculated from Eq. ( The external field F e has the effect of driving higher energy (hotter) particles with the field and lower energy (colder) particles against the field, while a Gaussian thermostat is used to remove the heat generated by F e . This results in a non-zero average heat flux given by As F e → 0, one recovers the linear response limit described by the Green-Kubo formula. The process then involves a series of simulations at varying external fields F e and constant T , with a simple linear extrapolation to zero field resulting in the true κ L . In contrast to the classical molecular dynamics in real space, perturbation theory for phonon-phonon interactions is formulated in reciprocal (momentum) space. where N is the number of included phonon modes, Ω is the volume of the primitive cell, f 0 λ is the Bose-Einstein distribution function, and ω λ , v i λ and τ λ are the frequency, group velocity and relaxation time of the phonon mode λ. The relaxation times are the reciprocals of the total scattering rates, which are calculated via the Fermi's golden rule. Considering only the intrinsic three-phonon scattering processes (λ ± λ → λ ), the single mode relaxation time can be expressed as 12,70,71 where Γ + λλ λ and Γ - λλ λ are the scattering rates from the absorption (+) and emission (-) processes, which can be evaluated from the harmonic phonon dispersion and 3rd-order FTCs as follows: 12,70,71 where λ a,i is the i-th component of the polarization vector of lattice site a, and q represents the phonon wave vector of mode λ. Refined iterative scheme can be used to obtain more accurate relaxation times by taking into account the nonequilibrium states of interacting phonons, where ∆ λ is the deviation from the single mode relaxation approximation: Here, N is the number of sampling points and ξ λλ ≡ ω λ v z λ /ω λ v z λ . An improved version of the above formulation has been developed recently in Refs. 74 and 75 by incorporating four-phonon scattering processes. In this section we focus on the numerical solution of the linear problem F = Aφ of Eq. (19). A is an N F × N φ matrix, where N F is the number of calculated force components, and N φ is the total number of unknown model parameters. In practice, the latter may far exceed N F , making Eq. ( Unfortunately, this is a computationally intractable combinatorial problem. We have recently shown that a similar problem in alloy theory, the cluster expansion (CE) method for configurational energetics, 60 can be solved efficiently and accurately using compressive sensing. while requiring a certain level of accuracy for reproducing the data. The 1 norm serves as a computationally feasible continuous approximation to the discrete 0 norm and results in a tractable convex optimization problem with a guarantee of finding the global minimum. Mathematically, the solution is found as where the second term is the usual sum-of-squares 2 norm of the fitting error for the training data (in this case, DFT forces). The 1 term drives the model towards solutions with a small number of nonzero FCT elements, and the parameter μ is used to adjust the relative weights of the 1 and 2 terms. Higher values of μ will produce a least-squares like fitting at the expense of denser FCTs that are prone to over-fitting, while small μ will produce very sparse under-fitted FCTs, simultaneously degrading the quality of the fit. The optimal value of μ that produces a model with the highest predictive accuracy lies between the aforementioned extremes and can be determined by monitoring the predictive error for a leave-out subset of the training data which is not used in Eq. ( The main advantages of CLSD over other methods for model building are that it does not require prior physical intuition to pick out potentially relevant FCTs and the fitting procedure is stable with respect to both random and systematic noise. An order-n FCT is then scaled by Φ → Φu n-1 0 in Eq. (19). Development of solvers for sparse signal recovery remains an active area of research Right preconditioner: If one computes s largest eigenvectors of A T A, an efficient preconditioner can be constructed using where D is an s×s diagonal matrix of eigenvalues, V is an s×N φ matrix of the corresponding eigenvectors, and N is an (N φ -s) × N φ matrix containing the vector space complement of V. In our experience, appreciable speed-up can be achieved even if s is a fraction of the number of equations N F (typically, 1/4) due to rescaling of the few largest eigenvalues of A T A. After variable substitution φ = C p φ , the problem to be solved becomes F = AC p φ . The main advantage of the right preconditioner is that the objective function remains the original sum-of-squares of residuals, and the expense of the preconditioning step versus the split Bregman iteration can be controlled by selecting s, the number of eigenvalues to be computed to construct the preconditioner. A key ingredient of CSLD is the choice of atomic configurations for the training and prediction sets. One of the most profound results of CS is that a near-optimal signal recovery can be realized by using sensing matrices A with random entries that are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). It is intuitively appealing to use snapshots from ab initio MD (AIMD) trajectories since they represent low-energy configurations. However, physically accessible low-energy configurations under thermodynamic distributions give rise to strong cross-correlations between the columns of A (i.e., high mutual coherence of the sensing matrix For the relatively simple task of fitting harmonic force constants for phonon spectra, we found it sufficient to independently displace all atoms in the training supercell structure in random directions by 0.01 Å away from their equilibrium positions. In practical CSLD model building, one may wish to adopt a divide-and-conquer strategy to fit different groups of parameters in steps. There are two reasons for this. First, as a consequence of the non-i.i.d. character of the sensing matrix A, the numerical stability of fitting is somewhat reduced. Second, the number of independent parameters N φ can easily exceed 10 4 in complex structures with high-order anharmonicity, making direct fitting in one shot very inefficient. If N φ is large ( > ∼ 3000), one may therefore divide φ into subsets ψ 1 , ψ 2 , . . . and the sensing matrix into corresponding sub-matrices A = (A 1 , A 2 , . . . ), e.g. pairwise potential parameters , harmonic parameters φ Training structures can be adapted for each set of parameters: small displacements for the harmonic parameters φ All DFT calculations were performed using the Perdew-Becke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional, A. Tests on Si, NaCl, Al, Cu 12 Sb 4 S 13 We show in Fig. ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ △ α=aaa abc (filled triangles). This feature is also observed in the harmonic force constants and can be attributed to the generalized ASR in Eq. ( yielded the 4-6th order residual FCTs. The final LD+FF fitting quality and lattice thermal conductivity results were previously reported - NaCl is an interesting case demonstrating the importance of fourth-and higher-order anharmonic interactions for accurate calculations of lattice thermal conductivity. We have conducted a comparative study of its lattice thermal conductivity using PT+BTE and the MD based Green-Kubo linear response formula. Classical MD simulations, based on a fourth-order CSLD fitting, were performed for temperatures between 200 and 600 K, with system sizes ranging from 512 to 4096 atoms. No discernible size-dependence was found in the range of supercells tested. The simulation time varied from 100 ps at 600 K to 1 ns at 200 K, and a timestep of 1 fs was used throughout. At each temperature, a minimum of 10 independent simulations were performed to obtain averages. Fig. Meanwhile, the Green-Kubo formula gives significantly reduced values of κ L , which achieve much better agreement with experiments above the Debye temperature (≈ 300 K for NaCl). This improvement strongly points to the importance of higher-order anharmonicity in NaCl (namely, of fourth-order FCTs). The tendency of the Green-Kubo formula to underestimate κ L at low temperatures (200 K and below) may be attributed to the lack of quantum correction in classical MD, as detailed in Ref. 91, although this is also the temperature region where the agreement between the experimental data and PT+BTE is expected to improve. To put our Green-Kubo MD results in a broader perspective, we note that recent theoretical efforts have been devoted to including fourth-order anharmonic contributions to the scattering rates in PT+BTE Type-I Si clathrate has been investigated as a potential thermoelectric due to its ability to incorporate guest atoms, which significantly lower κ L and donate electrons to the conduction band. As expected, the calculated FCTs for both the second and third order clusters are found to be dominated by short-range (up to the first-coordination shell) interactions, as can be seen from Fig. The third-order on-site FCT Φ aaa may serve as a measure of the strength of anharmonic interactions according to the generalized ASR in Eq. ( The calculated phonon dispersion curves and atom-projected phonon densities-of-states (DOS) are shown in Fig. We find that Ba atoms in Ba 8 Si 46 display similar characteristics in phonon DOS as identified for Na atoms. The slight difference lies in the fact that the Ba contribution to the phonon DOS seems to have a relatively extended distribution with only one broadened frequency peak resembling a single-frequency Einstein model at energy E 1 ≈ 6-8 meV, corresponding to the vibrations of Ba atoms in T cages. This raises the question whether or not there is essential difference in localization levels between Na and Ba atoms, which motivates us to explicitly calculate the atomic partition ratio using the definition in Ref. 107. As shown in Fig. The computed lattice thermal conductivities are shown in Fig. V. CONCLUSION We have described an anharmonic lattice dynamics model in a cluster-based form that is convenient for keeping track of high order force constants and a compressive sensing framework tailored towards force constant extraction from first-principles calculations. CSLD is general, conceptually straight-forward and computationally much more efficient than other currently existing methods for treating anharmonicity. For instance, CSLD can easily include 4th-to 6th-order anharmonic terms, which are currently inaccessible to DFPT and "2n+1" methods. Such terms are particularly important for compounds with double-well type potentials for harmonically unstable modes, such as thermoelectric Cu 12 Sb 4 S 13 and ferroelectric perovskites (e.g., BaTiO 3 ), and we expect that CSLD will contribute to advancing our theoretical understanding of these fascinating systems. The accuracy of the lattice dynamics model can be improved systematically by simply increasing the size of the training set, even though some inherent difficulties associated with the Taylor expansion basis set exist, including the growing numeric instability and error propagation associated with highorder polynomials, and the difficulty of treating the highly anharmonic potential within the first-coordination shell. The introduction of pairwise potentials for covalently bonded atoms into the CSLD formalism has shown to be effective in combating some of these difficulties. The software package CSLD is now freely available at https://github.com/LLNL/csld. Applications of CSLD for phonon calculations will be presented in Part II of the series.