We demonstrate a way to polarize and detect nuclear spin in a gate-defined quantum point contact operating at high Landau levels. Resistively-detected Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (RDNMR) can be achieved up to the 5th Landau level and at a magnetic field lower than 1 T. We are able to retain the RDNMR signals in a condition where the spin degeneracy of the first 1D subband is still preserved. Furthermore, the effects of orbital motion on the first 1D subband can be made smaller than those due to electrostatic confinement. This developed RDNMR technique is a promising means to study electronic states in a quantum point contact near zero magnetic field. In a quantum Hall setting, generation of nuclear spin polarization and NMR detection are mostly carried out at the lowest Landau level (LL). Examples include quantum Hall edge channels 1-8 , breakdown of integer and fractional quantum Hall effect One important application of this RDNMR techniques is to probe many body electronic states in the lowest 1D subband such as the 0.7 × 2e 2 /h anomalous conductance Although in a quantum Hall setting the out of plane field exerts circular motion on electrons, we found that the effects on the 1D subband can be made smaller than those due to electrostatic confinement. This makes it possible to preserve the electrons motion at the lowest subband in the quantum point contact so that the motion is as close as possible to that without a magnetic field. The layout and dimensions of the present devices displayed in Fig. The generic non-interacting energy spectrum of a quantum point contact in the presence of perpendicular magnetic field B for any given subband index n and an electron spin S z is 2 The first term describes the magneto-electric subband mixing with ω = ω 2 y + ω 2 c . ω y and ω c = eB/m * are lateral electrostatic confinement and cyclotron frequency, respectively. The second term describes electron spin Zeeman energy with effective Lande-factor g * n , whose magnitude is subband-index dependent. The third term describes the contact hyperfine interaction between an electron and a nuclear spin. For a GaAs semiconductor, the conduction band has an s-wave like character resulting in a relatively strong contact hyperfine coupling of about A = 85 μeV 51 . GaAs has three active nuclear isotopes with spin-3/2 namely 75 As, 69 Ga, and 71 Ga. Forcing electron spin to undergo spin flip scattering induces dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) through hyperfine-mediated spin flip-flop interaction. The Hamiltonian is usually expressed as The first term describes dynamic processes that make DNP possible. The last term describes static interaction between electrons and nuclear spins that make electric detection of NMR possible The conductance profile measured at zero magnetic field revealed that the electron density beneath a pair of split gates was fully depleted at approximately V SG ≈ -0.5 V, marked by a sharp decrease in the conductance as clearly displayed in Fig. The inset to Fig. We then proceeded to locally generate and detect nuclear spin polarization at high LL. For each selected magnetic field, we fixed the operating split gate bias to the left edge of the odd filling factors as displayed in Fig. The lower panels of Fig. It is interesting to note that the splitting reduces from about 30 kHz measured at filling (ν b = 4, ν qpc = 3) displayed in Fig. We convinced ourselves that the signal at a field of 0.98 T is truly an NMR signal since we were able to detect the signal coming from 69 Ga and 71 Ga nuclei as displayed in Fig. In summary, we have achieved generation and detection of nuclear spin polarization in quantum Hall setting at high LL of up to the 5th LL without lifting the spin degeneracy of the first subband. Our developed NMR technique can potentially work at even lower perpendicular magnetic fields and/or elevated temperatures by employing a higher mobility device Beyond the anomalous conductance, the developed RDNMR technique we have described would be useful for probing inter-edge mode interaction. One example would be studying spin mode switching at the edge of a quantum Hall system recently suggested by Khanna et al We would like to thank K. Muraki of NTT Basic Research Laboratories for supplying high quality wafers for this study. We thank K. Hashimoto * fauzi@m.tohoku.ac.jp † Present address: Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117551, Singapore 1 K. R. Wald, L. P. Kouwenhoven, P. L. McEuen, N. C. van der Vaart,