The effect of 30 keV Ga + ion beam irradiation on the low-temperature photoluminescence from a single crystal of the hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite MAPbBr 3 is presented for the first time. The irradiation leads to the suppression of the crystal's excitonic luminescence starting from the dose of 10 14 /cm 2 . However, its integral luminescence does not drop up to the doses of two orders of magnitude higher. Further increase of the irradiation dose starts to affect the integral luminescence and causes the crystal to sputter. The spatial resolution of modification by the ion beam found in the experiment is no worse than 50 μm. The theoretical resolution limit estimated by Monte-Carlo modeling using SRIM is three orders of magnitude lower. This work paves the way for the design of devices based on the spatial modulation of perovskite's excitonic properties or direct focused ion beam writing. KEYWORDS halide perovskite, ion beam irradiation, exciton, defect engineering, focused ion beam. In recent years halide perovskites draw attention of scientific community as a good candidate for solar cell absorber material reaching 20% conversion efficiency In order to make devices based on halide perovskite single crystals it is important to propose a method of spatial modulation of their optical properties, the best way at subwavelength dimensions. Recently it was shown that ion-beam irradiation of A3B5 quantum wells could lead to the modulation of only the desired exciton properties at ranges suitable for making diffractive optical elements Solution grown MAPbBr 3 single crystal was irradiated by uniform 300x300 mkm squares using 30 keV Ga + ion beam (see Supplementary information for growth, sample characterization and irradiation details) with irradiation doses ranging from 10 10 to 10 17 1/cm 2 (Fig. In order to address exciton properties the sample was cooled down to 4 K. Fig. In this paper we have studied effect of 30 keV Ga + ion beam irradiation on optical properties of a MAPbBr 3 single crystal. Low temperature photoluminescence study of uniformly irradiated areas reveals that starting from 10 14 1/cm 2 ion dose exciton PL intensity is gradually suppressed without change of the integral PL intensity. Only at doses > 10 16 1/cm 2 integral intensity starts to drop together with the sample sputtering and possibly decomposition. This proves high radiation stability of this material with possibility to modulate resonant excitonic properties using moderate ion irradiation doses. Exciton resonance energy remains nearly unchanged through the irradiation which means that the main effect of the irradiation-generated effects is non-elastic scattering of excitons. Monte-Carlo modelling of the defect generation in the sample by ion beam irradiation shows very small interaction volumes definitely subwavelength in size. This observation has two main conclusions: 1. Ion beam irradiation with doses < 10 16 1/cm 2 could be used for creation of active diffractive optical elements, photonic crystals or metamaterials based on the exciton resonance modulation by introduction of additional structural defects. 2. Nanoscale-sized structures retaining resonant excitonic properties could be created from perovskite single crystals by direct focused-ion-beam (FIB) patterning followed by < 100 nm 