We have conducted temperature dependent Angle Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES) study of the electronic structures of PbTe, PbSe and PbS. Our ARPES data provide direct evidence for the light hole upper valence bands (UVBs) and hitherto undetected heavy hole lower valence bands (LVBs) in these materials. An unusual temperature dependent relative movement between these bands leads to a monotonic decrease in the energy separation between their maxima with increasing temperature, which is referred as band convergence and has long been believed to be the driving factor behind extraordinary thermoelectric performances of these compounds at elevated temperatures. Introduction. -Lead chalcogenides PbQ (Q=Te, Se, S) are canonical systems for fundamental studies of thermoelectric (TE) properties In a number of reports, T dependent thermopower of PbQ has been interpreted in terms of a relative shift with increase in T Recently, there have been a number of important ARPES works Results. -In order to elucidate the ARPES data, we first consider the bulk Brillouin Zone (BZ) of PbQ, which has a face centered cubic (fcc) crystalline structure. This BZ is represented in Fig. To further investigate the valence band structure of PbQ, we look into Fig. Intensity (a.u.) Intensity (a.u.) to a specific bulk electronic state via a detailed study of the three-dimensional electronic structures. Nevertheless, Figs.1 and 2 together corroborate the two-band picture for the valence band structure of PbQ. Now we discuss the methodology for extracting band dispersions and band edges of UVBs and LVBs of PbQ from their EMIMs. As to the procedural details, we refer to Figs. 2(n) and 2(o), where we display Energy Distribution Curves (EDCs) along with their second derivatives with respect to (w.r.t) ω at the k U , the momentum lo-cation associated with the band maximum (BM) of the UVB, and at (k L ), the momentum location of the BM of the LVB, respectively for a PbS sample. In this context, an EDC is the distribution of electrons as a function of ω at a fixed momentum. On closer inspection Fig. The objective of the remainder of the paper is to interrogate the impact of increasing T on valence bands of PbQ. This is summarized in Figs. 