Transitions metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are direct semiconductors in the atomic monolayer (ML) limit with fascinating optical and spin-valley properties. The strong optical absorption of up to 20 % for a single ML is governed by excitons, electron-hole pairs bound by Coulomb attraction. Excited exciton states in MoSe2 and MoTe2 monolayers have so far been elusive due to their low oscillator strength and strong inhomogeneous broadening. Here we show that encapsulation in hexagonal boron nitride results in emission line width of the A:1s exciton below 1.5 meV and 3 meV in our MoSe2 and MoTe2 monolayer samples, respectively. This allows us to investigate the excited exciton states by photoluminescence upconversion spectroscopy for both monolayer materials. The excitation laser is tuned into resonance with the A:1s transition and we observe emission of excited exciton states up to 200 meV above the laser energy. We demonstrate bias control of the efficiency of this non-linear optical process. At the origin of upconversion our model calculations suggest an exciton-exciton (Auger) scattering mechanism specific to TMD MLs involving an excited conduction band thus generating high energy excitons with small wave-vectors. The optical transitions are further investigated by white light reflectivity, photoluminescence excitation and resonant Raman scattering confirming their origin as excited excitonic states in monolayer thin semiconductors. Transition metal dichalcogenides such as MoS 2 , WS 2 , WSe 2 , MoSe 2 and MoTe 2 are direct band gap semiconductors when thinned down to one monolayer Optical excitation of a semiconductor at the bandgap typically results in luminescence at lower energy due to energy relaxation of charge carriers and excitons. In Fig. FIG. Monolayer MoSe 2 is a very versatile TMD material ideally suited to explore coupling to optical cavities The experimental results for the high quality MoSe 2 samples encapsulated in hBN . T= 4 K. Sample #1(a): Scanning a Ti-Sa laser across the A:1s transition results in upconversion emission of the A:2s and B:1s transitions (black curve for excitation exactly at resonance). Blue symbols give the integrated upconversion intensity as a function of laser energy. (b) Reflection contrast for the same sample spot, confirming the energy positions of A:1s, A:2s and B:1s transtions. (c) The power dependence of the upconversion signal shows an increase with a slope α of roughly 1.64 (black symbols), as compared for the standard A:1s exciton emission with a slope roughly half (0.88 -red symbols). (d) Contour plot (blue -below 50 counts; red > 2000 counts) of upconversion PL intensity as the excitation laser is swept across the A:1s resonance. Sample #2: (e) Schematics of the charge tunable device. (f) Voltage control of upconversion. The signal is maximal in the neutral regime and gets weaker as the n-type regime favours trion and not neutral exciton absorption, the B:1s and A:2s emission are marked, a third emission peak of yet to be determined origin appears at lower energy. MoTe 2 is a very interesting layered material To further investigate the nature of these excited exciton states, we carry out PLE experiments. We monitor the PL emission of the A:1s state (as in Fig. As discussed in the previous section for MoSe 2 MLs, a powerful technique for investigating exciton states is photoluminescence upconversion. Here a cw laser excites the MoTe 2 monolayer at the A:1s resonance and emission at higher energies is monitored. In Fig. To summarize the main experimental results, we have demonstrated that TMD MLs such as MoTe 2 , MoSe 2 , MoS 2 and WSe 2 exhibit strong photoluminescence upconversion. At resonant laser excitation of the A:1s ground excitonic state luminescence from excited states, such as A:2s and B:1s is detected. The effect vanishes for non-resonant excitation or if the oscillator strength of the A:1s exciton is reduced by the gate-doping in charge tunable samples. Furthermore, the analysis of the upconversion PL intensity as a function of excitation power demonstrates that this effect is non-linear and requires two excitons in the ground state. In the next section we provide a theoretical model for our findings. In this section we provide a theoretical model of the upconversion effect observed in TMD MLs. In this process the emitted photon energy is larger than that of the absorbed photon. That is why, in order to fulfil energy conservation, a third body, an exciton or a phonon should be involved. However, at a temperature of 4 K the thermal phonon energies are less than 0.3 meV, thus, lattice vibrations cannot provide effective transfer of excitons up to several 100 meV above the excitation energy. Additionally, experimental data shown in Fig. This mechanism of generating highly excited excitons can be viewed as Auger-like exciton-exciton annihilation. At first glance, it seems to be quite weak because in order to satisfy the energy and momentum conservation laws, the initial kinetic energy of the involved particles should be very large The schematics of exciton-exciton Auger processes is presented in Fig. where E B ≈ 0.3 . . . 0.5 eV Here n X is the density of highly energetic excitons, n X is the density of photoexcited excitons in A:1s state, recombination and energy relaxation processes are disregarded in Eq. ( Here M XX is the matrix element of the exciton-exciton interaction, K 1 and K 2 are the center of mass wavevectors of the two interacting excitons, f (K) is the distribution function of photoexcited A:1s excitons, E(K) = 2 K 2 /2M is the exciton dispersion with M being its effective mass, the subscript ν denotes the quantum numbers of the final exciton state which include the electron band index [c or c for the processes shown, respectively, in Fig. For the derivation of Eq. ( The analytical results are obtained in Appendix C under the model assumptions E B E g , E g , which allow us to make use of k • p-perturbation theory for calculating the excitonic states and transition rates Our next target is to evaluate the scattering rate for exctions under the resonant condition E g = E g + 2E B -E B,n , where the energy released at the non-radiative recombination of A:1s exciton with K = 0 is equal to the energy of the excited c -band exciton in the ns-state. Neglecting the difference of exciton masses in the initial and final states and assuming that excitons are thermalized with the temperature T we have Here k B is the Boltzmann constant, a B is the exciton Bohr radius γ 3 and γ 6 are the interband momentum matrix elements (in the units of m 0 / , m 0 being the free electron mass) for electron transition from c to, respectively, v and c bands, κ is the effective high-frequency dielectric constant. In Eq. ( The values of |A n | 2 for several excitonic states are shown in Fig. The experimentally observed Auger rates in the literature are one-two orders of magnitude smaller than the resonant contribution to R A investigated here To summarize, our analysis suggests that exciton upconversion photoluminescence in TMD MLs is due to a specific nonlinear process: Two excitons generated by the resonant laser collide, as a result one of those recombines non-radiatively while the other is promoted to a highly excited state (most likely related to an excited conduction subband according to band structure calculation). Subsequently, the excited exciton loses its energy and a hot PL from the radiative A:2s and B:1s states is observed. This scenario describes the main experimental findings: (i) upconversion PL from the states A:2s and B:1s which are visible in the hot PL [Figs. We identify of excited exciton states in high quality MoSe 2 and MoTe 2 monolayer samples, which govern absorption and emission above the A:1s exciton resonance. We identify the A:2s state 150 meV (120 meV) above the A:1s state in ML MoSe 2 (MoTe 2 ). We show that excited exciton states can be studied in photoluminescence upconversion experiments. In addition to being a highly selective spectroscopic tool applicable to several TMD materials A electronic state. This is different in Fig. Here for simplicity we disregard the spin degree of freedom of change carriers, assuming that the spin is conserved in the course of exciton-exciton interaction. Furthermore, we focus on the states in the vicinity of one of the band extrema (K + or K -valley) and disregard here the processes involving intervalley transfer of electronhole pair studied in Refs. In the free-particle picture, we have two electrons in the c band which occur in the c -and v-bands after the Coulomb scattering. The two-electron wavefunctions of the considered system in the initial and final states can be presented as Here k c , k v are the electron and unoccupied state wavevectors in one of the excitons and k c , k v are the electron and unoccupied state wavevectors in another exciton. The wavefunction in each band n = c, c , v is a product of the Bloch amplitude and the plane wave: and the normalization area is set to unity. In the k • p model, the Bloch amplitudes have the form: where u n denotes the Bloch amplitude at the extremum point, m 0 is the free electron mass and p nn are the momentum matrix elements between the states in the bands n and n (n, n = c, c , v). The wavefunctions |i , |f in Eq. (C1) are antisymmetrized with respect to the permutations of electrons. It gives rise to the direct and exchange contributions. The matrix element of the direct interaction, where the electron from the state with the wavevector k c recombines with the hole from same exciton and transfers to the state k v , can be conveniently presented in the form where K 1 = k c -k v is the exciton center of mass momentum (note that the hole state corresponds to the timereversed counterpart of the unoccupied state) is the 2D Fourier image of the Coulomb potential with κ being the background average constant of the surrounding structure and r 0 being the dielectric screening parameter where γ 3 and γ 6 are the band structure parameters introduced in Refs. (C9) Finally, the direct interaction matrix element takes a simple form With account for the excitonic effect Eq. (C10) should be averaged over the exciton wavefunction We recall that K 1 , K 2 are the wavevectors of excitons in the initial state, K f = K 1 + K 2 is the wavevector of the exciton in the final state, the subscript ν enumerates the relative motion states of the remaining electron-hole pair. In derivation of Eq. (C11) we neglected the difference of electron effective masses in c and c bands and assumed that initially both excitons occupy 1s state, Φ 1s (ρ) is the envelope function of the relative motion. Correspondingly, the final state relative motion envelope function remains the same. Typical center of mass wavevectors involved in excitonexciton scattering are on the order of thermal wavevector K T = 2M k B T / 2 and are much smaller than the screening wavevector r -1 0 , therefore the direct excitonexciton scattering matrix element M dir is proportional to the first powers of the exciton wavevectors: M dir ∝ K T . Here we consider an exchange process, where the electron occupies the empty state in the valence band related to the hole in the other exciton, i.e. the electron with the wavevector k c transfers to the valence band state with the wavevector kv . As a result for uncorrelated electron-hole pairs we have for the exchange contribution where M 1 is defined in Eq. (C10). In order to transform Eq. (C12) to the form convenient for averaging over the exciton wavefunctions we introduce the relative motion wavevectors for two initial and final exciton states in accordance with Here we assumed that the effective masses of the electron and hole are the same in agreement with microscopic calculations and arrive at Here C ν (k) are the Fourier transforms of the relative motion exciton functions Φ ν (ρ): It follows from Eq. (C14) that only s-shell states contribute to the matrix element. As compared with its direct counterpart, the transferred momentum here is Since M 1 (q) ∝ q for qr 0 0, the direct contribution is by a factor K T a B smaller than the exchange one. Thus, in what follows we consider the exchange contribution only. In order to analyze the exchange process in more detail we first consider a limit where the screening is very strong, i.e., where |k 1 -k 2 |r 0 1. In this case we can approximate M 1 (q) by a constant and arrive at For arbitrary screening we evaluate the sum in Eq. (C14) making use of the two-dimensional hydrogenic functions. For the bound states ν = ns we have ) with κ n = (2n -1)ka B and P n (x) being the Legendre polynomial. As a result, (C17) Dependence of |A n | 2 on n for r 0 = 3a B is shown in Fig. The inset to Fig. Let us now briefly address the intraband process depicted in Fig. We start from the direct process. Instead of Eq. (C10) we have for the free carrier scattering As compared with Eq. (C10) the factor ∝ γ 6 /E g is absent due to the fact that only one charge carrier changes the band. Making use of the following notations ) we obtain for the exciton Auger scattering matrix element the following expression Here we take into account that only excitons with positive energies of relative motion can be in the final state, i.e., k f corresponds to the continuum electronhole pair state modified by the Coulomb interaction. The final state wavevector can be estimated from the energy conservation condition with the result k f = (E g -2E B )M/(2 2 ). In this estimate we neglected thermal energy of excitons as compared with E g -2E B and, as before, took the same effective masses for an electron and a hole. Since K 1 a -1 B , k f the integral in Eq. (C20) can be evaluated decomposing the exponent in the series. At K 1 = 0 the integral in Eq. (C20) equals to zero due to orthogonality of the functions of discrete and continuous spectra. Therefore we take into account the K 1 -linear term: where Within the hydrogenic model, which is used hereafter for crude estimations, D(k f ) ∝ (k f a B ) -3 and the ratio of the interband contribution (C11) and the intraband contribution (C20) can be estimated as Thus, the resonant interband process is dominant. Similar estimate holds for the exchange contributions. The exciton Auger recombination rate at resonant interband scattering of two 1s excitons into the ns exciton state is given by [cf. Eq. (3) of the main text] In order to calculate the rate of transitions we take into account that the matrix element M exch (K 1 , K 2 , K f , ns) depends on the principal quantum number n of the final state and is independent of the initial wavevectors of excitons. Let us first assume that there is exact resonance, i.e., for the certain value of n at K 1 = K 2 = K f we have where E B,n is the binding energy of ns state. Removing the energy conservation δ-function and assuming that i.e., the excitons are distributed according to the Boltzmann law at the temperature T , N is the normalization constant determined from the condition where the factor g accounts for the spin and valley degeneracy, we have Note, that the Auger process is active for collisions of bright (spin-allowed) excitons with bright or dark ones, while for the dark-dark scattering the process is strongly suppressed. In the latter case the k • p admixture with the valence band is minor and the recombination via discussed channel is not effective. The Auger decay rate can be recast in the alternative form where we introduced the Auger recombination time τ A (n X ). Since e 2 /a B ∼ E B , we have an estimate in the case of the resonance with 1s state where a 0 is the lattice constant. At T = 4 K, a 0 = 3 Å, a B = 1 nm, E B = 0.5 eV, and the exciton density n X = 10 9 cm -2 this estimate yields τ A ∼ 25 ps.