To explore material dependence of cuprate superconductors, we evaluate effective Coulomb interactions for Hg1201 and Tl1201, where Tl1201 having a nearly half value of T c of Hg1201 even at the optimal oxygen concentration. Although structures are similar for these superconductors, there is an apparent difference in the occupied levels below E F . The characteristic difference in the band structure is correlated with oxygen contents in the buffer layer. By using constrained Random Phase Approximation, effective screened Coulomb interactions are estimated for HgBa 2 CuO 4 and TlBa 2 CuO 5 . The results shows that the value of screened on-site Coulomb interaction in Hg1201 is nearly twice bigger than that in Tl1201. In addition, The eigenvalues of the linearized Eliashberg equation of single-band Hubbard model within FLEX can show apparent difference in T c . When we assume that the twice big screened on-site Coulomb for Hg, the material dependent T c might be explained. After the first discovery of a cuprate superconductor in 1986, To explore a basic mechanism of high-T c , we reconsider several common features and detailed difference among cuprates, which should be explained by a unique theory. One of the special characters of high-T c is material dependence of the superconducting properties. There are several known classification of cuprate superconductors in series, e.g. Hgcompounds, Tl-compounds, and Bi-compounds, which essentially differ in the atomic structure of the buffer layer. When we see some specific materials, and if we compare T c of some compounds in different series, we can actually find several hints to understand the relevant superconducting mechanism. We see global similarity in doping dependence of the CuO 2 planes. The optimal doping is often found at around a hole concentration of 0.16 per a CuO 2 plane. To adjust the concentration, one often needs to modify the buffer layers in its oxygen contents. When a high-T c material is optimized with respect to the hole concentration, at the optimal doping, the layer-number dependence of the transition temperature T c in several series of cuprates may be derived. Comparison among materials categorized in these series was made in experiment. Theoretically, there are many successful explanations on tendency of the material dependence. An example was the Fermi surface shape dependence of several cuprate series. Here an important hint can be found in the T c difference between the Hg-series and the Tl-series. A known experimental fact is that T c of Hg1201 is T c ≈ 100K and that of Tl1201 is T c ≈ 50K at the optimal doping. 6) Indeed, T c of Tl1201 is only a half of the value of Hg1201. As we will show, the band structure calculation and the tight-binding fitting by the Wannierization technique On this problem, there had been several discussions on the T c value and its dependence on materials parameters. The largeness of Madelung potential at the apical oxygen site, In this paper, we analyze the band structures given by the generalized-gradient approximation of DFT. By comparing the energy bands of Hg-based and Tl-based compounds, and then we apply constrained Random Phase approximation(constrained-RPA) method to evaluate Coulomb interactions. Then, to discuss the different strength of superconductivity in Hg-based and Tl-based compounds, we apply Fluctuation Exchange Approximation(FLEX) to single-band Hubbard model and solve the linearized Eliashberg equation. In this section, we introduce constrained-RPA methods which is recently-developed calculation method. where we have defined a screened interaction W r that does not include the polarization from the 3d-3d transitions: Screened Coulomb interactions at one time in the Wannier basis is expressed as Here i and j are the indices of the Wannier orbitals. W r (r, r ′ ) is a screened Coulomb interaction. where Ω is the crystal volume, ǫ -1 GG ′ (q) is the inverse dielectric matrix, q is a wave vector in the first Brillouin zone and G is a reciprocal lattice vector. The dielectric matrix is expressed as Where v(q) = 4π/Ω|q| 2 is the bare Coulomb interaction. The porlarization matrix in constrained-RPA method is expressed as Here ψ αk is the Bloch state, E αk is the energy of the state, and f αk is the occupancy. α, β stand for the bands which do not include 3d-3d band transitions. To perform the calculation and derive effective interactions, we use RESPACK-code For comparison, we consider Hg-compounds and Tlcompounds. When a cuprate crystal is prepared at an optimal doping, the structure often becomes an alloy or a mixed phase. To adopt reliable DFT codes HgBa 2 CuO 4 (Hg1201) lacks oxygen atoms at each HgO δ plane. (Fig. A nominal filling factor in the CuO 2 plane may be counted by the rule for ionization valence of noble metal, alkaline earth metal ions, and oxygen. Supposing Hg +2 , Tl +3 , Ba +2 , and O -2 , the Cu formal valence for these compounds are +2 (half-filling) for HgBa 2 CuO 4 and +3 (one hole doped per unit cell) for TlBa 2 CuO 5 . We show the band structures of HgBa 2 CuO 4 , and TlBa 2 CuO 5 in Fig. TlBa 2 CuO 5 We show the hopping parameters for the 3d x 2 -y 2 band in Hg1201,Tl1201 in Table . I. Here, a little larger value of t for the Tl-compound comes from its shrunk lattice constant. When we use the lattice constant of Tl1201 for Hg1201, the value of t becomes close to -0.57. We can see that the general form of the band structures are almost same. However, Tl1201 has more dense bands below the Fermi energy than Hg1201 has. Here we also show the total density of states and partial density of states onto orbitals and atoms. According to the results in Fig. Here c † iσ (c iσ ) stands for creation (annihilation) operator for electrons of site i and spin σ. n represent particle number operators for site i and spin σ. To discuss the strength of superconductivity, we perform the so-called Fluctuation Exchange Approximation (FLEX) Here ∆(k) is a gap function, G(k) the dressed Green's function. λ is the eigenvalue of the Eliashberg equation, where λ = 1 corresponds to T = T c , so λ serves as a measure of the strength of superconductivity. V(k) the effective interaction for spin single paring is represented as Where χ sp , χ ch stand for spin susceptibility and charge susceptibility, respectively. In this calculation, we take N = 128 2 sites with 2048 Matsubaras frequencies, k B T = 0.03 [eV], filling factor n is n = 0.425 (When n = 0.5, the system is half-filling). We take approximated U in Hg1201 as |U/t| = 2.9462/0.450 ≃ 6.5 and U in Tl1201 as |U/t| = 1.7088/0.574 ≃ 3.0. We use the hopping parameters for Hgand Tl-compounds derived from the band structures based on the density functional theory in Table . I. In Fig. In Tl-compounds, it is not so easy to access the optimal doping by the reduction of oxygen in the buffer layer. In a real Tl superconductor, La substitution was used to adjust the filling of CuO 2 . In the real material of TlBa 1-x La x CuO 5 , it is known that T c does not reach the value over 50K even by adjusting the hole concentration. To estimate the screened interaction, we utilized the constrained-RPA method. This method is formulated within RPA for the screened interaction W, where the function form of W r is justified in this approximation. With respect to this limitation, there might be a criticism on the use of W r for the effective interaction U of the correlated electron model, i.e. the Hubbard Hamiltonian. Here, we open another route to approach this formulation. Introduction of correlation effects in a generalization of the density functional theory (DFT) as the multi-reference DFT (MR-DFT The approximation leads us to reach an expression similar to constrained-RPA. Lets suppose that resulted W r (ω) is used for a d-band model, so that we can omit subscripts in v dd . In this expression, a partial polarization function is given by an effective screened on-site interaction. The term comes from a quantum fluctuation contribution prohibiting fluctuation in the occupation number of the d band. Here, notations c and v represents unoccupied conduction bands and fully filled valence bands. Therefore, in Eq. ( This is an ansatz in our proposed procedure. When we replace P (c,d) +P (d,v) with P r as an approximation, if we apply U eff ∼ 0 in the denominators of Eqs. ( By applying the constrained-RPA method, we evaluated an effective Coulomb interaction for Hg and Tl compounds. As a result, we have an indication of stronger screening in the onsite correlation in a Tl compound relative to Hg compound. Analyzing the nature of the electronic band structures of these compounds, we found that there is apparent difference in the occupied levels below E F . These differences reflect the varying crystal structures. Especially, we paid attention to different electronic structures originated from oxygen contents in buffer layer. From analyzing partial density of states and evaluating on-site Coulomb interaction in CaCuO 2 , we deduce that oxygen contents in the buffer layer have an large effects on screening of Coulomb interactions. However, quantitative evaluation of orbital-decomposed screening effects is future problem. The eigenvalue of the linearized Eliashberg equation within FLEX showed that the estimated difference in U screened for Hg and Tl can show apparent difference in T c . When we assume that the twice big U screened for Hg, the material dependent T c might be explained. We also comment on an another effect from the buffer layers. we paid attention to different electronic structure above the Fermi energy. By using MR-DFT method, we evaluated an effective exchange scattering amplitude for some Hg and Tl compounds. Analyzing the nature of the electronic band structures of these compounds, we found that the high energy levels originated from the Hg-O buffer layer contributes well creating enhancement of exchange interaction, which should lead the increase in T c via the spin fluctuation mechanism. In Tl compounds, however, the enhancement is not so apparent. This is because of the absence of the Tl-O branch around E F , which also may explain strange difference between T c s of Hgand Tl-compounds. 