) [1, 2] employs a large number of spatially distributed wireless sensors to monitor physical environments, e.g., temperature, humidity, and air pressure, have found wide applications including environmental monitoring [3], health care monitoring [4], smart cities [5] and precision agriculture [6]. A wireless sensor can collect, analyze, and transmit measurements of its environment [1, 2]. To date, wireless sensors used in IoT are predominately based on electronic devices that may suffer from electromagnetic interference in many circumstances. Immune to the electromagnetic interference, optical sensors provide a significant advantage in harsh environments [7]. Furthermore, by introducing optical resonance to enhanced light-matter interactions, optical sensors based on resonators exhibit small footprints, extreme sensitivity and versatile functionalities [8, 9], which can significantly enhance the capability and flexibility of wireless sensors. Here we provide High-quality WGM optical resonators that confine light in a small volume via total internal reflection can significantly enhance light-matter interactions, which has benefited a number of applications including microlasers In this work, we demonstrated a wireless WGM sensor node that can be integrated into IoT. We also developed a customized iOS app for remote system control, collection and analysis of sensing signals. Through this app, the spectral properties of WGM sensors can be monitored in real time. As the key elements in WSNs, sensor nodes should have the capability to collect sensing signals, perform signal analysis, and communicate with other sensor nodes or the gateway sensor node. The architecture of our wireless WGM sensor node is shown in Fig. In the sensing module, a tunable single-mode distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) laser is used to probe a packaged WGM sensor The sensor used in this system is a packaged WGM microtoroid resonator. It is fabricated by using UV curable low-index polymer to package a microtoroid together with its fiber-taper waveguide Light from the DBR laser with central wavelength of 976 nm and linewidth of 10 MHz is sent into the packaged WGM sensor and then received by the photodetector. The frequency of laser light can be tuned by adjusting the laser current and TEC temperature with tuning coefficients of 0.002 nm/mA and 0.07 nm/°C, respectively. By applying a saw-tooth wave with amplitude of 40 mA to the laser diode around a fixed central current, the frequency of laser light is linearly scanned to obtain the transmission spectrum of the WGM sensor. The interface of the customized iOS app is shown in Fig. We first characterized the spectral properties of the packaged WGM sensor by using the app. Its transmission spectrum is shown in Fig. With this wireless sensing system, we performed a 12-hour real-time measurement of air temperature on Jun. 18 th , 2017 in St. Louis, MO, USA. The whole system was mounted on the outside wall of a building. The packaged WGM sensor was in full contact with the surrounding air and was refrained from direct irradiance from sunlight. The optical fibers connecting the packaged sensor with the mainboard were carefully mounted to avoid polarization variations during the measurement. The variation of the resonance frequency induced by the air temperature change was monitored via the customized app. For comparison, we also mounted a commercial thermometer together with the packaged sensor. Through a 12-h measurement, we acquired a plot of frequency shift of the selected resonance mode. As shown in Fig. Introducing mobility to wireless sensor nodes can improve the capability and flexibility of WSNs and helps to meet the needs of certain scenarios with complex dynamic changes The measurements match well with the results from commercial thermometer (Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated a wireless WGM sensor node and exploited it for the applications of thermal sensing and aerial mapping. A customized iOS app enables us to monitor and control the system parameters, acquire and analyze the sensing signals in real time. Two application scenarios have been studied: one is to measure the temperature change at a fixed location; the other one is to have the system carried by an unmanned drone to measure the temperature distribution of a selected area. The successful demonstrations show the potential applications of our wireless WGM sensor node in IoT. It is also worth noting that our sensing system is not limited to thermal sensing. With proper design, the packaged WGM sensor can have various functionalities, e.g., WGM magnetometer with high sensitivity and large bandwidth 