Topological semimetals exhibit band crossings near the Fermi energy, which are protected by the nontrivial topological character of the wave functions. In many cases, these topological band degeneracies give rise to exotic surface states and unusual magneto-transport properties. In this paper, we present a complete classification of all possible nonsymmorphic band degeneracies in hexagonal materials with strong spin-orbit coupling. This includes (i) band crossings protected by conventional nonsymmorphic symmetries, whose partial translation is within the invariant space of the mirror/rotation symmetry; and (ii) band crossings protected by off-centered mirror/rotation symmetries, whose partial translation is orthogonal to the invariant space. Our analysis is based on (i) the algebraic relations obeyed by the symmetry operators and (ii) the compatibility relations between irreducible representations at different high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone. We identify a number of existing materials where these nonsymmorphic nodal lines are realized. Based on these example materials, we examine the surface states that are associated with the topological band crossings. Implications for experiments and device applications are briefly discussed. The study of semimetals with protected band degeneracies near the Fermi level has attracted a lot of interest in recent years, due their unique transport and topological properties Yet, a unified all-encompassing classification of semimetals, which combines the symmetries of the tenfold way Motivated by these considerations, in this paper we classify topological band crossings in hexagonal materials with time-reversal symmetry and strong spin-orbit coupling. We focus on the role played by nonsymmorphic symmetries, which lead to symmetry-required FIG. band degeneracies along high-symmetry lines, or within high-symmetry planes, of the Brillouin zone (BZ) We classify both types of band crossings on a case-bycase basis, by computing the algebraic relations obeyed by the symmetry operators. For the SGs with type-(i) band degeneracies, we also determine the compatibility relations between irreducible symmetry representations. We find that the band connectivities which follow from these compatibility relations are consistent with our results based on the algebraic relations of the symmetry operators. It should be noted, however, that type-(ii) band crossings cannot be derived from the compatibility relations in a straightforward manner. Band crossings protected by off-centered symmetries are therefore missing in classification schemes that build on the theory of irreducible (co-)representations of crystallographic SGs A secondary but equally important goal of this paper is to identify materials that exhibit the predicted band crossings. For this purpose we use the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) from FIZ Karslruhe The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we classify band crossings protected by conventional nonsymmorphic symmetries. We consider both nodal points (Sec. II A) and nodal lines (Sec. II B). The band connectivities that follow from the compatibility relations between different irreducible representations are discussed in Sec. II C. Sec. III is devoted to the classification of band crossings protected by off-centered symmetries. In Sec. IV we present a few example materials which realize the predicted band crossings near the Fermi energy and discuss their surface states. Conclusions and perspectives are given in Sec. V. Some technical details are relegated to Appendix A and Appendix B. Appendix C contains additional band structure calculations of the example materials. Nonsymmorphic space groups contain symmetry operators G = {g|t} that combine point group symmetries g with translations t by a fraction of a Bravais lattice vector where g is an n-fold point group symmetry and T a is the translation operator for the Bravais lattice vector a. The minus sign on the right hand side of Eq. (2.1) originates from g n , which equals -1 for Bloch electrons with nonnegligible spin-orbit coupling. In the band structure of nonsymmorphic materials, the operators G = {g|t} can lead to the protection of band degeneracies in the g-invariant space of the BZ, which satisfies gk = k. In these symmetry invariant lines and planes of the BZ, the Bloch states |ψ m (k) can be constructed in such a way that they are simultaneous eigen- functions of both G and the Hamiltonian. From Eq. (2.1) it follows that the eigenvalues of G are where m ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n -1}. Due to the momentum dependent phase factor e -ipk•a/n in Eq. (2.2) the eigensectors of G can be interchanged, as k is moved across the g-invariant space of the BZ. As a consequence, provided there are no additional degeneracies due to other symmetries, pairs of bands must cross at least once within the invariant space. This is the basic mechanism that leads to the protection of type-(i) band degeneracies 3) and twofold glide mirrors M of the form where the Pauli matrices σ i operate in spin space. (See Fig. Nodal points occur along the Γ-∆-A and M-U-L lines of the hexagonal BZ, which are left invariant by the screw rotations C 6,p and C 3 6,p , respectively. Let us discuss these two cases separately. It should be noted that nodal points discussed in this section can in certain cases be part of Weyl nodal lines. An example of this is presented in Sec. IV A 0 a. The M-U-L line is defined as the segment k = (π, 0, k z ), with k z ∈ [0, π], which connects the two timereversal invariant momenta (TRIMs) M and L along the k z direction, see Fig. which follows from Eq. (2.2) with n = 2 and a = (0, 0, 1). Due to the presence of spin-orbit coupling, the energy bands |ψ m (k) are in general non-degenerate, except at TRIMs (i.e., at M and L), where time-reversal symmetry enforces Kramers degeneracies. From Eq. (2.5), we find that at the M point C 3 6,p has eigenvalues ±i for all p, while at the L point the eigenvalues are ±i for p even and ±1 for p odd. At the M and L points time-reversal symmetry pairs up bands whose C 3 6,p eigenvalues are complex conjugate pairs. Therefore, Kramers partners at the M point have opposite C 3 6,p eigenvalues, while at the L point they have the same eigenvalues for p odd and opposite eigenvalues for p even. In the absence of additional symmetries, this leads to the band connectivity diagrams shown in Fig. From the above considerations, we expect that materials in SGs containing C6,p screw rotations with p odd have band crossings along the M-U-L line. However, some of these SGs contain additional symmetries that lead to extra band degeneracies. In particular, mirror and inversion symmetries enforce extra degeneracies at the L point, between bands with C 3 6,p eigenvalues +1 and -1. Therefore, in the presence of additional mirror or inversion symmetries the band crossing along the M-U-L line is no longer symmetry-required. In conclusion, we find that only those materials with SGs containing a C6,p screw rotation with p odd, but no inversion or mirror symmetry, exhibit the Weyl degeneracies within the M-U-L line. These are the SGs with Nos. 169, 170, 173, 178, 179, and 182, as indicated in the second column of Table Pairings of m 0 (0,5), (1,4), (2,3) 1 (0,0), (1,1), (4,4), (0,2), (3,5) 4 (0,3), (1,2), (4,5) 5 (2,2), (5,5), (0,4), The path Γ-∆-A is defined as the segment k = (0, 0, k z ), with k z ∈ [0, π], which connects the Γ point at the center of the BZ to the A point at the top surface of the BZ, see Fig. From the above analysis, it follows that materials in SGs with C 6,p screw rotations can have protected Weyl point degeneracies along the Γ-∆-A line. However, some of these SGs contain in addition to C 6,p also inversion or mirror symmetries, which create fourfould (or higher) degeneracies at the A point, thereby removing the symmetry-enforced Weyl crossings. Therefore, only materials in SGs with C 6,p symmetries, but no mirror or inversion symmetry, display the discussed Weyl points at the Γ-∆-A line. The SGs that satisfy these criteria are Nos. 169-173 and 178-182, as listed in Table . I. Nodal lines protected by glide mirror symmetries M , Eq. (2.4), occur within mirror-invariant planes of the hexagonal BZ which follows from Eq. (2.2). Mirror invariant planes contain either two or four TRIMs at which the Bloch bands are Kramers degenerate, see blue and red dots in Fig. The symmetry enforced band crossings discussed in the previous two sections can also be derived from the compatibility relations between irreducible representations (irreps) at different high-symmetry points (or lines) of the BZ The symmetries of electronic band structures with spin-orbit coupling and time-reversal symmetry are described by double crystallographic SGs and their doublevalued irreducible representations We will now show how this works for the case of 1 e i5π/6 e -iπ/3 i e -i2π/3 e iπ/6 Γ10 1 e -iπ/6 e -iπ/3 -i e -i2π/3 e -i5π/6 Γ11 1 e iπ/6 e iπ/3 i e i2π/3 e i5π/6 Γ12 1 e -i5π/6 e iπ/3 -i e i2π/3 e -iπ/6 Irrep\Element E C6,2 C 2 6,2 A7 1 e -iπ/6 e -iπ/3 -i e -i2π/3 e -i5π/6 A8 1 e i5π/6 e -iπ/3 i e -i2π/3 e iπ/6 A9 1 e -i5π/6 e iπ/3 -i e i2π/3 e -iπ/6 A10 1 e iπ/6 e iπ/3 i e i2π/3 e i5π/6 SG 171 (P 6 5 ). For this SG the relevant high-symmetry points that we need to consider are the TRIMs Γ and A. These two TRIMs are connected by the high-symmetry line Γ-∆-A, which is left invariant under the screw rotation C 6,2 (cf. Sec. II A 2). To determine the connectivity of the bands between the Γ and A points, we first derive the little-group irreps at Γ, A, and Γ-∆-A, and then study the compatibilities between them. Table On the Γ-∆-A line, however, the symmetry is lower, as time-reversal is absent; only the screw rotation C 6,2 remains as a valid symmetry. As a consequence, the littlegroup irreps at Γ-∆-A are in general complex, as shown in Table Next, we derive the compatibility relations between the little-group irreps at Γ, A and Γ-∆-A. This can be achieved, in principle, by studying the subduction of the little-group irreps at Γ (or A) onto the little group at Γ-∆-A where χ[D l Dl(g)] is the character of the symmetry element g for the real irrep D l Dl and {∆ m1 , ∆ m2 } is the set of irreps that D l Dl decomposes into. Eq. (2.8) essentially follows from the fact that the characters of each valid symmetry must be preserved, as we continuously move from Γ (or A) to a point on the Γ-∆-A line. Using Eq. (2.8) we find that the real irreps at Γ must decompose into while for the real irreps at A we have (2.10) These two sets of equations are the compatibility relations between the little-group irreps at Γ, A, and Γ-∆-A. The Bloch bands along Γ-∆-A must satisfy all of these compatibility relations. That is, as we move from Γ to a point on Γ-∆-A, Kramers pairs must decompose according to Eq. (2.9), while, as we approach A, they must pair up according to Eq. (2.10). As a consequence, the little-group irreps of Γ-∆-A switch partners, as shown in Fig. Using a similar approach as above, we have derived the compatibility relations for all SGs of Table I and constructed the corresponding band connectivity diagrams, see Appendix B. We find that the band connectivities obtained in this way fully agree with the derivation of Secs. II A and II B. which is based on the algebraic relations obeyed by the symmetry operators. It follows from band theory that, in the presence of time-reversal symmetry, a noninteracting band insulator can form only if the electron filling ν is an even integer, i.e., ν ∈ 2N Recently, the tight filling constraints for all 230 SGs with time-reversal symmetry were calculated by Watanabe et al. Nonsymmorphic symmetries G = {g|t ⊥ } with a translation part t ⊥ that is perpendicular to the g invariant space can be transformed into symmorphic symmetries by a suitable choice of reference for g. For instance, a glide mirror symmetry M = {m|t ⊥ } with a translation part t ⊥ that is perpendicular to the mirror plane, can be transformed into a symmorphic mirror symmetry by shifting the origin by t ⊥ /2. However, in the presence of a second symmetry G = {g |t } with a reference point different from G, the two translation parts which are perpendicular to the point-group invariant spaces cannot be removed both at the same time, since a shift of the origin affects both G and G . A pair of two such symmetries are called "off-centered" symmetries We are now going to show how these off-centered symmetries in hexagonal SGs lead to the protection of fourfold degenerate nodal lines (i.e., Dirac lines), which we refer to as type-(ii) nodal lines together with the inversion symmetry P , which sends (x, y, z) → (-x, -y, -z). Since M 2 z = -1, the eigenvalues of M z are ±i. Within the two m z invariant planes, k x = 0 and k x = π, we can label the Bloch states |ψ m (k) , by the M z eigenvalues, i.e., M z |ψ ± (k) = ±i |ψ ± (k) . Applying the symmetry operators M z and P successively, we obtain the following commutation relation Thus, in the k z = 0 plane the two symmetry operators commute, while in the k z = π plane they anticommute. Now, since the time-reversal symmetry operator T = iσ y K commutes with both M z and P , M z anticommutes with P T within the k z = π plane. Hence, the Kramers pair |ψ ± (k) and P T |ψ ± (k) have the same Therefore, if two bands with opposite M z eigenvalues cross within the k z = π plane, they form a protected line crossing with fourfold degeneracy. Such a fourfold degenerate nodal line is in fact required to exist by symmetry alone, i.e., it occurs in any material with the off-centered symmetries ( M z , P ). To see this, let us consider the degeneracies at the two TRIMs A and L within the k z = π plane. At these TRIMs the Bloch states form quartets of four degenerate states with the M z eigenvalues where K ∈ {A, L}. These four Bloch states are mutually orthogonal to each other, since they either have opposite M z eigenvalues or are Kramers partners. As we move away from the TRIMs, the Bloch bands become twofold degenerate in general. We find, however, that the two energetically degenerate states |ψ ± (K + k) and |ψ ± (Kk) , which are mapped onto each other by P (or by T ), have opposite M z eigenvalues. This leads to a band structure, whose M z eigenvalues are inverted with respect to K, as shown in Fig. From the above analysis, we expect that hexagonal materials in SGs containing both inversion and the glide mirror symmetry M z (3.1) have protected type-(ii) nodal lines. The SGs that fulfill these criteria are Nos. 176, 193, and 194 (cf. Talbe I). However, for SG Nos. 193 and 194 additional symmetries force the nodal lines to be pinned to the high-symmetry lines connecting A to L and A to H, respectively. Hence, in these cases the fourfold degeneracy is simply a consequence of the four dimensionality of the corresponding irreducible space-group representation, and hence the argument based on off-centered symmetries is not needed. To find example materials, we look for compounds crystallizing in one of the 13 SGs of Table For the four example materials we perform DFT calculations with the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) A. Materials with nodal points a. AuF 3 -Gold trifluoride AuF 3 The nontrivial topology exhibited by the Weyl points of AuF 3 manifests itself at the surface through arc states, which connect Weyl points with opposite chiralities. This is shown in Fig. While the band connectivity and the associated Weyl points of AuF 3 are very interesting from a theoretical point of view, this material is rather difficult to handle experimentally, as it is highly reactive. Moreover, AuF 3 is insulating with a large band gap of ∼ 2 eV, which makes it nearly impossible to probe the bulk Weyl points and arc surface states using tunneling spectroscopy, photoemission, or transport experiments. Therefore, in order to experimentally confirm the predicted band crossings, it is more feasible to instead consider the γ phase of In 2 Se 3 . b. In 2 Se 3 -In 2 Se 3 exists in several polymorphic forms b. LaBr 3 -An example of a hexagonal material with Dirac nodal lines is LaBr 3 in SG P 6 3 /m (No. 176) In closing we note that LiScI 3 In this work we have classified all possible nonsymmorphic band degeneracies in hexagonal materials with time-reversal symmetry and strong spin-orbit coupling. Our classification approach is based on representation theory of space groups and the algebraic relations between symmetry operators. We find that thirteen out of the 27 hexagonal space groups (SGs) support topological band crossings protected by nonsymmorphic symmetries (Table The results of our classification are helpful for searching and designing materials with Weyl and Dirac nodal points or nodal lines. Using the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) [48], we have identified a number of hexagonal materials which exhibit topological band crossings (last column of Table In closing, we mention several interesting directions for future studies. First, our approach can be generalized to other magnetic and nonmagnetic SGs containing screw rotations or glide mirror symmetries. In particular, materials in SGs containing threefold or fourfold screw rotations (e.g., in trigonal systems [78]) can have multiple Weyl band crossings with accordion-like dispersions, similar to Fig. nondegenerate bands as we move away from the TRIMs. Moreover, the graph is bipartite, since every line connects two nodes of two distinct TRIMs. The order of the graph is 2k, because 2k bands form 2k Kramer's pairs at the two TRIMs. Using mathematical induction, we will now show that the minimum number of crossings in this bipartite graph with 2k nodes is k -1. First we need to proof this statement for k = 1: The minimum number of crossings in a bipartite graph with two nodes is trivially zero, since a double connection between two nodes never has to cross itself. For the induction step, we need to show that if the statement holds for a graph with 2k nodes, it must also hold for a graph with 2k + 2 nodes. So let us assume that there is a graph with 2k nodes with crossing number k -1. We now wish to connect two more nodes of degree two to the bipartite graph, (i.e, one node at each TRIM), such that the total number of crossings is increased by as little as possible (see Fig. Figure In Fig. The Dirac nodal lines of LaBr 3 , which are located within the k z = π plane, are difficult to observe, as this material is insulating with a gap of about ∼ 2.5 eV [Fig. 