Core-shell nanowires made of Si and Ge can be grown experimentally with excellent control for different sizes of both core and shell. We have studied the structural properties of Si/Ge and Ge/Si core-shell nanowires aligned along the [110] direction, with diameters up to 10.2 nm and varying core to shell ratios, using linear scaling Density Functional Theory (DFT). We show that Vegard's law, which is often used to predict the axial lattice constant, can lead to an error of up to 1%, underlining the need for a detailed ab initio atomistic treatment of the nanowire structure. We analyse the character of the intrinsic strain distribution and show that, regardless of the composition or bond direction, the Si core or shell always expands. In contrast, the strain patterns in the Ge shell or core are highly sensitive to the location, composition and bond direction. The highest strains are found at heterojunction interfaces and the surfaces of the nanowires. This detailed understanding of the atomistic structure and strain paves the way for studies of the electronic properties of core-shell nanowires and investigations of doping and structure defects. Scaling down the size of the current generation of electronic devices has led to an increased interest in semiconductor nanostructures, such as nanowires and nanotubes Pure Si and Ge nanowires are typically grown by chemical vapour deposition within the VLS method VLS grown Si nanowires are known to form essentially exclusively along the 110 direction Strain has a significant impact on the structural stability as well as electronic properties of nanostructures Strained areas, particulary near the surfaces, can have a significant effect on chemical reactivity of nanowires because strain can lift degeneracy and cause band splitting The axial lattice parameter, which is sensitive to the changing of the NW composition, is a key input to any core-shell nanowire atomistic or electronic structure computation, and has a significant effect on the structure and hence electronic properties of the nanowire. Determining the optimum axial lattice parameter using first principle methods can be time consuming, so an estimate based on Vegard's law In situations where the lattice parameter of a solid solution is known experimentally (e.g. through diffraction data), Vegard's law is often used effectively in reverse, to estimate the relative compositions Ab initio approaches based on DFT are commonly used in studiying these structural factors of nanostuctures. Due to computational demands, the overwhelming majority of the work based on the DFT framework has examined NWs with diameters of around 5 nm or less In this work, we study the relationship between structural properties and overall composition of Si/Ge and Ge/Si core-shell nanowires with diameters in the range 4.9-10.2 nm using the linear scaling DFT code Conquest. We explore the accuracy of Vegard's law in determining the axial lattice constant, and investigate the intrinsic strain patterns of the core-shell nanowires, particularly how these change with core to shell ratio, coreshell composition and diameter. All the calculations of nanowire structure used the linear scaling DFT code, Conquest 42 , using the PBE GGA functional It is well known that the DFT ground state can be obtained by minimising the total energy with respect to the Kohn-Sham (KS) density matrix ρ(r, r ), which is formally defined as, where Ψ n and f n are the n th KS orbital and its occupation number, respectively. In Conquest, ρ(r, r ) is represented in terms of localized orbitals φ centered on the atoms, known as 'support functions': ( where i(j) indicates an atom and α(β) runs over the support functions on the i th (j th ) atom. While the support functions themselves can be represented in terms of basis functions, we use a one-to-one mapping between support functions and pseudo-atomic orbitals (PAOs) The PAO cutoffs are chosen to give an optimised bulk lattice paramter within 1% of the experimental values for both Si and Ge respectively. The coefficients K iα,jβ are the density matrix elements in the basis of support functions. In Conquest, the density matrix (K) can either be calculated by the conventional direct diagonalization with O(N 3 ) scaling or by using the density matrix minimization method proposed by Li, Nunes and Vanderbilt (LNV) where S iα,jβ = φ iα | φ jβ is the overlap matrix of support functions. To achieve linear scaling with the LNV method, a spatial cut-off R L must be imposed on the L-matrix so that its value is zero when the distance between the centres of the support-functions exceeds R L . Imposing this spatial cutoff is justified by the the nearsightedness of electronic matter The nanowires present an interesting challenge for structural optimisation: the nanowire is constrained along the [110] axial direction, but is free along the radial direction. We perform a two-stage relaxation to find the optimal axial lattice parameter: a value for the lattice parameter is chosen, and we perform a structural relaxation of the nanowire. This process is repeated for different values of the axial lattice parameter, a lat , to find the lowest energy value. The simulation cell includes ∼13 Å vacuum in lateral x-and y-directions to avoid any interactions between the images of neighboring nanowires from periodicity. Structural optimisations have been performed using the FIRE algorithm Our intention is to examine how the relative core-shell thicknesses will affect the structural properties of these nanowires, and as such we have performed calculations varying independently the shell and core size for both Sicore Ge-shell (SiGe-NWs) and Ge-core Si-shell nanowires (GeSi-NWs). The shape of the core is set by the free energies of the surfaces One approach for calculating the ideal axial lattice parameter is to treat the nanowire as a solid solution, and to use Vegard's law where N Si and N Ge are the total number of Si and Ge atoms present in the nanowire respectively. The bulk Si and Ge lattice constamts, a Si lat and a Ge lat are taken as 5.432 Å and 5.658 Å52 respectively, for all calculations. Another approach is to plot DFT calculated total system energy vs overall lattice parameter(a lat ) by varying the lattice parameter explicitly, and fitting to find the optimum lattice parameter corresponding to the minimum energy structure. This lattice parameter corresponding to the minimum energy structure is the ideal axial lattice parameter(a lat ) used for fixing the axial atomic distances and axial simulation cell length in structural relaxations performed in the next sections. The effect of varying the 3 3 SiGe-NW lattice parameter can be seen in Fig. Results from carrying this procedure out for the rest of the SiGe and GeSi nanowires are given in Table For the GeSi-NWs we can see that the interpolated axial lattice parameter consistently decreases towards the Si bulk lattice parameter with increasing shell size, as FIG. the number of Si atoms in the shell increases relative to the number of Ge atoms in the core. For the optimised calculations, the same trend is seen, though the values are all larger than the interpolated values. The interpolated axial lattice parameter of the SiGe-NWs increases with shell size as the system tends towards the Ge bulk lattice parameter, though this behaviour is not seen in the optimised parameters. With a small silicon core, the lattice parameter follows the interpolated value reasonably; with the larger silicon core, the behaviour is quite different, and the lattice constant behaves non-monotonically, with large differences to the interpolated values. Previous calculations of cylindrical core-shell NWs have also shown diameter dependent behaviour: very small (∼1.5nm diameter) NWs show non-linear behaviour This non-monotonic departure from the simple linear interpolation of Vegard's law highlights an important point: while it is desirable to understand the structural properties of these nanowires in the simplest possible terms, the many different interfaces, coupled with the elastic anisotropy of both Si and Ge, provide an extremely complex system which will require careful, first principles simulation to explore fully. The differences in lattice parameter found here (up to 1%), and the departure from simple, expected behaviour, may give significant deviations in atomic and electronic structure which can only be fully explored using a technique such as linear scaling DFT, which can reach realistic simulation cell sizes. This ability will help to understand systems in the field of next generation electronics, allowing systems of physically realistic size to be examined and trends exposed. Having calculated the axial lattice parameter corresponding to the minimum energy for each of our nanowire models, we now proceed to analyse the relaxed structures for this axial lattice in each case. We can see from Fig. We consider the directions of bonds in the nanowires carefully, as there is considerable anisotropy in the sys- tem, coming both from elastic anisotropy and from the different boundary conditions. Looking at the cross sectional schematic in figure There are many ways to present the data on bond lengths and local strain; we show two in Fig. The bond strain maps for the Si core, Ge shell nanowires are shown in Fig. Turning to the core, shown in Fig. It is well known that both Si and Ge are mechanically anisotropic, with the Young's modulus in the [111] direction larger than that in the [110], which in turn is larger than that in the [100] direction. It is clear that this anisotropy has a significant impact upon the relative bond compression and extension in each direction within the Ge shell. Coupling this fact with the surface and interface effects result in the differing strain patterns of the bonds depending upon bond direction. It is interesting to note that the core of the NW does not have the same radial freedom as the shell, which can expand into the vacuum, nor the strains induced by reconstruction; however, as we will see in the next section, for these nanowires and the present method, the anisotropy is largely associated with germanium, while silicon is much more uniformly strained. (We note that silicon does have a larger Young's modulus than germanium Examining the strain maps for the Ge-core Si-shell nanowires, shown in Fig. The Ge core shows less anisotropy than the Ge shell in the SiGe NWs, with a strong dependence on the thickness of the Si shell: increasing shell thickness leads to an increase in the tension (or equivalently decrease in compression) for the (111) ⊥ bonds. This may seem counter-intuitive, as a thicker shell might be expected to lead to it having more influence, but reflects the increasing tension along this direction in the shell. The shell clearly has more influence for the smaller core, seen particularly in the (111) ⊥ bonds. The anisotropy of the Ge is still considerable, with the (100) ⊥ bonds generally compressed, while the (111) ⊥ bonds vary with NW size and location, showing particular variation at the interface between (111) and (100) surfaces. As with the SiGe nanowires, we see that the germanium shows more anisotropy than the silicon. It is clear that a careful, detailed ab initio calculation is needed to describe the structure of nanowires properly: while simple extrapolation can approximate the axial lattice constant, the detailed structure depends sensitively on the details of the nanowire structure. Using linear scaling DFT calculations, we have studied and compared the axial lattice parameters and intrinsic strain patterns of Si/Ge and Ge/Si core-shell nanowires with different core to shell ratios, with diameters in the range 4.9-10.2 nm. We found that the axial lattice parameter calculated analytically using Vegard's empirical law gives a reasonable starting approximation to the axial lattice parameter, but that detailed DFT simulations are needed to find the correct values. In some cases, the error in lattice parameter from Vegard's law was as large as 1%. It is not surprising that a simple, empirical law based on solid solutions should only be approximately correct for these highly structured, anisotropic nanowires. Our DFT calculations show that increasing the Si content leads to a reduction in the axial lattice parameter, towards the value of bulk Si. With one exception, increasing the Ge content results in an increase in the axial lattice parameter towards the value of bulk Ge, though in all cases the behaviour does not follow the proportions of the constituents in a simple, linear fashion. The lattice constant of bulk Ge is greater than that of bulk Si by 4% and this generates an intrinsic strain in Ge and Si bonds in the nanowires. In all Si/Ge and Ge/Si nanowires we have studied, the Si component shows generally isotropic expansion, while the Ge component shows complex, bond-direction and nanowire-sizedependent tensile and compressive strain patterns. Given that the core does not have the same radial freedom as the shell, it is interesting that the Si component behaves consistently, regardless of whether it is placed as the core or the shell. The differences in the elastic properties of silicon and germanium may play a role in this behaviour, reflecting the different bond strengths in the two materi- als. The varying strain within core and shell will have a variable effect on the electronic structure In summary, we have shown that linear scaling DFT is both possible and necessary for systems of this size, and have produced a detailed study of the strain patterns in silicon-germanium core-shell nanowires. 