Optical grating technique, where optical gratings are generated via light inference, has been widely used to measure charge carrier and phonon transport in semiconductors. In this paper, compared are three types of transient optical grating techniques: transient grating diffraction, transient grating heterodyne, and grating imaging, by utilizing them to measure carrier diffusion coefficient in a GaAs/AlAs superlattice. Theoretical models are constructed for each technique to extract the carrier diffusion coefficient, and the results from all three techniques are consistent. Our main findings are: (1) the transient transmission change ∆T/T0 obtained from transient grating heterodyne and grating imaging techniques are identical, even these two techniques originate from different detection principles; and (2) By adopting detection of transmission change (heterodyne amplification) instead of pure diffraction, the grating imaging technique (transient grating heterodyne) has overwhelming advantage in signal intensity than the transient grating diffraction, with a signal intensity ratio of 315:1 (157:1). Carrier diffusion in semiconductors is crucial in electronic and opto-electronic devices, since it determines some key parameters of the devices, such as working frequency and response time. Studying carrier diffusion process can also reveal carrier scattering in semiconductors, assess carrier mobility with Einstein relation, and understand interactions between carriers and phonons, defects, and nanostructures. Currently, there are several optical techniques to measure the carrier diffusion coefficients nondestructively: transient grating In order to overcome this problem, heterodyne technique, where a reference beam is introduced to be collinear with the diffracted probe beam, has been implemented to amplify the diffraction signal In Figure With some simple modifications in the experimental setup (with blocker and selection of the detected beams), measurements for transient grating heterodyne or transient grating diffraction can be realized easily. Five cases are presented in Figure The sample under test is a 30-periods GaAs (6nm)/AlAs (6nm) superlattice on a glass substrate. The superlattice was originally grown on GaAs substrate and then wet-etched and transferred onto a glass substrate. Details of sample growth and characterization can be found in Ref. Before measuring the sample with optical grating techniques, pump-probe experiments without amplitude grating are performed in order to: (1) make sure the system response to the laser excitation is in the linear region, e.g. ∆T/T0 or ∆R/R0 signals proportional with the excited carrier density , where c is a proportional factor, N and N 0 are the time-dependent excited carrier density and initial excited carrier density, A 1 and A 2 are the weight factors of carrier cooling and carrier recombination, and τ cool and τ r are the carrier cooling time and carrier recombination lifetime, respectively. In the grating imaging experiments, the pump power is kept below 30 mW to make sure all measurements are performed in the linear region. with the non-grating case, the signals with grating decay faster. This is due to the carrier diffusion effect: carrier diffusing away to the un-detected region (dark fringes in Fig. The comparison between case 5 and case 3 & 4 directly shows the substantial improvement in the SNR with the heterodyne technique (signal amplified by introducing a reference beam). Note that the signal of case 5 has even been averaged for 10 scans, but only 2 scans for case 3 & 4. Figure Thus, the signal intensity of the transient grating heterodyne geometry is also about 157 times larger than the pure diffraction intensity. In order to extract the carrier diffusion coefficient from measurements with the various experimental geometries presented in Figure In the grating imaging method, the transmission (or reflection) change of the probe beams is detected, and it is assumed that the local transmission (or reflection) change is proportional to the local excited carrier density. Such assumption is typically valid for small pump excitation power at resonant wavelength where f = 2π/P is the spatial frequency, P is the spatial grating period, D is the carrier diffusion coefficient, A 1 and A 2 are the amplitudes for carrier cooling and carrier recombination, and τ cool and τ r are the carrier cooling time and carrier recombination lifetime, respectively. The first term in the square bracket of Equation ( . And the ratio of the remaining signal over the initial signal is A 1 ( . This ratio can be viewed as the percentage of the non-diffusion effect in the total signal. The ratio will be compared with that of case 2 to explain the difference observed in experimental data at longer time delay. The derivation is similar to that of case 1. Right after pump excitation (time zero), two pump beams CI 00 N 0 is a factor. If further considering the carrier cooling, the final analytical expression of the signal in case 2 is: Similar to case 1, the first term (the constant 1) in the second bracket on the right hand side is the non-diffusion term and the second term is the diffusion term. According to Equation (2), when the diffusion effect vanishes at long time delay, the ratio of the remaining signal over the initial signal )] ≈ 0.667 A 1 /(A 1 + A 2 ) , which is larger than the ratio in case 1 (0.479A 1 /(A 1 + A 2 ) as estimated above). This explains why at later time delay when there is no diffusion effect, the signal of case 2 is higher than that of case 1, as shown in Figure In the transient grating heterodyne method, the generated carrier density grating modulates the refractive index in the sample and diffracts the incident detection beam. The electrical field of the output light (after passing through the sample), is determined by the product of the incident electrical field and a transmission (or reflection) transfer function modulated by the carrier density grating. With the specially designed heterodyne geometry, the diffracted detection beam and the transmitted reference beam will coincide in space automatically, interfere with each other, and be collected by the photodetector. Due to the additional reference beam, the detected signal also reflects both the carrier diffusion (from the diffracted detection beam) and recombination (from the transmitted reference beam) processes. The reference beam amplifies the diffraction signal through heterodyne interference. By monitoring the diffracted probe intensity, the grating heterodyne method gains information of carrier diffusion from the decay process of the carrier density grating. In principle, grating imaging method is transmission based, while the grating heterodyne is still diffraction based but with remarkable signal amplification. Similar to case 2, two pump beams (+1 and -1 orders) generates a sinusoidal form of carrier density grating in the sample, N(t = 0) = N 0 ( where A 1 and A 2 are the amplitudes of carrier recombination and carrier cooling, and the approximation sign holds when a ≪ 1, which is the case here under the condition of small excitation. As has been discussed before, case 4 and case 3 are symmetric, so the analytical expression of the signal in case 4 should be the same as that of case 3. A derivation similar to case 3 indeed leads to the same result: The difference between case 4 and case 5 is that in case 5 there is no reference beam. So only the optical field of the diffracted detection beam is considered, which is When there is no pump laser, the intensity in the diffraction direction is 0. If further considering the carrier cooling effect, the final analytical expression of the diffraction signal in case 5 is Equations ( In Generally speaking, after a pump pulse generates excited carriers in a semiconductor, both the real part n and the imaginary part κ of the refractive index of the material will change, i.e. n=n0+∆n, κ= κ0+∆κ, which will result in a change in both reflectivity and transmittance, R=R0+∆R, and T=T0+∆T. However, the excited-carrier-induced changes in n and k and their importance will be different in different detection regions. In the following analysis, we will show that in resonant detection region where the probe photon energy is close to the bandgap of the material, ∆κ/κ0 (the absorption change) is typically much larger than ∆n/n0 (the phase change); but at probe wavelengths far away from resonance, ∆κ/κ0 is usually negligible while ∆n/n0 will dominate. In a real physical system, the ∆n/n0 and ∆κ/κ0 are not independent parameters, but correlated to each other through the Kramers-Kronig relation, which is expressed as: Hence, the change of the real and imaginary parts of refractive index are also correlated: If the magnitude of either n change or κ change is known, we can use Equations (s3)~(s4) to estimate the change of the other one. In a semiconductor structure with well-defined band structure, such as GaAs/AlAs supper lattice in our case, the excited carrier induced absorption change (∆κ) is typically due to the phase space filling effect. After carrier thermalization and cooling, the excited carriers will mainly occupy the band edge energy states (or the exciton state for 2D or low temperature cases), giving rise to an absorption change only non-trivial at around band edge (or the exciton energy). [1-4] Since photoluminescence (PL) signal can just reflect the distribution of the excited carriers at the band edge, the absorption change -∆κ(ω) and the PL signal typically will have the same shape. [1,5] Based on this understanding, we can assume the absorption change with the following expression: where κ 0 (ω) is the extinction coefficient before excitation, which has been measured and modeled in references, [6,7] ω g is the angular frequency corresponding to the band gap of the direct transition, and Γ is a line width parameter characterizing the occupied energy range, and A(ω) is the absorption reduced ratio with a step-function like shape (to eliminate the part with energies lower than the direct band gap where little is contributed to the absorption change). The profile of carrier induced absorption change ∆κ(ω)/κ 0 based on equation (s5) is plotted in Figure in equation (s3) has odd symmetry with respect to ω and vanishes away from ω, and the integrand in equation (s3) at the band edge ω is a product of the odd symmetric term with a smooth and gradual change term ω ′ ∆κ(ω ′ ), hence, in the resonant region, this integrand will have opposite sign with comparable magnitude, which will result in a major cancellation when performing the integration to get the refractive index change ∆n(ω). So mathematically it is reasonable to reach a small ∆n(ω) around the band edge ω. In our experiment, the probe wavelength is 800 nm with the photon energy close to the band gap (1.53 eV, see Figure References: ( 