To analyze the switching dynamics and output performance of a superconducting nanowire single photon detector (SNSPD), the nanowire is usually modelled as an inductor in series with a time-varying resistor induced by absorption of a photon. Our recent experimental results show that, due to the effect of kinetic inductance, for a SNSPD made of a nanowire of sufficient length, its geometry length can be comparable to or even longer than the effective wavelength of frequencies contained in the output pulse. In other words, a superconducting nanowire can behave as a distributed transmission line so that the readout pulse depends on the photon detection location and the transmission line properties of the nanowire. Here, we develop a distributed model for a superconducting nanowire and apply it to simulate the output performance of a long nanowire designed into a coplanar waveguide. We compare this coplanar waveguide geometry to a conventional meander nanowire geometry. The simulation results agree well with our experimental observations. With this distributed model, we discussed the importance of microwave design of a nanowire and how impedance matching can affect the output pulse shape. We also discuss how the distributed model affects the growth and decay of the photon-triggered resistive hotspot. Nanostructured superconducting wires are used as a platform for constructing single-photon detectors. A typical superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD) is a single long nanowire meandered into a compact two-dimensional shape for efficiently collecting incident photons. Alternative nanowire architectures have been developed to extend the functions of a SNSPD, such as nanowires arranged in parallel for resolving photon numbers To understand the detector performance of a particular nanowire geometry, it is important to have an electrical model of the superconducting nanowire. Conventionally, a superconducting nanowire is modelled as an inductor Lk in series with a time-dependent photon-induced resistor Rn, as shown in Figure However, the lumped element model of a SNSPD is only valid when its geometric length is much shorter than the effective wavelengths in the nanowire. We recently found that effective wavelengths of microwave signals propagating in thin superconducting nanowires are reduced by about two orders of magnitudes from their free space values In the distributed model, it is important to extract the characteristic impedance Zn (which determines the transmission and reflection coefficients) and the signal propagation velocity vn (which determines the propagation delay) of the equivalent transmission line from the geometry and material properties of a superconducting nanowire and its electromagnetic environment. For a lossless transmission line, the characteristic impedance is Z n = √L n /C n and the phase velocity is v n = 1 √L n C n ⁄ (where L n and Cn are the inductance and capacitance per unit length, respectively). The kinetic inductance LK of the nanowire is much larger than its geometric inductance LG, resulting in , where l is the total length of the nanowire. Cn is the capacitance per unit length of the nanowire in its surrounding dielectric materials. We estimated Zn and vn by simulation using the Sonnet software package, defining a material of sheet inductance of Ln×w. The results are shown in Fig. For a typical fiber-coupled SNSPD (100 nm wide nanowire, 50% fill factor, 10 μm × 10 μm area), the total length is 0.5 mm, which gives a total maximum delay of 64 ps if the nanowire is considered as a transmission line of vn = 0.026c0. This delay is close to the measured jitter of a SNSPD and thus is not easily observed with a single-ended readout We see that the phase velocity, and hence also the characteristic impedance, vary significantly as a function of frequency for the meander geometry. The more tightly packed the meander, the faster the phase velocity. For a given nanowire length, this effect results in a decreased ability to determine the photon absorption location based on a comparison of the timing of the output pulses from each end of the nanowire. The periodic structure seen in the phase velocity as a function of frequency results from standing wave resonances along the length of the nanowire The frequency-dependent phase velocity exhibited by the meander geometry results in pulse dispersion. To illustrate this, we show in figure Figure The taper had a passband starting from 700 MHz, ensuring the rising edge of the photon detection pulse would be efficiently transmitted. As a photon detection triggered two electrical pulses of opposite propagation directions toward to each end of the nanowire, we used a timing-differential readout to collect both of them. As the nanowire was designed into a CPW, dispersion was assumed to be negligible. Thus, a lossless transmission line model in SPICE can be used for representing the pulse propagation along the nanowire. As shown in Fig. To model the tapered nanowire for impedance matching, we divided the taper into 100 transmission lines of incrementally varying impedance and connected them in series. As shown in Fig. The more prominent features of the distributed nanowire model were exhibited at the first transmitted pulses, which are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we created a distributed model for a superconducting nanowire and applied this model to study the photon response pulses from a superconducting nanowire with different geometries and readout schemes. Our simulation results suggest that, to observe a clear position dependence of the output pulses on photon detection locations, the microwave design of the nanowire should be considered. The distributed model also showed that the growth of the hotspot resistance depended on its locations, which could be explained by considering pulse propagations and reflections. With this model, we can design a distributed nanowire detector and use the microwave readout to extract additional detection information, e.g. to map the photon detection locations from the pulse arrival times 