The hydrogenation and deuteration of graphite with potassium intercalation compounds (GICs) as start-ing materials was investigated. Characterization of the reactions products (hydrogenated and deuterated graphene) was carried out by thermogravimetric analysis coupled with mass spectrometry (TG-MS) and Raman spectroscopy in-cluding statistical Raman spectroscopy (SRS) and -microscopy (SRM). The results reveal that the choice of the hydro-gen/deuterium source, the nature of the graphite (used as starting material), the potassium concentration in the inter-calation compound as well as the choice of the solvent have a great impact on the reaction outcome. Furthermore, it was possible to proof that both mono and few-layer hydrogenated/deuterated graphene can be produced. The synthesis and complete characterization of fully hydrogenated graphene (graphane) remains to be a challenge in carbon allotrope chemistry. In order to study the general feasibility of the GIC protonation, we have systematically screened three different types of graphite -synthetic spherical (SGN18), natural flake (NG), and expanded powder (PEX10) -and varied a) the amount of potassium and b) the nature of the proton/deuteron source in order to obtain deeper insights into the underlying reactivity principles. The reaction products have been characterized in detail by scanning Raman spectroscopy (SRS) and -microscopy (SRM) In previous studies it has been noticed that the combination of KC 8 with proton sources leads to the formation of varying products ranging from nanoscrolls In particular, the potassium GIC (SGN 18 -spherical graphite, 18 μm flake size) has been exfoliated in THF via sonication and subsequently the intermediately generated graphenide flakes have been trapped with 10 eq. of a hydrogen/deuterium source. The dispersion of the intercalate in THF via sonication marks the fundamental difference to previously reported approaches, In order to prove that the successful hydrogenation of graphene is possible, thermogravimetric analysis coupled with mass spectrometry (TG-MS) has been applied. For this purpose the samples were heated from rt to 700 °C under a constant flow of helium and the thermally detached entities were analyzed by an EI mass spectrometer. As exemplarily depicted in Fig. Thus, it can be concluded that the hydrogen or the deuterium is directly introduced by the addition of the respective trapping reagent. It is most likely that the appearance of HD can be traced back to hydrogen exchange reactions with the residual H 2 O traces in the THF solvent. For a deeper understanding of the influence of the deuterium source we investigated three different systems, namely, t-BuOD, MeOD, and heavy water. The amount of deuteration can slightly be increased by the use of deutero-methanol (6.1 % mass loss in temperature region B) with respect to t-BuOD (5.5 % mass loss), but drastically decreases when D 2 O (2.2 % mass loss) was applied as trapping reagent (Fig. In order to check this rationale, we used liquid ammonia instead of THF for the exfoliation/dispersion of the potassium intercalation compound In the next step we studied the impact of the potassium concentration on the hydrogenation efficiency. In the case of the reductive phenylation of graphene we have already demonstrated that the degree of reduction determines the degree of covalent addend binding. Taking into account that for graphane -fully hydrogenated graphene -a maximum mass loss of 7.7 % can be expected, our obtained 4.8 % in the case of the SGN 18 (synthetic spherical graphite) starting GIC, with 0.25 eq. potassium, represents a very promising starting point for future graphane based applications. In addition, it can be expected -and it has been shown In the case of the powder graphite (3-5 μm flake size) the respective TG profile of G 1:4 C D (PEX) (Fig. Further unambiguous proof for the successful hydrogenation/deuteration of graphene was provided by a detailed Raman spectroscopic characterization including statistical Raman spectroscopy (SRS) and statistical Raman microscopy (SRM). The statistical Raman analysis reveals a comparatively narrow distribution of basal plane sp In the deuterated samples the mean I D/G ratio (Fig. In analogy to the TG-MS experiments, the thermal cleavage of the hydrogen and deuterium addends can be directly monitored by Raman spectroscopy. For this purpose G 1:4 B D was heated under an N 2 atmosphere from 100 to 500 °C and every 50 °C step a Raman map of 1,000 spectra was recorded. As presented in Fig. Significantly, the plot of the I D/G values as function of the temperature (Fig. The sample characterization presented so far was primarily based on the analysis of the bulk material. Here, we were able to demonstrate that an efficient bulk hydrogenation is possible on the basis of potassium intercalated graphite starting materials. That this reductive reaction protocol indeed leads to functionalized monolayer and few-layer graphene can be shown by a detailed investigation of drop-casted samples of the reaction mixture of G 1:4 C D (NG). In Fig. A remarkable observation is, that the spectral data of the single flakes also confirm the results of the bulk measurement with respect to the obtained degree of functionalization (I D/G of 1.0 and a broadened D-band). Moreover, it clearly poofs the successful production of a deuterated mono-layer (flake 1) and few-layer graphene (flake 2) with a respective I 2D/G ratio between 3.0 and 1.0 and a 2D-band FWHM of 30 cm -1 for flake 1 and 59 cm -1 for flake 2. In conclusion, we presented an efficient protocol for the reductive hydrogenation/deuteration of potassium intercalated graphite as starting material. In this way, a highly hydrogenated bulk material (4.8 % mass loss of hydrogen -7.7 % theoretical value for graphane) is accessible. The successful synthesis has been proven by detailed TG-MS and Raman spectroscopic investigations. The variation of the graphite starting material, hydrogen/deuterium source, and potassium concentration showed that these parameters have a distinct influence on the hydrogen content in the final material. By the right combination of these parameters, a tuneable degree of functionalization can be accomplished. In addition, the covalent binding of hydrogen is reversible and the attached hydrogen atoms can thermally be detached in a temperate region between 350 and 600 °C. As concluded from SRS and SRM, the reductive hydrogenation yields a functionalized bulk material mainly consisting of hydrogenated mono-layer and few-layer graphene. Ricarda A. Schäfer, Daniela Dasler, Udo Mundloch, Frank Hauke and Andreas Hirsch* Synthetic spherical graphite (SGN18, 99.99 % C, TGA residue 0.01 % wt -Future Carbon, Germany) with a mean grain size of 18 μm and a specific surface area of 6.2 m 2 /g was used after annealing under vacuum (300 °C). Natural flake graphite (NG, TGA residue 2.38 %, Kropfmühl AG, Germany) -with a mean grain size of ~1,000 μm and a specific surface area of 0.2 m 2 /g was used as received. Expanded powder graphite (PEX10, 98.5 % C, TGA residue 0.54 % wt -Future Carbon, Germany) with a mean grain size of 3-5 μm and a specific surface area of 6 m 2 /g was used as received. Chemicals and solvents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich Co. (Germany) and were used as-received if not stated otherwise. THF was distilled in an argon inert gas atmosphere once over sodium and three times over sodium-potassium alloy in order to remove any remaining water. Residual traces of oxygen were removed by pump freeze treatment (four iterative steps). THF(abs) was used for all reactions. The deuterated alcohols and heavy water were degased by pump freeze treatment (five iterative steps) to remove remaining traces of oxygen. Glove Box: Sample synthesis and preparation was carried out in an argon filled LABmaster pro sp glove box (MBraun), equipped with a gas purifier and solvent vapor removal unit: oxygen content < 0.1 ppm, water content < 0.1 ppm. Raman Spectroscopy: Raman spectroscopic characterization was carried out on a LabRAM Aramis confocal Raman microscope (Horiba) with a laser spot size of about 1 μm (Olympus LMPlanFl 50x LWD, NA 0.50) in backscattering geometry. As excitation source a green laser with λexc = 532 nm was used and the incident laser power was kept as low as possible (1.35 mW) to avoid any structural sample damage. Spectra were recorded with a CCD array at -70 °Cgrating: 600 grooves/mm. Spectra were obtained from a 50 μm x 50 μm area with 2 μm step size in SWIFT mode for low integration times. Exact sample movement was provided by an automated xy-scanning table. Calibration in frequency was carried out with a HOPG crystal as reference. Mass spectrometer coupled thermogravimetric analysis (TG/MS) was carried out on a Netzsch STA 409 CD instrument equipped with a Skimmer QMS 422 mass spectrometer (EI ion source, quadrupole mass spectrometer) with the following programmed time-dependent temperature profile: 24 -700 °C (dynamic heating of 10 K/min). Sample analysis (initial sample weight about 5 mg) was carried out under inert gas atmosphere with a helium gas flow of 80 mL/min. For the characterization of the deuterated graphene derivatives nitrogen was used as carrier gas. Graphite intercalation compounds with varying potassium:carbon ratios: G1:4 [K:C : hours. Afterwards, the salt was allowed to cool to RT and isolated as a dark blue (G1:24), bronze (G1:8) or beige (G1:4) material, respectively. In an argon filled glove box (<0.1 ppm oxygen; <0.1 ppm H2O), the graphite intercalation compound G1:4 (SGN18) (21.7 mg, 1 mmol carbon) was dispersed in 20 mL THF(abs) by the aid of a 5 min tip ultrasonication treatment (Bandelin UW 3200). Outside the glovebox under a constant Ar flow the corresponding hydrogen source (see table 