We investigate the waiting time distributions (WTDs) of superconducting hybrid junctions, considering both conventional and topologically nontrivial superconductors hosting Majorana bound states at their edges. To this end, we employ a scattering matrix formalism that allows us to evaluate the waiting times between the transmissions and reflections of electrons or holes. Specifically, we analyze normalmetal-superconductor (NIS) junctions and NISIN junctions, where Cooper pairs are spatially split into different leads. The distribution of waiting times is sensitive to the simultaneous reflection of electrons and holes, which is enhanced by the zero-energy state in topological superconductors. For the NISIN junctions, the WTDs of trivial superconductors feature a sharp dependence on the applied voltage, while for topological ones they are mostly independent of it. This particular voltage dependence is again connected to the presence of topological edge states, showing that WTDs are a promising tool for identifying topological superconductivity. Topological superconductivity is an exotic state of quantum matter characterized by the emergence of symmetry-protected gapless edge states An alternative to conventional current measurements is provided by the recent progress in the real-time detection of single electrons in nano-scale systems. Electron counting techniques have by now reached a level of sophistication where single charges can be manipulated and detected with high precision In this work, we identify the presence of edge states in topological superconductors using the distribution of electron waiting times. We describe the coherent microscopic processes that take place at normal-metal-superconductor (NIS) junctions with conventional or topological superconductors and include the effects of the transmission amplitudes and the applied voltage. Specifically, we demonstrate that the WTDs of Andreev processes are sensitive to the presence of topological edge states even under conditions where conductance and noise measurements would be ambiguous, i.e., in the presence of impurities or with high transmission amplitudes. While conductance spectroscopy requires tunnel junctions and fine-tunning of the bias voltage for subgap values, the distribution of electron waiting times can identify topological superconductors at junctions with arbitrary transparency and for fixed voltages. In an NISIN setup with grounded superconductor, we show that the WTD is sensitive to the number of resonances inside the transport window. For trivial superconductors, the WTDs change abruptly from a low-transmission profile for subgap voltages into an oscillatory one that reflects the transfer of electrons for voltages above the superconducting gap. The WTDs of topological superconductors, by contrast, are mainly determined by the zero-energy state and do not change over a wide range of voltages. This rest of the paper is now organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we describe the microscopic scattering theory of normal-metal-superconductor junctions. In Sec. 3, we discuss the theory of WTDs for coherent scatterers. In Sec. 4, we analyze the WTDs of NIS junctions with one normal-state lead and one superconductor lead. In Sec. 5, we turn to NISIN junctions, where the superconductor is sandwiched between two normal-state leads, so that Cooper pairs can be spatially split into different leads. Finally, Sec. 6 contains our concluding remarks and an outlook on prospects for future work. We are interested in the electronic transport in hybrid junctions consisting of superconducting and normal-state regions. The low-energy excitations of a superconductor are well-described by the Hamiltonian 51 where μ is the chemical potential and σ ˆ0,1,2,3 are the Pauli matrices in spin space. Corresponding to our choice of basis, the quasi-particle state has the form T where u σ (k) and v σ (k) are the electron-and hole-like components with spin σ = ↑, ↓ and wave vector k. We focus on one-dimensional systems extending along the x-direction and electronic excitations near the Fermi surface with the dispersion relation where m is the effective mass. For a singlet s-wave superconductor, the pairing potential has the simple form where the amplitude Δ ≥ 0 is independent of k and φ is the superconducting phase. A triplet p-wave superconductor, by contrast, has a pairing potential that is an odd function of the wave vector. Below, we choose the spin quantization axis to lie along the z-direction and to be parallel to the spin polarization of the triplet state x i 1 which is an odd function of k x . We now consider the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations where E is the excitation energy measured from the Fermi level. To proceed, we note that for both singlet and triplet superconductors, we can decouple the two independent spin channels of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here, the two wave vectors are given by  and the ratio of the hole and electron amplitudes reads Above, we have defined η σα = ±1 depending on the spin σ for singlet superconductors and on α for triplet superconductors. Thus, for a specific geometry, we need to find the coefficients v 0 , a σα and b σα , so that the boundary conditions are fulfilled and the state is normalized. We note here that a superposition of the s-and p-wave pairings from Eq. ( Throughout this work, we will be interested in transport processes taking place in hybrid systems involving normal-state regions (Δ = 0) and superconducting regions (Δ ≠ 0). As an example we first describe an NIS junction consisting of a normal-state (N) region connected via an insulating barrier (I) to a superconductor (S). The insulator is described by the potential barrier F 2  positioned (at x = 0) between the normal-state region (x < 0) and the superconductor (x > 0). Here, F  is the Fermi wave vector, and Z is the dimensionless strength of the barrier . The corresponding boundary conditions then read We consider electrons being injected from the normal-metal and correspondingly set r eh , and b σ-= 0 in Eq. ( ee eh For singlet superconductors, the amplitudes are the same for both spin directions, up to an irrelevant sign in the Andreev reflection amplitude σ r eh . For the triplet superconductors, the amplitudes for the two spin channels are identical. The difference between singlet and triplet superconductors comes from the product η σ + η σ-in the denominator of the amplitudes. For singlet superconductors, we have η σ + η σ-= 1, while for triplet superconductors, we get η σ + η σ-= -1, leading to the formation of a zero-energy Andreev bound state The procedure above can be used to find the transmission and reflection amplitudes of more complicated systems, for instance with two normal leads coupled to a superconductor Having formulated the boundary conditions, we can then evaluate the scattering properties of the NISIN structure. We are interested in quantum transport through superconducting hybrid junctions, specifically in the waiting time between quasi-particles leaving the superconducting region . To evaluate the WTD, we proceed as in ref. The idle time probability can be evaluated using scattering theory, leading to the determinant formula 37 s e s e where the set γ γ t t { , } s e corresponds to all relevant particles and associated time intervals. The hermitian operator is a matrix in the combined energy and particle type representation. It has the block form EE having omitted the time arguments. The scattering matrix E ( )  and the kernel E ( )  are matrices in the space of particle types. The kernel is the block diagonal matrix s e s e given by the direct sum of kernels To implement the matrix in Eq. ( In addition, the first-passage time distributions read The first distribution, Eq. ( . In combination, Eqs (15-22) allow us to evaluate the distributions of waiting times for the superconducting systems that we consider in the following. We first consider an NIS junction. The differential conductance at zero temperature is given by the well-known expression 54 where G N = (e 2 /h)/(1 + Z 2 ) is the normal-state conductance. Without a barrier the N and S regions, normal reflections are suppressed and Andreev reflection becomes the only available scattering mechanism. This situation corresponds to taking Z = 0 in Eq. ( . Consequently, the subgap conductance for transparent junctions, where |r eh | 2 = 1, takes the universal value G NS = 2G N independently of the pairing mechanism; see the green line in Fig. The distribution of waiting times between particles, either electrons or holes, at NIS junctions provides complementary information about the pairing mechanism in the superconductor. The Wigner-Dyson distribution is characteristic for the free flow of non-interacting fermions . Second, the width of the distribution reveals the wave nature of the quantum excitationscompletely regular transport would be characterized by a Dirac delta peak at τ = 〈τ h 〉. Finally, the simultaneous detection of two particles of the same type is forbidden due to the Pauli principle, i.e., τ = = → ( 0) 0 . All these considerations are valid at zero temperature. We do not expect a qualitative change up to finite electronic temperatures comparable to the applied voltage, cf. ref. Since normal backscattering is suppressed in transparent junctions, the WTD between reflected electrons approaches Poissonian statistics given by the exponential distribution, , as characteristic of low-transmitting contacts The surface state in the triplet superconductor completely changes this picture. For any applied voltage, a perfect Andreev reflection occurs at zero energy, making the scattering probability strongly energy-dependent. The WTD between reflected holes captures this effect resulting in a crossover between Wigner-Dyson and Poisson statistics indicated by the blue line in Fig. In addition to the waiting times between particles of the same type, it is interesting to analyze the distribution of waiting times between different types of particles. These distributions do not necessarily vanish at zero waiting time, since the simultaneous reflection of an electron and a hole is possible. For p-wave superconductors, which always fulfill |r eh (E = 0)| 2 = 1, the distribution of waiting times between electrons and holes is similar to a Wigner-Dyson distribution, but with the important difference that it remains finite at zero waiting time. In Fig. In Fig. Next, we turn to NISIN junctions. We thus consider a superconductor of finite width and we add a second normal electrode. The resulting structure, with barriers of strength Z L,R on each side of the superconductor, can function as a Cooper pair splitter To explore the different transmission profiles for trivial and topological superconductors, we evaluate the WTDs for the NISIN junction. To be specific, we consider low-transmitting barriers and a superconducting region that is wider than the coherence length. As a result, electron and hole transmission through s-wave superconductors is very weak and only takes place for energies above the gap. On the other hand, p-wave superconductors feature a finite transmission for both electrons and holes at zero energy. However, these scattering processes are of similar magnitude and have opposite contributions to the nonlocal conductance that tend to cancel. Thus, similarly to transparent NIS junctions, the nonlocal conductance cannot clearly identify the presence of topological edge states. The presence of the edge states can be captured by the WTDs. First, we consider the NISIN junction with a voltage bias applied to the left electrode only, i.e, V L = V and V R = 0. The WTDs between transmitted hole-like quasi-particles for s-wave superconductors strongly depend on the applied voltage, see Fig. We now allow for the voltage to drop symmetrically across the junction by setting V L = V and V R = -V. In addition to the incoming electrons from the left electrode, we must now include holes being injected from the right lead. These holes experience normal and Andreev reflections at the right interface, which contribute to the outgoing stream of electrons and holes in the right lead. Since we consider low-transmitting interfaces, normal reflections are dominant except for resonant energies. In Fig. We have shown that waiting time distributions are a useful tool to determine the presence of edge states in topological superconductors. At normal-superconductor junctions, the waiting time distribution of hole-like quasi-particles is equivalent to the distribution of waiting times between Cooper pairs being injected into the superconductor. Moreover, the distribution of waiting times between holes reveals the presence of topological edge states in junctions with p-wave superconductors. In addition, the distribution of waiting times between electrons and holes is very sensitive to the edge states, even in transparent junctions, where conductance measurements would not provide a clear signal. In trivial superconductors, the waiting time distribution is suppressed to zero at short waiting times for subgap voltages. By contrast, for topological superconductors, the waiting time distribution remains finite for any applied voltage, providing a clear difference from s-wave superconductors. In systems where topological superconductivity is artificially engineered For NISIN junctions, we have analyzed the waiting time between the transmissions of electrons and holes through the superconducting region. Also in this case, the p-wave superconductors feature distinctive behaviors in the nonlocal transport as revealed by the waiting time distributions. For s-wave superconductors, the waiting time distribution changes abruptly as the voltage bias is increased above the superconducting gap. By contrast, for p-wave superconductors, the transport is dominated by the presence of zero-energy edge modes, and the waiting time distributions are almost independent of the voltage. As an outlook on future work, we finally point out possible avenues for further developments. In quantum dot systems, the tunneling of individual electrons can now be experimentally observed using single-electron detectors, and measurements of an electron waiting time distribution have recently been reported Scientific REpORTS | (2018) 8:16828 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34776-y