In monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs) the valence and conduction bands are spin split because of the strong spin-orbit interaction. In tungsten-based TMDs the spin-ordering of the conduction band is such that the so-called dark exciton, consisting of an electron and a hole with opposite spin orientation, has lower energy than the A exciton. A possible mechanism leading to the transition from bright to dark excitons involves the scattering of the electrons from the upper to the lower conduction band state in K. Here we exploit the valley selective optical selection rules and use two-color helicity-resolved pump-probe spectroscopy to directly measure the intravalley spin-flip relaxation dynamics of electrons in the conduction band of single-layer WS2. This process occurs on a sub-ps time scale and it is significantly dependent on the temperature, indicative of a phonon-assisted relaxation. These experimental results are supported by time-dependent ab-initio calculations which show that the intra-valley spin-flip scattering occurs on significantly longer time scales only exactly at the K point. In a realistic situation the occupation of states away from the minimum of the conduction band leads to a dramatic reduction of the scattering time. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are promising for opto-electronics The large VB splitting gives rise to two distinct interband transitions (called A and B) strongly renormalized by excitonic effects Here we present a combined experimental and theoretical study of the intravalley scattering in 1L-WS 2 . Exploiting two-color helicity-resolved pump-probe spectroscopy, we find an almost instantaneous build-up of the occupation of both CB states in the K' valley after excitation of the A-exciton transition within the K valley. The build-up of the occupation of the lower CB state within the same valley, instead, is clearly delayed; however, it still displays a surprisingly short time constant of ∼200fs at 77K. We find that this process becomes faster at higher temperature indicating a phonon-mediated spin-flip scattering. This interpretation is confirmed by time-dependent abinitio calculations 1L-WS 2 flakes are produced by micromechanical cleavage from bulk WS 2 crystals (HQ Graphene, The Netherlands). These are exfoliated with Nitto Denko tape, then further exfoliated on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp for inspection under an optical microscope and stamping on a 200μm-thick fused silica substrate, as described in Ref. Both the equilibrium and non-equilibrium optical response of 1L-WS 2 are dominated by two excitonic resonances We then perform transient absorption measurements with the pump tuned to E A , while the probe is either resonant with E A (degenerate configuration) or E B (nondegenerate configuration) (Fig. Many scattering mechanisms contribute to the depletion of the bright state on a sub-ps timescale, since bright excitons can radiatively recombine in the same valley This interpretation is substantiated by comparing these findings to the case of MoS 2 . Here the spin ordering of the CB state in K is reversed compared to 1L-WS 2 implying that bright exciton has lower energy than dark exciton To gain a deeper insight into the underlying scattering mechanism, we study the temperature dependence of ∆T /T B,K (Fig. τ rise significantly decreases at higher temperature (Fig. In addition to intravalley relaxation, scattering into the opposite valley is expected to be a major channel for the depletion of the A excitons in K The valley polarization is defined as the imbalance of the exciton population between K and K', i.e. (∆T /T A,K -∆T /T A,K ′ ). The A polarization (grey line in Fig. We test our hypothesis on the fast intravalley relaxation process by time-dependent ab-initio calculations using a first-principles implementation of nonequilibrium MBTP The coherent term, ∂ t ρ(τ ) coh , includes the electron-hole interaction experienced by the photoexcited electron-hole pairs and describes the interaction with the pump laser, while the dissipative term, ∂ t ρ(τ ) coll , accounts for all scattering processes. The non-equilibrium population, f i (τ ), is defined as the diagonal part of the single-particle density matrix f i (τ ) = ρ ii (τ ), with i the generic index representing the electronic band and momentum. By solving Eq.1, we have access to the carrier distribution for all momenta and bands at different τ . In our simulation, the carriers are selectively photoexcited in the K valley by a circularly polarized pump pulse centered around the A exciton. The inset of Fig. The simulations clearly demonstrate that the inter and intravalley carrier scattering are driven by phonon mediated processes. Nevertheless it is well known In conclusion, we studied intra-and intervalley relaxation dynamics in 1L-WS 2 by two-color helicity-resolved transient absorption spectroscopy. This experimental approach allowed us to separately study and to disentangle these processes. We have shown that intravalley relaxation is fast (<1ps), leading to a very efficient depletion of the bright A exciton. The temperature dependence of the intravalley scattering rate is a signature of a phonon-mediated process, which depends on the value of the CB spin splitting. Ab-initio simulations based on non-equilibrium MBPT formalism are in good agreement with experiments, confirming the fast timescale. The valley polarization in 1L-WS 2 has a similarly fast relaxation time, suggesting a strong interaction between the two valleys. We stress that, since intravalley spin flip and intervalley scattering processes are effective on the same timescale, the former relaxation mechanism cannot be disregarded in explaining the fast valley depolarization of A excitons in 1L-WS 2 . Since the intravalley scattering process determines the formation of the dark intravalley exciton, our results strongly suggest that the bright to dark intravalley exciton transition occurs on a sub-ps timescale. Dark excitons reduce the light emission efficiency of 1L-TMDs 