We demonstrate the fabrication of ∼1.08 μm deep microfluidic cavities with characteristic size as large as 7 mm × 11 mm or 11 mm diameter, using a silicon-glass anodic bonding technique that does not require posts to act as separators to define cavity height. Since the phase diagram of 3 He is significantly altered under confinement, posts might act as pinning centers for phase boundaries. The previous generation of cavities relied on full wafer-bonding which is more prone to failure and requires dicing post-bonding, whereas the these cavities are made by bonding a pre-cut piece of Hoya SD-2 glass to a patterned piece of silicon in which the cavity is defined by etching. Anodic bonding was carried out at 425 • C with 200 V, and we observe that pressurizing the cavity to failure (> 30 bar pressure) results in glass breaking, rather than the glass-silicon bond separation. In this article, we discuss the detailed fabrication of the cavity, its edges, and details of the junction between the coin silver fill line and the silicon base of the cavity that enables a low internal-friction joint. This feature is important for mass coupling torsional oscillator experimental assays of the superfluid inertial contribution where a high quality factor (Q) improves frequency resolution. The surface preparation that yields well-characterized smooth surfaces to eliminate pinning sites, the use of transparent glass as a cover permitting optical access, low temperature capability and attachment of pressure-capable ports for fluid access may be features that are important in other applications. It is now well established in experiments Most experiments carried out to date have used multiple plates Attempts to study coherence-length thickness samples used films of The anodic bonding technique described here The paper starts by describing the design of the cavities, outlines the process flow and cleaning steps used, describes the patterning of the silicon, the design of the fill port and the polishing of the glass to eliminate scratches. The assembly jig for anodic bonding is described next along with the bonding process followed by the description of the metallization of the exterior of the cavity to achieve adequate thermalization. The surface roughness of both glass and silicon as measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM) is then discussed together with the cavity depth measured using a profilometer scan and scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging to characterize the edges of the cavity. Finally details of assembly of the fill line are provided followed by results of pressure testing and finite element simulations on a cavity identical to that used for NMR imaging experiments. Wafer handling equipment at the Cornell NanoScale Science and Technology Facility (CNF) had significant difficulty in accommodating 3 mm thick wafers that we had deployed in the first generation devices Figure In the past For the torsion pendulum, we sought to achieve a fluid to pendulum inertia ratio of ≈ 3 parts in 10 6 . To obtain an inertia resolution of 1.5 parts in 1000 we would require a frequency resolution of 1 part in 10 9 which required the quality factor of our pendulum > 10 6 and also a reduction of mechanical and electrical noise in our setup. Our target dimension (cavity height) for these series of experiments was 1.1 μm, and the thickness of silicon and glass were each 1 mm. The design that evolved was a cylindrical cavity with a diameter of 11 mm, to be embedded in a silicon sample of 14 mm diameter. The fill line -torsion oscillator attachment point is located at the center of the cavity and consists of a 335 μm through hole. To reduce bowing and prevent collapse of the cavity during bonding, we incorporated a C-shaped support region centered in the cell with an outer diameter of 4.00 mm and inner diameter of 1.50 mm. Thus, the cavity that dominates the superfluid signal (main experimental cavity) has an annular shape of inner diameter of 4.00 mm and outer diameter of 11.00 mm. The central region encompassing the fill line was connected to the main experimental cavity through a channel of 1.25 mm length and 0.60 mm width. Both the "C" shaped region and the periphery are designed to be bonded to the glass lid. The fluid inertia can be expressed as , where r o , r i are the outer and inner radii of the cavity (5.50 mm and 2.00 mm respectively), h is the height (1.08 μm), and ρ is the density of the 3 He. At vapor (effectively zero) pressure, the density of 3 He fluid is 0.0819 g/cm 3 , yielding a fluid inertia of 1.25 × 10 -6 g-cm FIG. The fabrication process can be divided into five major steps. First, define and create the step in the silicon surface for the cavity. Second, etch through the fill line hole and the backside concentric circles to enable the attachment of the fill line to the silicon with epoxy. Third, polish and cut the glass. Fourth, clean and prepare the surfaces, and bond the silicon and glass to complete the cell. The final step is to deposit a thick film of silver to help thermalize the silicon and glass at ultra-low temperatures. Figure Cleaning was carried out before each lithography step and before oxidation steps used to define the cavity dimensions. Additional cleaning was carried our prior to assembly. The RCA SC-1 clean recipe follows the procedure listed here: 1 part NH 4 OH (10-35% NH 3 ), 1 part H 2 O 2 (29-32% solution), and 5 parts of deionized water were heated to 75-80 • C. The solution was stirred vigorously using a magnetic stirrer while the pieces were immersed. The pieces were immersed in the stirred solution for 10 minutes between each lithography or oxidation step and for about half an hour before final assembly for bonding. The RCA SC-2 clean recipe was performed with a solution of 6 parts of deionized water, 1 part HCl (33-40% solution), and 1 part of H 2 O 2 (29-32% solution) at 70 • C, for 10 minutes. A modified local oxidation process is used to define the cavity to confine the 3 He. In the process, the silicon in the cavity region is converted to silicon oxide to a depth greater than the surrounding area, producing a recess in the silicon once all the oxide is removed. We could have etched the silicon surface using Reactive Ion Etching (RIE); however, this would have produced a much rougher finish at the bottom surface of the cavity and also would have resulted in significant variations of the cavity depth across the wafer and possibly also across a single cell. Cavity depth control and surface smoothness are extremely important for the experiments To prepare the wafer for patterning we grew a thick oxide (2.5 to 3.5 μm) on both sides of the wafer by exposing the wafers for 12 hours at 1200 • C in an atmospheric furnace. Hydrogen and oxygen (no HCl) were flowed into the furnace tube, providing the necessary conditions for wet oxidation. As the film thickness increases, the rate of the thermal oxide growth slows down significantly. Thus to get even thicker films, we needed to deposit extra oxide rather than growing more. A Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD) process using SiH 4 and N 2 O as precursors was used to deposit additional 2 μm of oxide on the front wafer surface. PECVD deposition is fairly fast, but the film quality is significantly lower, displaying lower density and large amount of incorporated hydrogen in the PECVD film compared to the thermally grown film. However, since we use this film as a mask layer, this is not as important and using PECVD oxide is acceptable. However, the lower density of the oxide layer affects the calculation of diffusion growth of oxide (discussed later in this section), and may compromise the accuracy of the desired depth so the PECVD film is only used as an additional masking layer. At the end of this step the wafer is at the point illustrated in Fig. The next step was to spin, bake and develop positive photoresist (SPR 220-3.5) following a standard procedure. The cavity pattern was exposed using UV light, and the regions of the resist exposed to it were dissolved away in the developer solution (AZ 726, 2.38% TMAH in H 2 O). Since we were using a very thick (3-4 μm) photoresist, a proximity plate bake was used (115 • C for 120 s). The wafer was not quenched on a cold surface to avoid cracking the resist and instead left to cool by itself in the wafer box. The wafers were then placed in a Reactive Ion Etch (RIE) chamber where a CHF 3 + O 2 recipe was used to dry etch and so remove the majority of the oxide in the cavity region. The last 150-200 nm of oxide was etched away using buffered oxide etch (BOE 1:6) since the plasma etch also attacks the Si. Because the BOE does not etch the Silicon, the etch is terminated exactly at the SiO 2 -Si interface and thus the BOE leaves the silicon surface smooth whereas the RIE would leave it rough. At the end of this step the wafer is at the point illustrated in Fig. After removing all the resist and carefully cleaning the wafers, the wafers were placed back into the oxidation furnace for a second oxidation step. The rate of oxide growth is given by the Deal-Grove model The fill line port should have straight walls and a well-defined diameter. Previous attempts to drill the hole using diamond drills or grind a hole using diamond slurry In the next step we etch away (using RIE) the oxide in the hole area from the cavity side while preserving the oxide on the other side (outer surface of the wafer). The oxide on the outside surface will serve as a stop for the plasma once the hole in the silicon is completed. The remaining resist and the oxide outside of the hole area provides a mask through which the wafer can be etched through DRIE (the Bosch DRIE process has a high selectivity for silicon versus resist, and even higher versus oxide). The DRIE process deposits fluoropolymer on the sidewalls of the hole. To remove this a further RIE plasma etch step of CF 4 + O 2 was performed. To ensure full removal of the Bosch polymer, and to preserve the cleanliness of the pieces until just before bonding, the wafers were oxidized one more time at 1100 • C for a short time and 200-300 nm of oxide was grown. Then just before bonding that oxide was removed using a 49% HF dip. Any residue that could be on the wafer surfaces prior to this step is oxidized in the furnace and underetched in the HF dip. At the end of this step the wafer is at the point illustrated in Fig. In contrast to the patterning of the silicon, the glass needs no preparation steps involving lithography. However prior to dicing, the Hoya SD-2 glass wafer After polishing, the next step was to dice the glass in the octagonal shape needed for the TO and a rectangular shape for the NMR cells. We spun a thick layer of SPR220-7 resist which was subsequently baked overnight in a 90 • C convection oven to harden the resist further. The hardened resist is thought to be more effective as a protective layer during the dicing process. The wafer was then put on a sticky dicing tape and diced with a diamond coated dicing saw tool in the clean room. For the TO, the wafer was first diced into squares, and then the squares were put in the tool one by one and had their four corners cut off to produce an octagon. At this point in the assembly process stream, the silicon and glass pieces were ready to bond The assembly was completed using a custom made bonding jig shown in Figure The bonding jig was placed in an air furnace and heated to 425 • C. The two electrodes were connected to a high voltage power supply with polarity shown in Fig. The final step in the fabrication was to deposit a ∼1 μm thick silver film layer on the outside surfaces of the cell. The silver film aids in the thermalization of the silicon and the glass to the electron temperature of the nuclear cooling stage. The fill line hole was temporarily sealed with a piece of kapton tape. A second small piece of kapton tape (approximately 2 mm on a side) was placed on the outer surface of glass side of the cell to cover the fill line hole so as to not obstruct the interior view of the fill line. This allowed us to verify that epoxy did not run into the cell when attaching the cell to the fill line. A teflon holder to clamp the cell by points on its edge was machined. The holder with head was attached to a rotation plate inside a sputter deposition chamber so that the TO cell could be silvered on all sides. The NMR cell was only silvered on its faces (the edges were not silvered to reduce eddy current heating from pulses). In order for the deposited silver film to adhere well to the silicon and the glass on the TO, a thin titanium adhesion layer was deposited first. Since titanium becomes superconducting at low temperatures decreasing its thermal conductivity significantly, we deposited only a 5-10 nm thick adhesion layer. The titanium layer was not used on the NMR cell and no problems with adhesion were noted. The process flow described in this section is summarized here in point form. 1. Design and prepare masks with the desired patterns. 2. Grow thick (∼2.5-3 μm) thermal oxide. 3. Deposit more oxide (∼2 μm) by PECVD. 4. Pattern the cavity region using photolithography. Etch the oxide in the cavity region through a photoresist mask using dry and wet etching. 5. Remove the photoresist in hot solvent bath. Clean the wafers in RCA SC-1 and SC-2 baths. 6. Thermally oxidize the wafers. This defines the cavity depth. 7. Deep Reactive Ion Etch (Bosch process) is used to etch a series of concentric circles around the fill line. 8. Deep Reactive Ion Etch through the wafer to create the fill line. 9. Remove the photoresist in hot solvent bath. To aid in the removal of the Bosch polymer that forms on the sidewalls during the Deep Reactive Ion Etch process, we plasma etch the resist stripped wafer in CF 4 +O 2 plasma. 10. Remove all oxide using wet etching by HF. To ensure full removal of the Bosch polymer, the wafers were additionally cleaned in RCA SC-1 and SC-2 baths and further oxidized for additional 300 nm of oxide on the surface. 11. The glass wafer is polished. The glass is diced. 12. Si wafers are broken along the tabs separating the individual cells. The Si pieces are dipped in HF to remove the protective oxide. 13. The Si and glass pieces are cleaned in RCA SC-1 bath and put in contact in the bonding jig. The pieces are subsequently anodically bonded. 14. A 1 μm thick silver layer for thermalization is sputter coated (over 5-10 nm Ti adhesion layer on the TO cell only) on the exterior of the cavity. The silver film did not cover the edges of the NMR cell The cell is now ready for the fill line or torsion rod to be attached to the backside. The seal made between silicon and coin-silver has to survive stresses arising from the differential contraction between coin-silver, silicon and any epoxy used to connect the two materials. Most epoxies have a thermal expansion coefficient that is about twice as large as that of silver. We found that Tra-bond 2151 had the lowest thermal expansion coefficient of all tested epoxies and it proved to provide excellent adhesion. It also had large enough viscosity so it would not flow into the fill line and contaminate the cavity. Additionally in order that the TO have a high quality factor (Q), the contact area of the coin-silver to silicon joint should be reasonably large so that the dissipation arising from two level systems To act as a filler and decrease the volume of bulk fluid in the fill line next to the experimental cell, we selected a hollow silica tube (inner diameter 100 μm, outer diameter 320 μm) The NMR cell variant was pressure tested at room temperature. The cell was pressurized in 2 bar steps to 32 bar where the glass eventually gave way (Figure In the assembled experiment, the "lid" of the nanofluidic devices is made from amorphous glass and the micromachined bottom part is a piece of single crystal silicon wafer (100 plane at the cavity surface). Nevertheless, for the simulation we assume isotropic mechanical properties for both sides. We used the material properties of polycrystalline silicon for the bottom part of the cell and the material properties given by Hoya SD-2 product literature for the top part. The relevant material properties used in the simulation are the density, Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio. For silicon, we used a value for the density ρ silicon = 2329 kg/m 3 , a value for the Young's modulus E silicon = 170 GPa and the value for the Poisson's ratio ν silicon = 0.28. For the Hoya SD-2 glass, we used a value of the density ρ glass = 2600 kg/m 3 , a value of the Young's modulus E glass = 88.6 GPa and a value of the Poisson's ratio ν glass = 0.244. In FEM simulations, one has to define the mesh geometry; we used tetrahedrons as mesh elements. We observed slight differences in the results as a function of the mesh element size. Eventually, the results should converge to a certain value when the mesh is sufficiently fine. The results reported here have been obtained with the finest meshing and should be within 10% of this convergence value. The maximum change in height for the NMR cell is 17.3 nm/bar in total with a contribution of 7.0 nm/bar from the silicon wafer and 10.3 nm/bar from the silica glass wafer. These results are illustrated in Figure We have demonstrated the ability to fabricate 1080 nm deep silicon-glass cavities with no internal supports. The use of anodic bonding of glass to silicon allows us to optically characterize the cavities after assembly. The well characterized glass and silicon surfaces fabricated using the processes detailed in this paper are demonstrated to be smooth enough not to pin the interfaces between the A and B phases of 3 He. Silicon -silver -epoxy joints also have been shown to survive multiple coolings to cryogenic temperatures while also demonstrating a high Q. The design of the fill line also minimizes the volume of bulk fluid in the fill line and shields the fill line fluid from RF simplifying NMR signal identification. These features are important enabling factors to be built on for future designs. New designs that span the parameter space from several μm down to the 100 nm scale will be possible, some with internal supports to limit bowing and prevent collapse while bonding. These designs could incorporate more complex structures including height steps and constrictions to allow the observation of mass and thermal flow across the nearly 3D to quasi 2D limit in superfluid 