We show that electron pairing is indispensable for the development of the leading edge gap as observed in ARPES measurement in the underdoped cuprates, even though clear evidence for the violation of the particle-hole symmetry is found in the electron spectrum. To support this assertion, we studied the electron spectrum under the scattering of diffusive antiferromagnetic(AF) spin fluctuation, which is thought to be a major candidate for a competing order in the competing order scenario of the pseudogap phenomena. We find that the Fermi level crossing along the M=(π, 0) to X=(π, π) line can only be avoided when the M point is pushed above the Fermi level in this scenario. We argue that the same conclusion holds in all competing order scenarios that preserve the U(1) charge conservation. The inconsistency between this prediction and the ARPES observation implies that a competing order in the particle-hole channel alone is not sufficient to explain the pseudogap as observed in ARPES measurement. We also find that the electron system always forms a single large Fermi surface under the scattering of short-ranged dynamical spin fluctuation, rather than forming small Fermi pockets as predicted by the AF band folding picture. The AF shadow band is smeared out in energy as a result of the dispersion in the scattered quasiparticle state and the diffusion in spin fluctuation energy. Nevertheless, we find that the AF band folding effect is important for the understanding of the quasiparticle dynamics in the pseudogap phase, especially, of the origin of the high energy hump structure in the anti-nodal region and the signature of particle-hole asymmetry in the electron spectrum. It may even provide the driving force of the pseudogap phenomena, since the strong dressing of the anti-nodal quasiparticle by the AF spin fluctuation will greatly reduce the kinetic energy penalty for electron pairing in this region. One of the main unresolved issue in the study of high T c cuprates is the origin of the pseudogap phenomena, which is observed ubiquitously in the quasiparticle spectrum, the spin fluctuation spectrum, transport properties and thermodynamic properties of the system To understand the origin of the pseudogap phenomena, it is important to know how the different manifestations of the pseudogap phenomena are related to each other. Here we would like to distinguish two types of pseudogap phenomena discussed in the literature Recently, ARPES measurement has provided with unprecedented detail the evolution of the electron spec-tral function with temperature in the underdoped cuprates The antiferromagnetic(AF) spin fluctuation scenario is the most extensively studied competing order scenario for the origin of the pseudogap phenomena. The existence of the strong AF spin fluctuation in the cupartes has been well documented by early neutron scattering and NMR measurements. More recently, RIXS measurements found that the high energy spin fluctuation in the cuprates is hardly changed from that of the AF insulating parent compounds by carrier doping In the AF spin fluctuation scenario, the pseudogap in the electron spectrum has been proposed to be the result of the AF band folding effect, which is illustrated in Figure These predictions of the AF band folding picture, however, are not quite consistent with the ARPES observation. First, the Fermi momentum along the M-X line is found to be almost temperature independent above T* and the M point is found to be always below the Fermi level. Second, rather than a closed Fermi pocket, a open Fermi arc is observed in the nodal region. In other words, the AF shadow of the Fermi surface seems to be totally missing. A possible excuse for the failure of the AF band folding picture presented above is the over-simplification on the AF spin fluctuation in the cuprates, which is both short-ranged and dynamical. In the background of shortranged and dynamical spin fluctuation, the scattered state will have an energy that is uncertain both because of the quasiparticle dispersion in k+q and the diffusion in the spin fluctuation energy Ω q The spin-Fermion model takes the form of Here is the spin density operator of the itinerant electron and S i is the local moment operator. g is a phenomenological coupling constant. In this study, we set t = 250 meV , t = -0.3t and μ = -t, so that the doping level is about x = 0.14. At the same time, we will adopt the widely used Monien-Mills-Pines(MMP) form as a phenomenological guess of the dynamical spin susceptibility of the local moment Here χ Q ∝ ξ 2 is the static spin susceptibility at the antiferromagnetic wave vector Q = (π, π), ξ is the spin correlation length, ω sf is a characteristic frequency describing the dissipation of the local moment by its coupling to the itinerant quasiparticles. In this study, we set ξ = 3a and ω sf = 15 meV at a temperature of k B T = t/20, which are typical for underdoped cuprates. Lastly, we note that the integrated spectral weight of the MMP susceptibility actually diverges logarithmically at high energy. To remove such an unphysical divergence, we cut off the spectral weight at ω c = 30ω sf = 450 meV . Such a choice for ω c is consistent with the RIXS measurement on high T c cuprates is the Green's function of the bare electron. The factor 3 comes from the three spin components. The imaginary part of the electron self-energy is given by in which c = 3g 2 /16π, ω k,q = ωk-q . R(q, ω) = -2Imχ(q, ω) is the spectral function of the spin fluctuation. The electron spectral function as calculated from the renormalized Green's function is given by In our calculation, we treat g 2 χ Q as a free parameter. The electron spectral function along the M-X line is plotted in Figure According to the above picture, the Fermi level crossing along the M-X line can only be eliminated when the M point is pushed above the Fermi level. Thus, if the pseudogap is opened in a continuous way, we should expect the Fermi momentum along the M-X line to decrease to zero as the temperature is lowered toward T*. This is obviously at odds with the ARPES observation, according to which the Fermi momentum along the M-X line is almost temperature independent above T* and the M point is always in the occupied side. We note that such an inconsistency exists not only in the AF spin fluctuation scenario, but exists in all competing order scenarios with an order parameter that preserve the U(1) charge conservation. The reason is as follows. While a competing order in the particle-hole channel can renormalize the quasiparticle dispersion, it can not eliminate the distinction between an occupied and an unoccupied state. If the M and X point are on the opposite side of the Fermi level, it then follows from continuity consideration that the quasiparticle energy must cross the Fermi level somewhere along the M-X line. This is in stark contrast with the situation in the pairing scenario, when the quasiparticle is the mixture of particle-like and hole-like object and has always a positive energy. We thus conclude the leading edge gap observed in the ARPES measurement below T* must involve electron pairing. This is the most important conclusion of this work. Although the magnetic scattering alone can not account for the observed leading edge gap in the ARPES spectrum below T*, it is indispensable for a consistent understanding of the quasiparticle dynamics in the cuprates. In particular, the emergence of the high energy hump structure in the electron spectrum and the back bending of its spectral maximum, which occurs at a momentum different from the underlying Fermi momentum, should both be attributed to the AF band folding effect. In the following, we will look more closely on the consequence of the AF band folding effect. In Figure Below T*, we should consider both the AF band folding effect and the electron pairing effect induced by the AF spin fluctuation simultaneously. In a recent work of us, we find that the AF band folding effect is responsible for the unusually flat quasiparticle dispersion in the anti-nodal region below T c 28 . In fact, both effects can be understood as self-energy correction to the quasiparticle dynamics induced by the AF spin fluctuation and should thus be treated on an equal footing. According to this picture, the electron spectrum of the pseudogap phase should be similar in nature to that of the superconducting phase. In particular, we expect the peak-dip-hump structure in the anti-nodal region to develop just below T*, although it becomes prominent only below T c . At the same time, the AF band folding effect may act as the driving force of the pseudogap phenomena. More specifically, the strong quasiparticle dressing by AF spin fluctuation will greatly reduce the kinetic energy penalty for electron pairing in the anti-nodal region, making possible the development of pairing gap at a temperature significantly higher than that in the nodal region(which is nothing but T c ). In other words, the development of the pairing gap below T* can be understood as a process through which the system reorganize its spin fluctuation spectrum so as to reduce the electron incoherence caused by the scattering from the low energy spin fluctuations and enhance the electron pairing mediated by higher energy spin fluctuations. The scenario presented above has many similarities with the strong coupling theory of phonon-mediated superconductivity. In particular, in both cases the self-energy correction in the normal channel is playing an important role for electron pairing. However, the two theories differ from each other on the following important points. First, the spin fluctuation in the magnetic scenario is subjected to strong feedback effect from electron pairing, while the phonon is almost free from such a feedback effect since it is an independent degree of freedom. Second, the self-energy correction induced by the AF scattering is strongly anisotropic on the Fermi surface in both the normal and the anomalous channel, while those induced by phonon scattering is essentially isotropic on the Fermi surface. Third, in the AF scattering scenario the Migdal theorem is strongly violated in the anti-nodal region as a result of the proximity to the Van Hove singularity, while in the case of phononmediated superconductivity the Migdal theorem is usually valid on the whole Fermi surface. A full theory of the quasiparticle dynamics in the magnetic scenario should thus include the contribution from higher order scattering process in a self-consistent way with proper account of the vertex correction effect. On a qualitative level, the higher order scattering process will push the spectral maximum of the hump structure to higher binding energy and reduce the extend of band renormalization. On the other hand, the vertex correction will enhance the coupling between the AF spin fluctuation and the quasiparticle, especially so in the anti-nodal region. We leave a more detailed analysis of the physical consequence of these differences to future studies. In conclusion, through the study of quasiparticle dynamics under the scattering of short-ranged and dynamical spin fluctuation, we show that electron pairing is indispensable for the development of the leading edge gap observed in ARPES measurement below T*. Nevertheless, we find the AF band folding effect is important for the understanding of the quasiparticle dynamics in the pseudogap phase. The frustration of kinetic energy related to the AF band folding effect may even provide a driving force for the development of the pairing gap in the anti-nodal region, in which the quasiparticle is strongly dressed by the AF spin fluctuation as a result of proximity to the Van Hove singularity. Finally, we note that it is more illuminating to search for the evidence of particlehole symmetry breaking in energy space, rather than in momentum space.