In ion irradiation processes, electronic stopping power describes the energy transfer rate from the irradiating ion to the target material's electrons. Due to the scarcity and significant uncertainties in experimental electronic stopping power data for materials beyond simple solids, there has been growing interest in the use of first-principles theory for calculating electronic stopping power. In recent years, advances in high-performance computing have opened the door to fully first-principles non-equilibrium simulations based on real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT). While it has been demonstrated that the RT-TDDFT approach is capable of predicting electronic stopping power for a wide range of condensed matter systems, there has yet to be an exhaustive examination of the physical and numerical approximations involved and their effects on the calculated stopping power. We discuss the results of such a study for crystalline silicon with protons as irradiating ions. We examine the influences of key approximations in RT-TDDFT non-equilibrium simulations on the calculated electronic stopping power, including approximations related to basis sets, finite size effects, exchange-correlation approximation, pseudopotentials, and more. Finally, we propose a simple and efficient correction scheme to account for the contribution from core electron excitations to the stopping power, as it was found to be significant for large proton velocities. When an irradiating ion penetrates condensed matter, the ion transfers its kinetic energy via collisions with the nuclei and electrons in the target material. The stopping power for an ion penetrating a material is the key quantity used to describe this energy transfer Electronic stopping power has been the focus of scientific research for decades due to its relevance in technological areas as wide-ranging as nuclear power In more recent years, advancements in high-performance computing have opened up the possibility of studying electronic stopping by simulating the non-equilibrium response of electrons using first-principles simulations based on TDDFT. The great potential of this approach was demonstrated in work by Pruneda et al. Within the framework of linear response theory, where TDDFT (i.e. TD-LDA) was used to obtained the dielectric matrix, recent work by Shukri et al. We use the real-time propagation approach of TDDFT (RT-TDDFT) for obtaining electronic stopping power. In all simulations, the time-dependent Kohn-Sham (TDKS) equations are integrated for a system in which a classical, energetic proton with constant velocity travels through the material of interest (diamond cubic silicon), giving rise to a time-dependent external potential acting on the electronic system. A detailed description of the particular RT-TDDFT implementation used in this study can be found in Ref. This approach requires a choice of linear regression and/or spline fitting, and it can influence the calculated stopping power, especially for higher projectile ion velocities. Alternatively, it can be shown that the non-adiabatic (NA) force on the projectile is equivalent to the instantaneous electronic stopping power We first discuss the observed problem of underestimating the electronic stopping power at high proton velocities via the RT-TDDFT simulations in which the ground-state DFT calculations are sufficiently converged. In our plane-wavepseudopotential (PW-PP) RT-TDDFT implementation in the Qb@ll/Qbox code we use the adiabatic approximation for its time-dependence Norm-conserving pseudopotentials This "standard" computational procedure is based on parameters that are sufficiently converged at the ground state DFT level for most ground-state properties, including the band gap (0.60 eV). The TDKS equations are integrated using an enforced time reversal symmetry (ETRS) propagator Instead of converging a classical ensemble average of projectile paths, the so-called "centroid path approximation" for the projectile path as demonstrated for 2D materials in In Figure In order to examine the influence of the basis set in the plane-wave expansion, we used a higher plane-wave (PW) kinetic energy cutoff of 80 Rydberg, which is much larger than that which is required for converging ground-state properties, including the band structure. Due to the increased computational cost, we examined stopping power for only three velocities: v = 6.0 a.u. (high velocity), v = 3.0 a.u. (mid-range velocity) and v = 1.5 a.u. (near the Bragg peak). As can be seen in Figure Another possible contributor to the stopping power high velocity underestimation problem is insufficient sampling of the Brillouin zone with the single Gamma point approximation. We performed RT-TDDFT simulations for three proton velocities (v = 1.5 a.u., v = 3.0 a.u., and v = 6.0 a.u.) using 4 Monkhorst-Pack k-points. As can be seen in Figure Finite size errors could possibly be responsible for the stopping power underestimation at high velocities. While the convergence of the calculation with respect to the k-point sampling in the Brillouin zone is not a problem as discussed above, non-physical interactions among periodic images need to be examined in the calculations with the periodic boundary conditions (PBC). Note that a constant shift in the total energy as in the Makov-Payne correction In the "standard" simulations, we employed the nonempirical generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional, PBE We compare the RT-TDDFT electronic stopping power using the PBE and PBE0 functionals as implemented in the Libxc library Using linear-response TDDFT and the random-phase approximation (RPA) to calculate the dielectric matrix within the framework of Lindhard's linear response model, Shukri, et al. reported the electronic stopping for silicon Within our "standard" RT-TDDFT simulations in the PW-PP framework, there are two notable deficiencies. One deficiency is that core electrons (i.e. 1s, 2s, and 2p electrons of silicon atoms) are not treated explicitly in the simulations, and therefore the calculated stopping power does not take into account any electronic excitations from core electrons. Second, using norm-conserving PPs, the wavefunctions for valence electrons do not behave properly within the PP cutoff radius. The total volume taken up by the PP volume amounts only to 5% (r cut =1.1 a.u.) ~ 7% (r cut =1.3 a.u.) of the total simulation cell volume, but the excitations from the core electrons likely become more dominant in electronic stopping at large velocities and during close ion-atom collisions. Unfortunately, it is prohibitively computationally expensive to represent all core electrons using plane-waves due to the fact that cutoff energies of hundreds of Rydbergs are required for convergence. Thus, we again used the RT-TDDFT simulations based on the Gaussian and augmented plane-wave method (GAPW) as implemented in the CP2K code for all-electron (AE) calculations to examine this aspect In addition to the AE and PP calculations, we also performed AE simulations in which the core electrons are not propagated in time. In these "frozen core (FC)" simulations, core electrons are restricted but the valence-electron wavefunctions correctly behave near the nuclei (except at the cusp). Figure excitations. The analysis based on the KS eigen-energies shows that the relative contributions of 1s, 2s, and 2p excitations to the stopping power are approximately 0.6%, 6.6%, and 22.9% of the contribution from valence electron excitations, being much larger than the centroid path trajectory. Although the centroid path approximation has been found to be satisfactory for calculating the electronic stopping power of various materials using simulations with pseudopotentials, this approximation becomes less satisfactory when core electron effects are important as shown in the all-electron RT-TDDFT calculations. At high velocities, semi-core electron excitations contribute significantly to the electronic stopping. Unfortunately, converging the stopping power with respect to the ensemble average of proton trajectories in all-electron RT-TDDFT simulations (3024 electrons) comes at a prohibitive computational expense. This is due to two factors: Small regions of the total simulation cell (< 10%) dominate the excitations at high velocities, implying that a large number of random trajectories would be required to converge the ensemble average. Additionally, stable numerical integration of the TD-KS equations becomes highly difficult during close collisions between the projectile ion and target atom nuclei, requiring a very small discrete time step, and this is also coupled with the fact that very high planewave kinetic cutoff energy is required if the PW-PP formalism is used. Here we propose a simple and efficient correction scheme to account for the missing "core electron" effects. We consider obtaining the corrected electronic stopping power S(v) for silicon by scaling the stopping power that is obtained from the RT-TDDFT simulations by a velocity-dependent correction factor F &'() (v), that takes into account the core-electron effects, are related to the total energy transfer that depends on the impact parameter, h, as (see Figure ) FIG. The distance between the proton and the Silicon target atom is given by r. The displacement of the proton is given by l. Energy transferred in single-atom collision simulations as a function of impact parameter h for the simulations using pseudopotentials (black), all electrons (blue), and frozen core (red) schemes. See the text for details. By expressing S /01/&'() ,-. also as functions, the velocity-dependent scaling factor is determined to correct for the missing core effects as in Eq. 2. This correction scheme can be also applied using PW simulations using semi-core PPs, in addition to the all-electron simulations with the GAPW approach. In the semicore PPs, only the 1s electrons are pseudized, and the 2s, 2p, 3s, and 3p electrons of silicon atoms are treated explicitly. In the expressions given above, the energy transfers in the semi-core PP simulations are used in place of the all-electron single-atom energy transfers. This alternative approach is possible due to the fact that 1s electron excitations contribute less than 1% to the total electronic stopping power. For these single-atom collision simulations, we generated semicore pseudopotentials for Silicon with cutoff radii of 0.40, 0.35, and 0.40 Bohr for the 2s, 2p, and 3p orbitals, respectively, in keeping with the parameters used by Tiago et al. Figure FIG. 9. Electronic stopping power as a function of the velocity of a proton projectile in Si. The solid black curve represents the empirical PSTAR model The sets of letters correspond to different experimental data sets that can be found in Ref. based simulation result (corrected with semi-core PP singleatom calculations), respectively. When these corrections are applied, we observe significant improvement with respect to the experimental data. The corrected GPW and PW electronic stopping power curves show the average absolute % difference relative to the PSTAR results of 5.1% and 5.2%, respectively. Applying the core correction increases the stopping power by -55% (105%) at v = 6.0 a.u. for the GPW (PW) simulations. For v <= 1.0 a.u., there is negligible difference between the corrected and uncorrected results. At the Bragg peak (v = 2.0 a.u.), the core correction increases the GPW (PW) electronic stopping power by 9.0% (7.1%). We presented a thorough, methodical examination of nonequilibrium electron dynamics simulations based on RT-TDDFT for the calculation of electronic stopping power. We have shown that converging several computational factors, such as k-point sampling, planewave cutoff energy, and exchangecorrelation (XC) approximation, with respect to the ground state DFT calculations is sufficient to ensure convergence of RT-TDDFT results. However, we have also several approximations that require special attention in these types of simulations. The combination of the centroid path approximation and the pseudopotential approximation leads to a neglect of core electronic effects, which are particularly important at high projectile ion velocities. We showed that core electrons affect electronic stopping in two ways: core electron excitations and modification of the valence wavefunctions near the core regions. We demonstrated that both of these effects contribute to an increase in electronic stopping and that the relative importance of these effects has a strong impactparameter dependence. Unfortunately, performing RT-TDDFT simulations with all-electrons or semi-core-PPs setup for a classical ensemble of projectile ion trajectories is not yet practical due to the computational expense. As an alternative approach, we proposed a single-atom correction scheme to approximately take into account the missing core electronic excitations for the electronic stopping power calculation. Another approximation in this work is the adiabatic approximation to the XC potential in RT-TDDFT. This approximation results in having the XC potential that depends only on the instantaneous electron density, neglecting any memory effects we can reduce the computational cost to O(log(n)*log(m)) and yields a 100-500 times speed up for the real space charge density analysis. Divide-and-conquer strategy is, first, used to reduce the computational time of looping over all the voxels. For the divide-and-conquer method, we recursively divide the simulation cell into eight equivalent smaller cells, called octants. Then, for each octant cell, we check to see if there is a unique atom that is closest from all the eight corner voxels of the grid. If not, we continue to divide the octant further into eight equivalent smaller cells to create a new smaller octant until all octants have been assigned to an atom. This strategy cuts all unnecessary calculations for looping over the grid voxels in individual octant regions. This makes the computational cost of the looping over the real space grid to O(log(n)) instead of O(n). Furthermore, the k-d tree algorithm is used to accelerate searching of the closest atom from each grid voxel. The basic idea of the k-d tree is to perform a pre-process to all the atoms in the space and generate the k-d tree, and then using the k-d tree as an index-like tool. By using this algorithm, the search time for the closest atom is reduced to O(log(m)) Real space grid Time for original implementation (sec) Dependence on the Gaussian basis set were tested with SZV, DZVP, TZV2P, DZV3P, and 6-311G**3P basis sets for RT-TDDFT simulations with the proton velocity of 1.5 a.u. (at the Bragg peak) for the centroid path. FIG. 