We present the first-principles determination of electronic stopping power for protons and α-particles in a semiconductor material of great technological interest: silicon carbide. The calculations are based on nonequilibrium simulations of the electronic response to swift ions using real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT). We compare the results from this first-principles approach to those of the widely used linear response formalism and determine the ion velocity regime within which linear response treatments are appropriate. We also use the non-equilibrium electron densities in our simulations to quantitatively address the long-standing question of the velocity-dependent effective charge state of projectile ions in a material, due to its importance in linear response theory. We further examine the validity of the recently proposed centroid path approximation recently proposed for reducing the computational cost of acquiring stopping power curves from RT-TDDFT simulations. Understanding the stopping process of highly energetic ions in condensed matter systems has great implications in modern technologies ranging from nuclear fission/fusion reactors Ever since the phenomenon of electronic stopping was discovered, a number of approximated analytical models have been developed: the classical Coulomb scattering formulas of Rutherford where v is the projectile ion velocity, and L(v) is a velocitydependent quantity called the stopping logarithm. This quantity is given in terms of either mean excitation energy of the target material in Bethe theory where ε is the macroscopic dielectric function of frequency ω and wavelength q. In the last few decades, both rapidly advancing highperformance computers and modern electronic structure methods have made it possible to obtain key parameters in the analytical models directly from first principles theory In light of this encouraging result, we apply the methodology to the representative semiconductor material silicon carbide (SiC). SiC has garnered attention for fusion and advanced fission energy applications due to its ability to retain important physical and chemical properties when exposed to extreme particle radiation The simulation methods employed in this work closely follow that described by Schleife et. al. In this work, we use a simulation cell consisting of 216 atoms (864 electrons) in a cubic super-cell (lattice constant 4.36 Å) of 3C-SiC, the zinc-blende polytope of silicon carbide. Despite the large simulation cell we employ, the electronic stopping power curve is not completely converged with respect FIG. FIG. to the simulation cell size. Unfortunately, it is not possible to achieve the strictest convergence at the present time because of the large computational cost associated with these RT-TDDFT simulations in obtaining the ensemble average. Instead, we used a representative projectile ion path (i.e. centroid path as discussed later) to estimate the finite size correction using a much larger simulation cell as discussed in detail in Supplemental Material. For the remainder of the work, electronic stopping power curves are shown with and without the finite size error correction. The gamma point was used in sampling of the Brillouin zone, and it was found to be sufficient for convergence by comparing with calculations with 4 k-points as shown in Supporting Information. A plane-wave energy cutoff of 50 Rydberg was used. In this work, we did not use a single, long, re-entering projectile path for obtaining an ensemble average as done previously for metallic systems where E is the time-dependent electronic energy and ρ(r;t) is the non-equilibrium electron density A. Electronic stopping power for proton and α-particle Janson and co-workers As an alternative to using a model dielectric function, the dielectric formalism can be cast in terms of the microscopic dielectric function, which can be computed using modern firstprinciples electronic structure calculations where Nk is the number of k points used in the Brillouin zone, Ω is the volume of the unit cell, q is a lattice vector in the first Brillouin zone, G are reciprocal lattice vectors, v is the ion velocity and the microscopic dielectric matrix was calculated using linear response TDDFT with the adiabatic local density approximation (ALDA). The energy dependence is given by ω = v • q + G , and their result for the cubic 3C-SiC is also shown for comparison in Figure In Figure yield stopping powers that are significantly lower (~50%) than those given by the empirical models even when the finite size error is taken into account. The linear response formulation is expected to become more accurate with the increasing velocity, and the noticeable difference between our RT-TDDFT result and the linear response result using the TDDFT microscopic dielectric matrix Figure The disagreement with the experimental measurements is indicative of underlying approximations in RT-TDDFT simulations, specifically the XC and adiabatic approximations. Comparing the stopping power curves for these two different projectile ions, proton and α-particle, (Fig 1 . and Fig 2 .), there is a shift in the stopping power curve maximum going from proton to α-particle: The peak of the proton stopping power curve is located at v = ~1.5 a.u., whereas the peak for the α-particle stopping power curve is at v = ~2.0 a.u. Such a peak shift cannot be obtained by employing a linear response model. Within linear response theory, the stopping power has a quadratic dependence on the projectile ion charge since the stopping logarithm (Eq. 2) depends only on the target medium. Considering the proton and α-particle curves, the ratio S α (v)/S H (v) = 4 represents the validity of the linear response theory at a specific velocity, assuming fully-ionized projectiles. The ratio, S α (v)/S H (v), from our RT-TDDFT results is plotted in Figure The observed difference in stopping power curves between protons and α-particles is directly related to the difference in the non-adiabatic forces on the projectile ion where ρ U t and ρ V t are the time-dependent electron densities for the α-particle and proton cases, respectively. The factor of 2 takes into account the fact that the induced electron density response is twice as large with α-particle within linear response theory. In plotting the response-normalized density difference, as in Figure The instantaneous energy loss rate of the projectile ion in a condensed matter system often depends strongly on the specific path taken by the ion and its proximity to atoms and bonds over the course of the trajectory. In order to obtain the electronic stopping power in real materials like SiC, an ensemble average over numerous projectile paths needs to be taken until satisfactory convergence is reached. Unfortunately, numerous expensive RT-TDDFT simulations are necessary to obtain an accurate ensemble average, making it a computationally demanding procedure. In an attempt to reduce this computational expense and still acquire accurate results, Ojanperä et al. The centroid path was determined by considering a 2D orthographic perspective of one channel of 3C-SiC. This perspective is deconstructed into its irreducible representation consisting of a triangle with a silicon atom, a carbon atom, and the channeling point as vertices (see Figure Figure Within linear response theory, one starts by considering a particle with a fixed charge interacting with a material. A natural question is whether or not this fixed charge is different from the ion charge in vacuum, and also the extent to which the charge state depends on the inhomogeneous electron density in real materials. As early as the 1920s, experiments by Rutherford As noted by other authors In principle, all necessary information for calculating the mean steady-state charge, q, on the projectile ion is contained in our RT-TDDFT simulations. However, a sensible partitioning scheme for non-equilibrium electron density is needed to quantify the electron charge belonging to the projectile ion. We presently employ the Voronoi analysis Returning to the question of the relationship between the concepts of the effective charge, Z eff , and Bohr's original definition of effective charge, q, it is interesting to examine the extent to which these two quantities become equivalent. Can scaling with the mean charge states rather than assuming fully ionized ion at all velocities remedy the shortcomings of linear response theory at low ion velocities? We examined q α /q H from our simulations in comparison to the calculated S U S V J// . While the two quantities are in excellent agreement for higher ion velocities v ≥ 3 a.u., there is a significant qualitative difference for v < 3 a.u. Even if other electron density partitioning schemes were considered, it is highly unlikely that q f /q H would yield the behavior observed for S U S V J// . Thus, for the present case of SiC, a non-empirical determination of Z eff in the context of linear response theory for predicting the stopping power curves for low ion velocities would not be feasible unless additional higher order perturbations were taken into account. In this work, we presented first-principles calculations of electronic stopping power in cubic silicon carbide (SiC) for protons and α-particles, from non-equilibrium electron dynamics simulations based on real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT). We have shown that the centroid path approximation An important approximation in the present study is the exchange-correlation (XC) potential 