The ground-state structure of monolayers and nanoplatelets of SnS with a thickness from two to five monolayers is calculated from first principles. It is shown that nanoobjects with only odd number of monolayers are ferroelectric. The ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and elastic properties of these polar structures are calculated. The appearance of polarization in these nanoobjects is explained by an uncompensated polarization that exists in an antiferroelectric structure of bulk SnS. The mechanism of ferroelectricity, in which the ferroelectric distortion is associated with short-range ordering of lone pairs, can be regarded as a way of creating ferroelectrics with high Curie temperature. In recent years, quasi-two-dimensional (2D) structures-monolayers and nanoplatelets with a thickness of a few monolayers-have gained a considerable attention. The first-principles calculations presented in this work were carried out within the density functional theory using the ABINIT software package and norm-conserving pseudopotentials constructed using the RKKJ scheme The calculation of the energies of different possible structures of bulk SnS shows that the P nma structure is the ground-state structure, in agreement with experiment. The energies of the Cmcm and F m 3m phases are by 20 and 49 meV per formula unit higher than that of the P nma phase. The calculation of the phonon spectra and elastic tensors for these phases shows that the F m 3m and P nma phases fulfill the stability criterion, i.e., all optical phonon frequencies in the Brillouin zone in them are positive and their structures are mechanically stable. This suggests that the F m 3m phase which has a higher energy is metastable. As concerns to the Cmcm phase, two instabilities are observed in its phonon spectrum: the ferroelectric one at the center of the Brillouin zone (the phonon frequency is 63i cm -1 ) and another one at the Y point on its boundary (the phonon frequency is 35i cm -1 ). The ferroelectric instability results in a phase transition to a metastable Cmc2 1 phase whose energy is by 15.5 meV higher than that of the P nma phase. The condensation of the unstable phonon at the Y point transforms the structure into the groundstate P nma phase. These two instabilities in the Cmcm phase compete with each other; the appearance of structural distortions described by the unstable phonon at the Y point suppresses the ferroelectric instability. To determine the ground-state structure of SnS monolayers and calculate their physical properties, the super- An increase in the thickness of the vacuum gap changes the energies of the discussed supercells. For supercells containing two monolayers, these changes saturate above c = 25.4 Å. This suggests that the thickness of the vacuum gap of ∼9.5 Å is sufficient to neglect the interaction between monolayers. When increasing c, the energy difference between the P 4/nmm and Cmcm phases abruptly decreases, but the energy of the P nma phase remains lower (Table critical pressure p c . The calculations of the phonon spectra were performed using primitive unit cells extracted from the supercells. The calculations for a SnS monolayer modeled with the P 4/nmm supercell find a doubly degenerate unstable ferroelectric E u mode with a frequency of 37i cm -1 at the Γ point and two unstable modes at the Z point of the Brillouin zone [Fig. The comparison of the energies of two possible Abm2 and P mn2 1 polar phases, into which the P 4/nmm structure can transform upon the ferroelectric distortion, shows that the energy of the P mn2 1 phase is lower (Table The calculations of the phonon spectrum of a SnS monolayer modeled with the Cmcm supercell find two unstable ferroelectric modes, B 2u and B 3u , with close energies at the Γ point (37i cm -1 ) and at least three unstable modes at the Y point. These are two antiferroelectric modes whose frequencies are very close to those of the ferroelectric modes and a weak coalescence mode (0.197i cm -1 ). In several cases, one or two very weak (∼0.03i cm -1 ) unstable modes describing an antiparallel sliding of adjacent monolayers in the xy plane appeared in the spectrum. An analysis of properties of three possible Cmc2 1 , Ama2, and Cc polar phases, into which the Cmcm structure can transform upon the ferroelectric distortion, shows that the Cc phase is unstable and the Cmc2 1 and Ama2 phases have the same lowest energy (Table The comparison of the energies of all found phases (Table I) shows that among possible ground-state structures of SnS monolayers, the phases with the [100] or [010] atomic displacements are the most energetically favorable. The weak dependence on the direction results from close a and b lattice parameters in the parent structures. However, the result why the energy is nearly independent on whether the supercell structure is ferroelectric or antiferroelectric needs explanation. This result is not surprising since in the c → ∞ limit all found solutions are physically equivalent and differ only by the orientation of polarization in weakly interacting adjacent monolayers. The appearance of the non-polar P nma and P nnm phases does not contradict the polar Cmc2 1 , Ama2, and P mn2 1 solutions because in the P nma and P nnm structures there are glide planes reversing the x or y direction of polarization upon a half-aperiod shift along the z axis. This means that the P nma and P nnm structures are actually antiferroelectric. Taking into account that the Ama2 and Cmc2 1 phases differ only by the polarization direction and the Cmc2 1 and P mn2 1 phases have the same polarization direction and differ by the way of conjugation of adjacent monolayers, in the c → ∞ limit these differences become negligible, and the P mn2 1 phase can be considered as the groundstate structure of SnS monolayers. The polarization in this structure is directed along the armchair direction [Fig. As noted above, in the phonon spectra of all studied SnS supercells there is a weak unstable mode whose eigenvector describes the coalescence of the monolayers into a two-layer (2ML) nanoplatelet. The typical frequency of this mode is 0.2-2i cm -1 for both P 4/nmm and Cmcm supercells. The coalescence of SnS monolayers into the 2ML nanoplatelet is indeed energetically favorable. The energy gain, however, depends on how the monolayers are conjugated at the interface. For nanoplatelets with the P mma symmetry, which are obtained from the Cmcm supercell, the energy gain is notably higher than for nanoplatelets with the P 4/nmm symmetry obtained from the P 4/nmm supercell (Table The phonon spectrum of a SnS 2ML nanoplatelet with the P mma symmetry exhibits three unstable modes at the Γ point: a strong ferroelectric B 3u mode (52i cm -1 ) polarized along the zigzag direction (with transition to the P mc2 1 phase), a weak ferroelectric B 2u mode (8i cm -1 ) polarized along the armchair direction (with transition to the P ma2 phase), and a B 2g mode (31i cm -1 ) describing strong antiferroelectric atomic displacements along the armchair direction (with transition to the P 2 1 /m phase). The energy gain resulting from the latter distortion (28.6 meV per unit cell) is much higher than those for both ferroelectric distortions. As follows from Table Surprisingly, the search for the ground-state structure of three-layer (3ML) SnS nanoplatelets reveals that they become ferroelectric again. The phonon spectrum of the P mmn phase exhibits four nondegenerate unstable modes at the Γ point, whereas the phonon spectrum of the P 4/nmm phase exhibits four doubly degenerate unstable modes (two ferroelectric E u and two antiferroelectric E g modes). As the eigenvectors of the unstable phonon modes become very complicated, the comparison of the energies of the different low-symmetry phases turns out to be more informative. The comparison of the energies of nanoplatelets conjugated in different ways (Table The study of four-layer (4ML) SnS nanoplatelets reveals that the P mma phase obtained using the Cmcm conjugation scheme is the lowest-energy parent structure (Table It should be noted that phonon spectra of this and thicker nanoplatelets exhibit several modes with same symmetry, but with different displacement patterns. In this case, the structural optimization usually gives the energy of the lowest-energy phase and the calculation of the "excited states" needs additional cumbersome orthogonalization procedure. This is why only the data for these low-energy phases are presented in Tables IV and V. The ground-state structure of the 4ML SnS nanoplatelet (the P 2 1 /m phase) is not ferroelectric. The study of five-layer (5ML) SnS nanoplatelets reveals that phonon spectra of parent P 4/nmm and P nnm structures both exhibit eight unstable modes. The energies of these parent phases and few lowest-energy structures for this nanoplatelet are given in Table The explanation of such an "intermittent" ferroelectric properties of nanoplatelets, in which the ferroelectricity appears only in nanoobjects with odd number of monolayers, is quite simple. As mentioned above, the P nma structure of bulk SnS is actually antiferroelectric. Although our conclusion about the ground-state structure of SnS monolayers (space group P mn2 1 ) is consistent with earlier published data, We now calculate some physical properties of SnS polar monolayers and 3ML and 5ML polar nanoplatelets. To characterize the properties of the nanoobjects, the contribution of one nanoobject into these properties is usually computed. These specific properties, which were obtained by multiplying the macroscopic property calculated for a supercell by the thickness occupied in it by one nanoobject, are given in Table For the P mn2 1 structure of the monolayer (1ML), there are four non-zero independent components of the specific elastic tensor and three non-zero independent components of the specific piezoelectric tensor. The obtained parameters are consistent with the results of earlier calculations, When increasing the nanoplatelet thickness to 3ML and 5ML, the spontaneous polarization P s increases, whereas the piezoelectric parameters, especially those of the d tensor, strongly decrease. The latter tendency is due to the fact that the specific elastic moduli C for nanoplatelets are defined per nanostructure and change roughly proportional to its thickness. As a result, the nanoplatelets become stiffer and their piezoelectric response decreases. It should be noted that the energy gain of ∆U = 1.32 meV per unit cell for 1ML may be too small to produce the ferroelectric distortion in it. In Ref. 32, a simple criterion was proposed to estimate if quantum fluctuations can destroy the phase transition. According to this criterion, in the case of 1ML the energy gain should be ≥ 1.89 meV to make the ferroelectric distortion stable against quantum fluctuations. A particular interest to polar SnS monolayers and nanoplatelets is due to the fact that they present a new mechanism of ferroelectricity. The appearance of ferroelectricity in these objects is not a consequence of the long-range dipole-dipole interaction, but is a result of short-range interaction of lone pairs of Sn 2+ ions (Fig. In bulk SnS, the antiferroelectricity is attributed to the ordering of s 2 lone pairs of Sn 2+ ions whose interaction is strong (as follows from high phase transition temperature in it) and short-range. In Sec. III C, it was shown that the ferroelectricity in nanoplatelets is associated with uncompensated polarization of monolayers. Strong shortrange interaction of lone pairs suggests that the distorted structure of nanoplatelets can be stable up to high temperatures. In thick nanoplatelets, the Curie temperature can approach that of the structural phase transition in SnS (878 K). For SnS monolayer, the energy gain ∆U from the ferroelectric ordering (the energy barrier separating two polar states) is too small, but it increases dramatically with increasing number of monolayers (Table VI). Our calculations suggest that the ferroelectric phase can be observed at 300 K in the nanoplatelets with a thickness of 3 ML or 5 ML. In thicker nanoplatelets, the energy barrier becomes too high to switch or rotate the polarization in them by an external electric field. The polarization in nanoobjects increases with increasing their thickness and approaches the local polarization in the layers of bulk SnS (∼ 3.7 • 10 -10 C/m). In addition to thermoelectric and piezoelectric applications of SnS monolayers and nanoplatelets, one can propose yet another possible use of their polar properties in electrically-driven thermal valves. Recent calculations have predicted high anisotropy of phonon conductivity in monolayer SnS. In this work, the ground-state structure of SnS monolayers and SnS nanoplatelets with a thickness from two to five monolayers has been calculated from first principles. All nanoobjects containing odd number of monolayers were shown to be ferroelectric. A new way of creating switchable spontaneous polarization by nanostructuring of an antiferroelectric compound whose distorted structure is associated with the ordering of lone pairs was revealed. When this short-range interaction is strong, one can anticipate high Curie temperature in these ferroelectrics. The ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and elastic properties of SnS polar nanoobjects were calculated. Based on the results of this study, one can anticipate that similar phenomena can be observed in other IV-VI layered semiconductors-GeS, GeSe, and SnSe. It would be also interesting to study if the proposed mechanism of ferroelectricity is possible in nanoplatelets made of other antiferroelectric compounds. a Ref. 18. b Ref. 22. c Ref. 13. In order to get better accuracy for phonon frequencies on the boundary of the Brillouin zone, the response function calculations were also performed on supercells containing two monolayers in the unit cell. In this case, the Z point of the Brillouin zone is projected on the Γ point.