In the present work, experimental study has been carried out to expose the thermal, mechanical, and microstructural properties of low carbon steel as well as to inspects the influence of etchant concentration and etching time on its microstructure. Ultra-low carbon steel, in the form of a sheet, was collected from the Mughal Steel Industry, Peshawar, Pakistan. The sample was chemically etched, using Nital as an etchant, by two different methods: first, by changing the etching time while keeping the composition of etchant the same and second, by keeping the time constant while varying the etchant composition in a range of 5-14 %. The microstructure analysis revealed that ultra-fine grain can be obtained for the etchant composition of 8 % nitric acid in ethanol. Additionally, we noticed that the best etching time, for getting a clear morphology, was 90 s. The X-ray diffraction revealed mainly α-iron. Thermal analysis showed a minor weight loss followed by weight gain of 1.31 wt %. Contraction and expansion, observed on the TDA curve, suggested the transformation of BCC to FCC structure. Our results indicated that the specimen is highly ductile, malleable and soft. The ever-increasing climate changes have led to the massive demands for engineering new and emergent materials with improved properties Carbon steel is one of the key material for transportation, infrastructure, and modern manufacturing The material studied in present work was an ultra-low carbon steel collected from the Mughal steel industry, Pakistan. According to the data provided by manufacturer industry, it contains the following alloying elements: Iron -99 %, Sulfur -less than 0.04 %, Manganese -0.35 to 0.65 %, Carbon -0.17 to 0.24 %, Chromium -up to 0.3 %, Phosphorous -less than 0.04 %, and Nickel -less than 0.3%. The sample was cut into a size of interest using an abrasive cutoff machine and its apparent density (7.46 g/cm3) was calculated from the mass and dimension. The sectioning-created damages were minimized by grinding and further removed by subsequent polish operations. After polishing, the sample was chemically etched by two different methods using Nital (Nitric acid in ethanol) as an etchant. To see which technique give best results the sample was first etched by changing the etching time while keeping the etching composition the same and then etched by varying the etchant composition while keeping etching time constant. The mechanical properties were assessed using an electromechanical universal testing machine (UTM) which yields the result at the output in the form of a graph obtained by a computer built-in software where further test results can be retrieved from it. To determine the temperatures associated with significant phase transitions, thermal gravimetric and differential thermal analysis (TG/DTA) was carried out, using Perkin Elmer TG/DTA unit, in the temperature range of 30-1200 o C with a heating/cooling rate of 10 o C/min. The thermal dilatometric analysis (TDA) was used to measure the dimensional changes of the material, including expansion, contraction and Curie point etc, as a function of temperature The force versus elongation, obtained by employing UTM, is demonstrated in Fig. The TDA analysis was carried out to determines both reversible and irreversible changes in the length expansion and shrinkage during heating/cooling process The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the sample, observed at room temperature in the range of 2θ = 30-70 o , is The microstructural analysis was carried out for the specimen etched by either changing the etchant concentration or etching time. To obtain a clear morphology, the sample must be well-polished and chemically etched. It is difficult to get beneficial information without etching, see for example, a scanning electron micrograph of an un-etched, poorly polished sample showing the cutting marks formed during cutting of sample (Fig. The secondary electron SEM images of the samples etched by keeping the composition of etchant constant while changing the etching time are shown in Fig. Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the thermal, mechanical, and microstructural properties of ultra-low carbon steel. We found that the specimen is highly ductile, malleable and soft. TG/DTA analysis revealed an overall weight gain of 1.31 % in the temperature range of 785-1200 o C. The contraction and expansion, observed on TDA curve, showed a phase transition from dual phase BCC structural iron to single phase FCC austenite. Phase analysis detected only a single phase of α-Ferritic. The variation of etchant concentration resulted in fine grains for 8 % nitric acid in ethanol while changing the etchant time best result was obtained for t = 90 s. We believe that our findings may reduce the confusion of the users for the selection of Mughal steel.