We report the properties of a triangular lattice iron-chalcogenide antiferromagnet FeAl2Se4. The spin susceptibility reveals a significant antiferromagnetic interaction with a Curie-Weiss temperature ΘCW -200K and a spin-2 local moment. Despite a large spin and a large |ΘCW|, the low-temperature behaviors are incompatible with conventional classical magnets. No long-range order is detected down to 0.4K. Similar to the well-known spin-1 magnet NiGa2S4, the specific heat of FeAl2Se4 exhibits an unusual double-peak structure and a T 2 power law at low temperatures, which are attributed to the underlying quadrupolar spin correlations and the Halperin-Saslow modes, respectively. The spin freezing occurs at ∼ 14K, below which the relaxation dynamics is probed by the ac susceptibility. Our results are consistent with the early theory for the spin-1 system with Heisenberg and biquadratic spin interactions. We argue that the early proposal of the quadrupolar correlation and gauge glass dynamics may be well extended to FeAl2Se4. Our results provide useful insights about the magnetic properties of frustrated quantum magnets with high spins. Introduction.-Magnetic frustration arises in systems with competing spin interactions that cannot be optimized simutaneously and kapellasite Inspired by the potentially rich physics in high-spin systems, in this Letter, we study a spin-2 triangular lattice antiferromagnet FeAl 2 Se 4 with both polycrystalline and single crystalline samples. Analogous to the Ni 2+ local moments in NiGa 2 S 4 Crystal structure.-Our polycrystalline and single crystal FeAl 2 Se 4 samples were prepared from the high temperature reactions of high purity elements Fe, Al and Se. In Fig. In the crystal field environment of FeAl 2 Se 4 , the Fe 2+ ion has an electronic configuration t 4 2g e 2 g that gives rise to a high spin state and a spin S = 2 local moment. The six Fe-Se bonds are of equal length and are 2.609(3) Å. Se-Fe-Se angles are 94.55(8) • , marked as α, and 85.45(8) • , marked as β, as displayed in the inset of Fig. Finally, in FeAl 2 Se 4 , the nearest intralayer Fe-Fe distance is d 1 = 3.8335(1) Å and the nearest interlayer Fe-Fe distance is d 2 = 12.7369(5) Å, indicating an ideal twodimensional character in terms of the lattice structure. Thermodynamic measurements.-To identify the magnetic properties of FeAl 2 Se 4 , we first implement the thermodynamic measurements. The temperature dependent dc magnetic susceptibility and its inverse χ -1 under the external magnetic fields of 0.01T, 2T and 8T are shown in Fig. The magnetic heat capacity after subtracting the phonon contributions is used to reveal the spin contribution. The heat capacity of an isostructural non-magnetic material ZnIn 2 S 4 is measured to account for the lattice contribution of FeAl 2 Se 4 . No clear anomaly associated with any magnetic transition can be detected from the specific heat data down to 0.4K, indicating a ground state without any true long range spin ordering. The magnetic contribution C m is obtained by subtracting the phonon contribution from ZnIn 2 S 4 . Similar to NiGa 2 S 4 and FeGa 2 S 4 The magnetic entropy, S m (T ) = T 0 C m /T dT , increases gradually over the entire measured temperature range but with a plateau near T ∼ 25K, indicating high degeneracy of low-energy states due to magnetic frustration. The total entropy reaches R ln(5) at T ∼ 135K, corresponding to the value for the S = 2 system. Then it further increases towards R ln(15) = R ln(5) + R ln(3). The latter term is from the orbital degree of freedom due to two holes present in the t 2g orbitals where V = √ 3a 2 c/2 is the unit-cell volume with a the Fe-Fe spacing, L 0 is the coherence length for the spin excitations and v j is the velocity in the j-th direction. Using the experimental data on the susceptibility χ(T → 0) = 0.0025emu/mol and C m /T 2 = 0.010J/molK 3 , the estimated spin stiffness ρ s = χ(v/κ) 2 = 49.5K, where κ = gμ B / , which is larger than those obtained in FeGa 2 S 4 (ρ s = 35.8K) and NiGa 2 S 4 (ρ s = 6.5K). To further compare FeAl 2 Se 4 with the other two counterparts, in the inset of Fig. Spin freezing and ac susceptibility.-To further characterize the low-temperature magnetic properties of FeAl 2 Se 4 at temperatures near the spin freezing, we measure the temperature dependent ac susceptibility from 5K to 25K for a number of frequencies. As shown in Fig. , where τ 0 is the intrinsic relaxation time, E a the activation energy of the process, and T 0 "the ideal glass temperature" Usually the spin freezing with the glassy behavior is due to disorder and/or frustration that are present in FeAl 2 Se 4 . Like the S vacancies in NiGa 2 S 4 , we suspect the Se vacancies to be the dominant type of impurities and sources of disorder. Without disorders, the system may simply develop the spin density or spiral magnetic orders. With (non-magnetic bond) disorders, the phase transition associated with the discrete lattice symmetry breaking would be smeared out in FeAl 2 Se 4 . No sharp transition was observed in the heat capacity measurement on FeAl 2 Se 4 . By assuming a complex XY order parameter for each magnetic domain in the spin freezing regime, the authors in Ref. 30 invoked a phenomenological gauge glass model Discussion.-Although the large spin moments tend to behave more classically than spin-1/2 moments, the large spin moments have a larger spin Hilbert space and would allow more possibilities for the quantum ground states. If the interaction can access these Hilbert space effectively, interesting quantum states may be stabilized. From our experimental results in FeAl 2 Se 4 , we find that the system exhibits two-peak structure in the heat capacity. We argue that these two peaks correspond to the separate growth of quadrupolar correlation and magnetic (dipolar) correlation. From the early experience with the spin-1 triangular lattice magnet NiGa 2 S 4 To be specific to FeAl 2 Se 4 , there are a couple directions for future experiments. Since the biquadratic interaction is suggested to arise from the spin-lattice coupling, it is useful to substitute some Se with S to modify the spinlattice coupling and hence the biquadratic interaction. This should affect the quadrupolar correlation and the specific heat. Neutron scattering measurement can be quite helpful to probe both the low-energy modes like the Halperin-Saslow modes and the spin correlation in different temperature regimes 