Impedance matching is one of the most important practice in wave engineering as it enables to maximize the power transfer from the signal source to the load in the wave system. Unfortunately, it is bounded by the Bode-Fano criterion that states, for any passive, linear and time-invariant matching network, a stringent tradeoff between the matching-bandwidth and efficiency; implying severe constraints on various electromagnetic and acoustic wave systems. Here, we propose a matching paradigm that overcome this issue by using a temporal switching of the parameters of a metamaterial-based transmission-line, thus revoking the time-invariance assumption underlying the Bode-Fano criterion. Using this scheme we show theoretically that an efficient wideband matching, beyond Bode-Fano bound, can be achieved for short-time pulses in challenging cases of very high contrast between the load and the generator impedances, and with significant load dispersion; situations common in e.g., small antennas matching, cloaking, with applications for ultra-wideband communication, high resolution imaging, and more. Introduction.-Impedance matching, a fundamental practice in wave engineering How can we bypass the Bode-Fano bound? the idea is to revoke its underlying assumptions In this letter we propose a different venue to mitigate the Bode-Fano bound by violating the time-invariance assumption through temporal switching of the TL parameters. By this scheme, it is possible to achieve beyond Bode-Fano transmission efficiency as shown by the blue line in Fig. Time-varying media have been suggested for various purposes and schemes such as for signal parametric amplification and delaylines and as a means to implement synthetic magnetic field Pulse dynamics in abruptly switched TL.-We consider the network shown in Fig. , where L i and C i are the per-unitlength distributed line inductance and capacitance (additional, and, possibly more practical, realizations are discussed in [12, Sec. 6]). Assume that the TL is initially at state #1. The voltage on the source, V g (t), excites a forward propagating pulse with temporal width T 1 that propagates along the line toward the load, Then, at some time t = t s , that is sufficiently larger than the pulse width T 1 , the TL characteristics are abruptly switched to state #2, see Fig. with τ = t -t s , ζ = z -z s where z s = v 1 t s , and the transmission and reflection coefficients are given by Assuming that the pulse width of V + 1 is T 1 , then, it follows from Eq. ( , where is the L 2 norm, as the energy delivered by the corresponding pulses, the energy balance Using Eq. ( with a and E a = V g 2 /2R g is the maximal available energy that the source could provide to a matched load (namely, with no switching and with Z 0 = R L = R g ). We define the matching efficiency, in the most conservative way, as the ratio between the power that is dissipated on the load, and the maximal available power from the source E a plus the total power that enters to the wave network by the switching ∆E. Thus, Note that in Eq. ( Passive switching [∆E = 0].-By using Eq. ( In this case the optimization proposed in Eq. ( The results in the current and following sections have been verified by circuit simulations of the metamaterial TL that its unit cell is shown in Fig. Active switching [∆E > 0].-In the previous section signal amplification by the switching scheme was not allowed, this is due to the constraint ∆E = 0. for this reason we called this scheme 'passive'. Here, conversely, we allow injection of energy into the system by the switching, i.e., ∆E > 0. With that in mind, and setting ∆E = δE a with δ > 0, Eq. ( where x, y, v and ρ are defined as in Eq. A. Shlivinski would like to acknowledge a partial support by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 545/15). Y. Hadad would like to acknowledge support by the Alon Fellowship granted by the Israeli Council of Higher Education (2018-2021).