The thermal conductivity κ of the cuprate superconductor La1.6-xNd0.4SrxCuO4 was measured down to 50 mK in seven crystals with doping from p = 0.12 to p = 0.24, both in the superconducting state and in the magnetic field-induced normal state. We obtain the electronic residual linear term κ0/T as T → 0 across the pseudogap critical point p = 0.23. In the normal state, we observe an abrupt drop in κ0/T upon crossing below p , consistent with a drop in carrier density n from 1+p to p, the signature of the pseudogap phase inferred from the Hall coefficient. A similar drop in κ0/T is observed at H = 0, showing that the pseudogap critical point and its signatures are unaffected by the magnetic field. In the normal state, the Wiedemann-Franz law, κ0/T = L0/ρ(0), is obeyed at all dopings, including at the critical point where the electrical resistivity ρ(T ) is T -linear down to T → 0. We conclude that the non-superconducting ground state of the pseudogap phase at T = 0 is a metal whose fermionic excitations carry heat and charge as conventional electrons do. Introduction. -Cuprate high-temperature superconductors exhibit a variety of correlated phases that interact with each other and with superconductivity, and understanding their associated complex phase diagram is a central challenge of condensed matter physics Below p , the electrical resistivity ρ(T ) measured in the normal state of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) down to low temperature, reached by applying a large magnetic field, increases dramatically as T → 0 Here we address these questions with measurements of heat transport in La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 (Nd-LSCO), a single-layer cuprate superconductor with a low critical temperature T c and critical field H c2 , such that superconductivity can readily be suppressed with static fields down to T → 0. In Fig. The thermal conductivity κ of Nd-LSCO was measured down to 50 mK in seven crystals, with p ranging from 0.12 to 0.24 (see Table old puzzle In this paper, we study a third cuprate, La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 (Nd-LSCO), known to exhibit an upturn in both ρ(T ) and R H (T ) Large single crystals of Nd-LSCO were grown by a traveling float-zone technique in an image furnace, with nominal Sr concentrations x = 0.20, 0.21, 0.22, 0.23, and 0.25. Samples were cut into small rectangular platelets of typical dimensions of 1 mm in length and 0.5 mm in width (in the basal plane of the tetragonal structure), with a thickness of 0.2 mm along the c axis. The hole concentration p of each sample is taken to be p = x, except for the x = 0.25 sample, whose doping is p = 0.24 ± 0.005 (see the Appendix). Each sample is labeled by its p value. Six contacts were made on each sample with H20E silver epoxy, in such a way as to short-circuit the c axis, and diffused by annealing at high temperature in oxygen (two contacts for the current, two for the longitudinal resistivity and two for the transverse Hall signal). Measurements were performed using a standard four-point technique with the current applied along the length of the sample (in the CuO 2 plane). The magnetic field was applied parallel to the c axis (normal to the CuO 2 plane). All samples were measured in Sherbrooke at a fixed field of H = 0 and H = 16 T. In Nijmegen, two types of measurements were carried out: field sweeps up to 37.5 T (a) Temperature-doping phase diagram of Nd-LSCO, showing the superconducting Tc (grey dome) and the pseudogap temperature T extracted from the electrical resistivity (red dots; ref. dogap phase or its transport signatures (other than by suppressing superconductivity). Methods. -The thermal conductivity was measured on the same five single crystals of Nd-LSCO used in our previous study of electrical transport (a) Thermal conductivity κ versus temperature plotted as κ/T vs T , for Nd-LSCO at p = 0.22 (red) and 0.24 (blue), in H = 0 (open symbols) and 15 T (dots). The lines are linear fits to the data over the temperature range shown. The y-intercepts of the fits are the residual electronic terms κ0/T . The horizontal dashed lines are calculated from the Wiedemann-Franz law L0/ρ(0) using the measured ρ(0) (see text). (b) κ0/T as a function of applied magnetic field for p = 0.22 (red) and 0.24 (blue). At both dopings, κ0/T saturates at high field, showing that the normal state has been reached. The error bars reflect the uncertainty on the fits shown in panel (a), which comes from varying the temperature range. For p = 0.24 the error bars are smaller than the symbols. the ab plane of the low-temperature tetragonal structure of Nd-LSCO and the magnetic field was applied along the c axis. Results.-In Fig. In Fig. where ρ(0) is the electrical resistivity as T → 0 and L 0 is the Sommerfeld value of the Lorenz number, equal to 2.44×10 -8 WΩ/K 2 . In Fig. The WF law was also tested in our six other samples, and found to hold in all cases, within error bars. The values of κ 0 /T obtained from fits to the H = 15 T data in Fig. In Fig. From our data at p = 0.12 and 0.15 (Fig. ble I), the WF law is also satisfied inside the CDW phase of Nd-LSCO (0.08 < p < 0.18), as previously reported for the CDW phase of YBCO (in the transverse Hall channel, at p = 0.11) Drop in conductivity below p . -With decreasing temperature, at fixed doping (p < p ), the onset of the pseudogap phase at the crossover temperature T (Fig. We say 'transition' because it is sharp. This can be seen in Fig. Hydrostatic pressure was recently shown to suppress the pseudogap and resistivity upturn in Nd-LSCO close to p , revealing a linear-T resistivity down to T = 0 at p = 0.22 and 0.23 under 2 GPa In Fig. It is interesting to examine the magnitude of this rapid drop in the T = 0 conductivity across p . The normalized conductivity, (κ 0 /T )/(L 0 /ρ 0 ), goes from 1.0 at p = 0.24 down to a value given by p for p = 0.22 and below. This shows that in the pure pseudogap phase, the T = 0 conductivity is a fraction p of its full value in the absence of the pseudogap, when the metal has its large Fermi surface. This large and sudden drop in conductivity at p , by a factor ∼ 5, is a clear signature of the pseudo-gap transition. It is consistent with the drop in carrier density n inferred from the Hall effect in YBCO Model calculations of transport properties across a quantum phase transition where AF order sets in Superconducting state (H = 0).-Turning to the zerofield data (Fig. In Fig. Summary. -We measured the thermal conductivity of Nd-LSCO across its pseudogap critical point p = 0.23. In the field-induced normal state, the fermionic conductivity κ 0 /T at T = 0 drops precipitously when p falls below p , in tandem with the drop in the Hall number n H Acknowledgements Nd-LSCO FIG. S1. Thermal conductivity κ versus temperature plotted as κ/T vs T for Nd-LSCO at p = 0.22, in magnetic fields as indicated. In all panels the line is a linear fit to the data over the entire range shown. 