Lattices of odd-layered two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as WSe 2 are non-centrosymmetric, and thus could possess linear piezoelectricity that is attractive for applications such as nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) and nanogenerators. Measuring the electromechanical coupling of 2D TMDs, however, is rather challenging, since its D 3h point group symmetry makes conventional piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) inapplicable. Here we develop a lateral excitation scanning probe microscopy (SPM) technique that enables mapping of the piezoelectric response of atomically thin WSe 2 directly on a substrate with high spatial resolution. Planar electrodes are used to excite piezoelectric vibrations while imposing anisotropic in-plane mechanical constraint to the WSe 2 , resulting in an out-of-plane deformation due to Poisson's effect that can be measured by an SPM probe. Using this technique, we show that WSe 2 monolayer and trilayers exhibit strong electromechanical response linear to the applied excitation biases that is distinct from the substrate, while WSe 2 bilayer show negligible electromechanical response as expected. The effective piezoelectric coefficient is estimated to be 5.2 pm/V from the measurement, consistent with theoretical predictions. This method can be conveniently applied to a wide range of 2D materials with similar symmetry. Piezoelectricity is the linear coupling of an applied electric field with the mechanical deformation of a material that interconverts mechanical and electrical energies Nevertheless, apparent piezoelectricity has been observed in MoS 2 MLs on a flexible PET substrate From symmetry, MX 2 MLs belong to the point group D 3h , and only possess three nonzero piezoelectric coefficients d 22 , d 21 =-d 22 , and d 16 =-2d 22 in Voigt notation ), wherein it is clearly observed that the first harmonic response is linear with respect to the applied bias and dominates the second harmonic quadratic response. This shows that the electromechanical response from WSe 2 ML and TL results from linear piezoelectricity and not from ionic electrochemical dipoles induced by the charged probe In summary, we have developed a convenient method to map the piezoelectric response of 2D materials quantitatively on their substrate, compatible with most device configurations. The method is based on lateral excitation and the Poisson effect, overcoming difficulty associated with conventional PFM for 2D materials. There is no need for micro-fabricated suspension, making the method widely applicable. Using this method, we measured the effective piezoelectric coefficient of WSe 2 ML to be 5.2 pm/V, consistent with theoretical predictions based on DFT. Device Fabrication: To test the electromechanical properties of 2D samples, electrodes must be attached using electron beam lithography (EBL), metal evaporation, and wire bonding Solution of 6% polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) in dichlorobenzene was spin-coated on the chip of interest as a photoresist under 1000 RPM for 10 seconds and 4000 RPM for 60 seconds. The spin-coated chips were baked at 180 ̊C for 3 minutes to cure the PMMA, after which they were patterned through electron beam lithography. The chip was then loaded into a metal evaporator and 5nm of vanadium (sticking layer) and 90nm of gold were evaporated onto the chip. After evaporation, the excess PMMA and V/Au were lifted off using a 30-minute dichloromethane bath, and the electrode pads were wire-bonded to larger electrodes. Conventional PFM: Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) is performed using MFP-3D AFM (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara). Resonance-enhanced PFM images are obtained by measuring the amplitude and phase of probe deflection in contact mode with the excitation bias amplitude of 5V applied to the probe tip while the contact resonance frequency is tracked using the dual-AC resonance tracking (DART) technique. The intrinsic amplitude, frequency, phase, and quality factor mappings are calculated based on the SHO model. The contact-mode scan is obtained with the rate of 0.65 Hz/line using conductive probes with nominal in-air resonance frequency of 45 kHz (PPP-EFM, Nanosensors). The optical lever sensitivity and the spring constant of each probe is calibrated before the operation using a noncontact approach as described in Higgins et al. Lateral excitation PFM on BL WSe 2 . Fig. 