We present a hybrid atomic sensor that realizes radio-frequency electric field detection with intrinsic field amplification and polarization selectivity for robust highsensitivity field measurement. The hybrid sensor incorporates a passive resonator element integrated with an atomic vapor cell that provides amplification and polarization selectivity for detection of incident radio-frequency fields. The amplified intra-cavity radio-frequency field is measured by atoms using a quantum-optical readout of AC level shifts of field-sensitive atomic Rydberg states. In our experimental demonstration, we employ a split field-enhancement resonator embedded in a rubidium vapor cell to amplify and detect C-band radio-frequency fields. We observe a field amplification equivalent to a 24 dB gain in intensity sensitivity. The spatial profile of the resonant field mode inside the field-enhancement cavity is characterized. The resonant field modes only couple with a well-defined polarization component of the incident field, allowing us to measure the polarization of the incident field in a robust fashion. Measured field enhancement factors, polarizationselectivity performance, and field distributions for the hybrid sensor are in good agreement with simulations. Applications of hybrid atomic sensors in ultra-weak radio-frequency detection and advanced measurement capabilities are discussed. The emergence of quantum sensor technologies is driving a paradigm shift in modern sensing and measurement instrumentation by enabling fundamentally new detection capabilities and performance metrics that are unmatched by those of traditional sensor technology Several limitations still need to be overcome for the Rydberg-EIT RF field measurement method to be applied in practical quantum RF field sensors. These include improving the achievable sensitivity: the most sensitive measurements demonstrated to date have measured fields down to the ∼0.1 mV/m level In the present work we explore passive electric-field amplification as a means to achieve sensitive field detection with the robustness that is inherent to RF field measurements based on EIT spectroscopy of field-induced Rydberg energy-level splittings or shifts. We realize this goal by using a hybrid atomic sensor that combines the advantages of Rydbergbased quantum RF field measurement with those of integrated RF resonator structures. The demonstrated resonators are solid metal structures that enable passive, polarizationselective compression and amplification of incident RF fields in an electric-field mode volume as small as a few cubic millimeters, for resonant RF wavelengths of several centimeters. While the resonators mimic the function of traditional radio receiver LC circuits, their small size allows for integration inside cm-to mm-sized spectroscopic vapor cells. As the field amplification is based on passive electric-field buildup in a rigid metal resonator, the hybrid atomic sensor enables robust atom-based RF field sensing by measuring spectroscopic level shifts and splittings that are comparatively insensitive to experimental parameters. The hybrid atomic sensor and its operating principle for RF electric-field sensing is illustrated in Figure We demonstrate field amplification with the hybrid sensor using the experimental setup shown in Fig. To determine RF electric fields we measure AC Stark shifts of the 31S 1/2 level. The probe and coupler Rabi frequencies at the beam centers are, for our laser powers and beam diameters, calculated to be Ω p = 2π×30 MHz and Ω c = 2π×15 MHz, respectively. Figure The RF electric fields, E, for the data in Fig. To determine the cavity-induced electric-field enhancement factor in the hybrid cell, we compare the cavity-enhanced field at 4.35 GHz in Fig. We benchmark the measured gain in the hybrid sensor against simulations of the electricfield mode function of the resonance in the cavity for an incident 4.37 GHz field of amplitude 1 V/m linearly polarized along y. Figure In Fig. Another feature of hybrid devices is their ability to discriminate between different RF polarizations. For the resonant structure employed here, the cavity acts as a RF-polarization filter in which only RF fields with a linear polarization component along the y-axis of the cavity are coupled into the resonator and field-enhanced within the active measurement volume. The orthogonal RF polarizations are rejected. Figure In Fig. A hybrid atomic sensor incorporating a resonant structure for passive radio-frequency field amplification with an atomic vapor cell has been demonstrated. Hybrid detectors with resonator structures either internal or external to the atomic vapor cell and optical readout medium are anticipated to provide improved performance capabilities for Rydbergatom-based RF field sensors, including high field sensitivity and polarization selectivity for directional field detection. In the device presented here, the enhancement channel and optical beam geometries were designed to ensure the amplified microwave field remained relatively homogeneous throughout the atomic detection volume, for optical beam sizes that are large enough in diameter so as to avoid interaction-time broadening of the EIT line (given by the average transit time of the thermal atoms through the beams). For measurement applications requiring EIT line widths narrower than realized with the present geometry, the probe and coupler Rabi frequencies can be reduced to lower the homogeneous EIT line width, and the inhomogeneous field broadening can be reduced by using smaller-diameter laser beams or larger resonant structures with more homogeneous field mode functions, or by a combination of such measures. Minimization of the line broadening will be beneficial, for instance, in hybrid sensors for weak-field microwave measurement based on small transmission changes of very narrow EIT line shapes We further note that the observation of multiple resonances in Fig. 