Magnetic oscillation is a generic property of electronic conductors under magnetic fields and widely appreciated as a useful probe of their electronic band structure, i.e., the Fermi surface geometry. However, the usage of the strong static magnetic field makes the measurement insensitive to the magnetic order of the target material. That is, the magnetic order is anyhow turned into a forced ferromagnetic one. Here we theoretically propose an experimental method of measuring the magnetic oscillation in a magnetic-order-resolved way by using the azimuthal cylindrical vector (CV) beam, an example of topological lightwaves. The azimuthal CV beam is unique in that when focused tightly, it develops a pure longitudinal magnetic field. We argue that this characteristic focusing property and the discrepancy in the relaxation timescale between conduction electrons and localized magnetic moments allow us to develop the nonequilibrium analog of the magnetic oscillation measurement. Our optical method would be also applicable to metals the under ultra-high pressure of diamond anvil cells. When an electric conductor is under a strong magnetic field, the electronic band structure is reconstructed to be Landau levels, and the isoenergy surface of electrons in the momentum space reduce into the so-called Landau tubes. For a fixed Fermi energy, these Landau tubes and their field dependence cause oscillations of various electronic properties as a function of the external magnetic field Although developed decades ago, the magnetic oscillation is still an vital tool in condensed matter physics When the target system is a non-magnetic conductor, the magnetic oscillation is indeed a powerful tool. However, if we are to apply that to conducting magnets with localized magnetic moments, a problem arises. In this case, the strong static magnetic field applied to measure the oscillation itself affects the magnetic structure. Therefore even if we are interested in the electronic structure of antiferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic, or some non-collinear magnetic states, there is a high possibility that a forced ferromagnetic state [Fig. Even for the collinear magnetic states, the use of the magnetic oscillation is not effective. Under the strong magnetic field, the collinear magnetic moments point to the direction of the external field. As a result, we cannot obtain the full profile of the Fermi surface because the magnetic oscillation only gives the information about the Fermi surface cross section perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. Due to this, the magnetic oscillation is not suitable for the study of the field-induced phase transitions where the strength or direction of the magnetic field have drastic impact on the electronic structure, though there are a number of such materials of our interest. A notable example is pyrochlore iridates where various electronic structures (metal, topological semimetal, and insulator) appear depending on the magnetic structure determined by the direction of the external magnetic field The key idea is to exploit the difference in the relaxation timescale between the conduction electrons and localized spins Therefore, if we apply a magnetic field pulse of far-infrared or THz frequency (whose timescale is of the order of 100 fs to 1 ps), as Fig. the conducting-electron spin polarization (or the total magnetization) of this nonequilibrium state, we will see the magnetic oscillation of the electrons under the influence of the initial magnetic structure. The problem is that if we use the conventional Gaussian laser pulses to apply the magnetic field, there inevitably accompanies the electric field which strongly excites and heats the electron system, smearing out the Landau tube structure we are interested in. Therefore, what we need is thus a source of a "pure magnetic field" without accompanying the electric field in the optical frequency regime. Equipments used for NMR or ESR experiments cannot generate such a high-frequency magnetic field. As we see below, what is called the azimuthal cylindrical vector (CV) beam meets the above criterion. In this section, we review the properties of the CV beam and how can they be exploited to the observation of the magnetic oscillations. In modern optics, a class of laser beams called the topological beams such as optical vortices In Fig. According to Ref. 30, the spatial profiles of the electric field E and the magnetic flux density B of the azimuthally polarized CV beam [Fig. where c is the speed of light in a vacuum. The constant α specifies the size of the entrance pupil and A gives the field amplitude. Here J n (x) is the Bessel function and k is the wavenumber. We see that at ρ = 0 fields are vanishing except the z-component of magnetic field. The details of the apodization function 0 (θ) and the choice of α depend on the pupil but the above property holds irrespective to its choice. As a whole, the field distribution of the tightly focused azimuthally polarized CV beam is given as Fig. We have discussed how the CV beam can be utilized to extend the magnetic oscillation measurement. In the following, taking a simple concrete model, we see how the magnetic oscillation signal depends on the configuration of localized magnetic moments. We consider the following square lattice tight-binding model under the CV beam whose electrons are coupled with localized moments through the exchange coupling. The Hamiltonian is given as The symbol c r,σ is the annihilation operator of a conduction electron at site r with spin σ, and the dimensionless vector m r is the localized magnetic moment at site r. The first term describes the nearest-neighbor hopping with amplitude t which is typically of the order of eV. The magnetic flux density B of the beam is introduced by the Peierls substitution with the vector potential A(r) = (By, 0, 0). The second term is the Zeeman coupling for the electron spins (s r ) α,β = c † r,α σ α,β c r,β . Here the magnetic flux density is treated to be static because, as we discussed before, a pulse of the CV beam with sufficiently long duration works as a static one for conduction electrons. The third term is the exchange coupling with the coupling constant J ex . Through the exchange coupling, conduction electrons feel the effective magnetic field in the direction of the localized magnetic moment m r at site r. The exchange coupling J ex typically takes the value of the order of sub eV to eV. For example, in pyrochlore iridates R 2 Ir 2 O 7 , J ex is the exchange coupling between f and d orbitals and is considered to be around 5 % of the hopping t The conducting-electron spin polarization of the model Eq. ( where s z tot = r s z r is the z component of the total conducting-electron spin, and |E n is the single-electron eigenstate with eigenenergy E n . We denote the Fermi energy as E F . Assuming the discrepancy in the relaxation timescale, we study this electron spin polarization as a function of the applied magnetic field of the CV beam. Figure The left-hand side is the oscillation period of the magnetic susceptibility as a function of 1/B and S f is the area of the extremal orbit on the Fermi surface perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. Due to the small system size of our calculation, here we are taking an artificially strong magnetic field (remember that the Landau level degeneracy is determined by the total flux penetrating the entire system). In realistic situations, as is experimentally verified, magnetic flux density of O(1-10) Tesla would be sufficient enough to measure magnetic oscillations. The result of Fig. Here we discuss several important issues related to our proposal and calculation. First, we consider the effect of the exchange coupling on the dynamics of localized magnetic moments. As we mentioned, the exchange coupling J ex is typically of the order of sub eV to eV. This seems to result in the fast dynamics of localized moments m r and break our assumption on the timescale discrepancy. The point is, though the exchange coupling itself has rather high energy, the laser-induced change in the electron spin polarization ∆ s tot B = s tot B -s tot 0 is very small [at most O(10 -3 ) of the saturating value even for O(10) Tesla as is read out from Fig. To observe the magnetic oscillation, typically we need a magnetic field pulse with the magnetic flux density of O(1-10) Tesla. As we mentioned, the frequency of the incident beam should be around THz or far-infrared. In the THz region, the magnetic field pulse of O(1) Tesla is just becoming possible, and it would take a while to reach O The effect of heating by the laser irradiation should also be considered. In the magnetic oscillation measurement, when the (electron) temperature becomes comparable with the bandwidth, the oscillation signal becomes vague. The primary source of the heating under irradiation of lasers is the coupling between the electric field and the electrons. Since the CV beam has a suppressed electric field near the focus, the heating is much weaker compared to that caused by the Gaussian beam. Nevertheless, there will exist a small change in the temperature. Therefore, applying our method to extremely heavy fermion systems with very small electron bandwidth could be problematic. On top of the pump laser pulse, the way of measuring magnetic oscillations is also important for our setup. Since our proposal stands on the nonequilibrium property of the electron-spin coupled system, we have to measure the nonequilibrium spin polarization in the optical timescale. One way to achieve this is to use the magneto-optical effect such as Kerr or Faraday effects which is already a common way of measuring the magnetization. To measure the nonequilibrium magnetic oscillation, the temporal resolution of those magneto-optical measurements should be shorter than the CV pulse duration, thus we have to use the ultrashort femtosecond pulses to probe the spin density. We can also measure physical quantities other than the spin density. Because the magnetic oscillation originates from the Landau tube structure, there should appear oscillating behaviors in any physical quantities related to the electronic structure. For example, optical conductivity would be an option. In this paper, we have focused on the magnetic materials and their Fermi surfaces. However, the applicability of the proposed method is not limited to that. A notable example is the Fermi surface measurement of materials under ultra-high pressure. In producing ultra-high pressure stronger than GPa, commonly the diamond anvil cell In this paper, we propose an extension of the magnetic oscillation measurement for the Fermi surface geometry using the azimuthal cylindrical vector beams. In contrast to the conventional method using the static magnetic field, the proposed protocol allows us to apply that to conductors with localized magnetic moments with an arbitrary magnetic order. Hence, we can study the field-induced phase transitions in magnetic materials such as pyrochlore iridates, chiral magnets, and so on. The same method is applicable to the Fermi surface measurement of generic metals under ultra-high pressure where the conventional magnetic oscillation measurements are hard to be performed. The unique focusing property of the cylindrical beam would have various applications in condensed matter physics. If the sample size is sufficiently small as is assumed in this paper, the radial and the azimuthal cylindrical beams allow us to apply the electronic and magnetic fields independently. We can change their amplitude, relative angle or phase, and so on. This unique situation is an ideal playground to explore novel ways of controlling and measuring physical properties of matter in an ultrafast way.