We report on room temperature THz detection by means of antenna-coupled field effect transistors fabricated by using epitaxial graphene grown on silicon carbide substrate. The photoresponsivity is estimated in ~0.25 V/W and NEP ~ 80 nW/√Hz. Two independent detection mechanisms are found: plasma wave assisted-detection and thermoelectric effect, which is ascribed to the presence of junctions along the FET channel. The superposition of the calculated functional dependence of both the plasmonic and thermoelectric photovoltages on the gate bias qualitatively well reproduces the measured photovoltages. Additionally, the sign reversal of the measured photovoltage demonstrates the stronger contribution of the plasmonic detection compared to the thermoelectric mechanism. Although responsivity improvement is necessary, these results demonstrate that plasmonic detectors fabricated by epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide are potential candidates for fast large area imaging of macroscopic samples. In addition to a variety of active and passive photonics devices 1 for the generation 2-4 and modulation 5-8 of terahertz (THz) radiation, graphene has been also successfully demonstrated as an excellent platform for low-cost room-temperature operation THz photodetection systems presence of temperature gradient within the graphene channel (thermoelectric effect) The large interest in reliable fast room-temperature photodetection is motivated by growing applications of the terahertz light in areas like spectroscopy, biomedical and security imaging. For imaging applications, particular attention is currently paid to develop sensitive, compact, portable, very fast imagers. Presently, room temperature detector arrays have been demonstrated with silicon CMOS Therefore, direct growth of graphene on the device substrate would be highly desirable. For this reason, epitaxial graphene represents a promising alternative. In fact, thanks to the graphitization of silicon carbide (SiC) by silicon (Si) sublimation, high quality graphene film can be directly grown on insulating SiC substrate in the form of large-diameter wafers. In this study, we report on THz detection measurements at room temperature of an antenna coupled-GFET when using epitaxial graphene grown on the Si-face of SiC substrate. In this kind of detectors, the photo-induced voltage was generated by both plasma wave rectification and photothermoelectric effect due to the non-uniform charge profile across the FET channel. The detector consisted of a log-periodic circular-toothed antenna (see inset of Fig. The detector was electrically characterized by two terminals-method, measuring the current (I sd ) as a function of gate voltage (V g ) while keeping source/drain voltage (V sd ) at 1 mV. The source/drain resistance (R sd ) varied from 14 to 17.5 kwith a maximum at gate voltage V CNP = 0.1 V. The observed p-doping can be ascribed to extrinsic contaminations (e.g. exposure to air and residual fabrication impurities), contrarily to the intrinsic electron-doping reported in as-growth epitaxial graphene on SiC due to the charged dangling bonds of the buffer layer When the detection mechanism is based on the rectification of THz-induced ac current between source and drain, the carrier density and drift velocity are simultaneously modulated at the radiation frequency . As a result, the detector photoresponse has the form of a dc signal proportional to the incident power. Plasma waves are excited in the FET channel The photoresponsivity was characterized by illuminating the detector with a broadband THz source (WR2.8AMC, Virginia Diodes Inc.) that covered a spectral range from 230 to 375 GHz. The output power was frequency dependent and ranged from 0.5 to 1 mW (calibrated after the focusing lens). The source was modulated at 858 Hz with a fixed horizontal polarization. A lens was employed to focus the radiation and maximize the illumination of the detecting region. The photovoltage signal was then recorded by means of a lock-in amplifier (Signal Recovery mo. 7265 DSP) with an input impedance of 10 Mand variable internal gain. Figure Fixing the THz wave polarization at 0 degree, the photo-induced voltage was measured at the peak frequencies of Fig. All curves (U ≡ U mis ) show nearly constant negative values at negative gate voltage, while an inverted V-shape with small sign switch at positive gate voltage. In the overdamped plasma wave regime, the solution of both Eulero equation (for the drift velocity) and continuity equation (for the carrier density) with k B the Boltzmann constant, T the sample temperature, e the electron charge and E F = k B T F the graphene Fermi energy and temperature (T F ). Eq. ( , whereas it is valid near the CNP only if the carrier density is such that k B T « E F , like in low mobility graphene as a result of large residual charge fluctuations The detector figures of merit were calculated by following the procedure in Ref. 15. The responsivity R was estimated from the measured photovoltage assuming a full coupling of the radiation to the FET channel and detector active area equal to the diffraction limit. Therefore, only the lower limit of R was extracted. The maximum responsivity was achieved at 263 GHz and 325 GHz corresponding to ~0.25 V/W. Instead, R ~ 0.15 V/W was estimated at 295 GHz and 353 GHz. It is worth noting that the maximum responsivity was achieved for the frequencies where the highest temperature gradient was estimated, confirming a more efficient coupling of the THz radiation with the FET channel. Finally, due to the non-currentbiased configuration, the thermal Johnson-Nyquist noise was assumed as the dominant contribution In conclusions, we demonstrated room temperature THz detection with epitaxial graphene grown on silicon carbide substrate as the channel of an antenna-coupled field effect transistor. Photoresponse analysis revealed the presence of two independent detection mechanisms: plasmonic detection by means of the electron transport nonlinearity and thermoelectric effect ascribed to the presence of carrier density junction and induced temperature gradient across the FET channel. In fact, the behavior of the measured photovoltage as function of the gate voltage was qualitatively well explained in terms of plasma wave and thermoelectric photovoltages. Particularly, the photovoltages of both mechanisms were calculated by assuming the hydrodynamic transport model for the plasmonic regime and the Mott formulation for the TE effect. Their functional dependences as the gate voltage varies were found to be similar but with opposite sign, pointing out the competition of the two mechanisms. Specifically, the analysis of the experimental data suggested that the plasma wave detection may be the dominant mechanism, even though strongly counterbalanced by the TE response. The detrimental competition between the DS and TE effects resulted in NEP ~ 80 nW/√Hz and photoresponsivity of about 0.25 V/W. This is one to two orders of magnitude lower than in plasmonic THz detectors fabricated by exfoliated graphene 