The discovery of magnetism by the ancient Greeks was enabled by the natural occurrence of lodestone -a magnetized version of the mineral magnetite. Nowadays, natural minerals continue to inspire the search for novel magnetic materials with quantum-critical behaviour or exotic ground states such as spin liquids. The recent surge of interest in magnetic frustration and quantum magnetism was largely encouraged by crystalline structures of natural minerals realizing pyrochlore, kagome, or triangular arrangements of magnetic ions. As a result, names like azurite, jarosite, volborthite, and others, which were barely known beyond the mineralogical community a few decades ago, found their way into cutting-edge research in solid-state physics. In some cases, the structures of natural minerals are too complex to be synthesized artificially in a chemistry lab, especially in single-crystalline form, and there is a growing number of examples demonstrating the potential of natural specimens for experimental investigations in the field of quantum magnetism. On many other occasions, minerals may guide chemists in the synthesis of novel compounds with unusual magnetic properties. The present review attempts to embrace this quickly emerging interdisciplinary field that bridges mineralogy with low-temperature condensed-matter physics and quantum chemistry. Many developments in solid-state physics and crystallography were historically inspired by observations on naturally occurring minerals. Various phenomena in condensed-matter physics were first discovered in natural samples, which had unsurpassed quality as compared to synthetic materials before the advent of modern chemical and crystal-growth technology In modern times, experimental solid-state physics predominantly relies on synthetic crystals, whose quality and chemical purity can be well controlled for an ever increasing number of materials. Therefore, today's condensed-matter physics has largely departed from mineralogy and geophysical sciences in its need for samples. Yet, there have always been exceptions to this general tendency, especially in the field of magnetism. In the early 1950's, the first triple-axis neutron spectrometer was put together by Brockhouse at the Chalk River NRX reactor in Canada Unlike magnetite, another famous iron-bearing mineral hematite (α-Fe 2 O 3 , with a corundum crystal structure) is an antiferromagnet with a very high Néel point, T N = 960 K. In addition, weak ferromagnetism is observed above the so-called Morin transition (T M ≈ 263 K) due to a spin-reorientation transition exchange interactions up to the 5 th nearest neighbour. They also confirmed linear dispersion relationships for low-energy AFM spin waves, predicted by Hulthén Another example of a classical antiferromagnet that was investigated by neutron scattering is hauerite (MnS 2 , pyrite structure), which has a habit of forming large cm-sized octahedral single crystals of high natural quality. It adopts a commensurate collinear AFM structure with a k = 1 1 2 0 wave vector below T N = 48 K This review does not aim to give a complete coverage of the field of quantum magnetism, which would hardly be possible in the limited volume of an article. There are several existing books and reviews that already presented an excellent introduction to this field, such as the lecture notes on "Quantum Magnetism" edited by Schollwöck et al. Neither does it present an exhaustive introduction to magnetism from the usual perspective of geophysics and geochemistry. From a geologist's perspective, rock magnetism would be typically restricted to classical ferro-or ferrimagnetic properties of minerals at ambient or elevated temperatures and pressures. Here an interested reader can also refer to the vast body of published works The review is structured according to the physics of magnetic subsystems, rather than the chemistry of corresponding compounds. Chapters 2 through 7 discuss different groups of minerals according to the dimensionality and complexity of their magnetic interactions, including zero-dimensional dimer systems (Chapter 2) and molecular magnets (Chapter 7), one-dimensional spin chains (Chapter 3), two-dimensional (2D) layered structures (Chapters 4 and 5), and 3D magnetic lattices (Chapter 6). Among the quasi-2D compounds, kagomelattice systems are so much more numerous among minerals, that they deserved a separate chapter. Finally, Chapter 8 discusses the 2D magnetic metal FeS, whose naturally occurring analog mackinawite can be seen as the only known natural prototype of a recently discovered iron-based superconductor. Most of the chapters start with an introductory section that summarizes the central results for a specific class of magnetic lattices and gives references for further reading. It is then followed by more specific sections that can be seen as case studies devoted to a certain magnetic mineral or a group of compounds with related properties. Because the main focus of this review is on quantum magnetism, the majority of the presented materials are cuprates (that is, spin-1 2 systems). Several Fe-, Mn-, and Co-based magnetic minerals with classical spins, such as jarosites (section 4.2), delafossites (section 5.2) and columbites (section 3.10), are also discussed for completeness. These are, however, limited to geometrically frustrated and low-dimensional crystal structures. Strong frustration can partially suppress or distort magnetic order even on lattices with large spins, which we D. S. Dimerized quantum spin systems are among the simplest and best studied physical models that serve as textbook examples for the realization of quantum critical phase transitions A variety of models with different critical alternation ratios α c arise depending on the specific lattice of interdimer interactions, several of them shown in Fig. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 9 Figure and α c2 that has varying estimates from 0.765 From the materials perspective, compounds that can serve as model systems for the realization of these assorted dimer lattices in the proximity to criticality are of the greatest interest. Therefore, the search continues among synthetic compounds as well as natural minerals. Particularly exciting are those systems that exhibit high sensitivity of the exchange constants to external parameters, such as hydrostatic pressure, offering the possibility to vary the alternation ratio experimentally in order to approach the QCP or stabilize new quantum ground states. As will become clear from the following examples, this situation is common in natural copper minerals, where the superexchange coupling sensitively depends on the Cu-O-Cu bond angles that can be tuned by pressure. In addition, some minerals realize less common and more complicated dimer structures that provide a new playground for theorists and serve as real-world challenges for testing the accuracy and reliability of different computational methods beyond simple purist models. The carbonate mineral malachite, with the formula Cu 2 CO 3 (OH) 2 , is famous as a gemstone and has been mined as a copper ore since antiquity. It has a monoclinic crystal structure (space group P 2 1 /a) in which pairs of edge-sharing planar CuO 4 plaquettes form Cu 2 O 6 dimers that are arranged into buckled dimer chains [see Fig. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 10 Lebernegg et al. later demonstrated that malachite is an exception among Cu 2+ systems, in which structural and magnetic dimers coincide In addition, full-relativistic calculations show that the lack of inversion symmetry along the exchange pathways gives rise to non-negligible antisymmetric Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI), which are important for understanding the finite values of the low-field uniform magnetization that are observed in experiments despite the large value of the spin gap Quantum Magnetism in The empirical GKA rules According to Lebernegg et al., the dimer compound Cu 2 Mg 2 (CO 3 )(OH) 6 • 2H 2 O, which is found in nature in the form of a violet-blue mineral known as callaghanite (Fig. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 12 Such an unusual behaviour is a consequence of the Cu-O-Cu bridging angle of 96.14 • within the dimers, which falls within the range where the compensation of AFM and FM exchange interactions is expected. At ambient pressure, the system shows quantum paramagnetic behaviour and no signs of magnetic ordering down to the lowest measured temperatures. Still, the sensitivity of the Cu-O-Cu bridging angle to pressure may result in a situation when the AFM interaction is reduced even further by very moderate pressures, leading to a magnetic phase transition and a pressure-driven QCP. While experimental investigations of callaghanite under pressure are not yet available, it definitely represents a very interesting model compound for studying the subtle balance of AFM and FM interactions close to compensation. A similar network of dimers is also present in the mineral liroconite, Cu 2 Al(AsO 4 )(OH) 4 • 4H 2 O A layered structure consisting of corrugated honeycomb layers is realized in the rare copperaluminium-arsenate mineral urusovite, CuAl(AsO 4 )O, discovered about 20 years ago on Kamchatka Naturally, the lowest-energy excitation in CuAl(AsO 4 )O, observed by ESR, corresponds to the singlet-triplet transition with an energy given by the spin gap, ∆ ≈ 30 meV. The average effective g factor was found to be g = 2.05 and remained constant down to ∼ 90 K, shifting afterwards to higher values. The latter artefact has been ascribed to paramagnetic impurities, which were also evidenced by the static magnetic susceptibility measurements Another example of a system with weakly coupled magnetic dimers is clinoclase, Cu 3 (AsO 4 )(OH) 3 , whose magnetic properties also lack in-depth experimental investigations to date. X-ray structural refinement The presence of weakly interacting nonequivalent spin dimers in clinoclase implies that its spin-excitation spectrum should consist of two gapped branches of triplet excitations similar to those observed in the prototypical coupled-dimer antiferromagnets KCuCl 3 or TlCuCl 3 Quantum spin chain and ladder models Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 15 are lattice configurations with magnetic frustration realized via the competition of nearestand further-neighbour exchange interactions. The simplest model of this kind is a uniform spin-1 2 chain with a FM nearest-neighbour (NN) coupling J 1 < 0 and AFM next-nearestneighbour (NNN) coupling J 2 > 0, which is relevant for the minerals tolbachite (CuCl 2 ), trippkeite (CuAs 2 O 4 ), linarite PbCuSO 4 (OH) 2 , and szenicsite Cu 3 (MoO 4 )(OH) 4 as well as for a number of archetypal low-dimensional cuprates CuBr 2 Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 16 Magnetic 1D chains with higher values of the local spin can also be found in some Mn-and Fe-based minerals. For example, the borate mineral gaudefroyite, Ca 4 (MnO) 3 (BO 3 ) 3 CO 3 , features ferromagnetic linear chains of edge-shared MnO 6 octahedra along [001] that are arranged on a kagome lattice in the ab plane Quantum effects, however, have much more drastic effects in low-dimensional antiferromagnets, even for systems with a large absolute value of the spin. In particular, an AFM spin chain with any integer spin, in contrast to the case of half-integer spin, has a singlet ground state that is separated by an energy gap, ∆, from the excited states. This has been first conjectured by Haldane The next level in the hierarchy of simple 1D spin systems is represented by decorated spin chains, where more complicated structural units are inserted in the 1D arrangement. Quantum Magnetism in Two or more coupled spin chains form a spin ladder, which takes an intermediate position between 1D and 2D spin systems. The principal difference between a solitary spin- 1 2 chain and a spin ladder is that a spin- 1 2 ladder with AFM couplings is a spin liquid with a singlet ground state, exhibiting a Haldane-type energy gap due to the dimerization of half-integer spins The mineral tolbachite, or anhydrous cupric chloride CuCl 2 , forms brown to golden-brown monoclinic crystals characterized by the space group C2/m Soon afterwards, the multiferroic properties of CuCl 2 were experimentally investigated by Seki et al. The greenish-blue mineral trippkeite, CuAs 2 O 4 , crystallizing in the tetragonal space group P 4 2 /mbc From measurements of the magnetization, magnetic susceptibility, and electron paramagnetic resonance, a positive Curie-Weiss temperature of Θ CW ≈ 40 K (consistent with the predominantly FM exchange interactions) and a saturated ordered moment of ∼ 1 μ B have been estimated. Initial measurements under hydrostatic pressure have indicated an increase in the Curie temperature with a rate of 1.35 K/Gpa, with no evidence for pressure-induced Quantum Magnetism in The translucent blue mineral linarite PbCuSO 4 (OH) 2 , space group P 2 1 /m is arguably the most studied natural quantum magnetic system, and for a good reason. The high degree of frustration in this system is evidenced by the large ratio of the Curie-Weiss and Néel temperatures, Θ CW /T N ≈ 10 The frustration among J 1 and J 2 leads to a long-range elliptical-spiral ordering below the Néel temperature T N = 2.8 K, which causes electric polarization of the lattice and leads to a ferroelectric behaviour Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 21 ordering (III), a collinear Néel AFM phase (IV), and a spin-density wave (V) Most recently, Y. Feng et al. Recent INS measurements of spin dynamics in linarite [178] reevaluated the magnetic interactions in linarite, including less significant terms such as direct, diagonal, and third-nearest-neighbour interchain exchange couplings. The authors fitted globally the spin-wave dispersions measured along high-symmetry directions at elevated magnetic fields of 10, 11, and 14.5 T applied along the a axis. The resulting ratio of J 2 /|J 1 | ≈ 0.27 places linarite even closer to the QCP between the FM state and spinmultipolar phases than anticipated in earlier works. This implies that despite the smallness of all interchain interactions and anisotropy terms, they can be highly relevant in suppressing the higher-order spin-multipolar quantum phases. The new data also demonstrated the sensitivity of the complex magnetic phase diagram and the ordering wave vector itself to the field direction, as entirely different phase sequences were found along the three orthogonal crystal directions [178]. Frustrated spin chains of a different type are realized in another quantum spin system, Cu 3 (CO 3 ) 2 (OH) 2 , known as azurite. This deep-blue copper carbonate mineral, closely associated with green malachite, has a monoclinic crystal structure, and its precise atomic positions are well known from both x-ray and neutron diffraction experiments Quantum Magnetism in Neutron diffraction measurements allowed Rule et al. The symmetric diamond chain obtained by setting J 1 = J 3 and J 4 = 0 has attracted much attention from the theory side Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 24 polarization of the dimers is limited to a few percent, indicating that they essentially remain in the singlet state. In azurite, the 1/3 plateau is observed in fields between B c1 = 11 T and B c2 = 30 T and is characterized by a spin gap opening at the AFM point q = 1 1 2 0 . The excitations are represented by ferromagnons with an approximately cosinusodial dispersion, originating from the interacting monomers, and a weakly dispersive Zeeman-split singlettriplet excitation at higher energies, originating from the dimers Honecker et al. also presented simulations of the dynamic structure factor in zero magnetic field using DDMRG on a chain with N = 60 sites Application of a magnetic field also leads to very notable and rather intricate changes in the energies of the spin excitations. According to the INS data Quantum Magnetism in The quasi-1D Heisenberg AFM spin chains found in the copper arsenate hydroxide mineral euchroite, Cu 2 (AsO 4 )(OH) • 3H 2 O (orthorhombic space group P 2 1 2 1 2 1 ) [201], consist of corner-sharing triangles, as shown in Fig. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 26 and 3.17 Å) and, consequently, in the Cu-O-Cu bond angles along the sides of every unit triangle guarantees that the three exchange paths J 1 , J 2 , and J 3 are nonequivalent. Natural samples of euchroite have been studied by magnetic susceptibility, specific heat, high-field magnetization, and 1 H-NMR measurements In a recent study, Fujihala et al. To estimate the value of the Haldane gap, Fujihala et al. also measured the low-energy spin-excitation spectra of a synthetic K 2 Cu 3 O(SO 4 ) 3 powder sample by time-of-flight neutron spectroscopy Another copper mineral that attracted recent attention is the green dioptase, Cu The magnetic structure has been reported in a number of works and is illustrated here in Fig. Gross and co-workers More recently, however, full-potential DFT calculations and neutron-spectroscopy measurements consistently demonstrated that the interchain coupling in dioptase is actually Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 29 ferromagnetic. The theoretical calculations resulted in the exchange parameters J 1 = 6.72 and J 2 = -3.19 meV The value of the spin gap in the zero-field AFM state, estimated from the INS data, amounts to ∼ 1.5 meV Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 30 Interesting physical aspects of frustrated spin chains were recently revealed in the rare coppermolybdate mineral szenicsite by Lebernegg et al. As discussed in section 3.1 above, the uniform AFM Heisenberg chain with NN and NNN interactions features a gapped dimer-crystal ground state for J 2 /J 1 > α c = 0.2411, and the exchange parameters estimated for the central chain in szenicsite certainly place it within this regime. Moreover, its J 2 /J 1 ratio is very close to the Majumdar-Ghosh point (α MG = 0.5), where two degenerate ground states can be exactly represented by a superposition of spin singlets The black mineral columbite, also known as niobite, is mined as a niobium ore. In 1801, the chemist Charles Hatchett analyzed a columbite specimen from the mineral collection of the British Museum, which then led to the discovery of the element niobium On the Mn-rich side, the spin chains are of Heisenberg type and antiferromagnetic In particular, CoNb 2 O 6 attracted a lot of recent interest as a model material for the realization of a frustrated antiferromagnet consisting of ferromagnetic Ising chains Quantum Magnetism in Periodic 2D arrangements (tilings) of regular polygons are exemplified by 11 uniform Archimedean lattices, which serve as prototypes of 2D interacting spin systems realized in various crystal structures The corner-sharing geometry of KAFM layers supports an extensive classical ground-state manifold that leads to a finite residual entropy at T = 0. A coplanar or slightly canted Figure Quantum Magnetism in Herbertsmithite was the first kagome-layered compound to feature a perfect equilateral geometry and no order down to T = 0, while its metastable polymorph kapellasite with ferromagnetic NN interactions was later shown to host a gapless spin-liquid ground state due to the frustrated further-neighbour interactions The jarosite family of minerals with the general formula AFe 3 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) 6 (with A being an alkali metal) are model kagome antiferromagnets with the classical spin S = 5/2 Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 35 kagome plane given by tan(2η) = 2D p /( √ 3J + D z ), as illustrated in Fig. On the experimental front, "triangular-spin AFM ordering" was first observed in a synthetic sample of K-Fe-jarosite back in the 1980's by powder neutron diffraction, Mössbauer, and magnetic susceptibility measurements The quantitative understanding of magnetic interactions in jarosite was enabled by the INS measurements performed independently by two groups in 2006. First, Matan et al. reported the spin-wave spectrum measured on a deuterated powder sample and a smaller (100 mg) nondeuterated synthetic single crystal of KFe 3 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) 6 More recent works focused on the origin of spin anisotropy in K-Fe-jarosite, in order to distinguish the effects of single-ion anisotropy from those of DMI. The single-ion anisotropy energy could be first accurately measured using x-ray absorption spectroscopy In contrast to the alkali-metal jarosites discussed above, synthetic samples of hydronium jarosite (H 3 O)Fe 3 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) 6 Quantum Magnetism in Herbertsmithite, γ-ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 , is a copper-hydroxychloride mineral The most remarkable property of herbertsmithite is the absence of any long-range magnetic order down to the lowest measured temperatures, despite the large negative Curie-Weiss temperature of Θ CW ≈ -314 K The momentum-space structure of spin correlations in herbertsmithite was investigated by Han et al. using neutron scattering Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 39 additional Hamiltonian parameters, such as Ising and DMI terms The bulk ac susceptibility and the dynamic susceptibility measured by neutron spectroscopy show a universal scaling relationship in herbertsmithite that is typical for systems with disorder or in proximity to a QCP Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 40 from INS data, χ (ω, T ), is plotted for various temperatures. The quantity χ (ω, T )T α with α ≈ 2/3 collapses on a single curve as a function of ω/k B T . It can be well described by the same functional form F (ω/T ) = (T /ω) α tanh(ω/βT ) as the one used to fit the dynamic susceptibility in La 1.96 Sr 0.04 CuO 4 The situation with understanding the low-temperature magnetism in herbertsmithite is further complicated by the recent results of Zorko et al. Apart from the most studied herbertsmithite, structurally perfect S = 1/2 KAFM lattices are also realized in its isostructural Mg, Ni, and Co analogues tondiite, γ-MgCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 Quantum Magnetism in 28 The magnetic properties of γ-NiCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 (gillardite) and γ-CoCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 (leverettite) have been probed by magnetization and susceptibility measurements The mineral kapellasite is a metastable polymorph of herbertsmithite, in which Zn ions occupy positions in the kagome layers rather than at the intersites Experimental results available to date suggest that kapellasite develops no long-range order but rather short-range magnetic correlations with the noncollinear "cuboc2" structure Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 42 A more recent theoretical work by Iqbal et al. , also termed Cd-kapellasite, has been grown in single-crystal form by the hydrothermal transport method Finally, it is also worthwhile to mention the effect of disorder on the magnetic properties of kapellasite. In a study that employed a combination of 35 Cl NMR, ESR, and μSR, Kermarrec et al. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 43 relaxation times at low temperatures. Due to the metastability of the α-ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 polymorph and the proximity of ionic radii of Zn 2+ and Cu 2+ ions, it remains a real chemical challenge to decrease the amount of structural disorder in the kagome layers and thereby improve the quality of synthetic samples. One possible way to circumvent this problem is to replace Zn 2+ with another nonmagnetic cation. Such a possibility is offered by the newly discovered mineral centennialite of the atacamite group, CaCu 3 Cl 2 (OH) 6 • 0.7H 2 O An alternative possibility to avoid disorder in the S = 1/2 kagome lattice is offered by the telluride mineral quetzalcoatlite, Zn 6 Cu 3 (TeO 6 ) 2 (OH) 6 • Ag x Pb y Cl x+2y In some of the S = 1/2 kagome minerals, frustration is relieved by structural distortions within the kagome plane, which leads to non-equivalent exchange on the triangles. Historically, the mineral volborthite, Cu 3 V 2 O 7 (OH) 2 • 2H 2 O with monoclinic space group C2/m, was among the first candidate compounds for the realization of a S = 1/2 KAFM model system The first theoretical analysis of the microscopic magnetic model for volborthite by Janson et al. The situation cleared somewhat when thermodynamic measurements on volborthite single crystals became available. The specific-heat data of Yoshida et al. Quantum Magnetism in In addition, superlattice reflections were observed below T s by x-ray diffraction, indicating a doubling of the unit cell along the c axis In the most recent theoretical paper, Chern et al. The understanding of high-field magnetic phases in volborthite also received a second impetus from the successful growth of high-quality single crystals Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 48 A possible spin-nematic phase at high fields, evidenced by a slowing down of spin fluctuations due to the condensation of magnon bound states, has therefore been proposed. The ordering patterns among d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 copper orbitals that attracted so much attention to volborthite over the last two decades also play a role in a number of other kagome minerals. For instance, an orbital arrangement similar to that of volborthite but with a different orientation of the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals on the Cu(2) sites has been proposed for KCu 3 As 2 O 7 (OH) 3 In the structurally related mineral vesignieite, BaCu 3 (VO 4 ) 2 (OH) 2 A realistic magnetic model that considers the anisotropic DMI in addition to the two inequivalent exchange constants J and J along the sides of isosceles triangles, as illustrated here in Fig. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 49 (a) The noncollinear "q = 0" magnetic order suggested for vesignieite by Owerre up to 50 T, and the analysis of specific heat suggests that only 1/3 of the spins contribute to the magnetic order, while the other 2/3 form singlets and are therefore magnetically inactive Contrary to the previously suggested models, the most recent INS measurements, carried out on a synthetic deuterated powder sample of vesignieite, indicate that the magnetic model is actually dominated by the third-nearest-neighbour AFM Heisenberg exchange J 3 Quantum Magnetism in Among the less-studied copper minerals with a deformed kagome lattice, one can also mention bayldonite, PbCu 3 (AsO 4 ) 2 (OH) 2 (space group C2/c) Another type of distortion that can be found in kagome compounds is the 3D buckling of magnetic kagome planes. It is particularly pronounced in the layered cuprate mineral francisite, Cu 3 Bi(SeO 3 ) 2 O 2 Cl The microscopic magnetic model for francisite has been addressed in a number of recent theoretical and experimental works . Crystal structure of francisite with buckled kagome planes. After Constable et al. based on the Hartree-Fock mean-field approximation for the electronic Hamiltonian resulted in a slightly different set of parameters for the effective magnetic model by taking into account hybridization effects and the spin-orbit interaction. In this model, the canted zerofield ground state arises from a competition among ferromagnetic NN and antiferromagnetic NNN interactions within the kagome planes, whereas weaker anisotropic terms fix the spin directions and contribute to the anisotropic behaviour of the magnetization. Therefore, the interaction regime in francisite can be considered similar to that of kapellasite in terms of the bond frustration imposed by the competition among the FM and AFM interactions, while the network of interactions is altered by the stronger buckling of kagome layers. It has to be noted that both theory papers treated francisite in its high-temperature P mmn structure, neglecting the lattice distortion present in the P cmn low-temperature phase that was only understood a year later The most recent works focused on the multiferroic behaviour of francisite and the fieldinduced metamagnetic spin-flip transition to a ferrimagnetic structure, which has been observed at the critical field B c ≈ 0.8 T applied along the c axis In recent years, a group from Moscow State University systematically investigated the possibility of replacing Ba atoms in the francisite structure with Y or nonmagnetic lanthanides Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 53 depending on the composition. This signifies different strengths of the interlayer exchange interaction, while the essential physics is qualitatively preserved. Unsurprisingly, the magnetic behaviour of the Sm compound with the large Sm 3+ spin and orbital magnetic moments turned out to be much more complex. This compound develops AFM order below T N = 35 K and shows a spin-reorientation transition at T C = 8.5 K. In magnetic field, the system undergoes multiple metamagnetic phase transitions before the magnetization saturates in moderate fields of several teslas Mineral claringbullite, Cu 4 (OH) 6 FCl The ferromagnetic coupling between the kagome layers was initially assumed to be weak While the details of the microscopic magnetic model of barlowite and claringbullite may require additional work to be settled, the main interest to these systems is motivated by the possibility to substitute nonmagnetic ions onto the Cu(2) sites Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 56 One more kagome compound that deserves to be mentioned here derives from the coppersulfate mineral brochantite, Cu 4 SO 4 (OH) 6 , which crystallizes in the monoclinic P 2 1 /a space group From the T dependence of the susceptibility, a gapless RVB spin-liquid ground state with a spinon Fermi surface has been suggested The assumption about the spin-liquid state of Zn-brochantite has been recently corroborated in a series of experiments by M. Gomilšek et al. that combined local-probe techniques with neutron scattering Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 57 ∼ 5 K with a saturation below 0.6 K. In the 2 D NMR data, a nonmonotonic behaviour of 1/T NMR 1 with anomalies around 15, 5, and 0.76 K and a power-law dependence at higher temperatures was observed. This led to a conclusion that two spin-liquid regimes, SL1 and SL2, are realized at different temperatures A similar route to the realization of a kagome spin liquid has been suggested by Botana et al. The vast majority of quasi-2D crystals form regular periodic structures known as Archimedean lattices Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 58 lattices, in particular the so-called dice lattice Quantum Magnetism in The delafossite group of minerals serves as a perfect realization of the triangular magnetic lattice. The hexagonal delafossite structure (space group R3m) derives from the cubic rocksalt (NaCl) structure, if two different cations statistically distributed on the cation site undergo an order-disorder transition, segregating into alternate 2 ), as shown in Fig. phase between T N1 and T N2 is a sinusoidally amplitude-modulated structure with a (q q 3 2 ) propagation vector that changes with temperature In high magnetic fields applied parallel to the c axis, delafossite undergoes a sequence of firstorder metamagnetic phase transitions at B c1 ≈ 7 T, B c2 ≈ 13 T, B c3 ≈ 20 T, and B c4 ≈ 34 T, seen as sharp magnetization steps with a hysteretic behaviour The magnetic order in CuFeO 2 is also sensitive to pressure. Under hydrostatic pressure, the collinear low-temperature phase turns first into a proper-screw magnetic ordering between 3 and 4 GPa, similar to the field-induced ferroelectric phase. Above 4 GPa, a second pressureinduced incommensurate phase appears, representing a combination of proper-screw and cycloidal spin spiral configurations Quantum Magnetism in In the isostructural CuCrO 2 , the spin-wave spectrum has been also mapped out on synthetic single crystals by Poienar et al. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 62 In a more recent neutron-spectroscopy work, Park et al. Finally, it is worth noting that the mineral crednerite, CuMnO 2 For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that a triangular lattice of 5 2 -spins is also realized in the mineral yavapaiite, KFe(SO 4 ) 2 Among the quasi-2D layered compounds, the monoclinic copper sulphate-hydroxide mineral devilline, CaCu Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 64 gen bonds. The large unit cell of devilline contains eight inequivalent Cu sites, and the distortions within the sheets lead to a variation in the Cu-Cu distances ranging from 3.04 to 3.27 Å. This mineral has a Pb analogue lautenthalite, PbCu 4 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) A very similar triangular-lattice layered structure has been reported in two polymorphs of the copper hydroxyl nitrate Cu 3 (NO 3 )(OH) 3 , gerhardtite and rouaite. These compounds have been successfully synthesized Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 65 Another highly symmetric layered structure with a triangular motif in the copper planes is realized in the trigonal sulphate mineral schulenbergite, Cu 7 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) 10 • 3(H 2 O) Here the layers represent strongly distorted triangular-lattice planes, in which every unit cell contains equilateral triangles of different sizes, which are expected to be the source of geometric frustration. Cu atoms occupy two inequivalent Wyckoff sites: Cu(1) is shared by two larger triangles and one smaller triangle, whereas Cu(2) sits in the centre of the hexagon formed by six larger triangles, as shown in Fig. As already mentioned previously, there is a handful of naturally occurring copper minerals, some of them discovered only recently, that realize the spin- 1 2 magnetic maple-leaf (T4) lattice Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 66 hydrated copper sulfate mineral spangolite, Cu 6 Al(SO 4 )(OH) 12 Cl • 3H 2 O, which is found in the form of finely grained thin turquoise plates. For the purpose of physical characterization, they chose a natural specimen from the Blanchard mine, Socorro, Colorado. The refinement of single-crystal x-ray diffraction data resulted in a structure with the trigonal space group P 3 1 c, consisting of well separated slightly distorted triangular-lattice layers in which 1/7 of the Cu 2+ ions are replaced with nonmagnetic Al 3+ , in agreement with the earlier result of Hawthorne et al. The application of GKA rules to the spangolite structure suggests that the superexchange interactions J 1 and J 2 within both trimers must be antiferromagnetic, resulting in a strong frustration Measurements of the magnetic susceptibility show a broad maximum around 50 K that is typical of a spin-dimer system. No signs of magnetic ordering were seen down to 0.1 K, despite the high Curie-Weiss temperature of Θ CW = -38 K. The effective magnetic moment obtained from the susceptibility was 4.55 μ B /f.u., that is significantly reduced from the anticipated value of 10.39 μ B /f.u. for one formula unit with six Cu 2+ spins. From the low-temperature Curie tail, a ∼ 7.5% population of defective spins in the natural spangolite specimen could be estimated. The existing experimental evidence strongly suggests that spangolite has a singlet ground state, yet the microscopic details of its formation still await to be clarified. The presence of two inequivalent sublattices in spangolite certainly represents an unnecessary complication that may prevent this mineral from playing the desired role of the model system for the realization of theoretically proposed models on the perfect mapleleaf lattice The tetragonal mineral diaboleite, Pb 2 Cu(OH) 4 Cl 2 In natural diaboleite crystals, powder x-ray diffraction and chemical analysis revealed the presence of stacking faults and about 5 -10% of copper vacancies Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 67 local structural distortions but do not disrupt the couplings between the remaining Cu sites. While the magnetic transition remains sharp, the vacancies influence the low-temperature behaviour of the magnetic susceptibility below the broad hump seen around 30 K. As one can see, in spite of the model character of diaboleite that serves as an example of the textbook square-lattice model with just a single dominant AFM interaction J 1 , the low-temperature physical measurements on this mineral remain limited. One can therefore expect that it will draw more interest in future as a subject for more detailed studies using neutron spectroscopy and local magnetic probes. Another layered mineral that fell under recent scrutiny is shattuckite, Cu 5 (SiO 3 ) 4 (OH) 2 From the temperature dependence of the magnetization in the paramagnetic state, the Curie-Weiss temperature of -13.5 K and the Curie constant of 2.23 emu K/mol have been estimated To estimate the relevant magnetic interactions in shattuckite, A. V. Koshelev et al. performed electronic-structure calculations in the framework of a self-consistent spin-polarized DFT Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 69 There are two naturally occurring polymorphs of the layered hydrated copper hydroxyl sulphate mineral Cu 4 (OH) 6 SO 4 • 2H 2 O: langite (space group P c) to which wroewolfeite is converted upon loss of water. Wroewolfeite has been synthesized artificially Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 70 the latter evades long-range magnetic order due to frustration. 6. Three-dimensional frustrated lattices While the majority of 3D spin systems tend to develop magnetic order at sufficiently low temperatures, signatures of magnetic frustration can be seen in the unusual behaviour of their spin fluctuations, which are expected to be stronger than in the case of conventional ferroor antiferromagnets. A separate matter of present-day interest in quantum magnetism is the search for magnetic systems that would display magnon fractionalization, resembling the emergence of spinon excitations in spin chains but in a 3D network of magnetic interactions In three dimensions, the pyrochlore lattice plays a similar role to the triangular lattice in 2D, serving as the emblem of geometric frustration for AFM interactions between the nearest neighbours Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 71 competition of nearest-and further-nearest-neighbour interactions. Inclusion of multiple exchange terms in the Hamiltonian may stabilize various ordered ground states, such as ferro-or antiferromagnetism, single-or multi-q spin spirals, nematic order, or some more exotic phases A regular 1/4 site depletion of the pyrochlore lattice can lead to the formation of the 3D hyperkagome, apart from 2D kagome or kagome-staircase lattices In many other 3D crystal structures, even in the absence of structural motifs supporting geometric frustration, bond frustration can still be present as a result of competing interactions. Moreover, frustration may arise due to anisotropic compass-type interactions Copper hydroxychloride, Cu 2 (OH) 3 Cl, has multiple polymorphs and plays a central role in the field of quantum magnetism as the parent compound of the famous kagome antiferromagnet herbertsmithite, ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 , and its relatives As the most common and well known mineral, atacamite attracted considerable attention of the solid-state physics community, yet its magnetic properties are still a subject of debate. Its crystal structure contains two crystallographically independent Cu atoms in the Jahn-Teller distorted octahedral coordination. The first one is bonded to two Cl atoms, forming a Cu(OH) 4 Cl 2 octahedron, while the other one is bonded to a single Cl atom to form a Cu(OH) 5 Cl octahedron. This difference leads to a highly distorted pyrochlore structure that can be alternatively viewed as a set of Cu-O-Cu chains connected by CuO ladders Interestingly, a similar controversy also exists about the spin-1 analogue of atacamite, the synthetic frustrated antiferromagnet Ni 2 (OH) 3 Cl with a distorted-pyrochlore structure Quantum Magnetism in More recently, the nature of the successive magnetic transitions in γ-Cu 2 (OH) 3 Cl was readdressed by Raman spectroscopy Quantum Magnetism in Another cuprate mineral with a pyrochlore-like structure of the magnetic sublattice is the oxychloride Cu 2 OCl 2 , known as melanothallite Immediately afterwards, a μSR study was reported The first attempt to determine the spin structure in the ordered state of Cu 2 OCl 2 was based on Cu-NMR measurements. The study of Nishiyama et al. More recent direct measurements of the spin structure in melanothallite by neutron diffraction A similar lattice with a structure approximating the pyrochlore lattice of 1 2 -spins is also found in the mineral paramelaconite, Cu 4 O 3 . Alternatively, its structure can be seen as alternating chains of edge-shared CuO 4 plaquettes. In contrast to Cu 2 OCl 2 , this compound has a more pronounced difference between the interchain and intrachain interactions, which reduces the frustration and places it closer to a low-dimensional spin-chain antiferromagnet Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 75 A rich variety of minerals is represented by tellurium oxycompounds, some of them realizing unique crystal structures, as summarized in a recent review article by Christy, Mills, and Kampf The dominant AFM interactions among the Cu 2+ ions generate a strongly frustrated hyperhyperkagome network of S = 1/2 spins, but the magnetic connectivity is additionally enhanced by weaker interactions that partially relieve this frustration. Through a combination of magnetization measurements with NMR and μSR, it was shown that spin fluctuations persist down to 20 mK without spin freezing Inelastic neutron scattering measurements, performed on both powder and single-crystal samples in the group of B. Lake Quantum Magnetism in It would be an inexcusable omission not to mention the perovskite-group minerals with their rich and complex structural hierarchy that was recently summarized by Mitchell, Welch, and Chakhmouradian Magnetic ordering is also expected in A-site vacant double hydroxyperovskites that form either cubic or tetragonal structures, such as CuSn(OH) 6 (mushistonite), FeGe(OH) 6 (stottite), FeSn(OH) 6 (natanite), FeSn(OH) 5 O (jeanbandyite), and MnSn(OH) 6 (wickmanite and tetrawickmanite) After having discussed one-, two-, and three-dimensional magnetic interaction networks that are found in natural minerals, we now turn to zero-dimensional structures represented by nearly noninteracting spin clusters. The simplest possible example of such a cluster is a spin dimer, which we already discussed in Chapter 2. However, larger magnetic clusters that consist of more than two spins can also be found in minerals. They often form regular geometric arrangements of ions that can be viewed as magnetic "molecules", arranged into a crystal by nonmagnetic spacer atoms. Such clusters would not be stable as standalone molecules outside of the crystal, which offers a natural connection between mineralogy and the highly active research field of molecular magnetism. Molecular nanomagnets and single-molecule magnets have been in the focus of condensedmatter research for several decades al. Of particular interest are molecular nanomagnets that show geometric frustration The presence of frustration may lead to ground-state degeneracy or to the presence of multiple magnetic configurations of the cluster that are very close in energy. In experiments, this can be seen as the appearance of discrete jumps in the field dependence of the magneti- Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 79 zation The minerals olivenite, Cu 2 (AsO 4 )(OH) Apart from the copper-based spin-1 2 systems represented by olivenite and libethenite, the same adamite-type crystal structure is also realized in several magnetic systems with higher half-integer values of the spin. These include the synthetic compounds Co 2 (PO 4 )(OH) The complex halide mineral boleite with the formula KPb 26 Ag 9 Cu 24 (OH) 48 Cl 62 Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 81 is expected to be smaller due to the proximity of the Cu-O-Cu bridging angle to the point where the FM and AFM exchange contributions are compensated Unfortunately, the need to rely on natural single crystals, that may vary in their chemical composition and structural quality, and the inability to synthesize the deuterated version of boleite artificially for neutron-scattering experiments have so far precluded more thorough investigations of their spin dynamics. In particular, the value of the spin gap has not been measured directly. Also, no magnetization plateaus or similar anomalies could be revealed, most probably due to the insufficient chemical and structural homogeneity of the natural samples. Neutron-scattering experiments, described in the appendix B of Ref. In 1993, a new mineral of the zeolite group Quantum Magnetism in The mineral is very rare and is found only in small cubic light-blue transparent crystals with a maximum size up to 0.15 mm, which can be described by the chemical formula Ca 4 (K,Ca,Sr,Ba) 3 Cu 3 Al 12 Si 12 O 48 (OH) 8 • 20H 2 O. Despite the very complex structure and chemistry of tschörtnerite, its putative spin-1 2 magnetic sublattice is surprisingly simple and symmetric. The copper ions occupy a single Wyckoff position and form well separated Cu 12 clusters in the form of regular cuboctahedra, surrounded by nonmagnetic atoms. This mineral can therefore serve as a paradigmatic example of a crystal consisting of nearly noninteracting frustrated magnetic molecules with several nearest-neighbour superexchange paths, similar to the above-discussed boleite. The relatively small size of the clusters allows for an exact diagonalization of its complete energy spectrum Practically all minerals discussed to this point were insulators. Indeed, there are very few examples of naturally occurring stoichiometric metallic minerals that show magnetic properties. I deliberately leave aside the discussion of nickel-iron alloys, for example, that occur in meteorites showing structural similarity to the superconducting iron arsenides The numerous case studies presented in this review illustrate that the world of minerals offers an inexhaustible source of materials and crystal structures as a playground for the realization of various models in quantum magnetism and for trying computational approaches of modern quantum chemistry. A considerable number of works summarized here were undertaken during the last two decades, marking an appearance of a new interdisciplinary field of research that bridges mineralogy with low-temperature condensed-matter physics. For most of the studied compounds, it was impossible to comprehend the underlying physics that determines their magnetic properties from just a superficial examination of their structure. On many occasions, the application of modern experimental and computational methods offered new surprises, and the ultimate understanding of the magnetic properties of most minerals was gained from a long sequence of trial and error that extended over several decades. At the same time, one has to admit that apart from a mere handful of examples presented here, the majority of known minerals have not been so far subjected even to the simplest low-temperature physical characterization, not even to magnetic susceptibility or D. S. Inosov Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 85 magnetization measurements. In this respect, physicists have barely scratched the surface of the vast variety of magnetic minerals that could serve as subjects for future studies. There are ongoing systematic low-temperature investigations of natural samples from the world's largest mineral collections There are abundant examples of copper oxysalt minerals realizing various spin-1 2 magnetic sublattices at low temperatures that have not, as of yet, received much attention from the point of view of their low-temperature physical properties. A general structural classification of cuprates illustrated with multiple examples has been discussed, for instance, by Leonyuk et al. A low-dimensional structure consisting of Cu 3 (OH) 2 ferrimagnetic ribbons of edge-sharing copper octahedra is realized in the copper-molybdate mineral lindgrenite, Cu 3 (MoO 4 ) 2 (OH) 2 [742]. Neutron-diffraction measurements revealed that below the ordering temperature of ∼ 13 K, the magnetic moments on the two inequivalent copper sites both point along the a axis and are antiparallel to each other, showing no signs of geometric frustration A much simpler two-dimensional arrangement of structural dimers, shown in Fig. Quantum Magnetism in A very rich variety of low-dimensional structures can be also found in copper sulfate minerals Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 87 properties, as it was recently confirmed in INS measurements Finally, crystal structures that combine Cu 2+ spin-1 2 moments with other magnetic ions are also common. For instance, the new arsenate mineral auriacusite of the olivenite group, Fe 3+ Cu 2+ AsO 4 O, with the structure shown in Fig. The examples given here are intended to show that the investigations of quantum magnetism in crystal structures motivated by naturally occurring minerals are far from being complete. Many new studies appear every year, which are concerned with the physical problems that are absolutely central for modern solid-state physics. Future progress will certainly depend on the ability to reproduce complex mineral structures in the form of chemically pure synthetic samples, and the incessant discoveries of new minerals should guide chemists in this endeavor. In this emerging field of knowledge, new results are expected from fruitful collaborations among mineralogists, crystallographers, chemists and crystal growers, experimental solid-state physicists, and condensed-matter theorists. Quantum Magnetism in Minerals 88 • . The interaction within the Cu(1) -Cu(2) dimer (J D1 ) is nearly compensated