Based on bottom--up assembly of highly variable neural cells units, the nervous system can reach unequalled level of performances with respect to standard materials and devices used in microelectronic. Reproducing these basic concepts in hardware could potentially revolutionize materials and device engineering which are used for information processing. Here, we present an innovative approach that relies on both iono--electronic materials and intrinsic device physics to show pattern classification out of a 12--unit bio--sensing array. We use the reservoir computing and learning concept to demonstrate relevant computing based on the ionic dynamics in 400--nm channel--length organic electrochemical transistor (OECT). We show that this approach copes efficiently with the high level of variability obtained by bottom--up fabrication using a new electropolymerizable polymer, which enables iono--electronic device functionality and material stability in the electrolyte. We investigate the effect of the array size and variability on the performances for a real--time classification task paving the way to new embedded sensing and processing approaches. S.P. and D.G. fabricated the devices. M In biological systems, dynamical and complex information is processed efficiently by highly redundant and parallel network of cells while standard computing systems are quickly reaching their limitations for equivalent information processing tasks. For instance, at the opposite to top--down circuits with highly uniform devices used for general purpose computers, bottom--up assembly of neural cells with high level of variability, can process auditory, visual or olfactive stimuli and generate complex actions very efficiently. Material implementation of such bio--inspired principles for sensing and computing has been a stimulating direction that has reached significant milestones with the development of neuromorphic sensors (retina, cochlea...) and circuits. We propose an adaptation of the recent proposition of reservoir computing (RC), Thus developing RC strategies to process information out of an ion--sensitive transistors network could open new perspectives for biological sensors. The key elements of RC are (i) non--linearity of the reservoir's nodes (non--linear conversion from input signal to output signal) and (ii) a fading memory effect keeping the history of the stimuli active in the network on a given duration. Material implementations of RC have been proposed recently with optical or magnetic oscillators. Alternative materials based on glycol--side--chain polythiophene have demonstrated high performances while operating in accumulation mode. This short--term memory effect is due to the accumulation of ions from pulse to pulse and on the unbalanced relaxation between each stimulation resulting in higher steady-state mean conductance at high frequency (larger amount of ions are accumulated) and lower steady--state conductance at low frequency (lower amount of ions are accumulated). In each case in Figure Nevertheless, the qualitative response showing higher potentiation at higher frequency with respect to the control pulse (green lines in Figure Characteristic time constants for charging are on average shorter (from 1.08 to 13.7 s) than discharging (from 2.03 to 43.7 s). The level of memory of each individual device can be define along two metrics: (i) τmean, the average value of τdischarge and τcharge and (ii) the τdischarge/τcharge ratio. When τdischarge/τcharge ≈ 1 (equivalent to a capacitor), the device is a purely short--term memory. When τdischarge / τcharge tends to higher values, the memory moves from short--term to long--term memory (note that non--volatile memory tends to maximize this ratio with τdischarge > 10 years and τcharge < 1 ns). Figure Various Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) approaches have been proposed so far for time--dependent pattern classification (speech, for example). Recurrent networks or Time Delay Neural Network are of particular interest for this task since they offer the possibility to encode the time signature of such signals explicitly. Reconstruction on the read--out layer of the time--dependent signals out of these virtual nodes is then used to classify patterns (i.e. speech signals). This approach corresponds to an explicit representation of time where the first neuron is associated to the first time interval, second neuron to the second time interval... and so on. Each OECT is then used to collect different features from the reservoir and to perform classification at the read--out layer. To test this concept, we designed low complexity signals consisting in square waves of constant amplitude --900 mV and 1 s duration applied to the global gate with variable frequencies. The two signals used to demonstrate time--dependent signal classification are built with square--type and triangle--type pulse--frequency modulation between 0.3 and 0.8 Hz. Figures Comparing the patches morphology (Figure Implementation of the reservoir target classification of the two patterns (square--type and triangle--type) with a simple read--out equivalent to a simple perceptron implemented here in software (i.e. one neuron with m=12 weighted input). Output current from each OECT has been sampled over time and will be used to define the state of the reservoir at each time step, for a given location into the reservoir. The collection of outputs from the array of OECTs correspond to the state at time t of the reservoir in response to a given stimuli. This output values are then used as input to a simple perceptron in charge of classification through learning (i.e. the perceptron function is limited to signal weighting, summation and activation function). We use a 1 ms sampling rate of the signals. For each time step, we associate a given vector {Xi}(t) of dimension (1x12). A total of 11750 vectors are recorded from each pattern composed of three repetitions of one period of square (triangle, respectively) elementary pattern. Each vector is then fed to a simple perceptron with m=12 weighted inputs. The total output Y(t) from the perceptron before activation function at time t is then with wi the synaptic weight of the i th input line, Xi(t) the current value at time t of OECT #i. Vectors {Xi} belongings to the triangle--type pattern are associated to class "1" (i.e. output neuron is activated) and square--type pattern to class "0" (i.e. output neuron is not activated). The activation function rule of the output neuron is then realized with pseudo--inverse learning (i.e. Moore Penrose operator) These results are based on two important aspects. (i) The number of OECTs used for pattern classification that we have associated to the number of features collected from the reservoir. (ii) The variability from device to device that affects how much each feature is different from the other. For instance, two identical OECTs will provide the same feature while very different OECTs will provide very different features (i.e. different transient time between two devices will provide different memory window and consequently, different type of features). To demonstrate that RC takes directly advantage of both number of features and variability in the OECT array, we realize the same classification task with only "partial" arrays of m OECTs, with 1 ≤ m ≤ 12. Performance of classification should be directly linked to the number of features the number of features used to describe the patterns. Referring to the general idea of RC, increasing the number of OECT in the network corresponds to increasing the dimensionality of the space used to project the input signal. The expected effect is consequently to ease the readout layer (i.e. the perceptron) to classify the patterns. In this sense, more OECTs are better for classifying time--dependent signals. Classification of more complex patterns (i.e. patterns with higher level of similarity, for example) should require more OECTs in the array. We notice that small arrays (m<6) require less training vectors to reach error rate of about 10%. In agreement with theoretical prediction from ref. [25], this effect implies that for a relatively small number of training vectors, it exists an optimal number of features to reach the best accuracy. In other words, it shows that the training shall be adapted to the size of the OECT array, which should be adapted to the task complexity. Another important issue is to know what type of features could lead to better performances. Figure We demonstrated in this study that despite the high level of inherent variability in our bottom--up ion--sensing devices, we successfully discriminated dynamic patterns out of our OECT network by using a well--established neuromorphic learning algorithm. This approach could be applied to various practical cases since most of biological processes such as electrical activity in brain cells or evolution of composition in physiological medium belongs to the class of dynamical patterns. We showed that the RC approach can efficiently cope with many--fold variabilities in both transistor characteristic time constants and non--linear current levels to recognize frequency--modulated pulsed signal. Monomer Synthesis: The monomer TEDOT has been synthesized by deprotection/functionalization of the appropriately protected thiolate groups according to the already published method, Institute of Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, Av. Poincaré, F-59652 Cedex, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, 2 Bd. Lavoisier, F-49045 Angers, France * E-mail: sebastien.pecqueur@iemn.univ-lille1.fr; fabien.alibart@iemn.univ-lille1.fr