In this work, we study the antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin dynamics in heterostructures which consist of two kinds of AFM layers. Our micromagnetic simulations demonstrate that the AFM domain-wall (DW) can be driven by the other one (driven by field-like Né el spin-orbit torque, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 017202 ( Antiferromagnets are attracting more and more attentions due to their potential applications in the field of antiferromagnetic (AFM) spintronics. On the one hand, replacing ferromagnets by antiferromagnets in spintronics devices offers insensitivity to external magnetic field perturbations and produces no perturbing stray fields due to the zero net magnetic moment in the AFM element. For the other proposed driven methods, the drift velocities are not so large, and strict restrictions on the external stimuli are suggested. For example, our earlier work has demonstrated that considerable velocity of the AFM DW only can be obtained near the resonance frequency of the oscillation magnetic field in cooperation with a static field. Based on these earlier studies, we investigate the AFM dynamics in exchange coupled AFM1-AFM2 heterojunction in which the DW in AFM1 layers is driven by the NSOT, as simplistically depicted in Fig. In this work, the heterojunction system is considered to be a three-dimensional cuboidal lattice with the free boundary conditions applied in the x-, y-and z-axis directions. The model Hamiltonian can be given by AF1 AF2 inter where where J AF1 /J AF2 is the antiferromagnetic exchange interaction between the nearest neighbors in AFM1/AFM2 layers, and J inter is the interface coupling between the nearest neighbors, ) is the staggered field along the x (x)-axis direction on the magnetic sublattice 1 (2) in AFM1 layers. Here, the magnitudes of the anisotropies could be modulated through tuning the thickness of the heterojunction. The simulation is performed on where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α = α 1 (α 2 ) is the Gilbert damping constant in AFM1 (AFM2) layers, and the internal field is Subsequently, we investigate the effects of the interaction couplings on the spin dynamics and the critical velocity v c . Fig. It is well noted that the energy of the DW determines its stabilization, i. e., higher energy results in more stable DW. Thus, the AFM2 DW is further stabilized as J AF2 increases, leading to the increase of the critical B N and v c , as clearly shown in our simulations. Furthermore, for J AF2 > 1, the velocities of the DWs under B N = 0.04 slightly decrease with the increasing J AF2 due to the reduction of their mobility. Furthermore, the effects of J inter are also studied, and the corresponding results are presented in Fig. As a matter of fact, biaxial anisotropy does exist in real materials and is believed to play an essential role in the current-induced orientation of the AFM order. At last, the effects of the damping constants on the velocities are also investigated and the simulated results are presented in Fig. Up to now, there is an urgent need in modulating AFM multi DWs to provide useful information for practical applications. In this work, the AFM DW has been proven to be driven efficiently by the other AFM DW under the staggered field through the interface coupling in heterostructures. Furthermore, the highest possible velocity of the AFM DW relevant to several factors has been clarified and detailed explained. Finally, the control of multi DWs is proposed based on the detachment of the two DWs under the staggered field larger than the critical value. 