Increased traffic demands globally and in particular in short-reach links in data centers will require optical communication systems to continue scaling at an accelerated pace. Nevertheless, energy constraints start to limit the bit rate that can be practically transmitted over optical systems both at the shortest distances in data centers and at the longest distances in ultra-long submarine links. Short-reach links in data centers face strict constraints on power consumption, size, and cost, which will demand low-power solutions that scale to bit rates beyond 100 Gbit/s per wavelength, while accommodating increased losses due to longer fiber plant, multiplexing of more wavelengths, and possibly optical switching. At the longest distances, submarine optical cables longer than about 5,000 km face energy constraints due to power feed limits at the shores, which restricts the electrical power available to the undersea optical amplifiers, ultimately limiting the optical power and throughput per fiber. This dissertation addresses fundamental challenges towards designing spectrally and power efficient optical communication systems. The first part of this dissertation focuses on short-reach optical systems for intra-and inter-data center applications. Chapter 2 evaluates higher-order modulation formats compatible with direct detection (DD) that are best suited to replaced on/off keying (OOK) in next-generation data center links that support 100 Gbit/s per wavelength. We show that four-level pulse-amplitude modulation (4-PAM) outperforms orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) due to its relatively low complexity and higher tolerance to noise and distortion. And in fact, 4-PAM was later adopted by the IEEE 802.3bs task force to enable 400 Gbit/s using 8×50 Gbit/s and 4×100 Gbit/s transceivers. The work in Chapter 2 was done in collaboration with Dr. Milad Sharif, who has conducted the research and analyses for single-carrier modulation formats. Chapter 3 focuses on how to improve the limited receiver sensitivity of 4-PAM systems proposed in Chapter 2 by using avalanche photodiodes (APDs) or semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs). We showed that APDs and SOAs improve the receiver sensitivity by 4 to 6 dB, which will extend the lifetime of 4-PAM and other DD-compatible modulation formats. The work in Chapter 3 was also done in collaboration with Dr. Milad Sharif, who studied the benefits and drawbacks of using v SOAs. Chapter 4 focuses on the design of DSP-free coherent receiver architectures for low-power shortreach systems. As demonstrated in Chapters 2 and 3, DD-compatible formats face significant challenges to scale beyond 100 Gbit/s per wavelength. Moreover, these systems already face tight practical constraints even when counting on amplification, either by using APDs or SOAs. The underlying reason behind these challenges is that DD-compatible systems only leverage one degree of freedom of the optical channel, namely its intensity. Coherent receivers allow four degrees of freedom, two quadratures in two polarizations. But coherent receivers have been traditionally realized using high-speed analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) and digital signal processing (DSP), which are prohibitively power hungry for data center applications. We proposed low-power coherent receivers architectures that completely preclude the need of high-speed DSP and ADCs, while achieving similar performance to their DSP-based counterparts. The work in Chapter 4 was done in collaboration with Dr. Anujit Shastri, who designed and simulated the polarization recovery system based on cascaded phase shifters and maker tone detection. The second part of this dissertation focuses on ultra-long submarine optical links, where energy constraints due to limited power feed voltage at the shores ultimately limits the amount of information that can be practically transmitted per fiber. Chapter 5 focuses on the channel power optimization of long-haul submarine systems limited by energy constraints. The throughput of submarine transport cables is approaching fundamental limits imposed by amplifier noise and Kerr nonlinearity. Energy constraints in ultra-long submarine links exacerbate this problem, as the throughput per fiber is further limited by the electrical power available to the undersea optical amplifiers. Recent works have studied how employing more spatial dimensions can mitigate these limitations. This chapter addresses the fundamental question of how to optimally use each spatial dimension. Specifically, we discuss how to optimize the channel power allocation in order to maximize the information-theoretic capacity under an electrical power constraint. Our formulation accounts for amplifier physics, Kerr nonlinearity, and power feed constraints. We show that the optimized channel power allocation increases the capacity of submarine links by about 70% compared to the theoretical capacity of a recently proposed high-capacity system. Our solutions also provide new insights on the optimal number of spatial dimensions, amplifier operation, and nonlinear regime operation. I would like to first thank my principal adviser Prof. Joseph M. Kahn for his continuous support, guidance, and encouragement over the past five years. I have learned a lot from Prof. Kahn's approach to scientific research, from his commitment to teaching, and from his unwavering pursuit of excellence. I could have not asked for a more insightful, generous, and caring research adviser. I would also like to thank members of my oral defense committee: Prof. Olav Solgaard, Prof. Boris Murmann, Prof. Sanjay Lall, and Prof. Bernard Widrow, who generously agreed to be part of my committee. I greatly appreciate their time and I am honored to have them in my oral defense committee. I want to thank Prof. Solgaard and Prof. Murmann for also serving as members of my dissertation reading committee and taking time out of their busy schedules to read this dissertation. I would also like to thank the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) -a Brazilian federal government agency -for awarding me a fellowship for three years of my graduate studies. I would also like to thank the collaboration and funding from our industry partners: Maxim Integrated, Google, and Corning Inc. I am also very grateful for the continuous support and guidance that I received from my former professors at Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo (UFES), in Brazil. In particular, Prof. Moisés Ribeiro, who over the years has always demonstrated great interest in my personal and academic success. I am also thankful for of all past and current members of Prof. Kahn's Optical Communica- These curves were obtained for ENOB = 6, and other parameters as given in Table 2.12 Required ENOB to achieve target BER of 1.8 × 10 -4 for DC-OFDM (dashed lines) and ACO-OFDM (solid lines) with 16-and 64-QAM nominal constellation sizes. . . One of the pillars supporting the information age is the ability to transmit ever-larger amounts of information across countries and continents. Optical communication systems have been remarkably successful in fulfilling that task. Over the past three decades, pivotal technologies such as erbiumdoped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs), wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), and coherent detection employing digital compensation of fiber impairments have enabled data transmission of tens of terabits per second across transoceanic distances. Over the next few years, traffic demands are expected to continue growing at an accelerated pace. According to the Cisco forecast shown in Fig. Meeting this projected traffic growth will be particularly challenging at the shortest distances, as shifting computing paradigms have transformed how information is distributed, processed, and stored. For instance, web-based applications, content streaming, and cloud computing have turned personal computers and mobile devices into "mere" client interfaces, while most of the computing heavy lifting is realized remotely in large computing facilities known as data centers. As a result, overall traffic and growth rate is even larger in short-reach optical links within data centers. As shown in Fig. As traffic demands continue to soar globally and in particular in data centers, optical communication systems must continue to scale at an accelerated pace. However, energy constraints start About 71% of all traffic is expected to reside within data centers. Source: Cisco Global Cloud Index, 2016-2021. to limit the bit rate that can be practically transmitted over those systems both at the shortest distances and at the longest distances In this dissertation, we propose spectrally and power efficient optical systems for short-reach links in data centers and ultra-long links in submarine systems. Given the evident differences in those systems, different strategies are warranted. In data center applications, we propose low-power coherent detection systems that completely avoid high-speed analog-to-digital converters (ADC) and digital signal processors (DSP). At the longest distances, we optimize the channel power allocation to maximize the information-theoretic capacity per fiber under an electrical power constraint. The subsequent subsections detail the problems faced in data centers and submarine systems and review part of the terminology and technicalities of each problem. Fig. The short links of a few hundred meters, shown in black in Fig. Throughout this dissertation, we will refer to intra-data center links as the SMF links reaching up to 10 km that connect different switches in a data center, shown in green in Fig. in Fig. To satisfy strict constraints in power consumption and cost, research focused initially on modulation formats compatible with direct detection, i.e., detection of information encoded in the optical intensity. However, Chapters 2 and 3 show that these direct-detected (DD) systems are extremely As evidenced by a recent surge in deployment, submarine systems are of great and increasing importance to society and information technology. On October 7, 2017, The Economist reported that 100,000 km of submarine cable was laid in 2016, up from 16,000 km in 2015. This is consistent with the $ 9.2-billion investment on submarine links between 2016 and 2018, five times as much as in the previous three years. To illustrate the effect of this limitation, let us consider the example of a 10,000-km-long cable, which is typical of cables connecting the US to Asia or to Brazil. Assuming that amplifiers are positioned every 50 km results in a total of 200 amplifiers. All these amplifiers are powered from the shores where the feed voltage is 12 kV. For maximum electrical power transfer, the source resistance (cables) must be equal to the load resistance (repeaters). Therefore, the energy dissipated in the cables must be equal to the energy available to the repeaters. Assuming cable resistance of ∼ 1Ω/km, leads to 3,600 W of power for all repeaters, or equivalently 18 W for each of the 200 repeaters. Typically, 10% of the repeater power is spent in operations that do no contribute directly to optical amplification such as cooling and monitoring Assuming that the cable contains eight fiber pairs. The EDFA for each fiber would have roughly 1 W of electrical power. Unfortunately, EDFAs are not remarkably power efficient; typical electricto-optical power conversion efficiency ranges from 1.5% to 5% To mitigate this problem, recent works have turned to an insight from Shannon's capacity that establishes that in energy-constrained systems, we can maximize capacity by employing more dimensions while transmitting less data (power) in each. In fact, recent works have studied how employing more spatial dimensions (modes, cores, or fibers) through spatial-division multiplexing (SDM) improves capacity and power efficiency of submarine systems In the second part of this dissertation, Chapter 5 formulates the problem of optimizing the power allocation under an energy constraint. Chapter 5 also details the models used for amplifier physics, Kerr nonlinearity, as well as the optimization algorithms used to solve the resulting non-convex problem. Data Center Optical Systems with direct detection (DD) Several modulation formats have been proposed to realize single-laser 100 G links, including pulseamplitude modulation (PAM) All attempt to provide higher spectral efficiency than OOK, while offering similar complexity and power consumption. In this chapter, we review and compare the most promising modulation formats to enable singlelaser 100G links. As a complement to prior simulation-based studies, we derive analytical models to evaluate performance and complexity of different modulation formats, since analysis is more generally applicable and fosters insight into design optimization and the relative merits of the various schemes. In Section 2.1, we start by reviewing the main impairments of the optical fiber in short-reach links. In Section 2.2, we review important characteristics of intra-and inter-data center links. In Section 2.3, we discuss modulation formats compatible with direct detection focusing primarily on multicarrier formats based on OFDM. Single-carrier formats were studied in collaboration with Dr. Sharif in and four-level PAM (4-PAM) was shown to outperform other single-carrier formats. Hence, we briefly review 4-PAM in Section 2.3.1. In Section 2.4, we compare these different modulation formats in terms of receiver sensitivity and required optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR) to achieve a target bit error rate (BER). In Section 2.5, we compare these different modulation formats in terms of system complexity and power consumption. Section 2.6 summarizes the main conclusions of this chapter. In short-reach links, the two primary impairments introduced by propagation over SMF is loss and chromatic dispersion (CD). Other phenomena such as polarization mode dispersion (PMD) and Kerr nonlinearity are generally negligible due to the short link length, and, in particular for Kerr nonlinearity, due to the relatively small optical power levels. Data center transceivers are designed to be eye safe and consequently the maximum power per fiber cannot exceed 14 dBm near 1310 nm or 17 dBm near 1550 nm CD arises as signals at different frequencies propagate through the optical fiber with different velocities. Thus, CD can be modeled as a phase shift in the electric field: where E(f ; z) is the Fourier transform of the electric field at distance z along the fiber, and , where D(λ) is the dispersion parameter shown in the bottom plot of Fig. However, in DD systems the information is encoded in the optical signal intensity (instantaneous power) and not on the electric field. CD is not a linear operation in the intensity, and thus a simple transfer function between input and output optical power cannot be derived. In the small-signal (or small-dispersion) regime, we can derive an approximated transfer function given by where P (f ; z) is the Fourier transform of the optical power signal at distance z, and α is the transient chirp parameter, which is not a property of the optical fiber. Chirp refers to the phenomenon of instantaneous variation of the optical carrier frequency upon intensity modulation. In optical communication systems, chirp is usually introduced by the optical modulator. In high-speed directly modulated lasers (DMLs) and electro-absorption modulators (EAMs), transient chirp is dominant Nonetheless, the combined effect of CD and modulator chirp leads to power fading. Due to the periodicity of H IM-DD (f ; z), the small-signal frequency response of the fiber is characterized by several notches. As dispersion increases the frequency of the first notch becomes smaller. Fig. shows the frequency of the first notch of the IM-DD channel frequency response for several values of transient chirp parameter α. To allow receiver-side linear equalization of single-carrier formats, the first notch cannot fall below half of the symbol rate; otherwise, the noise enhancement penalty becomes exceedingly high. Hence, for 56 Gbaud 4-PAM, the first notch cannot fall below 28 GHz. From Fig. Fig. Intra-data center links reach up to 10 km and typically operate near 1310 nm to minimize CD. Intra-data center links are typically unamplified, resulting in low power margin. In these unamplified links the dominant noise is thermal noise from the receiver electronics, in particular the trans-impedance amplifier (TIA). Typical high-speed TIAs have 3-dB bandwidth of 20-70 GHz and input-referred noise ( Īn ) of 20-50 pA/ √ Hz [28, After analog-to-digital conversion (ADC), the receiver performs equalization to mitigate the intersymbol interference (ISI) introduced by bandwidth limitations of the components along the link. As discussed in Section 2.1, in short-reach links CD is accurately modeled by a linear filter, and thus receiver-side electronic equalization is effective to compensate for CD-induced distortion, as shown in the performance curves of Section 2.4. Fig. The optical amplifier introduces amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise whose one-sided PSD per real dimension is given by where G AMP is the amplifier gain, hν is the photon energy, and NF is the equivalent amplifier noise figure and depends on the number of amplifiers in the link as well as their individual noise figures. In the case of N A identical amplifiers each with noise figure NF 1 , the equivalent noise figure is Direct detection causes mixing between signal and ASE, resulting in the signal-spontaneous beat noise, which is the dominant noise at the receiver. The signal-spontaneous beat noise one-sided PSD is given by where R is the receiver photodiode responsivity and P is the received average optical power. PAM and other single-carrier techniques were studied by Sharif et al. in In M -PAM, the information is encoded in M intensity levels. At the transmitter, the intensity modulator driving signal is generated by a log 2 M -bit DAC. The transmitter may also realize other operations, such as pulse shaping and pre-equalization or preemphasis, but there are important considerations. Firstly, these operations require higher-resolution DACs, which at high sampling rates (> 50 GS/s) are power-hungry and have narrow bandwidths on the order of 10-15 GHz. Secondly, preemphasis increases the signal peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR), resulting in signals with high excursion, which requires components with high dynamic range in order to avoid distortion. Lastly, after pulse shaping and preemphasis filtering, a relatively large DC bias must be added to make the M -PAM signal non-negative, and thus compatible with intensity modulation. This DC bias directly affects the receiver sensitivity and it was shown to cause a 3-dB power penalty in 100 Gbit/s 4-PAM systems for intra-data center links At the receiver, the optical signal is direct detected, filtered, and converted to the digital domain where adaptive equalization is performed. The equalizer may be a simple feedforward equalizer (FFE) or a decision-feedback equalizer (DFE). Alternatively, the receiver may perform maximum likelihood sequence detection (MLSD). Provided that CD is small, the IM-DD channel is accurately modeled as a linear channel. In this regime, an FFE exhibited only a 1-dB penalty with respect to the optimal and more complex MLSD The performance of an M -PAM system is determined by the noise variance at each intensity level. There are three scenarios of interest. The first consists of unamplified links in which the receiver uses a positive-intrinsic-negative (PIN) photodiode and thermal noise is dominant. In the next scenario, the receiver uses an avalanche photodiode (APD), which offers higher sensitivity, but shot noise becomes significant and will affect the noise variance at each level differently. APD-based receivers are discussed in detail in Chapter 3. Lastly, in amplified systems with either SOAs or EDFAs, the signal-amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) beat noise is dominant, resulting in different noise variances at the different intensity levels. Although the signal-ASE beat noise is not Gaussian, it can be approximated as Gaussian, as systems with forward error correction (FEC) operate at relatively high error rates. For each of these scenarios, we can compute the total noise variance at the kth intensity level: df is the receiver one-sided noise bandwidth, where H rx (f ) is receiver equivalent frequency response and H eq (f ) is the equalizer's equivalent continuous-time frequency response. N 0 is the one-sided thermal noise PSD at the receiver, R is the photodiode responsivity, P k is the optical power of the kth intensity level at the input of the PIN or the optical amplifier, and G AMP is the amplifier gain. Assuming that all the noises involved are Gaussian distributed and uncorrelated, the BER is given by p(y|P 0 ) p(y|P 1 ) p(y|P 2 ) p(y|P 3 ) BER where Q(•) is the well-known Q-function and G ef f is the effective gain of the receiver; i.e., G ef f = R for PIN-based receivers and G ef f = RG AMP for amplified systems. Equation (2.6) assumes that ISI is negligible or was compensated by FFE or DFE. In compensating for ISI, the equalizer causes the well-known phenomenon of noise enhancement, incurring a performance penalty. The effect of noise enhancement is accounted by the receiver noise bandwidth ∆f in (2.5), which would otherwise be ∆f = R s /2, where R s is the symbol rate. The intensity levels {P 0 , . . . , P M -1 } and the decision thresholds {d 1 , . . . , d M -1 } are typically equally spaced, but they can be appropriately optimized to minimize the BER. While the exact optimization is intractable, nearly optimal performance is achieved by setting the intensity levels sequentially according to the following heuristics where σ 2 k is given by (2.5). Given P k-1 , we can determine σ 2 k-1 and solve for P k using (2.7). Following this procedure, all error events will have equal probability P e = BER log 2 M 2(M -1) . This procedure may be realized in an iterative fashion to account for the modulator non-ideal extinction ratio r ex . That is, ideally modulators would have minimum power P min = 0. However, in practice the minimum power outputted by the modulator is limited by its extinction ratio such that P min = r ex P max , where P max is the maximum power outputted by the modulator. Practical highspeed modulators exhibit r ex on the order of -10 to -20 dB. Returning to the level optimization procedure, at the first iteration, P (0) 0 = 0, and all other levels are calculated according to (2.7). At the ith iteration, P M -1 Alternatively, the receiver could sweep the decision thresholds until the BER is minimized. This is equivalent to the point where the conditional PDF of neighboring levels intersect, which corresponds to the maximum likelihood decision. Even when the noise is not Gaussian, a similar level spacing optimization procedure based on the saddle point approximation can be applied to calculate the optimal intensity levels and decision thresholds For the unamplified systems, we characterize the performance in terms of the receiver sensitivity, defined as the average optical power Prx = 1/M M k=1 P k required to achieve a target BER, defined by the FEC code threshold. In amplified systems, it is more convenient to characterize the performance in terms of the required OSNR: OSNR req = GAMP In OFDM, the information is encoded on narrowband and orthogonal subcarriers. In data center literature, OFDM is commonly referred to as discrete multitone (DMT), which is terminology borrowed from wireline communications literature, where DMT is often used to describe an OFDM signal transmitted at baseband. OFDM, in principle, offers higher spectral efficiency than 4-PAM, since the individual subcarriers can be modulated using higher-order QAM. Two variants of OFDM were originally proposed for intensity-modulated data center links: DC-biased OFDM (DC-OFDM) and asymmetrically clipped optical (ACO)-OFDM. These OFDM variants differ in how they meet the non-negativity constraint of the intensity-modulated optical channel, and they achieve different tradeoffs between power efficiency and spectral efficiency. In DC-OFDM, a relatively high DC bias is added to minimize clipping distortion. By contrast, in ACO-OFDM, the entire negative excursion of the signal is clipped, and clipping distortion is avoided by encoding information only on the odd subcarriers To obtain a real-valued time-domain signal x[k], X n must satisfy the Hermitian symmetry condition: X n = X * N -n . For ACO-OFDM, we have the additional constraint X n = 0, for n even. That is, the even subcarriers are not modulated, as illustrated in Fig. By the central limit theorem, for an IFFT length N FFT sufficiently large, the OFDM signal is approximately Gaussian-distributed with zero mean and variance (2.8) After parallel-to-serial conversion and cyclic prefix insertion, the discrete-time OFDM signal x[k] is clipped at levels -r 1 σ and r 2 σ to reduce the required dynamic range of the DAC and subsequent components: where r 1 = r 2 = r for DC-OFDM; r 1 = 0, and r 2 = r for ACO-OFDM. The parameters r 1 and r 2 are referred to as clipping ratios. This definition allows us to easily calculate the clipping probability: , where Q(•) is the Q-function for the tail probability of a Gaussian distribution. Note that a clipping event does not necessarily result in a bit error event. In DC-OFDM, the clipping ratio r 1 = r 2 = r determines the tradeoff between clipping distortion and quantization noise, as discussed in Section 2.3.2.3. In ACO-OFDM, r 1 = 0 and r 2 = r. The distortion caused by clipping the entire negative excursion only falls onto the even subcarriers, which purposely do not carry data The clipped OFDM signal x c [k] is converted to the analog domain by the DAC and an appropriate DC bias is added to make the signal non-negative. where for ACO-OFDM, Ptx follows directly from calculating the mean value of the clipped Gaussian distribution and assuming r large The performance of the OFDM signal depends on the received SNR of each data-bearing subcarrier. Assuming that the noises involved are white and consequently equal in all subcarriers, we can write the noise variance at the nth subcarrier for the same noise scenarios as in Section 2.3.1: where Prx is the average optical power at the receiver input; i.e., the input of the PIN photodiode, or the optical amplifier. Moreover, is the sampling rate of the OFDM signal, where p = 1 or 2 for DC-OFDM or ACO-OFDM, respectively, accounts for the loss in spectral efficiency by not modulating the even subcarriers. Here, M is the nominal constellation size, R b is the bit rate, N CP is the cyclic prefix length and should be larger than the channel memory length, r os = N FFT /(pN u ) is the oversampling ratio of the OFDM signal, where N u is the number of subcarriers used to transmit data. After DD, the SNR at the nth subcarrier is given by where P n,rx is the power of the nth subcarrier referred to the receiver input; i.e., to the input of the PIN photodiode, APD, or optical amplifier. Note that (2.13) could be easily modified to include any receiver-side bandwidth limitation by accounting for how signal and noise power are attenuated by the receiver frequency response at each subcarrier. As OFDM usually requires high-resolution DAC and ADC, quantization noise must be included. Computation of quantization noise variance The BER is given by the average of the bit error probability in each subcarrier weighted by the number of bits in each subcarrier: where P QAM (SNR n ; M n ) gives the bit error probability for an uncoded M -QAM constellation in an additive white Gaussian noise channel with a given SNR. There are analytical expressions for P QAM (SNR n ; M n ) for square and non-square QAM constellations The non-flat frequency response of the channel causes some subcarriers to be attenuated more than others. Thus, to use all subcarriers effectively, we must perform power allocation, bit loading, or a combination of the two. We consider two alternatives: (i) constant bit loading and preemphasis (channel inversion), and (ii) optimized bit loading and power allocation. In the preemphasis or channel inversion approach all subcarriers have the same constellation size M , but their power is inversely proportional to the channel gain at their corresponding frequencies: , where G ch (f n ) is simply the frequency response of the channel at the nth subcarrier. As a result, at the receiver, all subcarriers have the same power and SNR, provided the noise PSD is constant over the signal band. In the optimized bit loading and power allocation method, the constellation size of each subcarrier is determined by solving the margin maximization problem The optimization problem (2.15) can be solved via Lagrange multipliers, resulting in the conventional water-filling solution. However, in practice, we employ the Levin-Campello (LC) algorithm OFDM is characterized by high peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) and noise-like time-domain waveforms. As a result DACs and ADCs for OFDM systems must have high dynamic range in order to minimize clipping, and they must have high effective resolution in order to minimize quantization noise. These conflicting requirements lead to a trade-off between clipping distortion and quantization noise. As the effective resolution of DACs/ADCs is limited at roughly 6 bits for sampling rates higher than 30 GS/s, it is necessary to properly optimize clipping and quantization. Studying clipping and quantization allows us to derive the optimal clipping ratio, required effective resolution, and effect of quantization on SNR. Clipping is necessary to reduce the required dynamic range of DAC/ADC and other components. Here, we extend the theory derived in where Here, K is a constant that depends only on the nonlinear amplitude distortion It can be shown that (2.17) Note that for r 1 = 0 and r 2 → ∞ (i.e., ACO-OFDM with clipping only at the zero level), K = 1/2, as previously shown in where Var(•) is a function of r 1 , r 2 , and σ 2 , which can be obtained from the distribution of x c [k], i.e., a Gaussian distribution clipped at -r 1 σ and r 2 σ. Quantization noise is typically modeled as an additive, uniformly distributed white noise, whose variance is given by where ∆X denotes the dynamic range of the quantizer, and ENOB is the effective number of bits of the quantizer. Practical quantizers introduce noise and distortion, which effectively lowers their resolution. ENOB specifies the resolution of an ideal quantizer that obtains the same resolution of a practical quantizer subject to noise and distortion. Note that the clipping probability reduces the quantization noise variance, since at the clipped levels there is no error due to quantization, provided they are also quantization levels. The dynamic range of the quantizer depends on the input signal statistics. At the transmitter, the input signal is the clipped OFDM signal. Therefore, the quantization noise variance at the transmitter is given by For a given transmitter clipping ratio, the signal excursion of DC-OFDM is twice the signal At the receiver, the signal has undergone linear filtering by the channel with overall frequency response G ch (f ). A DC-OFDM signal can still be considered Gaussian-distributed with variance Thus the dynamic range of the quantization for DC-OFDM at the receiver is given by ∆X rx = 2r rx σ rx , where r rx is the clipping ratio at the receiver. ACO-OFDM, on the other hand, is highly asymmetric. As an approximation, we can consider the received ACO-OFDM signal as non-negative with mean σ/ √ 2π (assuming all filters have unit DC gain), with the positive tail approximated by a Gaussian of variance σ 2 rx . For ACO-OFDM the sum in (2.21) is over the odd subcarriers only. Thus the dynamic range of the quantizer for ACO-OFDM at the receiver is given by ∆X rx = σ/ √ 2π + r rx σ rx . This approximation is not ultimately important, as we optimize the clipping ratio both at the transmitter and at the receiver to minimize the power penalty. It is just a convenient way to express the clipping and quantization levels in terms of the signal power. This facilitates the analysis of clipping and quantization noises, as well as the required ENOB. Hence, the quantization noise variance at the receiver is given by , ACO-OFDM There is a clear tradeoff between clipping and quantization noises. Although the minimum total noise is achieved around r = 2.8 for ENOB = 5, and r = 3.8 for ENOB = 6, we must choose the clipping ratio so as to make clipping noise negligible compared to quantization noise. This is because clipping noise has several undesired characteristics, such as non-white power spectrum, whereas quantization noise can be accurately modeled as a bounded uniform white noise. Indeed, minimum optical power is achieved for clipping ratios in the range of 3.7 to 4.5, where clipping noise becomes negligible, as can be seen in Fig. Assuming that all subcarriers have the same power and bit loading, and considering the limit when quantization noise becomes dominant, equation (2.13) reduces to where σ 2 Q,tx and σ 2 Q,rx are given by (2.20) and (2.22), respectively. Note that although quantization noise is uniformly distributed, after the FFT operation at the OFDM receiver, the noise is approximately Gaussian distributed by to the central limit theorem. Note also that σ 2 Q,tx and σ 2 Q,rx are proportional to the signal power, and that in the case of equal bit loading and power allocation we have σ 2 = N u P n . Thus, SNR n has a ceiling in the quantization-noise limited regime. This can be verified by plotting the SNR as a function fo the received power 16-and 64-QAM DC-OFDM, as shown in Fig. This value of ENOB is actually a lower bound, as we have neglected thermal noise and filtering; however, it is useful to provide a first estimate of the required resolution for DC-and ACO-OFDM, allowing SNR req to be calculated based on the target BER and the nominal constellation size of the OFDM signal. Fig. In SSB-OFDM, the subcarriers corresponding to the negative-frequency sideband are not modulated. The SSB-OFDM signal can still be directly detected, provided that a sufficiently strong unmodulated optical carrier is also transmitted. After DD, the mixing of the unmodulated carrier and the SSB-OFDM signal yields a real-valued double-sideband (DSB)-OFDM signal carrying the same information as the original SSB-OFDM signal. This DSB-OFDM signal does not experience the power fading characteristic of the IM-DD channel shown in Fig. The negative sideband of an intensity-modulated OFDM signal can be suppressed electronically, as indicated in the diagram of Fig. where H{•} denotes the Hilbert transform. After clipping, and digital-to-analog conversion, the resulting signals drive an dual-quadrature P n , affects the system performance. The signal propagates through the fiber, whose complex impulse response due to CD is h CD (t). The received signal y(t), after DD is given by (2.26) The constant terms and the ASE-ASE beat noise were neglected. n(t) is a white Gaussian noise whose one-sided PSD is S ASE (2.3), and g(t) is a real-valued impulse response whose Fourier transform is given by where The SNR at the nth subcarrier is given by: where 0 ≤ γ(CSPR) << 1 accounts for imperfect SSI cancellation. γ(CSPR) may be interpreted as the remaining power of the SSBI term after SSBI cancellation. This approximation is possible since, by the central limit theorem, any noise after the FFT operation is approximately Gaussian P n,rx is the signal power at the optical amplifier input, where P n,rx is the power of the nth subcarrier referred to the input of the optical amplifier. The three terms in the denominator of SNR n in (2.28) account for, respectively, signal-ASE beat noise, quantization noise, and imperfect SSBI cancellation. Knowing the SNR at each subcarrier, we can compute the BER according to The OSNR required is given by OSNR req ≈ GAMPP C 2SspB ref . In contrast to the DC-OFDM discussed in Section 2.3.2, the OSNR required no longer depends on the clipping ratio at the transmitter, but it now depends on the carrier power Several SSBI cancellation techniques have been proposed with different efficacies and complexities. In Another SSBI cancellation technique proposed in where F{•} and F -1 {•} denote direct and inverse discrete-time Fourier transform, respectively. sgn(ω) is the sign function and it equals 1, for ω > 0; -1, for ω < 0; and 0, for ω = 0. The electric field Ê[k] can then be reconstructed: (2.30) The reconstructed electric field in (2.30) corresponds to the SSB-OFDM signal at the receiver, which can be detected as a conventional OFDM signal by removing cyclic prefix, computing the FFT, performing one-tap frequency-domain equalization, and finally performing symbol detection. The KK phase retrieval technique outlined in equations (2.29) is not restricted to SSB-OFDM signals. In fact, the KK phase retrieval technique was utilized to reconstruct a SSB 4-PAM signal in The KK phase retrieval does permit electronic CD compensation, but at arguably higher DSP complexity than the techniques described previously. The logarithm and square root computations require high-precision arithmetic as well as upsampling by a large factor in order to correctly represent ln P [k] in the frequency domain. In In this section we compare the different modulation formats discussed in Section 2.3 for the intra-and inter-data center links of Section 2.2. In intra-data center links, the system performance is quantified by computing the receiver sensitivity, which is the received power Prx necessary to achieve a certain target BER, usually determined by the FEC code threshold. For all scenarios studied in this chapter, we consider a weak FEC code such as RS(255, 239), which has a net coding gain of 5.6 dB at BER = 10 -12 , an input BER threshold of 1.8 × 10 -4 to achieve 10 -12 BER, and overhead of ∼ 7%. Note that the FEC choice is not critical for the performance comparison, since all schemes would benefit from a stronger FEC code. While stronger codes can provide higher gains, their complexity is prohibitive for low-cost and low-power applications such as data center links. On the other hand, without coding, single-laser 100 G links presumably cannot achieve the required 10 -12 BER, and are difficult to analyze, since it is difficult to formulate system models that are accurate to such low BERs. As inter-data center links are optically amplified, their performance is more conveniently quantified in terms of the OSNR necessary to achieve the target BER. 4-PAM outperforms all other candidates in all considered scenarios. Level spacing optimization improves OSNR required by roughly 3 dB (Fig. DC-OFDM has a significant penalty due to the relatively high DC bias required to meet the non-negativity constraint of the intensity-modulated optical channel. Although ACO-OFDM has better performance, it requires prohibitively high DAC/ADC sampling rates (equation (2.12)), as the even subcarriers cannot be used to transmit data. In fact, the ACO-OFDM performance curves are not monotonic because, as dispersion increases, subcarriers near the first notch of the IM-DD channel frequency response achieve poor SNR and are not used. Similarly to 4-PAM, CD mitigation through linear equalization is only effective when CD is small. Bit loading and power allocation would allow OFDM variants to better exploit the powerfaded optical channel resulting from considerable CD, but such systems are unlikely to be practical, since DD also leads to intermodulation products that fall in the signal band. Fig. The previous section compared the performance of the various modulation formats and detection techniques in terms of receiver sensitivity and OSNR required. This section focuses on the overall complexity and power consumption of these schemes. Table Figure uncompensated link would also be excessively high, since the complexity of the MLSD receiver grows exponentially with the memory length of the Viterbi decoder. We do not include MLSD 4-PAM in the comparison of Fig. We have evaluated the performance, complexity, and power consumption of 4-PAM and OFDM variants for intra-and inter-data center links. 4-PAM outperforms all the other modulation formats due to its relatively low complexity and high tolerance to noise and distortion. In unamplifed intra-data center links operating near 1310 nm and reaching up to 10 km, dispersion is small enough that CD can be modeled as a linear filter that causes power fading. This power fading will limit the reach and ultimately the throughput that can be practically transmitted over a SMF. Another challenge is that systems designed to achieve 400 Gbit/s or 1 Tbit/s over a single fiber will have small power margin even when using single-laser 100 Gbit/s link with 4-PAM. Eye safe systems cannot exceed 14 dBm per fiber, which limits the power per channel. Accounting for all the losses, an eye-safe 4 × 100 Gbit/s system would only have about 5 dB of margin. Consequently, these systems would not support increased losses due to longer fiber plant, more wavelengths, and possibly optical switching. Chapter 3 studies the use of APDs to mitigate this problem. In amplified inter-data center links operating near 1550 nm and reaching up to 100 km, CD is significant and must be compensated. As CD is a nonlinear operation in IM-DD systems, receiver-side linear equalization is not effective. Transmitter-side predistortion, for instance, could compensate for CD, but any electronic compensation technique will inevitably be more power-hungry than simple optical CD compensation, which can be realized by dispersion-matched DCFs or FBGs. Alternatively, future data center links may favor DSF with small dispersion in the C-band, so that CD compensation is avoided altogether. However, even in small CD regime the OSNR require for 100 Gbit/s 4-PAM systems is roughly 30 dB, which may also not support data center network evolution in the long term. eye-safe 400 Gbit/s link using four wavelength-division-multiplexed (WDM) channels is expected to have an optical power margin of under 5 dB after accounting for all the losses Avalanche photodiodes (APD) and semiconductor amplifiers (SOA) are promising alternatives to improve receiver sensitivity, with reasonable additional cost and power consumption. This chapter studies the benefits and drawbacks of APDs in 100 Gbit/s-per-wavelength links for intra-data center applications. SOAs were studied in collaboration with Dr. Sharif in The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 3.1, we review recent progress in the design of high-speed APDs. In Section 3.2, we present the system model used to evaluate the performance of APD-based data center links. In Section 3.3, we evaluate the performance of APDbased sytems in WDM systems. In Section 3.4, we consider practical considerations of APD-based receivers. Section 3.5 summarizes the main findings of this chapter. APDs provide internal electrical gain through impact ionization. APDs are operated in high reverse bias resulting in a large junction electric field. As a result, carriers generated by the photoelectric effect gain enough energy to excite new carriers through the process of impact ionization. These new carriers, in turn, will excite other carriers unleashing an avalanche effect. The gain provided by the APD comes at the expense of excess shot noise due to the inherently stochastic nature of the impact ionization process. Fig. In addition to excess shot noise, the avalanche process increases the carrier transit time through the multiplication region, an effect known as avalanche buildup. As a result, the APD bandwidth decreases as the gain increases. This dependency is often expressed as a constraint on the gainbandwidth product (GBP) of an APD. APDs have been widely adopted in 10 Gbit/s links for metro and access networks Shot-noise is significant in APD-based receivers. The received optical powers for optical communication systems in data centers are relatively high (e.g., above ∼ -13 dBm from (3.3)). At such power levels, far from the quantum regime, shot noise can be described accurately as a white Gaussian noise whose one-sided PSD, ignoring the APD frequency response, is given by the well-known expression where q is the electron charge, G APD is the APD gain, R is the APD responsivity, Prx is the received optical power, I d is the APD dark current, and F A (G APD ) is the APD excess noise factor. The Gaussian approximation allows us to calculate the BER without relying on moment generating functions and the saddle point approximation, but it must be used with caution. As shown in Equation (3.1) does not account for the APD frequency response, which filters both signal and shot noise. Exact computation of the filtered shot noise variance at the APD output would require knowledge of the second-order statistics of the impulse response, which is generally not tractable analytically and requires computationally intensive simulations where B(G APD ) is the 3-dB bandwidth of the APD at gain G APD . Operating regimes for this model are illustrated in Fig. The choice of a deterministic exponential decay for the impulse response is consistent with the transit-time/RC limited regime, but it does not capture the intrinsic correlation between an APD's gain and its impulse response. As shown in The encoder output drives an optical modulator, which could be an directly modulated lasers (DML), an electro-absorption modulators (EAM), or a Mach-Zenhder modulator (MZM). The intensity-modulated signal is launched into an SMF. The received signal after fiber propagation is detected using an APD-based receiver, as illustrated in Fig. The fixed symbol-rate LE requires accurate knowledge of the channel response and precise timing recovery. In practice, a receiver employing a fixed anti-aliasing filter with an adaptive fractionally spaced LE can achieve performance approaching the ideal symbol-rate LE, while compensating for timing errors and not requiring prior knowledge of the channel. After equalization, symbol-by-symbol detection is performed using decision thresholds {d 1 , . . . , d M -1 }, which may be optimized based on the statistics of the received noise, as described in Section 2.3.1. As in Chapter 2, the system is assumed to use a simple Reed-Solomon code such as RS(239, 255) with BER threshold of 1.8 × 10 -4 and 7% overhead. Throughout this chapter, we quantify the system performance relative to an ideal ISI-free 107-Gbit/s 4-PAM system with a thermal noise-limited PIN receiver. The receiver sensitivity of the reference system can be computed as a function of the target BER where R b is the bit rate and R is the photodiode responsivity. For our analysis and simulation in this paper, we assume R b = 107 Gbit/s, R = 1 A/W, and TIA with input-referred noise of Īn,in = 30pA/ √ Hz. Hence, for BER target = 1.8 × 10 -4 , the reference receiver sensitivity is Preq,ref ≈ -13 dBm. In an APD-based receiver signal power scales with G 2 APD , while shot noise variance scales with G 3 APD , as can be seen from Moreover, in the avalanche buildup time limited regime, the APD gain and bandwidth are coupled and related by the GBP. Hence, to determine the optimal APD gain we must account for APD bandwidth limitations. The APD filters both signal and shot noise. Consequently, the total noise (shot plus thermal noise) is not white. From Fig. Note that the received intensity waveform P rx (t) already includes ISI caused by the modulator. Thus, P rx (t) = x(t) * h mod (t), where x(t) is the ISI-free modulator drive signal, and h mod (t) is the modulator impulse response. If shot noise were signal-independent, the convolution in (3.5) would reduce to simply scaling the noise variance by the energy of h(t), leading to the well-known noise enhancement penalty. Here, however, the convolution in (3.5) makes the noise variance dependent on the sequence of symbols within the memory length of |h(t)| 2 . Fortunately, the memory length of |h(t)| 2 is fewer than five symbols, even when the APD bandwidth is as low as 20 GHz. The impact of |h(t)| 2 on the shot noise variance is particularly noticeable on the lowest intensity levels. As an example, the variance of the shot noise component y n,sh [n] is nonzero even when the symbol P 0 = 0 is transmitted (modulation with an ideal extinction ratio), due to shot noise from neighboring symbols. In performing level spacing optimization, we adopt a conservative approach and calculate (3.5) considering the worst-case scenario, where all the symbols in the memory of are the highest level. The effect of thermal noise can be computed in terms of its equivalent one-sided noise bandwidth, since thermal noise is not signal-dependent. Hence, σ 2 th = N 0 ∆f , where ∆f th = ∞ 0 |H e (f )| 2 df , and H e (f ) is the electric filter frequency response normalized such that H e (0) = 1. Fig. For GBP = 100 GHz, avalanche buildup time limits the bandwidth when G APD ≥ 5. In this regime, increasing the gain further reduces the APD bandwidth, but this does not translate into an increased noise enhancement penalty, since the APD filters both signal and shot noise. As a result, the sensitivity improvement remains almost constant. For GBP = 300 GHz, the avalanche buildup time-limited regime is reached at higher gains, when G APD ≥ 15, and hence higher sensitivity improvements can be achieved. For k A = 0.1 we observe sensitivity improvements up to 6.3 dB for equal level spacing, and up to 7 dB for optimized levels. Note, however, that there is very little penalty by operating the APD at gains substantially smaller than the optimal gain. Although 8-PAM is more spectrally efficient than 4-PAM, its poorer noise tolerance leads to significantly smaller sensitivity improvements. Hence, as in systems using PIN-based receivers 4-PAM outperforms 8-PAM. In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of 100 Gbit/s-per-wavelength WDM links. The performance of individual channels could be different due to wavelength-dependent characteristics of the system such as chromatic dispersion (CD). The WDM analysis is particularly important for receivers with SOAs to evaluate the effects of wavelength-dependent gain and nonlinear crosstalk caused by cross-gain modulation The amount of dispersion that each channel experiences depends on the channel spacing as well as the number of channels. The typical channel spacing for short-reach applications is 20 nm for coarse wavelength-division multiplexing (CWDM) links and 4.5 nm for LAN-WDM. Although CWDM is often preferred, as it generally does not require temperature-controlled lasers, LAN-WDW can accommodate more channels close to the zero-dispersion wavelength, which is necessary for 1 Tbit/s and possibly 1.6 Tbit/s systems. The number of channels in the short-reach WDM links is typically constrained by transmit power limit and CD. Here, we consider two systems: 10-channel LAN-WDM with 4.5-nm channel spacing and 4-channel CWDM with 20-nm channel spacing. The average optical power launched in to the fiber is conservatively limited to 9.4 dBm due to eye-safety restrictions of Class 1 lasers, which are considered inherently safe. The industry also uses Class 1M lasers with eye safety limit of about 14 As discussed in Section 2.1, CD in intensity-modualated direct-detected (IM-DD) systems leads to power fading. When the modulator introduces transient chirp, the power fading is mitigated by satisfying αD(λ) < 0, so that the fiber small-signal frequency response provides some gain, which can potentially compensate for the limited bandwidth of the modulator or APD. Therefore, we assume that all WDM channels are placed at wavelengths shorter than the zero-dispersion wavelength (1310 nm for standard SMF), such that αD(λ) < 0 is satisfied for modulators with positive chirp. Fig. For both WDM links, as shown in Fig. We have evaluated the performance of 4-PAM and 8-PAM 100 Gbit/s per-wavelength links using APDs to improve receiver sensitivity and using LE to compensate for ISI caused by the modulator and APD. APD-based receivers may provide sensitivity improvements up to 4 dB for GBP = 100 GHz, and up to 6.2 dB for GBP = 300 GHz, assuming a low-gain bandwidth of 20 GHz, k A = 0.1 (Si). APDs fabricated in InAlAs (k A = 0.2) with otherwise the same characteristics may provide sensitivity improvements up to 5.3 dB. These sensitivity improvement values are with respect to an ideal thermal-noise limited PIN receiver with same responsivity. Unfortunately, however, current APDs still have responsivities below 1 A/W, which reduce the achievable sensitivity, e.g., by 3 dB for Ge-Si APDs having R = 0.5 A/W and by 1.3 dB for InGaAs-InAlAs having R = 0.74 A/W (Table InAlAs from Optimization of the PAM level spacing and receiver decision thresholds can provide about 1 to 2 dB additional sensitivity improvement for either SOA and APD-based receivers. Moreover, by appropriately selecting wavelengths such that αD(λ) < 0, the receiver sensitivity is improved after a few km of SMF, due to the combined effect of CD and modulator chirp. Practical SOA-based receivers offer sensitivity improvement of about 6 dB, which is higher than APD-based receivers due particularly to the poor responsivity of current APDs. Moreover, SOAs can amplify multiple WDM channels, helping amortize their higher cost and power dissipation. Important practical considerations such as cost, temperature sensitivity, and power consumption may nonetheless favor APDs in practical systems. Low-Power DSP-Free Coherent Chapters 2 and 3 showed that four-level pulse amplitude modulation (4-PAM) systems currently adopted by the industry already face tight optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR) and power margin constraints in amplified and unamplified systems, respectively. This is concerning because nextgeneration interconnects will likely need to accommodate increased optical losses due to fiber plant, wavelength demultiplexing of more channels, and possibly optical switches. To alleviate some of these constraints, both mature and emerging technologies can help on a number of fronts. High-bandwidth, low-power modulators And as discussed in Chapter 3, avalanche photodiodes (APD) and semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA) may improve receiver sensitivity of 100 Gbit/s 4-PAM systems by 4.5 and 6 dB, respectively. Improved laser frequency stability, either using athermal lasers These technologies will extend the lifetime of 4-PAM, but they do not address the fundamental problem of such intensity-modulated direct-detections (IM-DD) systems, which is that they only exploit one degree of freedom of optical signals, namely, their intensity. Stokes vector detection has been proposed to enable up to three independent dimensions Coherent detection is more scalable, as it enables four degrees of freedom of the single-mode fiber (SMF), namely two quadratures in two polarizations, and improves sensitivity by up to 20 dB by mixing a weak signal with a strong local oscillator (LO) These fundamental differences may favor low-power architectures based on analog signal processing that avoid high-speed ADCs and DSP altogether. DSP-based coherent receivers optimized for short-reach applications In this chapter, we propose and evaluate homodyne DSP-free coherent receiver architectures for dual-polarization quadrature phase-shift keying (DP-QPSK). This study was done in collaboration with Dr. Anujit Shastri, who proposed polarization demultiplexing based on optical phase shifters that are controlled by low-frequency marker tone detection circuitry. CR is based on either an optical or an electrical phase-locked loop (PLL). We propose a novel multiplier-free phase detector based on exclusive-OR (XOR) gates. We also study the relative performance of homodyne DP-differential QPSK (DP-DQPSK), whereby information is encoded in phase transitions, hence avoiding CR circuitry. The estimated power consumption of the high-speed analog electronics of our most power-hungry architecture is nearly 4 W for 200 Gbit/s DP-QPSK, assuming 90-nm CMOS. Moreover, near zero chromatic dispersion (CD), the proposed DSP-free systems exhibit ∼ 1 dB power penalty compared to their DSP-based counterparts. The DSP-based receiver used as a benchmark employs a newly proposed 2 × 2 multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) equalizer based on a small-differential group Coherent detection based on high-speed DSP is a mature technology in long-haul systems, but it may be currently unsuitable for data center links, where cost and power consumption are paramount. DSP-based coherent solutions may eventually become viable for short-reach applications by leveraging more power-efficient CMOS processes and optimized implementations for short-reach applications, where fiber impairments are less severe. Variables in boldface are vectors, [•] D denotes the decision operator for a QAM symbol, x * denotes element-wise complex conjugate and x H denotes the Hermitian (transpose conjugate) of a vector. demultiplexing, PMD compensation, CD compensation, carrier recovery and clock recovery. Some implementations place the DSP chip on the line card itself with an analog interface to the pluggable transceivers, referred to as analog coherent optics (ACO). While this can increase transceiver port density, it essentially offloads the power consumption to elsewhere in the system. The power consumption of the various operations performed by the receiver was extensively studied in The CD equalizers may be omitted if CD is small enough such that the filters in the To simplify the complexity of the CD equalizers, Martins et al. Assuming that ISI is effectively mitigated and that phase error after carrier recovery is negligible, the BER for square M -QAM signals is approximately In unamplified systems, the receiver noise is dominated by shot-noise due to the strong LO laser signal, while in amplified systems the ASE noise is dominant. The SNR for each of these scenarios is given by where Prx is the average received optical power, R is the photodiodes responsivity, q is the electron charge, h is Planck's constant, ν is the optical signal frequency, N A is the number of amplifiers, and ∆f is the receiver equivalent noise bandwidth, which in a ideal receiver would be ∆f = R s /2, where R s is the symbol rate. Note that a 1-dB penalty in SNR corresponds to a 1-dB penalty in the receiver sensitivity. In DSP-based systems, the combination of anti-aliasing filtering followed by fractionally spaced adaptive equalization achieves similar performance to the optimal receiver consisting of analog matched filtering and symbol-rate equalizer. In this case, ∆f ≈ R s /2. The difference between ∆f and R s /2 corresponds to the noise enhancement penalty. For DSP-free receivers, discussed in the following Section, the noise bandwidth is determined solely by the receiver LPF. Coherent detection using analog signal processing was studied extensively in the 1980s and early 1990s The constraint on frequency offset can be satisfied by strict laser temperature control, whose cost and power consumption could be shared among several channels by using frequency combs We restrict our analysis to the feedback CR techniques OPLL and EPLL, which are governed by the same underlying theory, as described in Section 4.2.2. Feedforward CR (FFCR) has been widely used in DSP-based coherent receivers However, analog FFCR has several implementation drawbacks. First, phase estimation in analog FFCR is limited to non-data-aided (NDA) methods, e.g., raising the signal to M th power (for M-PSK), which have poorer performance than decision-directed methods In DSP-based coherent receivers, a 2 × 2 MIMO equalizer performs polarization demultiplexing and compensates for PMD and polarization-dependent loss (PDL) Fortunately, PMD effects are negligible up to 80 km at 56 Gbaud with modern standard SMF With PDL causing only small power penalties at these distances, polarization rotation becomes the only impairment that needs to be compensated. Polarization rotation through a fiber varies on a time scale of the order of milliseconds For the DSP-free receiver we propose polarization rotation compensation by cascaded phase shifters controlled by low-speed circuitry. Further details about the phase shifters and phase tuning algorithm is given in CR architectures based on an OPLL or an EPLL consist of three basic stages: phase estimator, loop filter, and oscillator. The oscillator is the LO laser in an OPLL, and an electronic VCO in an EPLL. The phase estimator stage wipes off the modulated data in order to estimate the phase error, which is then filtered by the loop filter, producing a control signal for the oscillator frequency. We consider a second-order loop filter where ζ is the damping coefficient, typically chosen to be 1/ √ 2 as a compromise between fast response and small overshoot. Here, ω n = 2πf n is the loop natural frequency, which must be optimized to minimize the phase error variance. A second-order loop filter is typically preferred, as it has ideally infinite d.c. gain, resulting in zero steady-state error for a frequency step input. shows the block diagram of a conventional Costas loop phase estimation is performed in both polarizations and summed, as illustrated in Fig. It is important to highlight that ∆ν tot refers to the intrinsic laser linewidth due to spontaneous emission. Low-frequency flicker noise caused by electrical noise in the tuning sections of tunable lasers may lead to an apparent broader linewidth. Indeed, as reported in The SNR is given in (4.2) and it depends on whether the receiver is shot-noise limited, e.g., in unamplified intra-data center links, or ASE-limited, e.g., in amplified inter-data center links: As shown in where σ 2 e is given by (4.4) and we can compute the receiver sensitivity penalty as a function of f n , τ d and ∆ν tot . Fig. The maximum delay is significantly reduced at wider linewidths or when the natural frequency is suboptimal. An example of this is shown in Fig. Both Costas and XOR-based phase estimators exhibit a 90 • phase ambiguity. This ambiguity is typically resolved by either transmitting a known training sequence at the beginning of transmission, or by differentially decoding the bits. Although differentially decoding the bits doubles the biterror ratio (BER) Moreover, using a training sequence would require retraining whenever there is a cycle slip. If the bits are differentially decoded, however, a cycle slip only causes a few more error events that could be corrected by the FEC. At startup, the receiver cannot perform polarization demultiplexing and CR simultaneously. For instance, marker tone detection is only possible after CR, so that the marker tone is at the expected frequency. CR, in turn, requires that the received signals in each polarization branch must be QPSK, which is not the case for any given received state of polarization. To circumvent these problems, we have devised a startup protocol, which can also be used to recover from a continuous loss of the marker tone in the relevant tributary caused by a discontinuous polarization change. First, the transmitter sends the same data in both polarizations so that the received signal in each polarization branch is QPSK regardless of the received state of polarization. The transmitted sequence needs to be known at the receiver only if the bits are not differentially decoded, in which case a training sequence is required to resolve the 90 • phase ambiguity. Once phase lock is acquired, the polarization estimation algorithm can adjust the phase shifters to demultiplex the two polarizations, as described in section II.A, with the marker tone now at the appropriate frequency. Once the polarizations have been demultiplexed, as determined by the polarization recovery processing detecting sufficiently low marker tone amplitudes in the XQ, YI and YQ tributaries, data transmission in both polarizations can start. In DQPSK transmission, the information is encoded in the phase transitions between two consecutive symbols. Hence, DQPSK detection does not require an absolute phase reference and CR is not necessary, which significantly simplifies the receiver. Homodyne DQPSK, however, has some disadvantages compared to homodyne QPSK. First, DQPSK has an inherent ∼ 2.4 dB SNR penalty due to differential detection compared to coherent detection Since the receiver does not perform carrier recovery, the frequency difference between the LO and transmitter laser may be large. The BER of homodyne M -DPSK in the presence of frequency error is given by where ∆Ψ = 2πf of f T s is the phase error due to frequency offset f of f during a symbol period. As shown in Fig. The computation of the phase difference between two consecutive symbols may also be realized in the optical domain by using delay interferometers, as illustrated in Fig. In this section, we compare the performance of the proposed receiver architectures based on analog signal processing with their DSP-based counterparts. In the DSP-based receiver, equalization and polarization demultiplexing are simplified, as discussed in Appendix II. CR is performed using the Viterbi-Viterbi method We target a bit rate of 200 Gbit/s per wavelength, resulting in 224 Gbit/s after including 7% hard-decision FEC overhead [100], and 5% Ethernet overhead. As in previous Chapters, the FEC is assumed to be hard-decision RS(255, 239) or similar, which leads to a FEC threshold of 1.8 × 10 -4 . Unamplified systems are characterized in terms of (a) receiver sensitivity, while amplified systems are characterized in terms of (b) OSNR required. The x-axis may be interpreted as total dispersion in intra-data center links or residual dispersion after optical CD compensation in inter-data center links similarly to the resultin in Chapter 2. without a LO laser are no longer linear in signal electric field values, CD and PMD cannot be equalized using DSP. The previous sections compared the performance of the various modulation formats and detection techniques in terms of receiver sensitivity and OSNR required. This section focuses on the overall complexity and power consumption of these schemes. Table The DSP-free receiver power consumption is estimated at 90-nm CMOS as detailed below. Power consumption of the analog receiver is harder to estimate, since there is more variability in the choice of the functional block implementation and transistor technology. For instance, CMOS transistors would offer lower manufacturing costs, while bipolar transistors would offer improved linearity and lower power consumption. The most complex and power hungry parts of the proposed analog circuitry are analog mixers and XORs. Both can be realized using Gilbert cells .13: Coarse estimate of power consumption of high-speed DACs, ADCs, and DSP for various modulation schemes at 200 Gbit/s. DSP power consumption estimates are made for 28-nm CMOS using the models presented in full-wave rectifiers, one comparator, one loop filter, and one QVCO. Under the conservative assumption that the power consumption of each individual component is equal to the power consumption of a Gilbert cell (93 mW in 90-nm CMOS), the aggregate power consumption of all functional blocks would be nearly 2 W. This estimate does not account for layout and interconnects, which typically double the power consumption of high-speed analog integrated circuits. Hence, we estimate that the power consumption of the high-speed analog electronics for an EPLL implementation would be 4 W. More accurate estimates may only be obtained after circuit-level design, which is beyond the scope of this work. An OPLL-based DP-QPSK receiver and a DP-DQPSK receiver have even lower power consumption, as they do not require a de-rotation stage. Other receiver operations such as polarization demultiplexing and CDR are also power-efficient. For instance, three phase shifting sections can have a total power consumption of approximately 75 mW We proposed and evaluated DSP-free analog coherent receiver architectures for unamplified intradata center links and amplified inter-data center links. We showed that using a marker tone-based polarization demultiplexing scheme with an optical polarization controller, the analog coherent receiver can recover and track the transmitted polarization-multiplexed signals for a receiver operating at baseband. This technique can be extended to higher order QAM formats like 16-QAM and above, and can also be extended to higher-order IM formats such as 4-PAM and above. We also showed how CR can be conducted using a multiplier-free phase detector based on XOR gates and that its performance is within 0.5 dB of a Costas loop-based phase detector. Our proposed multiplier-free phase estimator is limited to QPSK inputs, however. Finally, we showed that DSP-free analog coherent receivers would have ∼1 dB penalty at small CD relative to their DSP-based counterparts. The SNR-penalty for DSP-free systems increases quadratically with CD and reaches 5 dB at roughly ±35 ps/nm. The power consumption of polarization demultiplexing and high-speed electronics is estimated to be nearly 4 W in 90 nm CMOS. Moreover, the improved receiver sensitivity due to coherent detection would allow 40-km unamplified and eye-safe transmission of up to 49 DWDM channels near 1310 nm, potentially blending intra-and inter-data center applications. The high spectral efficiency enabled by coherent detection, combined with its improved receiver sensitivity, will potentially blur distinctions between intra-and inter-data center links. Part II power? In this paper, we formulate this problem mathematically and demonstrate how to solve it. Our formulation accounts for amplifier physics, Kerr nonlinearity, and power feed constraints. Modeling amplifier physics is critical for translating energy constraints into parameters that govern the channel capacity such as amplification bandwidth, noise, and optical power. Although the resulting optimization problem is not convex, the solutions are robust, i.e., they do not seem to depend on initial conditions. This suggests that the optimization reaches the global minimum or is consistently trapped in an inescapable local minimum. In either case, the solutions are very promising. The optimized power allocation increases the theoretical capacity per fiber by 70% compared to recently published results that employ spatial-division multiplexing (SDM) and flat power allocation. This improvement in capacity may be achieved without modifying the submerged plant and may only require altering the terminal equipment. The optimization also provides insights into power-limited submarine link design and operation. For instance, in agreement to prior work A submarine transport cable employs S spatial dimensions in each direction, which could be modes in a multimode fiber, cores of a multi-core fiber, or simply multiple SMFs. Throughout this paper, we assume that each spatial dimension is a SMF, since this is the prevailing scenario in today's submarine systems. Each of those fibers can be represented by the equivalent diagram shown in Fig. The link has a total length L, and it is divided into M spans, each of length l = L/M . An optical amplifier with gain G(λ) compensates for the fiber attenuation A(λ) = e αSMF(λ)l of each span, and a gain-flattening filter (GFF) with transfer function 0 < F (λ) < 1 ensures that the amplifier gain matches the span attenuation, so that at each span we have G(λ)F (λ)A -1 (λ) ≈ 1. In practice, this condition has to be satisfied almost perfectly, as a mismatch of just a tenth of a dB would accumulate to tens of dBs after a chain of hundreds of amplifiers. As a result, in addition to GFF per span, periodic power rebalancing after every five or six spans corrects for any residual mismatches. The input signal consists of N potential WDM channels spaced in frequency by ∆f , so that the channel at wavelength λ n has power P n . Our goal is to find the power allocation P 1 , . . . , P N that maximizes the information-theoretic capacity per spatial dimension. We do not make any prior assumptions about the amplifier bandwidth, hence the optimization may result in some channels not being used i.e., P n = 0 for some n. Due to GFFs and periodic power rebalancing, the output signal power remains approximately the same. But the signal at each WDM channel is corrupted by amplifier noise P ASE,n and nonlinear noise NL n . Thus, the SNR n of the nth channel is given by Note that only channels for which the amplifier gain is greater than the span attenuation can be used to transmit information, i.e., P n = 0 only if G(λ n ) > A(λ n ). The optical amplifiers for submarine links generally consist of single-stage EDFAs with redundant forward-propagating pump lasers operating near 980 nm. In ultra-long links, the pump power is limited by feed voltage constraints at the shores. From the maximum power transfer theorem, the total electrical power available to all undersea amplifiers is at most P = V 2 /(4Lρ), where V is the feed voltage, and ρ is the cable resistance. To translate this constraint on the total electrical power into a constraint on the optical pump power P p per amplifier, we use an affine model similar to the one used in where η is an efficiency constant that translates electrical power into optical pump power, and P o accounts for electrical power spent in operations not directly related to optical amplification such as pump laser lasing threshold, monitoring, and control. The factor of 2S appears because there are S spatial dimensions in each direction. This constraint on the pump power limits the EDFA output optical power and bandwidth, thus imposing a hard constraint on the fiber throughput. As an example, increasing P n may improve the SNR and spectral efficiency of some WDM channels, but increasing P n also depletes the EDF and reduces the amplifier overall gain. As a result, the gain of some channels may drop below the span attenuation, thus reducing the amplifier bandwidth and the number of WDM channels that can be transmitted. Further increasing P n may reduce the SNR, as the nonlinear noise power becomes significant. These considerations illustrate how forcing more power per fiber is an ineffective strategy in improving the capacity per fiber of power-limited submarine cables. Returning to (5.1), we need to compute the amplifier gain and noise for a given pump power P p (5.2) and input power profile P 1 , . . . , P N . The steady-state pump and signal power evolution along an EDF of length L EDF is well modeled by the standard confined-doping (SCD) model where the subindex k indexes both signal and pump i.e., k ∈ {p, 1, . . . , N }, z is the position along the EDF, and μ k = 1 for beams that move in the forward direction i.e., increasing z, and μ k = -1 otherwise. Here, l k denotes the background loss (or excess loss), α k is the absorption coefficient, g * k is the gain coefficient, and n2 /n t denotes the population of the second metastable level normalized by the Er ion density nt . ζ = πr 2 Er nt /τ is the saturation parameter, where r Er is the Er-doping radius, and τ ≈ 10 ms is the metastable lifetime. According to this model, the amplifier characteristics are fully described by three macroscopic parameters, namely α k , g * k , and ζ. The first term of (5.3) corresponds to the medium gain, the second term accounts for absorption, and the third term accounts for amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise. To compute the amplifier gain and noise using (5.3), we must solve the boundary value problem For amplifiers pumped at 980 nm, the noise figure is approximately gain-and-wavelength independent, and it can be computed from theory or measured experimentally. Although we focus on end-pumped single-mode EDFAs, similar models exist for multicore EDFAs By assuming that the amplifier is not saturated by ASE, equation (5.3) reduces to a single-variable implicit equation where Q in k = P k hν k is the photon flux in the kth channel, and is the total input photon flux. The output photon flux Q out is given by the implicit equation: Therefore, to compute the amplifier gain using the semi-analytical model, we must first solve (5.8) numerically for Q out , and then compute the gain using (5.7). This procedure is much faster than solving That is, the signal power plus the accumulated ASE noise power at the input of the last amplifier in the chain. As a result, all amplifiers are designed to operate under the same conditions as the last amplifier. This pessimistic assumption is not critical in systems that operate with high optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR), and accounts for signal droop in low-OSNR systems, where the accumulated ASE power may be larger than the signal power, and thus reduce the amplifier useful bandwidth. To account for Kerr nonlinearity, we use the Gaussian noise (GN) model, which establishes that the Kerr nonlinearity in dispersion-uncompensated fiber systems is well modeled as an additive zero-mean Gaussian noise whose power at the nth channel is given by for 1 ≤ n 1 + n 2n + q ≤ N . Here, Pn denotes the launched power of the nth channel, which is related to the input power to the amplifier by Pn = A(λ n )P n . The nonlinear noise power is scaled by the span attenuation A -1 (λ n ) due to the convention in Fig. (n 1 , n 2 , n) is the set of fiber-specific nonlinear coefficients that determine the strength of the four-wave mixing component that falls on channel n, generated by channels n 1 , n 2 , and n 1 + n 2n + q. Here, q = 0 describes the dominant nonlinear terms, while the coefficients q = ±1 describe corner contributions. The nonlinear coefficients D (1 span) q (n 1 , n 2 , n) for one span of SMF of length l, nonlinear coefficient γ, power attenuation α SMF , and propagation constant β 2 are given by the triple integral ρ((x + n 1 )∆f, (y + n 2 )∆f, (z + n)∆f ) • rect(x + yz + q)∂x∂y∂z, (5.10) where rect(ω) = 1, for |ω| ≤ 1/2, and rect(ω) = 0 otherwise. Equation (5.10) assumes that all channels have a rectangular spectral pulse shape. As the coefficients D (1 span) q (n 1 , n 2 , n) only depend on the index differences n 1n and n 2n, (n 1 , n 2 , n). Fig. The pixel at the center of the images in Fig. Computing D (1 span) q (n 1 , n 2 , n) is computationally less intensive than D (M spans) q (n 1 , n 2 , n), since the highly oscillatory term χ(f 1 , f 2 , f ) in D (M spans) q (n 1 , n 2 , n) (1 span) q (n 1 , n 2 , n). The nonlinear coefficients for M spans can be computed by following the nonlinear power scaling given in where the parameter controls the nonlinear noise scaling over multiple spans, and for bandwidth of ∼ 40 nm (e.g., 100 channels spaced by 50 GHz), it is approximately equal to 0.06 We do not include stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) in our modeling for two reasons. First, long-haul submarine cables employ large-effective-area fibers, which reduces SRS intensity. Second, the optimized amplifier bandwidth is not larger than 45 nm, while the Raman efficiency peaks when the wavelength difference is ∼ 100 nm. Using equations (5.1), (5.6), (5.7), and (5.9), we can compute Shannon's capacity per fiber by adding the capacities of the individual WDM channels: where 0 < Γ < 1 is the coding gap to capacity and G(λ n ), A(λ n ) denote, respectively, the amplifier gain and span attenuation in dB units. The indicator function 1{•} is one when the condition in its argument is true, and zero otherwise. As we do not know a priori which channels contribute to capacity (P n = 0), we sum over all channels and let the indicator function indicate which channels have gain above the span attenuation. Since the indicator function is non-differentiable, it is convenient to approximate it by a differentiable sigmoid function such as 1{x ≥ 0} ≈ 0.5(tanh(Dx) + 1), where D > 0 controls the sharpness of the sigmoid approximation. Although making D large better approximates the indicator function, it results in vanishing gradients, which retards the optimization process. Hence, the optimization problem of maximizing the capacity per fiber given an energy constraint that limits the amplifier pump power P p can be stated as maximize LEDF,P1,...,P N given P p (5.15) In addition to the power allocation P 1 , . . . , P N in dBm units, we optimize over the EDF length L EDF , resulting in a (N + 1)-dimensional non-convex optimization problem. L EDF may be removed from the optimization if its value is predefined. It is convenient to optimize over the signal power in dBm units, as the logarithmic scale enhances the range of signal power that can be covered by taking small adaptation steps. Even if we assumed binary power allocation, i.e., P n ∈ {0, P}, it is not easy to determine the value of P that will maximize the amplification bandwidth for which the gain is larger than the span attenuation. Note that if we did not have the pump power constraint and the amplifier gain did not change with the power allocation P 1 , . . . , P N , the optimization problem in (5.15) would reduce to the convex problem solved in We now apply our proposed optimization procedure to the reference system with parameters listed in Table We first study how the optimized power allocation and the resulting spectral efficiency is affected by the amplifier pump power. We also investigate how Kerr nonlinearity affects the optimized power allocation and when it can be neglected. This discussion does not assume any particular power budget or number of spatial dimensions. In Section 5.2.2, we consider how employing multiple Note that P n corresponds to the input power to the amplifier. The launched power is Pn = G(λ n )F (λ n )P n = A(λ n )P n . Thus, the launch power is 9.75 dB above the values shown in these graphs. spatial dimensions can lead to higher overall cable capacity. For a given pump power P p , we solve the optimization problem in (5.15) for the system parameters listed in Table For the optimized power profile for P p = 30 mW shown in Fig. Recall that in the optimization all amplifiers are designed to operate under the same conditions (noise level) as the last amplifier. As a result, the optimization correctly predicts that channels near 1537 nm should not be used, as otherwise the gain of the last amplifiers in the chain could drop below the span attenuation of 9.75 dB. In the optimization, the span attenuation can be increased to allow higher margin to account for model or device inaccuracies. At the last span of the signal and ASE evolution simulation, we compute the spectral efficiency per channel and compare it to the approximated results obtained using (5.1)-(5.13). As shown in Fig. To gauge the benefits of our proposed optimization procedure, we compare the results of our approach to those of a recently published work The span attenuation for all cases was calculated as A = α SMF l + 1.5, where the 1.5 dB of additional attenuation is added as a margin. The total pump power per fiber was assumed P p,total = 287×50 = 14350 mW. Hence, making the span length shorter reduces the pump per amplifier. The optimal span length is achieved for 40-50 km, resulting in a span attenuation of 8.1-9.75 dB. The main benefit of the channel power optimization is to allow the system to operate over a wider amplification bandwidth by appropriately adjusting the channel powers. Given that capacity scales linearly with dimensions (frequency or space) and only logarithmically with power, the optimization will favor power allocations that maximize the useful amplification bandwidth, i.e., bandwidth over which the gain is larger than the span attenuation. The optimization does not necessarily make the amplifiers exhibit higher PCE. In fact, highly saturated optical amplifiers achieve higher PCE, but that does not necessarily mean higher overall amplification bandwidth. The optimal strategy is therefore to employ more spatial dimensions while transmitting less power in each one. The optimal number of spatial dimensions depends on the available electrical power budget. As an example, Fig. From this and assuming efficiency η = 0.4 and overhead power P o , we can compute the pump power per amplifier P p according to (5.2), and obtain the capacity per fiber from Fig. The optimal number of spatial dimensions in each direction S decreases as the overhead power increases, reaching 20, 12, and 8 for the power overhead P o = 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 W, respectively. This corresponds to amplifiers with pump powers of 43.7, 47.4, and 65.7 mW, respectively. Hence, at the optimal number of spatial dimensions the system operates in the linear regime, as can bee seen by inspecting Fig. Power difference (dB) Figure An important practical consideration for submarine systems is their ability to recover when the input power drops significantly due to faulty components or pump laser failure. Thus, submarine amplifiers are designed to operate in high gain compression, so that the power level can recover from these events after a few spans. We show that the optimized input power profile and amplifier operation can still recover from such events. Fig 5 .10 illustrates the power variation with respect to the optimized power profile when one of the two pump lasers in an amplification module fails. The failure occurs at the span indexed by zero. The amplifier operates with redundant pumps resulting in P p = 50 mW, and in the event of a single-pump failure the power drops to P p = 25 mW. The signal power in the channels at the extremities of the spectrum are restored with just two spans. Capacity is not significantly affected by a single-pump failure, since the amplifier noise increases by less than 0.5 dB in all channels. Although the power levels could still be restored in the event that the two pump lasers fail, the total amplifier noise power would be about 10 dB higher in some channels. We have demonstrated how to maximize the information-theoretic capacity of ultra-long submarine systems by optimizing the channel power allocation in each spatial dimension. Our models account for EDFA physics, Kerr nonlinearity, and power feed limitations. Modeling EDFA physics is paramount to understanding the effects of energy limitations on amplification bandwidth, noise, and optical power, which intimately govern the system capacity. We show that this optimization results in 70% higher capacity when compared to the theoretical capacity of a recently proposed high-capacity system. Our optimization also provides insights on the optimal number of spatial dimensions, amplifier operation, and nonlinear regime operation. Our proposed technique could be used in existing systems, and also to design future systems leveraging SDM. Chapter 6 The first part of this dissertation focused on short-reach optical communication links for data centers. To continue supporting the accelerated Internet traffic growth, next-generation data center transceivers will need to support bit rates beyond 100 Gbit/s per wavelength, while offering high power margin to accommodate additional losses due to longer fiber plant, multiplexing of more wavelengths, and possibly optical switches. These challenges motivated research on spectrally efficient and low-power modulation formats compatible with direct detection, which culminated in the adoption of four-level pulse amplitude modulation (4-PAM) by the IEEE 802.bs task to enable 8 × 50 and 4 × 100 Gbit/s links. Compared to competing modulation formats such as orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), 4-PAM offers lower transmitter and receiver complexity and higher tolerance to noise. However, as demonstrated in Chapter 2, 4-PAM systems already face tight optical power margin and optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR) constraints in unamplified and amplified links, respectively. To alleviate some of these constraints, emerging technologies can help on a number of fronts. High-bandwidth, low-power modulators based on thin-film lithium niobate, for instance, will reduce intersymbol interference and improve signal integrity. Segmented optical modulators will simplify transmitter-side electronics of multi-level modulation formats. And as discussed in Chapter 3, avalanche photodiodes (APD) and semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA) may improve receiver sensitivity of 100 Gbit/s 4-PAM systems by 4.5 and 6 dB, respectively. Further work is still necessary in designing APDs that decouple bandwidth from responsivity. Current APD structures are typically made thin to reduce carrier transit time and improve the device bandwidth, but this also reduces the APD responsivity. Another possible fruitful line of research lies on designing Si-based APDs with high-responsivity absorption regions. Si-based APDs offer nearly ideal gain and noise characteristics, but the absorption section of these devices is typically made in Ge, which has poor responsivity. Aided by those technologies, 4-PAM and possibly other modulation formats compatible with direct detection will meet data center demands in the short-term, but more degrees of freedom are needed to support higher per-wavelength bit rates. Coherent and differentially coherent detection methods enable up to four degrees of freedom while significantly improving receiver sensitivity due to the gain provided by mixing the weak incoming signal with a strong local oscillator laser (LO). However, current coherent receivers rely on power-hungry digital signal processors (DSPs). These DSP-based coherent receivers designed for long-haul transmission, which prioritizes performance, are suboptimal for data center applications, which prioritize cost and power consumption. By reducing receiver complexity and making system performance tradeoffs, the power consumption of coherent links can be made low enough for intra-and inter-data center applications. Following this philosophy, we propose DSP-free coherent and differentially coherent architectures that allow performance comparable to their DSP-based counterparts, while consuming much less power. Our proposed DSP-free coherent receiver performs three synchronization operations: polarization recovery, carrier recovery, and timing recovery, using analog operations to reduce power consumption. Polarization recovery performs marker tone detection to adjust the individual phase shifts of three (or more) cascaded phase shifters. Carrier recovery is realized by a phase-locked loop (PLL), either optical or electrical. An optical PLL requires frequency modulation of the LO laser as well as highly integrated receivers in order to minimize the loop delay. An electrical PLL eliminates these requirements at the expense of more complex high-speed analog electronics, but the estimated power consumption of the analog electronics remains under 4 W. For either optical or electrical PLL, we proposed a multiplier-free phase detector based on exclusive-OR (XOR) gates. This phase detector is simpler than conventional Costas-type phase detector, but it restricts the modulation to dualpolarization (DP) quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK). Lastly, timing recovery and detection are performed using conventional clock and data recovery techniques. Due to their high receiver sensitivity and low power consumption, DSP-free DP-QPSK coherent receivers seem particularly promising for intra-data and inter-data center links. The improved receiver sensitivity would allow 40-km unamplified and eye-safe transmission of up to 49 dense wavelength-division multiplexed (DWDM) channels near 1310 nm, potentially blurring distinctions between intra-and inter-data center links. In amplified inter-data center links, where receiver sensitivity is not as critical, LO-free differentially coherent receivers for dual-polarization differential QPSK (DP-DQPSK) based on delay interferometers are particularly promising, as the high-speed analog electronics essentially reduces to simple clock and data recovery only. DSP-free coherent receivers, however, cannot electronically compensate for chromatic dispersion (CD). Hence, they require optical CD compensation by employing dispersion compensating fibers (DCFs). To allow more flexibility and reduce losses introduced by DCFs, future data center links may favor dispersion-shifted fibers (DSFs) with zero dispersion wavelength near 1550 nm, thus allowing low-dispersion amplified links. Nonlinear fiber effects that can be exacerbated by DSFs are negligible in short-reach links. Moreover, dispersion-flattened optical fibers with zero-dispersion wavelengths near both 1310 nm and 1550 nm bands would allow operability of intra-data center links in both bands. If power consumption remains one of the primary concerns in designing optical systems for data centers, these types of fiber should be preferred, since any electronic CD compensation technique will inevitably be more power hungry than passive optics. These same considerations apply to links based on direct detection, as in those systems, CD leads to power fading and limits the system reach. Future work should solve implementation challenges that will arise in bringing DSP-free coherent receivers to market. On the electronics side, this includes circuit-level design of the proposed receiver functions. Moreover, analog-based phase detectors for higher-order quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) would allow DSP-free receivers to scale to higher-order formats and provide higher spectral efficiency. On the optics side, commercial coherent receivers today are exclusively designed for 1550 nm operation, but data centers will also require designing polarization and phase hybrids, and similar optical subsystems, for operation at 1310 nm. Moreover, transceivers for data centers applications will likely need to be produced in high volume, which will certainly bring new manufacturing challenges. Data center links in general will benefit by new advances in photonic integration to reduce cost, power consumption, and to increase port density. Additionally, improved laser frequency stability, either using athermal lasers or frequency combs, will enable DWDM within the data center, possibly yielding a multi-fold increase in capacity per fiber. As bit rate demands continue to grow, DSP-based receivers may eventually become attractive as they allow higher-order modulation formats and easy compensation of transmission impairments. DSP-based systems may ultimately become economically viable for short-reach data center links by leveraging designs that minimize power consumption and by utilizing more power-efficient complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) processes, though that remains unclear as we approach the limits of Moore's law. The second part of this dissertation focused on long-haul submarine links with an energy constraint. Long-haul submarine links employ hundreds of repeaters (i.e., optical amplifiers) to compensate for fiber loss along the link. These submerged repeaters are designed to operate continuously for over 20 years, and they are powered from the shores, where feed voltage limits the amount of electrical power that can be delivered to the amplifiers. The limited available power per amplifier ultimately limits the amount of optical power and data that can be transmitted per cable. To mitigate this problem, recent works have turned to an insight from information theory that establishes that in energy-constrained systems, we can maximize capacity by employing more dimensions while transmitting less power, and less data, in each. Dimensions in this context refers to spatial dimensions i.e., modes in multimode fibers (MMFs), cores in multicore fibers (MCFs), or simply multiple single-mode fibers (SMFs). In fact, numerous recent works have studied how employing more spatial dimensions improves the capacity and power efficiency of ultra-long submarine links. To complement that work, we demonstrated in Chapter 5 how best use each spatial dimension. Specifically, we demonstrated how to maximize the information-theoretic capacity of ultra-long submarine systems by optimizing the channel power allocation in each spatial dimension. Our models account for amplifier physics, Kerr nonlinearity, and power feed limitations. Modeling amplifier physics is paramount to understanding the effects of energy limitations on amplification bandwidth, noise, and optical power, which intimately govern the system capacity. The main benefit of the channel power optimization is to allow the system to operate over a wider amplification bandwidth by appropriately adjusting the channel powers. Given that capacity scales linearly with dimensions (frequency or space) and only logarithmically with power, the optimization will favor power allocations that maximize the useful amplification bandwidth, i.e., bandwidth over which the amplifier gain is larger than the span attenuation. Interestingly, the optimization does not necessarily make the amplifiers exhibit higher power conversion efficiency. We show that this optimization improves the capacity by 70% when compared to the theoretical capacity of a recently proposed systems. Our optimization also provides new insights that challenge long-standing assumptions made in designing and analyzing long-haul submarine systems. We show that the optimal number of spatial dimensions can be as large as tens of spatial dimensions in each direction, in contrast with today's systems that typically operate with only eight pairs of fibers. Nonetheless, as the number of spatial dimensions grows, the improvement in capacity diminishes. For instance, we showed that 80% of the cable maximum capacity can be achieved with half the number of dimensions. When the number of spatial dimensions is large, Kerr nonlinearity is negligible. However, systems subject to practical limitations such as cost and size may need to operate with reduced number of dimensions, in which case Kerr nonlinearity may be non-negligible. In addition to demonstrating the benefits of our proposed optimization experimentally, future work should consider the possibility of using different fibers for long-haul transmission such as MMFs or uncoupled or coupled core MCFs. To become serious contenders MCFs and MMFs need to offer several technical and economical advantages over simply using multiple SMFs. First and foremost, fibers for long-haul transmission must exhibit low loss. This will likely restrict the design of MCFs and MMFs to silica-core fibers, where the attenuation coefficient is as low as 0.16 dB/km. Second, Kerr nonlinearity is smaller in coupled core MCFs and MMFs owing to their large effective area, even when compared to large-effective area SMFs. However, as discussed in Chapter 5, energy constraints favor transmission employing tens of spatial dimensions (modes, cores or fibers) with less power in each dimension. As a result, if practical systems can operate with the optimal number of spatial dimensions, Kerr nonlinearity will become a less important issue. In this scenario, the motivation for coupled core MCFs or MMFs over multiple large-effective area SMFs becomes less apparent. Their higher effective area (lower Kerr nonlinearity) will be less critical, but mode coupling will inevitably require costly, and perhaps impractical, multiple-input multiple-output signal processing at the receiver in order to untangle the modes. Another important consideration is the electrical power efficiency of optical amplification. In SMF amplifiers, the conversion of optical pump power into signal output power is close to the fundamental limit of 63% for amplifiers pumped near 980 nm. However, the plug power to optical output power efficiency in SMF amplifiers is only 1.5-5%. This poor performance is, among other factors, limited by the pump laser efficiency, which for single-mode lasers is only about 20%. Moreover, each amplifier is pumped by two pump lasers for redundancy. MCFs and MMFs may make optical amplification of many spatial dimensions more power and cost efficient by leveraging new pumping schemes such as cladding pump, which require fewer pump lasers operating at larger output power. The pump-to-output optical power conversion in these amplifiers will not be superior to SMF amplifiers, as the overlap between the pump mode and the doped cores is smaller than end-pumped SMF amplifiers. However, they potentially can offer higher plug-to-optical power efficiency as they require fewer multi-mode pump lasers, which have efficiency of 46% It is also necessary to compute the gain gradient with respect to the EDF length. where P is the launch power into the fiber at each channel, so that Pk = P k e α SMF,k L , (A. * 6 bits for ACO-OFDM * At 90% of breakdown voltage. 1 shows typical values of responsitivity, impact ionization factor k A , dark current, lowgain bandwidth and GBP, and structures and materials for published APDs. Fig 3.2 shows a few examples of APD structures. link, the receiver sensitivity is improved by about 8 dB and 6 dB for SOA-and APD-based CWDM receivers respectively with equally spaced levels. The improvement is less significant for LAN-WDM receivers as these systems experience less dispersion. For longer link lengths, however, modulator chirp and CD cause severe nonlinear distortion that cannot be compensated by a LE. DSP is a mature technology in long-haul systems, but it may be currently unsuitable for data center links. Table : Update equations using CMA or LMS algorithm for the simplified polarization demultiplexer. 2 × 2 MIMO equalizer can compensate for it. Moreover, if the skew between the two polarizations is much smaller than the sampling absolute value notation in (5.17) means that |H| is obtained by replacing the eigenvalues of H with their absolute values. from our optimization for EDFAs pumped with 60 mW. The resulting achievable spectral efficiency per channel is, on average, 4.8 bit/s/Hz, yielding a maximum rate of about 13 Tb/s per core. This is indicated by the red dot in Fig. k ∂G k ∂L s (G k -A) log 2 (1 + SNR k ), (