Solvents are an essential element in the production and processing of two-dimensional (2D) materials. For example, the liquid phase exfoliation of layered materials requires a solvent to prevent the resulting monolayers from re-aggregating, while solutions of functional atoms and molecules are routinely used to modify the properties of the layers. It is generally assumed that these solvents do not interact strongly with the layer and so their effects can be neglected. Yet experimental evidence has suggested that explicit atomic-scale interactions between the solvent and layered material may play a crucial role in exfoliation and cause unintended electronic changes in the layer. Little is known about the precise nature of the interaction between the solvent molecules and the 2D layer. Here, we use density functional theory calculations to determine the adsorption configuration and binding energy of a variety of common solvent molecules, both polar and non-polar, on two of the most popular 2D materials, namely graphene and MoS 2 . We show that these molecules are physisorbed on the surface with negligible charge transferred between them. We find that the adsorption strength of the different molecules is independent of the polar nature of the solvent. However, we show the molecules induce a significant charge rearrangement at the interface after adsorption as a result of polar bonds in the molecule. Two dimensional (2D) layered materials have attracted considerable attention since the discovery of graphene, due to their potential for advanced technological applications. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed using the projected augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented the vasp code. The graphene (MoS 2 ) Brillouin zone is sampled with a 5 × 5 × 1 (3 × 3 × 1) Monkhorst-Pack mesh The determination of charge transfer depends sensitively on how the charge density is assigned to each atom. Here, we use both the Density Derived Electrostatic and Chemical (DDEC) net atomic charges 42 scheme as implemented in the chargemol program and the Bader partitioning scheme. For multi-atom adsorbents, such as the molecules considered here, there is a large phase space of possible adsorption configurations. In order to find the lowest energy binding site, we follow a process similar to Åkesson et al., The following workflow is used to determine the ground state binding configuration: The individual components, i.e., the molecule and the 2D layered material, are first relaxed to determine their isolated structures. A uniform grid is then defined at a typical binding height (3.5 Å) above the surface of each material, as shown in Fig. Due to the low adsorption concentration considered here, each molecule will minimize its total energy by maximising its total area of overlap with the surface, i.e., planar molecules adsorb flat against the substrate. The total energy of each of these configurations, without relaxation, is calculated. The entire procedure is then repeated for a sub-set of these configurations at a lower height in steps of 0.25 Å until the lowest energy adsorption height is found. At this stage, a structural optimization of all structures at local minima with total energies within 0.05 eV of the global minimum is performed. The configuratation with the lowest total energy after this structural optimization is the ground state configuration. The solvent molecules are found to adsorb at an average binding height of 3.35 Å from the surface of both graphene and MoS 2 . The binding heights are shown in Fig. The carbon atoms in cyclopentanone are sp 3 hybridized with the exception of that bonded to oxygen, which is sp 2 hybridized. The three carbon atoms bonded to hydrogen atoms which point towards the graphene layer are located above hollow sites. The carbon atom bonded to a hydrogen atom which points away from the graphene layer is adsorbed above a carbon top site. The remaining electropositive carbon atom is adsorbed on a graphene top site, while the electronegative oxygen atom is located close to a graphene bridge site. Similarly, the oxygen atom in 2-propanol adsorbs close to a bridge site and all sp 3 hybridized carbon atoms avoid the top sites. It maximizes its surface contact area by adsorbing such that the C-O bond is approximately parallel to the graphene layer. For the case of NMP, the electronegative oxygen and nitrogen atoms dictate the orientation of adsorption by adsorbing close to bridge sites. Fixing the adsorption position of these two atoms determines the orientation of the rest of the molecule. Finally, for the case of chloroform, each of the chlorine atoms adsorbs close to a hollow site, with the hydrogen pointing away from the layer in a so-called "H-up" configuration. Note that this is a different adsorption configuration to that found by Åkesson et al. due to the more restrictive configuration space considered in that work. The geometrically optimized configurations of the molecules adsorbed on MoS 2 are shown in the bottom panel of Fig. The binding energy between the layered material and the adsorbed solvent molecule is defined as: where E layer is the total energy of the clean monolayer, E mol is the total energy of the isolated molecule and E mol+layer is the total energy of the combined system. The binding energies of each solvent molecule adsorbed on both graphene and MoS 2 are shown in Fig. The magnitude of total charge transfer between the molecules and both graphene and MoS 2 is no more than 0.11e -per molecule as determined by both the Bader and the DDEC methods. In some cases, these two methods do not agree on the direction of the charge transfer. Given the difficulties in partitioning space in order to assign charge to the molecule or substrate, this magnitude of the charge transfer may be considered essentially zero. Fig. Notwithstanding the negligible charge transfer involved, significant charge reorganization occurs on both the molecule and the 2D layer as as result of their interaction. To visualize this, we show in Fig. For the case of toluene, the small net molecular dipole points towards the methyl group. As a result, a small charge accumulation (red) is evident beneath the methyl group and a charge depletion (blue) occurs beneath the carbon ring. This dependence of the charge rearrangement on the molecular dipole is particularly evident for molecules with an electronegative oxygen atom, such as benzaldehyde, cyclopentanone and NMP. In these cases, charge depletion occurs beneath the oxygen atom, whereas there is charge accumulation beneath the carbon ring. This is true for those molecules adsorbed on both graphene and MoS 2 . Similarly, in 2-propanol the net dipole points away from the oxygen atom. However, the response of the 2D layer to 2-propanol depends on the out-of-plane rotation of the molecule. For the case of graphene, the molecule is adsorbed with the hydrogen atom, which is bound to the oxygen atom, pointing towards the surface. This hydrogen atom has a partial positive charge, and so results in charge accumulation in the layer directly beneath it. When adsorbed on MoS 2 , that hydrogen atom points away from the surface. The charge depletion in the sulfur atoms of the substrate is then as a result of the partial negative charge on the oxygen atom. Finally, for the case of chloroform adsorption, the net dipole is perpendicular to the layers so that the changes in charge density around the molecule are symmetric. As the chlorine atoms have partial negative charges, charge depletion is evident directly beneath them, whereas there is a charge accumulation beneath the hydrogen atom which adsorbs on top of the metal atom. We have determined the adsorption configuration of six common solvent molecules on the basal plane of both graphene and MoS 2 using first-principles calculations which take van der Waal interactions into account. The calculated binding energies, adsorption heights and charge transfer all show that the solvent molecules are physisorbed on graphene and MoS 2 , with only minor variations in binding height and binding energy between the different molecules and on the two different monolayers. For those molecules which contain a carbon ring, the lowest energy adsorption configuration on graphene is one in which a Bernal-like stacking arrangement of the carbon atoms is achieved. Non-planar molecules which have hydrogen atoms pointing towards the surface adsorb such that those atoms are located in the hollow site of the substrate lattice. We find that the orientation of both 2-propanol and chloroform are rotated by 180 • when comparing adsorption on graphene and MoS 2 . Finally, despite negligible charge transfer between the solvent and monolayers, there is a significant charge rearrangement within the substrate layers in response to the partial charges on the atoms in the molecules, similar to the creation of an image charge in metals.