In this paper, a dual polarized, dual band, low profile, embedded bias network, and compact tunable varactor band pass frequency selective surface (FSS) is designed with a wide tuning range. The proposed FSS is composed of two metallic layers printed on both sides of the substrate, where the top side has two cross strips with different dimensions encircled with high pass grids, whereas the bottom side includes a proper bias network. The loaded varactors between the grids and the cross strips with a designed bias network achieve two independent tunable pass bands. Moreover, an equivalent circuit of the FSS is extracted, which show good agreement with the full wave simulation results. The proposed FSS can operate from 2.28 GHz to 4.66 GHz and from 5.44 GHz to 11.3 GHz by proper tuning of the varactors loaded in the large and small cross strips. The tunable range of the low and high pass bands are about 70% with respect to the center frequency of each pass band. The electrical dimensions of the proposed FSS are about 0.05k Â 0.05k, where k is the free space wavelength at a lower pass band (2.28 GHz). Moreover, the proposed FSS works properly up to 60 incident angles. Frequency selective surfaces (FSSs) can be considered as spatial microwave filters with three-dimensional frequency transfer functions made of periodic unit cells, which can be used in absorbers, The electric or magnetic tuning structures (varactors and the ferrite substrate) are usually used in agile tune FSSs. To the best of authors' knowledge, the only reported dual band electronically tunable FSS has been proposed in Ref. 16 with small dependence on the pass bands and 55% tuning range. This structure includes two resonators on both sides of the substrate to achieve compact dimensions. However, this FSS response is unstable over the incident angles. In this paper, a new dual pass band frequency selective surface is designed which consists of two metallic layers (FSS unit cells and a bias network) printed on both faces of one thin dielectric substrate. The two groups of varactor diodes are used in these FSS unit cells to tune the pass bands, independently. A proper embedded bias network is proposed which can control the pass bands, independently. The proposed FSS structure operates from 2.28 GHz to 4.66 GHz and from 5.44 GHz to 11.3 GHz band with 70% tuning range and a stable wide response up to 60 incident angles. Moreover, an equivalent circuit model is extracted for the proposed FSS which shows good agreement with the full wave simulation ones. The electrical dimensions of this a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: sedighy@iust.ac.ir. compact FSS are about 0.05k Â 0.05k, where k is the free space wavelength at a lower pass band (2.28 GHz). The paper outline is as follows: the basic design procedure and the unit cell design are discussed in Sec. II. Moreover, the bias network of this structure and the equivalent circuit model are also presented in this section. The simulation and analysis of the proposed FSS is considered in Sec. III. The effect of the bias network and the incident angle in the FSS transmission response is also discussed in this section. The band pass response can be basically designed with two different FSS unit cells, "cross with high pass grid" and "complementary of cross". In the "cross with high pass grid" shown in Fig. The dimensions of these unit cells are similar as L Â L 1⁄4 20 mm Â 20 mm, while the length and the width of the cross strips (slots) are Ls 1⁄4 18.4 mm and W 1⁄4 2.9 mm, respectively. Moreover, the gap considered has g 1⁄4 0.3 mm and w g 1⁄4 0.5 mm and the copper thickness is 0.018 mm. These unit cells are printed on a RO4350B dielectric substrate with 0.422 mm thickness and e r 1⁄4 3.48. Notice that the manufacturing tolerance of this substrate is about 38 lm, which does not affect the designed FSS performance. The simulation results of "complementary of cross" and "cross with high pass grid" unit cells are compared in Fig. The electric field distribution of the "cross with high pass grid" unit cell is shown in Fig. To achieve a tunable dual band FSS unit cell, two "cross with high pass grid" unit cells with dimensions can be used as shown in Fig. To deal with these problems, a new combination of these two unit cell is proposed as depicted in Fig. The bias network is composed of two independent DC networks, the first one is designed to control the low pass varactors, while the second one is designed to control the high pass ones. The low pass bias network is controlled by a single DC voltage line printed on the top side of the network which is connected to the low pass strips in the columns through vias to the top layer as depicted in Fig. An equivalent circuit model of the designed FSS without a bias network is presented in Fig. The proposed FSS is designed to work at two independent bands printed on a Rogers 4350B with 0.422 mm thickness and a copper thickness of 0.018 mm. The geometric dimensions of the structure are: D with and without the bias network are compared in Fig. The pass band of the proposed FSS is independently tunable by using suitable varactors. Figure To prove the equivalent circuit proposed in Sec. II, the full wave simulation results of the proposed unit cell and its corresponding circuit are compared in Fig. , and are performed using Advanced Designed System (ADS) software. The incident wave is considered normal to the FSS with TE polarization, also. As it is clear, there is good agreement between the full wave and circuit model results which prove the proposed model, properly. The sensitivity of the proposed FSS transmission response to the oblique incidences is evaluated for both TE and TM polarized waves. The simulation results are depicted in Fig. A varactor tunable dual polarized, low profile, dual band and compact FSS has been designed, where its pass bands can be tuned independent of each other. The varactor bias network was designed to provide independent band tuning capability without any undesired effect on the FSS operation. An equivalent circuit has been extracted for the proposed FSS, which showed good agreement with the full wave simulation. The tunable range of low and high pass bands is about 70% with respect to the center frequency of each pass band. Moreover, this FSS depicted stable pass band transmission responses for the incident angles up to 60 at both polarizations. Rahmani-Shams et al. J. Appl. Phys. 123, 235301 (2018) J. Appl. Phys. 123, 235301 (2018)