We present a complete characterization at the nanoscale of the growth and structure of singlelayer tungsten disulfide (WS 2 ) epitaxially grown on Au(111). Following the growth process in real time with fast x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, we obtain a singly-oriented layer by choosing the proper W evaporation rate and substrate temperature during the growth. Information about the morphology, size and layer stacking of the WS 2 layer were achieved by employing x-ray photoelectron diffraction and low-energy electron microscopy. The strong spin splitting in the valence band of WS 2 coupled with the single-orientation character of the layer make this material the ideal candidate for the exploitation of the spin and valley degrees of freedom. Only a short time after the successful creation of graphene by mechanical exfoliation The technological exploitation of the SL TMDCs will benefit from production by bottomup growth, rather than exfoliation. Chemical vapor deposition and molecular beam epitaxy appear to be promising approaches to obtain a high degree of orientation and a closed layer There has been recent progress in the growth of single orientation two-dimensional materials, for example for SL BN on Ir(111) XPD measurements were able to conclusively prove that SL WS 2 can grow with a single orientation and determine the relative orientation of SL WS 2 with respect to the Au(111) substrate. Growth and characterization experiments were carried out at the SuperESCA beamline Each XPD pattern was measured by collecting XPS spectra for more than 1000 different polar (θ) and azimuthal (φ) angles, as defined in the diagram in Figure where I 0 (θ) is the average intensity for each azimuthal scan at polar angle θ. The structural determination was performed by comparing measured XPD patterns to multiple scattering simulations for a trial structure. Such patterns were simulated using the program package for Electron Diffraction in Atomic Clusters (EDAC) where χ sim,i and χ exp,i are the simulated and the experimental modulation functions for each emission angle i. The estimation of the accuracy of the quantities derived by means of Rfactor analysis, i.e. lattice constant, layer thickness and percentage of mirror domains, was deduced from the R-factor confidence interval defined as where R min is the minimum R-factor value and N is the number of well-resolved peaks in the XPD pattern (N ∼ 350). The LEED experiments were carried out using a commercial VG instrument installed at the experimental chamber of the SuperESCA beamline. LEEM data were recorded using an ELMITEC LEEM III instrument at the University of Bremen. A sample was prepared at the SuperESCA beamline, transferred to Bremen through air and then annealed to 670 K after inserting it in the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chamber. As a diffraction based method, LEEM can access either real space (imaging mode) or reciprocal space (diffraction mode) providing information on both surface morphology and atomic structure. We have characterized SL WS 2 on Au(111) prepared according to two distinct growth procedures, hereinafter labeled as GR1, that led to the growth of a mixture of two mirror domains, and GR2, which resulted in the growth of SL WS 2 with a single orientation. In both growth methods, tungsten was dosed on Au(111) from a hot W filament in a background pressure of H 2 S. For GR1, the substrate temperature was 873 K and the W deposition rate, measured by means of a quartz microbalance, was 7.5 × 10 -3 ML/min, with 1 ML corresponding to the surface atomic density of the Au(111) surface. The H 2 S pressure was 1×10 -6 mbar. The growth conditions for GR1 are comparable to those commonly employed in the growth of WS 2 on noble metal substrates High-resolution W 4f core-level spectra measured after GR1 and GR2 are shown in Figure with its spin-orbit doublet separated by 2.14 eV. The line-shape parameters used for the spectral deconvolution are given in Supplementary Material. In Figure Two main components are visible in each of the spin-orbit peaks, indicated in light (S 2p 3/2 BE=162.45 eV) and dark (S 2p 3/2 BE=162.59 eV) orange: the latter has been assigned to S atoms from the 'bottom' (close to the Au(111) surface) while the former stems from the 'top' atoms in the S-W-S sandwich arrangement of WS 2 . This interpretation follows the assignments for SL MoS 2 prepared on Au(111) Besides these two components we observed several extra peaks at lower binding energy for GR1 , which are originating from species other than WS 2 . On the contrary, the spectrum acquired on GR2 shows the spectral components associated with top and bottom sulfur only, indicating a better quality of the grown layer. In XPD, photoemission intensity modulations arise from the interference between the component of the photoelectron wave field that reaches the detector directly from the emitting atom and the components scattered by atoms surrounding the emitter. This makes XPD very sensitive to the local environment of the emitter We acquired XPD patterns from the W 4f 7/2 core level on the layer produced with GR2 using a photon energy hν = 170 eV (photoelectron kinetic energy, KE∼137 eV), at which both forward and backward scattering contributions are significant, and at hν = 360 eV (KE∼326 eV), enhancing the forward scattering and suppressing the backscattering The experimental XPD patterns (color sector in Figure where I 0 is the contribution to the XPD pattern from the main orientation (Or1) and I mir is the contribution from the mirror orientation (Or2), according to the models shown in topright of Figure The three-fold symmetry of the simulated patterns for a single orientation matches the experimental data, which is a direct experimental indication of a dominant domain orienta- tion and hints at a minor contribution from the mirror orientation. However, a conclusive determination of the layer orientation was achieved only through the R-factor analysis, as shown in the following. For the simulations of the photoemission intensity by multiple scattering calculations, the values for layer thickness (i.e. the vertical S-S distance), the lattice constant and the fraction of mirror domains in the SL, assuming the 1H phase, were changed independently, running an R-factor optimization in the three-dimensional parameter space, using the data sets of both Figure A similar analysis on the XPD patterns from S 2p 3/2 and W 4f 7/2 was performed assuming a octahedral (1T) polytype for the WS 2 SL. The simulations of the XPD patterns were performed using the same lattice constant and layer thickness determined earlier for the 1H polytype. The analysis returned higher values of the R-factor for the 1T phase, ruling then out this structure. The details of this analysis are reported in the Supplementary Material. To understand whether also GR1 leads to a singly-oriented SL WS 2 , we carried out an Rfactor analysis simulating XPD patterns with a different percentage of mirror domains and compared them with the experimental pattern obtained from the W 4f 7/2 peak belonging to WS 2 acquired on GR1 (Figure It is interesting to ask what physical mechanisms are responsible for the growth of the single orientation. The only element breaking the symmetry is the Au(111) substrate. While the first Au layer has a six-fold symmetry, considering deeper layers lowers the symmetry to three-fold, providing a suitable template for the growth of singly-oriented WS 2 . However, this feature can only be exploited by an adequate choice of the growth parameters, in particular the W deposition rate, the substrate temperature and the H 2 S partial pressure. Optimizing these does not only improve the quality of the resulting SL WS 2 but drives the formation of a single domain orientation. This could be favorable to achieve in GR2 because a higher temperature allows an enhanced surface diffusion of W atoms on the Au substrate while a lower W deposition rate, together with a higher H 2 S background pressure, avoids the formation of partially sulfided species, as seen by XPS. Having established that GR2 results in the growth of a single domain orientation, we used the XPD pattern from the W 4f 7/2 core-level component for GR2 to determine the orientation of the WS 2 layer with respect to the Au(111) substrate. In order to do this, we determined the orientation of the Au(111) substrate by measuring an XPD pattern stemming from the bulk component of Au 4f 7/2 on the clean Au sample, i.e. before the deposition of WS 2 . Figure show up bright at the chosen electron energy of 31 eV. Tuning the energy to 40 eV highlights other WS 2 islands, as can be seen in Figure In order to confirm the structural origin of these differences, we show calculated I(V ) curves (dashed lines in Figure From an overall quantitative evaluation of the available DF images, we derive a fraction of less than 5% of the surface being covered by the minority domains, in agreement with the results of the R-factor analysis performed for the XPD experiments. Moreover, these mirror domains are not uniformly distributed on the surface but rather were only found near surface defects, such as scratches or contaminations. This outcome sets the LEEM as an ideal technique to investigate the growth and features of TMDCs at the nanoscale, helping to understand the role of the deposition parameters and the growth mechanism from a microscopic point of view. In summary, we have reported the characterization of the growth and structural features of WS 2 single layers on Au(111). We found that a low W deposition rate, a high partial pressure of H 2 S and a high substrate temperature during the growth yield a unique crystalline orientation of SL WS 2 , i.e. suppressing the presence of any detrimental mirror domains. Moreover, we have determined the layer stacking of WS 2 on the Au(111) substrate and obtained information about the morphology and size of the domains, highlighting the differences due to the growth conditions in the structure of the final layer. Earlier studies about the growth of epitaxial SL WS 2 did rarely explore in quantitative detail the domain morphology and orientation. However, there have been indications of a domain mixture different from 50% for WS 2 on Ag(111), as circular dichroism in the excitation of a valley polarization was observed for this system 