A magnetic Hopfion is a three-dimensional topological soliton that consists of a closed loop of a twisted magnetic Skyrmion string. The results of numerical simulations are presented that demonstrate the existence of a stable Hopfion in a nanocylinder of a chiral magnet and an explicit analytic expression is shown to provide a reasonable approximation to the numerically computed Hopfion. A mechanism is suggested to create the Hopfion from a target Skyrmion by introducing an interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Topological solitons are smooth field configurations that impersonate particles Hopfions were first studied in relativistic field theories Naively, it is tempting to conclude that the results on Hopfions in chiral liquid crystals automatically transfer to the setting of chiral magnets, with a simple change of scale from the micrometer to the nanometer. This conclusion is based on the fact that the Frank energy includes terms describing the splay, twist and bend of the liquid crystal, and if these are given equal weight (known as the one-constant approximation) then the expression for the energy of the chiral liquid crystal exactly reproduces that of a chiral magnet, with an appropriate identification of constants. However, this simple argument contains a fatal flaw. The oneconstant approximation is not a good description of the regime used to obtain Hopfions. The weighting of the twist is lower than the other terms and this allows perpendicular anchoring conditions on the surface of a thin film to induce a stable uniform ground state in which to immerse the Hopfion, without the need for lateral confinement. In the case of a chiral magnet, the increased contribution of the twist destroys a uniform ground state, even in the presence of perpendicular anchoring conditions on the surface of a thin film. Unfortunately, this means that the Hopfion, as a localized disturbance embedded within a uniform state, does not survive the relocation from a liquid crystal host to a chiral magnetic host. Here, the results of numerical simulations are presented that demonstrate a resolution of this problem. It is shown that a Hopfion can exist in a nanocylinder of a chiral magnet with dimensions similar to those used in recent experiments on target Skyrmions in the chiral magnet FeGe Within the standard formalism of micromagnetics, the direction of the local magnetization is given by a three-component unit vector m = (m 1 , m 2 , m 3 ), defined throughout the material. The energy density for a chiral magnet in an external magnetic field H = (0, 0, H) is given by where A and D are the exchange and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya constants, with the constant M s being the saturation magnetization. This system has a natural length scale, given by the helical period L = 4πA/D. For experiments in FeGe nanocylinders where n is the unit outward normal to the surface. The geometry of the chiral magnet sample is taken to be a cylinder with dimensions designed to be favourable to supporting a stable Hopfion. Explicitly, the height of the cylinder is set to the helical period L and the diameter is equal to 3L. Coordinates are used in which the axis of the cylinder is aligned with the z-axis, so in terms of cylindrical coordinates (ρ, θ, z) the sample is given by 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 3L/2 and -L/2 ≤ z ≤ L/2. The height of the cylinder is motivated by attempts to suppress helical and cone phases and is familiar from studies on thin films. To enhance lateral confinement, the diameter of the cylinder is close to the smallest value that supports a Hopfion (found by performing numerical simulations with a range of diameters). Motivated by the results on chiral ferromagnetic liquid crystal colloids in thin films For simplicity, it is assumed that K is large enough that the approximation m = e 3 is reasonable at the ends of the cylinder z = ±L/2. Even in this strong boundary anisotropy regime, the fully polarized uniform ferromagnetic state m = e 3 is unstable, and this is still true in the thin film limit where the diameter of the cylinder is taken to be large, so that the lateral boundaries that yield an edge twist can be ignored. As mentioned earlier, this is an important difference between the liquid crystal and magnetic systems. By introducing an external magnetic field near the critical value H c , the ferromagnetic uniform ground state can be recovered but it turns out that a Hopfion is destroyed at magnetic fields well below this value, so this is not a fruitful approach. However, confinement within cylinders of the dimensions introduced above does allow stable Hopfions, as the results in the next section demonstrate. Before presenting the numerical results, the topology of magnetic Skyrmions and Hopfions for smooth magnetizations m ∈ S 2 will be briefly reviewed, using standard results from homotopy theory The three-dimensional topology of a Hopfion is a generalization of the two-dimensional topology of the Skyrmion just described. In this case the topology of a Hopfion is revealed by finding a three-dimensional region V 3 in the material that is homeomorphic to a closed ball, with m taking the same value at all points on the boundary ∂V 3 of this region. Let V 3 denote V 3 with all points on the boundary ∂V 3 identified, then this has the topology of S 3 and the magnetization can be considered as a map m : V 3 → S 2 . These maps are classified by elements of the homotopy group π 3 (S 2 ) = Z, that counts the number of Hopfions inside V 3 and is known as the Hopf charge. A single Hopfion has Hopf charge equal to one and this time the integer counts a linking number of magnetization field lines, rather than a winding number. In detail, consider any fixed value m (I) of the magnetization, then generically the points in V 3 where m takes the value m (I) will form a closed curve C (I) . Consider any second fixed value m (II) , distinct from the first, and its associated closed curve C (II) . For a single Hopfion the curves C (I) and C (II) will be linked exactly once. Typically V 3 is chosen so that m = e 3 on ∂V 3 and then the closed curve inside V 3 where m = -e 3 is defined to be the core of the Hopfion. This core may be interpreted as a closed loop of a twisted Skyrmion string, where the twist produces exactly one full rotation to generate the unit linking number between any two closed curves along which the magnetization remains constant To numerically compute a Hopfion in a cylindrical chiral magnet the energy (2.1) is minimized using a standard gradient flow algorithm, which is similar to strongly damped Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert evolution. Cylindrical coordinates are used in space as these more conveniently match to the geometry of the cylinder than Cartesian coordinates. The simulation lattice contains 106 × 64 × 71 grid points in the ρ, θ, z directions and spatial derivatives are evaluated using second order finite difference approximations. For a cylinder of the chiral magnet FeGe of height L and diameter 3L, with L = 70 nm, this corresponds to a lattice spacing of 1 nm in both the radial and z directions. Although cylindrical coordinates are employed, no assumptions are made regarding the angular dependence of the magnetization, so the simulations are fully three-dimensional and are not restricted to configurations with any given symmetry. The boundary conditions for the simulations are those described in the previous section, namely m = e 3 at z = ±L/2 and the free boundary condition (2.2) at ρ = 3L/2. A variety of initial conditions yield the same final Hopfion solution after gradient flow relaxation. For example, the z-independent initial condition m = (sin(2πρ/L) sin θ, -sin(2πρ/L) cos θ, cos(2πρ/L)) (3.1) can be used in the interior of the cylinder. The initial condition is not required to satisfy the boundary conditions because these are imposed directly on the cylinder surfaces. Any initial jump in the magnetization at the boundary is not an issue for the numerical simulations because gradient flow rapidly reduces this boundary mismatch. The numerically computed Hopfion is displayed in Fig. These images confirm the interpretation of the Hopfion core as a twisted Skyrmion string. In particular, the cross-section through the plane y = 0 clearly shows the characteristic winding of a Skyrmion in the region x > 0, as the Skyrmion string moves into the plane. The Skyrmion string returns to this plane in the region x < 0, but this time moving out of the plane so that it appears as an anti-Skyrmion in this cross-section. The isosurface where m 3 = -0.7 is presented in Fig. then the approximation is given by In Fig. The images in Fig. The transformation of a target Skyrmion into a Hopfion is demonstrated in the simulation presented in Fig. Numerical simulations support the existence of a stable Hopfion in a nanocylinder of a chiral magnet such as FeGe in the presence of an interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy at the ends of the nanocylinder. Target Skyrmions have already been obtained experimentally in similar nanocylinders without the interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and computations predict that introducing the anisotropy will transform the target Skyrmion into a Hopfion, thus providing a viable experimental procedure for Hopfion creation. Given the potential technological applications of magnetic Skyrmions it seems likely that there may be a role to play for their Hopfion relatives that could exploit the fully three-dimensional nature of these topological solitons. Future studies are required to fully investigate the properties of Hopfions in chiral magnets, for example by considering their dynamical properties under varying magnetic fields and their response to electric currents. For simplicity, it has been assumed that at the ends of the cylinder the uniaxial anisotropy constant at the interface is large enough that the approximation m = e 3 is reasonable. However, this approximation is not necessary and applying the boundary condition (2.3) directly yields similar results if K is sufficiently large, of the order of D, which is realistic for physical material parameters. Finally, the demagnetization energy has been neglected in this study but the expectation is that this should only improve the stability of the Hopfion, in a similar way to the situation for target Skyrmions Note added: During the completion of this work two preprints 