Besides graphite, diamond, graphene, carbon nanotubes, and fullerenes A new type of carbon chains, called carbyne The possibility of the realization of stable carbynes in labs stimulates considerable theoretical interest and investigations. Some interesting features of carbynes have been revealed and discussed recently from the theoretical side, e.g., it could be stronger, stiffer and more exotic than other known materials First-principles calculations are performed with plane-wave ultrasoft pseudopotential by means of GGA with PW91 functional as implemented in the CASTEP code (Cambridge Sequential Total Energy Package) The plane-wave cut-off energy is 380eV, and the Brillouin-zone integration is performed over the 3×3×10 grid sizes using the Monkorst-Pack method for structure optimization. This set of parameters assures the total energy convergence of 5.0×10 - 6 eV/atom, the maximum force of 0.01eV/Å, the maximum stress of 0.02 GPa and the maximum displacement of 5.0×10 -4 Å. In the following sections, we perform calculations on carbynes after or without having optimized the geometry structure by the GGA-PW91. Crystal binding energy W is defined as the energy difference (per atom) between the total energy E 0 when the crystalline is stable for N atoms, and the total energy of the N atoms E N when they are in a free state, i.e., W= (E N -E 0 )/N. For covalent crystals, when the crystal binding energy is larger, the crystal will be more stable, usually with higher melting-point and hardness. The energy of a free carbon atom is calculated to be -147.017951eV. For cumulene, E N is given by the total energy of 2 free carbon atoms, while E 0 for 2 carbon atoms is estimated to be -308.375891eV. Thus, the crystal binding energy reads W=[(-147.017951)×2- (-308.375891)]/2=7.1699945eV. On the other hand, for polyyne E 0 =-308.378995eV, leading to W=7.1715465eV. The values of W are consistent with previously reported values of W=6.99~8.19eV From the crystal binding energy, we conclude that both cumulene and polyyne can be stable against free carbons. Comparatively, polyyne is more stable than cumulene with the gain of 1.55 meV per atom. This is consistent with the fact that the unit structure of cumulene (=C=C=) is known to undergo a Peierls transition into that of polyyne (-C≡C-) The stability of carbynes can be further examined by comparing the formation energy E f with those of other carbon allotropes, i.e., diamond and graphite. The total energy of diamond and graphite for two carbon atoms are calculated to be -309.873429eV and -310.129136eV, respectively. We can see that they are lower than E f for both cumulene and polyyne, which underlines the difficulty of synthesizing carbynes from diamond or graphite. The significant energy difference also indicates a possible instability of carbynes at room temperatures. The most basic mechanical property of the carbyne chain is its tensile stiffness, which is defined as (1) where a is the unit cell length (2.565 Å), E is the strain energy per two C atoms, and ε is the strain. As shown in Fig. Another mechanical property is the bond stiffness, which describes the change of the bond length between neighboring C atoms (d) with respect to an applied pressure (P). Taking the bond length at ambient pressure P 0 to be d 0 , we expand the relative bond length (d/d 0 ) up to second order of P, ⁄ and then determine the coefficients by fitting the calculated d/d 0 to the polynomial. The chemical bond stiffness K is given by The above data shows that cumulene is very stiff even among the carbon materials, e.g., the bulk modulus of diamond is about 600GPa, and the value of cumulene, on the other hand, more than 1500GPa. as a function of hydrostatic pressure for cumulene. The relation between stress and strain in cumulene can be studied from two aspects, i.e., either by studying the response of the bond length to different loads applied to the chain (as in Fig. In this subsection, we move to the discussion of the mechanical properties of polyyne. We first calculate the tensile and bond stiffness of polyyne using the same method as in cumulene. The results for the dependence of the total energy and band gap on the strain are shown in Fig. We may conclude that cumulene is a conductor while polyyne is a semiconductor. Besides, from the point of view of the total energy, cumulene seems to be more stable than polyyne while keeping the cell size unchangeable. If the cell size is optimized, polyyne would be more stable than cumulene, as narrated in "crystal binding energy and formation energy of carbyne ". A similar calculation starting from the side of cumulene without geometry optimization can also be performed. The result shows little quantitative difference compared with the case of polynne (see Fig. In this section, we discuss the impact of the adopting supercell number on the . In more detail, at N=5, the final energy reaches its global minimum, while at the same time, the band gap and the bulk modulus reach their maximums. At N=4, the situation is reversed. We can conclude that the system is the most stable when the supercell number N=5. The results for the effect of the supercell number in cumulene after geometry optimization are summarized in Fig. and final energy (Fig. From Fig. The complex dielectric function ɛ contains a real part ɛ 1 and an imaginary part ɛ 2 . The imaginary part ɛ 2 , which is related to the real part of optical conductivity, can be calculated from the band structure directly by taking into account inter-band transitions, while the real part ɛ 1 can then be obtained by employing the Kramers-Kronig relations The low-energy part of the phonon dispersion of cumulene and its DOS obtained by GGA-PW91 are shown in Fig. Since each unit cell of cumulene contains two carbon atoms, there are six vibration modes including three acoustic and three optical ones. As shown in Fig. The band structure along high-symmetry points in the Brillouin zone and the DOS are shown in Fig. Fig. We calculate the mechanical, electronic band structure, optical and phonon properties of the two kinds of carbyne, i.e., cumulene and polyyne, by the first principles. The mechanical properties including the tensile stiffness, bond stiffness and Young's modulus show similar behaviors; while quantitatively, polyyne turns out to be more stable and harder than cumulene. The results on the electronic band structure show that cumulene is a conductor while polyyne is a semiconductor. The supercell calculation suggests that carbyne is the most stable when the supercell number N=5. The dielectric function of carbynes varied in different direction, which is consistent with the one dimensional nature of the carbon chains. The presence of the imaginary frequencies in the phonon dispersion of cumulene indicates that at room temperature and normal press, cumulene might be unstable.