Bilayer graphene twisted by a small angle shows a significant charge modulation away from neutrality, as the charge in the narrow bands near the Dirac point is mostly localized in a fraction of the Moiré unit cell. The resulting electrostatic potential leads to a filling dependent change in the low energy bands, of a magnitude comparable, or larger than the bandwidth. These modifications can be expressed in terms of new electron-electron interactions, which, when expressed in a local basis, describe electron assisted hopping terms. These interactions favor superconductivity at certain fillings. The discovery of strong repulsive interactions and superconductivity in twisted graphene bilayers In the following we consider the effect of the long-range Coulomb interaction on the bands nearest to the neutrality point, as function of their filling. The occupation of the low energy bands in a twisted bilayer graphene leads to inhomogeneous electrostatic potentials of order of magnitude e 2 /( L M ), where L M is the length of the Moiré lattice unit, and is the dielectric constant of the environment. We expect this interaction to be comparable, or larger, than the band splitting, and thus it will give rise to a significant distortion of the bands. We analyze the screening of the Coulomb interaction within the Hartree-Fock approximation. As this is a variational method, it can be reliably used to treat screening effects, even when the interaction energy is comparable to the kinetic and crystal field contributions. We find that the electrostatic potential due to the inhomogeneous charge distribution in the Moiré unit cell gives rise to significant distortions in the band. Using general properties of the Wannier functions which de- scribe this band Estimates of the electron-electron interactions. We evaluate electron-electron interactions in the low energy bands of a twisted Moiré bilayer with twist angle θ to leading powers in d/L M , where d ≈ 2.4 Å is the lattice unit of graphene, and L M = d/(2 sin(θ/2)) ≈ d/θ is the Moiré lattice unit. The charge distribution of the states in the bands near the neutrality point is mostly concentrated in regions with AA stacking. This inhomogeneous charge leads to electrostatic potentials of strength V Coulomb ∼ e 2 /( L M ). For an angle of the order θ ∼ 1 • , ≈ 4 and a Moiré pattern of wavelength L M ∼ 10 -20 nm, we obtain a Coulomb potential in the order of 50 meV. The overlapping π orbitals of the carbon atoms also generate an intra-atomic Hubbard interaction, U ∼ e 2 /d, which prevents double occupancy. This potential, when projected onto wavefunctions of extensions similar to L M , generates an effective interaction U eff ∼ (U N -2 M ) N M , where N M ≈ (L M /d) Band structure and charge distribution. For small twist angles the wavelength of the Moiré superlattice is much larger than the graphene unit cell. It therefore makes sense to analyze the band structure using the continuum approximation, see Refs. Hartree potential. The Hamiltonian of twisted bilayer graphene breaks electron-hole symmetry, and charge inhomogeneities can be expected, even at half filling. These fluctuations are expected to be small as, for low twist angles, the Moiré pattern can be decomposed into regions with AA, AB and BA stacking, which are locally neutral. In the following we neglect these charge inhomogeneities. The charge distribution which arises away from the neutrality point in inhomogeneous, and it is peaked in the AA regions, so that a change in the occupancy of these bands will lead to charge fluctuations with the periodicity of the Moiré unit cell, L M , as confirmed by numerical calculations described below. Fluctuations of the charge density and electrostatic potential are dominated by the first star of reciprocal lattice vectors, the six points with |G| = (4π)/( √ 3L M ). If we consider partially filled conduction bands, their contribution to the charge density can be parametrized by a dimensionless number, ρ G , a complex quantity which encodes the symmetric (real) and antisymmetric (imaginary) parts of the charge density. From the value of ρ G we can easily find the electrostatic potential in Fourier space, v G = V 0 = v Coulomb (G)ρ G , and v Coulomb (G) = (2πe 2 )/( |G|). The amplitude of the fluctuations of the potential in real space are given by V = (2πe 2 ρ G )/( Ω|G|), where Ω = L 2 M √ 3/2 is the area of the Moiré unit cell. We finally obtain V = (e 2 ρ G )/( L M ). In the following, we neglect the dependence of ρ G on sublattice and layer, as both vary over length scales of order L M . The value of ρ G depends on the extent of the wavefunctions in momentum space, and it is bounded by |ρ G | < 4, as it is a cross product of amplitudes times a spin-layer degeneracy factor 4, Here ρG is a a constant which takes into account the contribution to the total density from all the bands not included in the calculation. We fix its value by imposing an homogeneous state at charge neutrality, ρ G (n 0 ) = 0, where n 0 is the density at half filling. The coefficient a k+G is the amplitude that the wavefunction of band state k is represented by a Bloch state with momentum k + G, and a sum over sublattice and layer indices is omitted. The wavefunctions of the lowest bands in twisted bilayer graphene are delocalized in momentum space, and we find 0.4 |δρ G | 4. In all cases considered, Im(ρ G ) 0.1Re(ρ G ). This imaginary part arises from the small breaking of the symmetry between the AA and the AB and BA regions in the Hamiltonian We approximate the fully self consistent Hartree potential by describing it in terms of the six shortest reciprocal lattice vectors. Our calculations indicate that the next set of higher Fourier components are an order of magnitude smaller. The amplitude of the Hartree potential, V H , determines the parameters of the Hamiltonian. As function of these parameters and the filling, n, we determine the charge density, ρ G . The self consistency equation for the Hartree potential can be written as where n is the band filling. In Fig. As we increase the Hartree potential, the energies at the K, K and M points are raised in comparison to those at the Γ point, and the upper band becomes flatter (as can be seen in Figs. S2, this effect is largely described by first order perturbation theory). We show a selection of bands for a few choices of the Hartree potential in Fig. For = 4 and L M ≈ d/θ ≈ 13 nm, we obtain V 0 ≈ 28 meV. Using this value, the solution to (2) is shown in Fig. Exchange potential. We now consider the Fock part of the Hartree-Fock approximation. Exchange coupling takes place between states in the same valley with identical spin. The exchange potential plays an important role in monolayer graphene, as it is the origin of the renormalization of the Fermi velocity Besides the renormalization of the Fermi velocity, the exchange potential leads to an overall widening of the bands. We can estimate this effect by considering the shift of the states at the band edges, located at the Γ point. As the Coulomb potential is singular at zero momentum, the leading contribution to the shift of the states at the Γ point comes from the interaction with occupied states with similar momenta. The occupied states at the bottom of the band have a similar internal structure to the neighboring ones, differing only in the crystal momentum. If we assume that this approximation is valid up to some cut-off in momentum space at a distance Λ from the Γ point, the energy shift has the value Assuming that Λ L -1 M , we find that the shift of the lower Γ state, and the bandwidth, scales as δ Γ ≈ e 2 /( L M ). We have analyzed numerically the decay of the overlap S = | φ Γ |φ k | 2 as function of the distance between k and Γ. Results are shown in Fig. This energy is an approximation for the increase in bandwidth. As the unoccupied state at the top of the conduction band has an internal structure which is orthogonal to the states at the lower Γ point, it will not experience a significant exchange shift. Description of electrostatic effects in terms of local interactions. The Hartree potential significantly distorts the lowest band in a twisted bilayer graphene, but it leaves the bands which lie further away from the Dirac point mostly unchanged. Hence, it can be expected that the Hartree potential does not significantly alter the Wannier wavefunctions for these bands. These Wannier functions have been extensively discussed, see, e.g., Refs. where {i S , i V } label the sublattice and valley degrees of freedom. Each of the components has a different symmetry around the AA lobes, with angular momentum = -1, 0, 0, 1, see Ref. The functions m, n belong either to the Ā or the B sublattice in the emergent honeycomb lattice with the Moiré pattern as a building block. We choose the sites m = 1, 3, 5 to belong to the Ā sublattice, and the sites m = 2, 4, 6 belong to the B sublattice. The angular momentum of the different components of each Wannier function determines the phase of the amplitudes α i S ,i V m in (6). Matrix elements between functions which belong to different sublattices require the evaluation of integrals between states with angular momentum = ±1 and states with = 0. The phases shown in Ref. where t 1 and t 2 are real-valued tight binding parameters, VH parametrizes the Hartree potential, i, j and i, j are first and second nearest neighbors. This Hamiltonian ignores a number of the hopping terms considered in Refs. Results for different values of VH are shown in Fig. The description of the Hartree potential in terms of effective hopping parameters allows us to define an Wannier-based model for the long-range Coulomb interaction in graphene. The occupation of Wannier functions leads to charge accumulation at the AA sites. The strength of the potential at a given site is proportional to the occupancy of the six Wannier functions centered at the neighboring AB and BA sites. The ensuing potential leads both to a change in the on-site energies, and to the creation of effective couplings between Wannier orbitals E (a.u.) Band structure of a simple tight binding model based on the Wannier functions of twisted bilayer graphene, including the electrostatic potential. Black lines: bands at charge neutrality. Red and blue lines: bands as function of increasing Hartree potential. which are second nearest neighbors in the honeycomb lattice, but overlap in the same AA region. We obtain the effective Hamiltonian where the sum over the m index implies a sum over the centers of the hexagons in the honeycomb lattice, which define the AA sites. The first term in H int describes the local repulsion between charges placed at the AA sites, and it has been discussed in Ref. Electron assisted hopping and superconductivity. The existence of assisted hopping terms 40 in the effective Hamiltonian of twisted bilayer graphene seems natural, as different Wannier functions overlap at regions where charging effects are maximal We analyze the effect on superconductivity of the interaction term in (8) using the Bogoliubov-de Gennes approximation. For simplicity, we consider here only superconducting states with spin zero and invariant under time reversal symmetry, although other phases are possible. The competition between the repulsion described by the term proportional to V H1 and the assisted hopping term, V H2 can lead to many superconducting phases. The local description derived from ( Here I σ and σ x are the identity matrix and a Pauli matrix in sublattice space, τ x and τ z operate on the electron hole index, and F is the Fermi energy. The vectors ãi are the lattice vectors of the honeycomb lattice. The values of ∆ 1 (k), • • • , ∆ 5 (k) have to be determined self consistently, see (S5) in the Supplementary Information, Section 6. The existence of superconductivity is determined by the functions f (k) and in g(k) defined in (S6) in the Supplementary Information, Section 6. The function f (k) is always positive. The terms in (9) proportional to V H1 describe a repulsive interaction which cannot lead to superconductivity in an isotropic s-wave like channel. This repulsive interaction is somewhat underestimated, as interactions over length scales longer than L M are ignored (see, however, the estimate of the screening length in the Supplementary Information, Section 5). On the other hand, the function g(k) is positive near the Γ point, and negative in a large region near the edges of the Brillouin Zone. If g(k) < 0 superconductivity becomes possible. Fermi surfaces for different fillings are shown in Fig. The results in Fig. The occupation of the low energy bands in a twisted bilayer graphene leads to inhomogeneous electrostatic potentials of magnitude of order of e 2 /( L M ), where L M is the Moiré unit length. This estimate is comparable, or larger, than the width of the band. Electrostatic effects, induced by charging the system away from the neutrality point, distort the bands significantly. The states at the edges of the Brillouin Zone, at K and M , are shifted with respect to the states near the center of the Brillouin Zone, the point Γ. The exchange term, on the other hand, leads to an increase in the bandwidth, approximately a fraction of e 2 /( L M ). The band distortion induced by the electrostatic potential can be described in terms of induced assisted hopping couplings. These terms fit naturally with the complex overlapping Wannier functions which give a local description of twisted bilayer graphene. Assisted hopping interactions favor generally superconductivity, and we explicitly show that s-wave pairing is possible at certain fillings. The imaginary part in ρ G reflects the difference in the effective interlayer hopping between the points on the same, e.g. A → A, and different, e.g. A → B, sublattices. Following Ref. Details of the calculation of the Hartree potential. Definition of Wannier functions. The analysis of the effective interactions induced by charging effects, carried out in of the main text, relies on the definition of localized Wannier functions. We use the description given in Ref. Interactions in the weak coupling limit. The local description of the interactions induced by the Coulomb potential given in Eq. ( If we assume that where W ∼ 1 -5 meV is the bandwidth, we obtain λ F T L M , which justifies a posteriori the use of the local approximation implicit in Eq. ( Self consistency of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations. The quantities ∆ 1 (k) • • • ∆ 5 (k) in (9) have to be determined self consistently: (S5) The first three terms correspond to intra-sublattice nearest-neighbor, inter-sublattice nearest-neighbors and inter-sublattice next-nearest-neighbor density-density couplings, and the last two terms correspond to intra and inter sublattice terms associated to assisted hopping. 