Combining single-layer two-dimensional semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with graphene layer in van der Waals heterostructures offers an intriguing means of controlling the electronic properties through these heterostructures. Here, we report the electronic and structural properties of transferred single layer WS 2 on epitaxial graphene using micro-Raman spectroscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements (ARPES) and Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. The results show good electronic properties as well as well-defined band arising from the strong splitting of the single layer WS 2 valence band at K points, with a maximum splitting of 0.44 eV. By comparing our DFT results with local and hybrid functionals, we find the top valence band of the experimental heterostructure is close to the calculations for suspended single layer WS 2 . . Our results provide an important reference for future studies of electronic properties of WS 2 and its applications in valleytronic devices. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, h-BN, phosphorene, and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), are an ideal platform for studying exciting physical properties not attainable in their bulk counterparts They often exhibit a versatile electronic structure controllable by thickness In addition to homogenous 2D materials, van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures have recently emerged as a novel class of materials, in which different 2D atomic planes are vertically stacked to give rise to distinctive properties and exhibit new structural, chemical, and electronic phenomena Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is one of the most suitable tools to investigate the electronic structure of 2D materials with energy and momentum resolution as well as surface sensitivity There have been a number of ARPES studies either on bulk MX 2 samples or few-layer samples prepared by various methods such as exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) Single layer graphene was produced via a two-step process beginning with a starting substrate of 4H-SiC(0001). Prior to graphitization, the substrate was hydrogen etched (100% H 2 ) at 1550 °C to produce well-ordered atomic terraces of SiC. Subsequently, the SiC sample was heated to 1000 °C and then further heated to 1550 °C in an Ar atmosphere The ARPES measurements were conducted at the CASSIOPEE beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL (Saint-Aubin, France). We used linearly polarized photons of 50 eV and a hemispherical electron analyzer with vertical slits to allow band mapping. The total angle and energy resolutions were 0.25° and 10 meV. All ARPES experiments were done at low temperature (8 K). XPS experiments were carried out on the TEMPO beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL (Saint-Aubin, France) at room temperature. The photon source was a HU80 Apple II undulator set to deliver linearly polarized light. The photon energy was selected using a high-resolution plane grating monochromator with a resolving power E/ΔE that can reach 15,000 on the whole energy range (45 -1500 eV). During the XPS measurements, the photoelectrons were detected at 0° from the sample surface normal n ⃗ ⃗ and at 46° from the polarization vector E ⃗ ⃗ . In this work, TMD/graphene heterostructures were made from WS 2 grown by CVD on SiO 2 /Si substrates that were then transferred onto graphene/SiC Moreover, Raman peaks at 323.7 cm -1 and 297.1 cm -1 are combinations modes, which are attributed to 2LA (M) -E 2g 2 (Γ) and the 2LA (M) -2E 2g 2 (Γ) modes, respectively. Raman mapping was conducted to investigate the uniformity within the single flake. The 2LA (M), E 2g 1 (Γ) and the A 1g (Γ) modes intensity and position mapping are shows in Figure The high quality of the WS 2 transferred on graphene layer allows investigating the electronic structure by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ARPES. Both the feasible large-area synthesis and the reliable film transfer process can promise that WS 2 ultrathin films will pave a route to many applications of 2D materials and vdW heterostructure. XPS is used to determine the chemical composition and stoichiometry of the WS 2 films transferred on the graphene. The C-1s XPS spectrum of WS 2 /graphene heterostructure, collected at h=340 eV, is shown in Figure These components correspond to the SiC bulk (labeled SiC), the graphene layer (labeled G), and the interface layer (labeled I), respectively. The G peak was fitted by a sum of a Gaussian function convoluted with a Doniach-Sunjic line shape with an asymmetry factor  of 0.09 and a FWHM of 0.4 eV. The low value of the FWHM indicates that only one core level peak was present and thus the carbon atoms had a unique chemical environment. Moreover, no structure appeared at 286.7 eV in the C-1s XPS spectrum, usually attributed to the contamination and/or oxidation, this means even if the samples were annealed at 300 °C, the WS 2 /graphene layers were very inert and did not show any contamination after WS 2 transfer process. The W-4f and S-2p XPS peaks deconvolution shown in Figure The WS 2 is well fitted by a doublet peaks at BE of 33.4 eV, 35.6 eV, corresponding to W-4f 7/2 , W-4f 5/2 core energy levels (4f 5/2 : 4f 7/2 ratio of 0.75) The electronic structure was also probed using ARPES measurements. The WS 2 flakes are relatively well spaced on the graphene substrate, ensuring, thanks to the small spot size (50×50 m 2 ), the mapping of a single flake. SiC It is obvious that also the sharp and intense structure of -bands confirms the high structural quality of WS 2 / graphene heterostructure. Differently from our previous work on MoS 2 /graphene layer and from Diaz et al. Moreover, an analysis of the curvature of the bands from the ARPES measurements also allows us to deduce the effective mass of the single layer WS 2 forming the heterostructure. We determined an experimentally derived hole effective mass of 0.4 m 0 (upper band) and 0.5 m 0 (lower band) (where m 0 is the free electron mass) at K, and a hole effective mass of 1.7 m 0 at . These values agree very well with the PBE calculated bands, suggesting that many body effects are not important close to the top of the valence band at K. Finally, the gap between the two highest energy valence bands and the bands at lower energies is substantially underestimated in PBE. The inclusion of the exchange interaction within the HSE06 functional on top of the PBE geometry corrects both errors but leads to a somewhat too large spin-orbit coupling. Although we cannot include explicitly the interaction with the substrate as we miss the structural orientation between WS 2 and graphene, it seems that the measured ARPES data agrees well with the bands of an isolated single layer with PBE geometry and electronic structure obtained with the inclusion of the exchange interaction. In particular the exchange interaction seems to improve the agreement not only for the top of the valence band at zone center but also for the electronic structure in the binding energy region below -3 eV. In summary, we have studied the electronic structure of single layer WS 2 on epitaxial graphene. We found that this heterostructure gives rise to sharp bands, in particular for the WS 2 VBM near the  and K points. We directly observe the strong spin splitting of the upper VB and its value are in excellent agreement with the PBE DFT calculations. Our ARPES measurements on the heterostructure showed graphene and WS 2 largely retained their original electronic structure and, in particular suspended WS 2 monolayer is a good approximation of the electronic properties close to the top of the valence band. Finally, we determined experimentally spin-orbit splitting. Our results provide an important reference for future studies of electronic properties of WS 2 and their applications in spintronic and valleytronic devices For the transfer process PMMA was spin-coated onto the WS 2 flakes (step 1) and peeled them off from the SiO 2 substrate by wet etching in KOH solution (step 2 and 3). Afterward, the PMMA/WS 2 layer was transferred onto the graphene/SiC substrate (step 4 and 5). The PMMA was finally removed using acetone (Step 6). The micro-Raman spectra measurements were performed on the Renishaw microscope using a 532 nm laser in an ambient environment at room temperature. The excitation laser was focused onto the samples with spot diameter of ~1 μm and incident power of ~400 μW. The integration time was optimized to obtain a satisfactory signal-tonoise ratio. We obtained Raman spatial maps by raster scanning with 0.3μm step size using a precision 2D mapping stage. Using Raman spectroscopy, in the case of 2D material, it is possible to discriminate the strain, doping and temperature variation. If we take as a reference the strain-shift relation to be -2.07cm -1 /% of strain for the E 2g 1 peak The PL measurements were carried out using a confocal commercial Renishaw micro-Raman microscope with a 100× objective and a Si detector From Figure IV. EDC curve at the Γ point of the WS 2 Brillouin zone: The work function of the WS 2 /graphene was determined via the measurement of the low energy cut-off of the secondary electron (SE) energy distribution curve obtained by XPS measurements (Figure Electronic structure calculations were performed using the QUANTUM-ESPRESSO code 