First-principles calculations for pristine neutral ferroelectric domain walls in BiFeO 3 reveal that excess electrons are selectively trapped by the domain walls, while holes are only weakly attracted. Such trapped excess electrons may be responsible for the thermally activated electrical conductivity at domain walls observed in experiments. In the case of a periodic array of domain walls, the trapped excess electrons create a zigzag potential, whose amplitude depends on the electron concentration in the material and the domain-wall distance. The potential is asymmetric for 71°and 109°domain walls. This could modify the open-circuit voltage in a solar cell and hence influence the photoelectric effect in BiFeO 3 . Introduction. The ferroelectric oxide BiFeO 3 exhibits the photovoltaic effect, which makes it a prototype material to study ferroelectric photovoltaics. In principle, ferroelectric photovoltaics are promising materials for solar cells because their polar structure allows one to extract a photocurrent without the need to create a p-n junction by doping. In practice, ferroelectrics are usually large band-gap materials, with low light absorption in the visible range. Two quantities are important for an efficient solar-cell absorber: the photocurrent, and the photovoltage, both of which should ideally be large. Ferroelectrics can at least fulfill one of the two requirements, in that their open-circuit voltage can be very large. This feature has first been ascribed to ferroelectric domain walls (DWs) acting as a series of naturally occurring p-n junctions Methods. In rhombohedral perovskites, such as BiFeO 3 , the polarization in adjacent domains can form angles of about 71°, 109°, and 180°, which are all studied here. For each DW angle, we selected the DW with the lowest possible Miller indices which is electrically neutral and mechanically compatible In order to investigate the localization of the excess charges, we calculated their densities as where f vk is the occupation number of the Bloch function ψ vk , and v and c are the valence-and conduction-band indices, respectively. Symmetry causes the trap states to be only half occupied, if only one excess electron is introduced in the supercell. In order to avoid such artificial partial occupation, we placed two electrons or holes in the supercell. In test calculations without symmetry and with a single excess electron only, the electron localized at one of the two DW, i.e. the trap- online) Our proposed model for charge-carrier distribution and electronic potential. In the lower panel we show the electronic potential for the charge-neutral system V 0 (black solid line), and in the case of excess electrons V e -or holes V h + . online) Characterization of the 71°DW. Ferroelectric polarization profile P r (top), charge density excess of excess electrons and holes (center), and electronic potential V (bottom). P r is the r component of the polarization. excess and V are averaged over one atomic layer to smoothen strong rapid oscillations at atomic nuclei state occupation was the same as that of the supercell with two excess electrons and symmetry. Results and discussion. In the top panels of Figs. where ≈ 25 is our calculated bulk electronic permittivity, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, and s -and s + are positions left and right of the wall. However, this is too crude an approximation to capture any systematic trends in the real profiles of the full Kohn-Sham potential in the present case. Let us focus first on the Kohn-Sham potential of the neutral system (solid black line). For the 71°and 109°DWs the dominant feature in the potential is a narrow local minimum, which extends over up to two perovskite monolayers at the DW. In the case of the 180°DW the potential well becomes a shallow barrier. Similar potential wells/barriers have been found as a result of flexoelectric coupling and/or deformation potential in Ref. The effect of the DWs and of the charge accumulation on the electronic structure is analyzed next in Fig. In both Refs. In this study we consider the idealized case of pristine DWs, which is well defined, but incomplete. Real samples contain various amounts of oxygen vacancies and/or other point defects, which may aggregate at the DWs. These may modify the electronic potential and the amount of excess electrons by acting as traps. Therefore a fully realistic picture will be obtained by considering pristine DW sections, intersected by point defects. Notably, the presence of point defects at DW could also influence the resistivity of the walls themselves. The trap states at the DW (≈ 1 eV below the conduction band) are apparently deeper than those in the domain interior (≈ 0.6 eV below the conduction band Summary and conclusion. Neutral ferroelectric domain walls in BiFeO 3 strongly trap excess electrons, but only weakly attract holes. The different localization behavior of electrons and holes at the walls may be understood on the basis of the electronic states which dominate the top of the valence band (delocalized O p states) and the bottom of the conduction band (localized Fe d states). The potential profile at the domain walls is dominated by excess charge carriers. Without excess electrons, the electronic potential at the domain wall exhibits mainly a well or barrier. Once electrons are trapped in the domain walls, they create a strong repulsive zigzag potential, whose amplitude depends on excess-electron and domain-wall density. The potential at the 71°and 109°domain walls is asymmetric, could enable a net photovoltaic current generation, the potential at the 180°domain is approximately symmetric, indicating this may be photovoltaically less active. The trap states for electrons at domain walls in BiFeO 3 may be at the origin of the thermally activated domain-wall conduction found in experiments.