The role of thermal relaxation in nanoparticle melting is studied using a mathematical model based on the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation for heat conduction. The model is formulated in terms of a two-phase Stefan problem. We consider the cases of the temperature profile being continuous or having a jump across the solid-liquid interface. The jump conditions are derived from the sharp-interface limit of a phase-field model that accounts for variations in the thermal properties between the solid and liquid. The Stefan problem is solved using asymptotic and numerical methods. The analysis reveals that the Fourier-based solution can be recovered from the classical limit of zero relaxation time when either boundary condition is used. However, only the jump condition avoids the onset of unphysical "supersonic" melting, where the speed of the melt front exceeds the finite speed of heat propagation. These results conclusively demonstrate that the jump condition, not the continuity condition, is the most suitable for use in models of phase change based on the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation. Numerical investigations show that thermal relaxation can increase the time required to melt a nanoparticle by more than a factor of ten. Thus, thermal relaxation is an important process to include in models of nanoparticle melting and is expected to be relevant in other rapid phase-change processes. Technological advancements are driving the need to better understand the thermal characteristics of nanosystems Many current and future applications of nanoparticles require quantitative knowledge of how they respond to their thermal environment and their behaviour during melting. The thermal response of a nanoparticle differs from that of a macroscopic body for two main reasons. Firstly, the large ratio of surface to bulk atoms leads to many key thermophysical properties, such as melt temperature Recent theoretical studies of nanoparticle melting have investigated the role of size-dependent material properties The observation of wave-like thermal transport in liquid helium The first studies that incorporated the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation into models of phase change focused on mathematical issues In this paper, we investigate the role of non-Fourier heat conduction and thermal relaxation in nanoparticle melting using a mathematical model based on the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation. Furthermore, we address the issue of which boundary condition should be imposed at the solid-liquid interface. A new form of the temperature jump condition is systematically derived from the sharp-interface limit of a non-Fourier phase-field model that accounts for variations in the material properties of the solid and liquid. We use a combination of asymptotic and numerical methods to study the dynamics of phase change. The analysis uncovers a key shortcoming of the continuity boundary condition for the temperature, which results in the speed of the melt front exceeding the finite speed of heat propagation in the materiasls. An asymptotically reduced model is obtained in the limit of large Stefan number. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that such a reduction has been carried out on a model that is based on the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation. Finally, we assess the validity of our model in the context of classical thermodynamics. The paper is organised as follows. In Sec. 2, a theoretical model for spherical nanoparticle melting is developed. The numerical scheme is presented in Sec. We consider the transient melting of a spherical nanoparticle of radius R 0 that is suspended in a warm environment held at temperature T e . This environment is envisioned to be a solid matrix that the nanoparticle is embedded in To enable the identification of the dominant mechanisms of phase change, the density variation that occurs during melting is assumed to be so small that the change in total volume of the liquid-solid system and the motion of liquid can be neglected. Density-driven motion and expansion of the liquid are considered in Refs. The governing equations are derived by considering the local form of energy conservation in the solid and liquid phases: where ρ is the mean density of the solid and liquid phase, u s and u l are the internal energy per unit mass of the solid and liquid, and q s and q l are thermal fluxes. The conduction of heat is described by the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation. Thus, the thermal fluxes satisfy where τ s and τ s are thermal relaxation times of the solid and liquid and k s and k l are thermal conductivities. The first term on the left-hand sides of (2) captures the delayed response of the flux to a change in thermal environment. This delay is caused by the finite time between the interactions of heat carriers. The introduction of a time derivative in (2) leads to the flux depending on the history, i.e. the time integral, of the temperature gradient. For times that are large compared to the relaxation time, the memory term is negligible and Fourier's law is recovered. The internal energy of the solid and liquid per unit mass can be defined as where c is the mean heat capacity of the solid and liquid at constant pressure, T s and T l are the temperatures of the solid and liquid, respectively; T * m is the bulk melting temperature; and L m is the latent heat of melting. By substituting (3) into the local energy balances (1), evolution equations for the temperature are obtained: By differentiating each equation in (4) with respect to time and using the Maxwell-Cattaneo equations (2), the temperatures can be shown to satisfy a pair of hyperbolic heat equations given by where κ s = k s /(ρc) and κ l = k l /(ρc) are the thermal diffusivity of the solid and liquid, respectively. Unlike the standard parabolic heat equation, the hyperbolic heat equation predicts that thermal energy is transported in a wave-like manner with a finite speed given by (κ i /τ i ) 1/2 . For t τ i , or τ i → 0, the hyperbolic heat equations reduce to the standard heat equation. Despite the elegant form of the hyperbolic heat equations given by To facilitate the derivation of the boundary conditions, the solid-liquid interface r = R(t) can be considered as a shock where the solutions to the governing equations exhibit a discontinuity. Under this interpretation, it is possible to define an internal energy u, temperature T , and flux q that hold throughout the entire domain and satisfy where τ and k represent the phase-dependent thermal relaxation time and conductivity, respectively. A no-flux condition is imposed on the solid flux at the origin: The transfer of heat from the environment into the nanoparticle is modelled by a generalisation of Newton's law that accounts for the time scale of thermal relaxation. Relaxation effects can be incorporated into Newton's law by introducing a time derivative of the thermal flux where h is a heat transfer coefficient. Assuming that the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation holds at the surface, Eqns. ( It is important to note that the classical Newton boundary condition An alternative and common choice for the boundary condition at r = R 0 is to assume the temperature is held at a fixed value above the bulk melting temperature. However, as discussed by Ribera and Myers Conservation of energy across the solid-liquid interface can be enforced by applying the Rankine-Hugoniot condition to the energy balance (6a), yielding a Stefan condition given by where Ṙ ≡ dR/dt. In deriving The final boundary conditions are the subject of some debate and depend on how the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation is perceived. On one hand, the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation can be viewed as in (2) as a constitutive relationship that is independently applied to the solid and liquid phase. In this case, it is natural to require the temperature to be continuous across the solid-liquid interface where T m is the equilibrium melting temperature of a solid nanoparticle of radius R. The condition where l cap is the capillary length, i.e., the length scale on which surface energy becomes important. The capillary length can be written as l cap = (2σ sl )/(ρ s L m ), where σ sl is the surface energy of the solid-liquid interface and ρ s is the density of the solid. On the other hand, the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation can be viewed as in (6b) as a physical law that must hold throughout the two-phase mixture. In this case, it is natural to derive a jump condition from the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation (6b) in the same way that the Stefan condition By combining where κ = k/(ρc) is the thermal diffusivity. Naively taking τ → 0 in The thermal conductivity of the solid phase is often greater than that of the liquid. A sharp jump (i.e., discontinuity) in thermal conductivity across the sharp solid-liquid interface prevents the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation (2) from being put into conservative form and the Rankine-Hugoniot condition from being applied. An extended jump condition for the case of varying material properties can be derived by treating the solidliquid interface as diffuse and performing a sharp-interface limit, details of which are presented in Appendix A. The extended jump condition can be written as The corresponding interfacial temperatures for the solid and liquid phases can also be determined from the sharp-interface limit and are found to be The interfacial conditions Assuming that temperature continuity When the jump condition based on The initial temperature of the solid is assumed to be equal to the equilibrium melting temperature of a spherical nanoparticle of radius R 0 . Furthermore, the initial flux through the solid is taken to be zero. Thus, we impose T s (r, 0) = T m (R 0 ) and q s (r, 0) = 0. Melting begins from the surface of the nanoparticle so that the initial position of the melt front is given by R(0) = R 0 . As this corresponds to a nanoparticle that is completely solid when t = 0, it is not possible to impose initial conditions for the temperature and flux of the liquid. However, as shown in Sec. 4.1, it is possible to obtain an asymptotic solution to the model that is valid for arbitrarily small times, which can be used in place of initial conditions. The governing equations are now cast into dimensionless form by a suitable rescaling of the variables. In doing so, we make the simplifying assumption that the model parameters are independent of temperature, although it is straightforward to account for their temperature dependence. Spatial variables are scaled by the initial radius of the solid nanoparticle R 0 . We let ∆T = T e -T m (R 0 ) be the characteristic temperature scale of the system. As it is the influx of heat from the environment that drives the melting process, it is sensible to define a scale for the flux q using the Newton boundary condition Finally, a time scale is chosen by balancing the change in latent heat with the thermal energy that is delivered to the interface, giving t ∼ (ρL m R 0 )/(h∆T ). Using these scales, we define dimensionless variables, marked by hats, given by t The dimensionless bulk equations are given by (upon dropping the hats) where τ r = τ s /τ l , k r = k s /k l , and γ = Cβ -1 N is the effective relaxation parameter, which is the product of the Cattaneo number C, the inverse Stefan number β -1 , and the Nusselt number N . These dimensionless numbers are defined as The Cattaneo number represents the ratio of the thermal relaxation time scale of the liquid to the classical thermal diffusion time scale. The Stefan number characterises the time scale of melting relative to heat conduction. Small values of the Stefan number are associated with fast melting processes. The Nusselt number describes the rate at which thermal energy is transferred to the nanoparticle compared to the rate at which it is transported away from the surface by conduction. Large Nusselt numbers characterise situations involving rapid surface heating, with an infinite Nusselt number describing the case of an instantaneous jump in surface temperature. The effective relaxation parameter γ therefore describes how the importance of thermal relaxation is affected by the time scales of thermal diffusion, melting, and heat transfer. The no-flux condition at the origin in dimensionless terms is given by The dimensionless Gibbs-Thomson condition for the melt temperature reads where θ = T * m /∆T is the dimensionless bulk melting temperature and = l cap /R 0 is the non-dimensional capillary length. The cases of temperature continuity and a temperature jump can be combined into a single set of boundary conditions. The dimensionless interfacial conditions for the temperature are which lead to a Stefan condition given by 1 + 1 2 Taking the classical limit as γ → 0 (with τ r γ → 0) in ( Finally, the initial conditions for the solid temperature, solid flux, and position of the melt front are T s (r, 0) ≡ 0, q s (r, 0) ≡ 0, and R(0) = 1. We consider nanoparticles that have initial radii in the range of 10 nm to 100 nm. The lower bound of 10 nm ensures that the melting process can be described using continuum theory, which is thought to hold on length scales greater than 2 nm However, we also provide parameter values for gold and lead in Table The ratios of the specific heat capacities and densities of tin are c s /c l = 0.86 and ρ s /ρ l = 1.03, justifying our assumption that these remain constant during melting. The ratio of the bulk thermal conductivities is k r = 2.23. The Stefan number is given by β = (235 K)/∆T and will typically be large unless the temperature Table Rather than estimate the order of magnitude of the Cattaneo number C, it is more enlightening to work directly with the effective relaxation parameter, which may be written as γ = (τ l h∆T )/(ρL m R 0 ). Using the maximum heat transfer coefficient h max , τ l = 10 -10 s, and R 0 = 10 nm, the effective relaxation parameter can be written in terms of the temperature difference as γ = (0.114 K -1 )∆T . A value of ∆T 10 K is reasonable and would make the effective relaxation parameter O(1) in size. However, for tin nanoparticles that exceed 10 nm in radius or which have reduced heat transfer coefficients or thermal relaxation times, the effective relaxation parameter will be smaller. The non-dimensional model ( This approach leads to a decoupling of the melting and transport processes and avoids the need to solve a nonlinear system of equations at each time step. Asymptotic methods are used to calculate analytical solutions to the governing equations under specific limits and simplifying assumptions. We first focus on calculating an approximate solution that is valid for arbitrarily small times. This solution can be used as a consistent initial condition when numerically simulating the model. Furthermore, the small-time solution gives key insights into the physical relevance of the jump condition for the temperature. We then examine the "classical" limit as γ → 0, showing that the Fourier solution is only recovered in the case of a continuous temperature profile. Finally, we construct solutions that are valid in the limit of large Stefan number. Large Stefan numbers characterise phase-change processes that are slow compared to the rate of thermal diffusion. As this is the case in many physical scenarios and for a range of materials, the large-Stefan number limit is perhaps the most common approach for simplifying models of phase change. The relatively fast rate of thermal diffusion implies that on the time scale of melting, the temperature can be well approximated by its quasi-static profile. An analytical solution for the temperature can then often be obtained, which allows the problem to be reduced to a system of ordinary differential equations for position of the free boundary and, in the case of non-Fourier heat conduction The behaviour of the solution for small times can be determined by introducing an artificial small parameter ε 1 and then writing t = ε t. It will also be convenient to use the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation (19d) to write the Newton condition Separate balancing procedures are used to determine the relevant scales for variables associated with the liquid and solid phases. In the case of the liquid, the scales are chosen to ensure the initial influx of thermal energy from the environment is captured by the model. In the case of the solid, the scales are chosen to capture the development of a thermal boundary layer near the melt front, which forms due to the change in melting temperature with nanoparticle size. To facilitate the calculation, we will assume that all of the dimensionless parameters (aside from ε) are O(1) in magnitude. Setting the effective relaxation parameter γ to zero recovers the classical formulation of the melting problem where the flux is governed by Fourier's law. The bulk equations can be written as and the Stefan condition is To determine the problem for the liquid, we start by balancing the left-and right-hand sides of the Newton condition (25) that the temperature gradient ∂T l /∂r must be O(1) in size. Using these facts in the Stefan condition All that remains is to determine the problem for the solid. The evolution of the solid temperature is driven by changes in the melting temperature. Since T m = O(ε), we scale T s = ε T . Naively taking ε → 0 in (27a) and using the initial condition shows that Ts (r, t) ≡ 0, which cannot satisfy the boundary condition at the To capture the formation of a boundary layer at the melt front, we use the change of variable r = 1 -ε R( t) -ε 1/2 ζ and t = t , which leads to the problem for the solid temperature given by (after dropping the prime) with Ts = -θ R at ζ = 0, Ts → 0 as ζ → ∞, and Ts = 0 at t = 0. Using the scales for the solid problem in the Stefan condition implying that the thermal conduction through the solid does not strongly influence the initial melting kinetics. Thus, to leading order, R( t) = t. In principle, the solution for the melt front can be used in the problem for the solid temperature, which can be solved using a similarity solution of the form Ts ( ζ, t) = tf ( ζ/ t1/2 ); however, we do not compute this here. In terms of the original non-dimensional variables, the small-time solutions for the liquid temperature, liquid flux, and position of the melt front are given by Importantly, (32b) shows that the liquid flux predicted by Fourier's law is O(1) in size and constant in time, which results in the linear melting kinetics given by (32c). The magnitude of the flux ultimately arises from the form of the Newton condition will not be the case when relaxation effects are included in the model. The small-time solution given by We follow the same procedure to determine the scales for the solid and liquid problems in the nonclassical melting problem. Balancing terms in the Newton boundary condition To capture the thermal boundary layer in the solid problem, we let r = 1 -ε 2 R( t) -ε ζ. Balancing thermal relaxation and temperature gradients in the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation (19b) leads to a flux scale of O(ε 2 ). Thus, we write q s = ε 2 qs , showing that the solid flux is indeed smaller than the liquid flux. As ε → 0, the leading-order problem for the solid temperature and flux is given by with Ts = -θ R at ζ = 0, Ts → 0 as ζ → ∞, and Ts = qs = 0 at t = 0. Combining both equations in The The boundary conditions read We assume that there is no flux through the surface of the nanoparticle at time t = 0. The leading-order The solution for the liquid temperature and flux, as well as the melt front, written in terms of the original dimensionless variables, is given by By accounting for thermal relaxation effects, the magnitude of the liquid flux (37b) is now predicted to increase linearly with time. This is in stark contrast to the instantaneous change in the liquid flux that is observed when using Fourier's law to describe heat conduction. The gradual change of the liquid flux in the case of Maxwell-Cattaneo conduction leads to substantially slower melting kinetics, which are now quadratic in time. At leading order, the small-time solutions for the cases of temperature continuity and a temperature jump are the same. This is because the initially slow rate of melting, Ṙ = O(t), leads to a temperature jump that is O(t 2 ) in magnitude; see Eqn The small-time analysis performed here, in combination with those carried out by other authors, have identified four scaling laws for the initial melting kinetics. When using a fixed-temperature boundary condition, Fourier's law, and neglecting density variation between phases (see, e.g. Refs. We now examine the "classical" limit given by γ → 0 with all other parameters O(1) in size. We first assume that the temperature is continuous across the melt front and then consider the case of a temperature jump. There are two key time regimes in the limit as γ → 0. The first time regime, t = O(γ), captures the quick thermal relaxation that occurs as thermal energy is being transferred to the nanoparticle. In the second time regime, t = O(1), the flux has relaxed to its Fourier value and the classical nanoparticle melting problem is recovered. The scales for the first time regime are determined using the same balancing procedure that was used to construct small-time solutions. The pertinent scales for the solid problem are given by t = γ t, R = 1 -γ R, T s = γ Ts , and q s = γ 1/2 qs . The thermal boundary layer has width O(γ 1/2 ). The solid problem is analogous to that in Differentiating subject to ql = R = 0 when t = 0. The solution for the liquid temperature, liquid flux, and position of the melt front, written in terms of the original dimensionless variables, is given by As t → 0 with γ fixed, the solutions for the flux (40b) and the position of the melt front (40c) reduce to in agreement with the small-time limit of the non-Fourier model given in In the second time regime, defined by t = O(1), the relaxation terms can be neglected and the variables do not need to be rescaled from their original dimensionless form. The Maxwell-Cattaneo equations (19b) and (19d) therefore reduce to Fourier's law. The matching conditions for the flux and the position of the melt front can be obtained from (40b) and (40c) in the limit γ → 0 with t fixed, yielding which are precisely the small-time solutions to the Fourier model There are again two time regimes to consider, t = O(γ) and t = O(1). However, the asymptotic solutions in these regimes are the same as when the temperature is continuous across the melt front. The scaling in the first regime implies that Ṙ = O(1). From the interfacial conditions in We now compute asymptotic solutions in the limit as β → ∞ with γ = O(1). Before proceeding with the calculations, it is helpful to re-examine the sizes of the various non-dimensional numbers that appear in the model. The parameter θ is of the same order of magnitude as the Stefan number, implying that θ = O(β). The dimensionless capillary length is always small. We will make an additional assumption that θ = O(1) as β → ∞ so that the temperature at the melt front is O(1) during the majority of the melting process. For practical scenarios, where ∆T is of the order of a few Kelvin or larger, this assumption will be true. There are two main time regimes to consider. The first regime is defined by t = O(β -1/2 ) and captures non-Fourier heat conduction through the solid core of the nanoparticle. Only a small amount of melting occurs during the first time regime. The second time regime, defined by t = O(1), captures the complete melting of the solid core. The temperature profiles are quasi-steady in the second time regime, but non-Fourier transport mechanisms still affect the liquid flux, altering the melting kinetics. The first time regime is captured by writing t = β -1/2 t, R = 1 -β -1 R, q s = β -3/2 qs , q l = β -1/2 ql , Ts and T l = β -1 Tl . The problem for the solid temperature is given by with qs = 0 at r = 0, Ts = -θ R + O(β -1 ) at r = 1 + O(β -1 ), and Ts = qs = 0 when t = 0. The problem for the liquid and the melt front can be obtained by letting r = 1 -β -1 r to find The leading-order solution for the liquid flux and temperature is given by Tl = -N (r -R) -θ R and ql = -t, where R = -(1/2)γ -1 t2 . A closed-form solution to the leading-order solid problem is not required. However, it is interesting to examine the large-time behaviour in order to understand how the second time regime is entered. The Gibbs-Thomson condition implies that the solid temperature behaves like Ts = O( t2 ) as t → ∞. The scaling for the flux is determined by balancing both terms in the energy equation (43a), yielding qs = O( t). Using these scales in the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation (43b) reveals that the temperature gradient dominates all other terms. Thus, we find that Ts ∼ - as t → ∞. The time scale for the second regime is obtained from the liquid problem. Using the leading-order solutions for the liquid temperature and flux in (44b) shows that all three terms balance when t = O(β 1/2 ), corresponding to t = O(1). To study the dynamics in the second time regime, where t = O(1), we first note that T s = O(1) and ) due to the limiting behaviour in the first time regime given by We also find that q l = O(1) in the second regime, implying that the solid will not influence the melting kinetics. The leading-order contributions to (19c) show that the liquid flux q l is divergence free and can be written as do occur in the second time regime, t = O(1), however. The solid flux is still small, q s = O(β -1 ), and the solid temperature is uniform, T s (r, t) = T s (R(t), t). The liquid temperature satisfies Laplace's equation and the solution can be written as where T l (R, t) is given by (52a). The reduced system of equations governing the melting process can be written as The small-time behaviour is given by ( The asymptotic analysis of Sec. 4 reveals that the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation can lead to marked changes in the melting kinetics compared to Fourier's law. Furthermore, for sufficiently small times, the choice of boundary condition does not alter the predicted melting kinetics. To explore how the choice of boundary condition affects the long-term melting behaviour, we carry out numerical simulations of the full governing equations. In the following discussion, we will refer to the MC-TC and MC-TJ models as those based on the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation with temperature continuity and a temperature jump at the melt front, respectively. In the first numerical experiment, we compare predictions obtained using all three models: Fourier, MC-TC, and MC-TJ. We consider a nanoparticle of initial radius R 0 = 10 nm and a Stefan number of β = 10, corresponding to ∆T 24 K. We suppose the solid and liquid have the same relaxation time and set τ s = τ l = 10 -10 s, leading to τ r = 1 and γ 2.5. The results of the simulations are shown in Fig. The different melting behaviour that is observed when using the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation but varying the boundary condition can be rationalised in terms of the temperature at the melt front (see Fig. Imposing the jump condition leads to the temperature of the liquid at the melt front being larger than the Gibbs-Thomson melting temperature. Consequently, there is a smaller temperature difference between the liquid and the environment and the transfer of heat into the nanoparticle is reduced. This means that less thermal energy is transported to the melt front, resulting in a slower melting process compared to when the temperature profile is assumed to be continuous. and τ s = τ l = 10 -10 s and correspond to those of Fig. In particular, the bulk temperature is unable to respond to the rapidly changing melting temperature and, therefore, a large thermal gradient develops at the melt front. In the Fourier and MC-TC models, the speed of the melt front increases in time and becomes unbounded as the radius of the solid core approaches zero. This leads to a "thermal sonic boom" in the MC-TC model, whereby the speed of the melt front equals and then exceeds the finite speed of thermal waves. In dimensionless terms, the speed of heat propagation in the solid and liquid is given by v s = k r β/(τ r γN ) and v l = β/(γN ), respectively. Since v s > v l for these parameter values, the transition from "subsonic melting" with Ṙ < v l to "supersonic melting" with Ṙ > v l occurs at roughly t = 1.4. After this time, we find that the temperature profile in the liquid develops a local maximum near the melt front, a feature which is impossible in Fourier-based heat conduction. To explain this phenomenon, we recall that in the supersonic regime, the melt front propagates faster than thermal energy can be delivered to it from the liquid. The system therefore responds by introducing a local maximum in the temperature, amplifying the local temperature gradient and flux, thus compensating for the insufficient rate of thermal transport from the liquid. Ultimately, supersonic melting is unphysical because the speed of melting cannot exceed the speed of heat propagation The temperature profiles obtained from the MC-TJ model are shown in Fig. Eventually, the temperature of the liquid at the melt front exceeds that at the outer boundary, leading to heat flowing in the direction of positive temperature gradient, in violation of the second law. The increase in liquid temperature at the melt front reduces the temperature gradient across the liquid and thus the thermal flux, slowing the melting process and thereby preventing the onset of supersonic melting. Thus, the jump condition for the temperature essentially acts as a flux limiter, forcing the temperature profiles to adjust in such as way to limit the flux and avoid the onset of supersonic phase change. We now explore how the thermal relaxation time affects the melting process for a fixed set of parameter values, assuming that the relaxation times of the solid and the liquid are the same, τ l = τ s = τ . We take R 0 = 10 nm and β = 10, corresponding to ∆T 24 K, and examine values of τ that range from 10 -12 s to 10 -10 s. The effective relaxation parameter γ lies between 0.025 and 2.5. The results of numerical simulations carried out with these parameters, along with the case when τ = 0, are shown in Fig. show results obtained using the MC-TC and MC-TJ models, respectively. When τ r = 10 -12 s (γ 0.025), the evolution of the mean thermal flux can clearly be divided into the relaxationand diffusion-dominated time regimes discussed in Sec. 4.1.2. As the thermal relaxation time is increased, the duration of the first, relaxation-dominated time regime is prolonged. In the case of τ r = 10 -10 s and temperature continuity, the nanoparticle completely melts before the second, diffusion-dominated regime is at the melt front for all times. Thermal relaxation therefore inhibits the transport of thermal energy to the melt front, leading to slower melting kinetics and a melting time that monotonically increases with the relaxation time. The size of the nanoparticle R 0 influences the melting dynamics in a non-trivial manner. This is demonstrated in Fig. For small temperature differences ∆T and hence large Stefan numbers, the asymptotically reduced models given by ( The role of thermal relaxation in nanoparticles composed of gold and lead can be studied using the parameter values in Table Thus, positive entropy generation requires thermal energy to travel in the direction of negative temperature gradient. When the liquid temperature has a maximum near the melt front, as in Fig. The melting of spherical nanoparticles is studied using a non-classical model of heat conduction, based on the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation, that accounts for the finite thermal relaxation time of materials. By seeking asymptotic and numerical solutions to the model using realistic parameter values, we show that the jump boundary condition for the temperature produces the most physically meaningful results. In particular, the jump condition avoids the possibility of supersonic melting, whereby the speed of the melt front exceeds the speed of heat propagation. However, deriving the correct jump condition is not straightforward and requires the formulation of a diffuse interface model when capturing variations in the thermal conductivity. Similar considerations may be required for other non-Fourier conduction laws as well. We find there is a non-trivial interplay between heat exchange with the environment and thermal relaxation. Depending on the size of the nanoparticle, thermal relaxation can either decelerate or accelerate the overall melting process relative to the case of Fourier conduction. The relevance of thermal relaxation generally increases as the nanoparticle radius decreases or the imposed temperature difference increases, both of which lead to melting processes that occur more rapidly. For the parameter range and materials considered here, thermal relaxation is found to modify the melting time by more than a factor of 10. We can conclude that thermal relaxation is an important process to capture in models of nanoparticle melting and will likely influence the dynamics of phase change in other technologically relevant systems as well. We have previously studied the solidification kinetics that arise when heat conduction is described by the Guyer-Krumhansl (GK) equation, which is an extension to the Maxwell-Cattaneo equation that considers the mean free path of phonons Given the range of mathematical descriptions for nanoparticle melting, an important area of future research should focus on model validation. Ideally, this would involve a comparison with experimental data for the temperature profiles and motion of the solid-liquid interface. For instance, comparing the small-time melting kinetics observed experimentally to those predicted theoretically could provide useful insights into the most suitable condition to impose at the outer boundary of the nanoparticle. However, due to the small length and time scales involved in nanoparticle melting, such data is likely to be difficult to acquire with current technology. Thus, it may be insightful to use molecular dynamics simulations to generate data that can assist with model validation. parameter is given by φ(r, t) = 1 2 tanh r -R(t) + 1 , where is the width of the diffuse interfacial layer, although this choice is ultimately immaterial. By non-dimensionalising the bulk equations as in Sec. 2.4, we obtain ∂ ∂r r 2 q = 0, (A.4a) γτ (φ) ∂q ∂t + q + N -1 k(φ) ∂T ∂r = 0, (A.4b) where now τ (0) = τ r , τ (1) = 1, k(0) = k r , and k(1) = 1. This non-dimensionalisation introduces the parameter δ = /R 0 , corresponding to the non-dimensional width of the diffuse solid-liquid interface. Molecular dynamics simulations predict that the width of the solid-liquid interface for copper and aluminium is on the order of a few Angstroms A sharp-interface model with compatible jump conditions can be derived from the asymptotic limit as δ → 0. Physically, this limit collapses the diffuse interfacial layer, which has a dimensionless width that is O(δ) in size, to a sharp interface located at r = R(t). Naively taking δ → 0 shows that φ = 0 for r < R(t) and φ = 1 for r > R(t). This leads to bulk equations for the temperature and flux given by ∂ ∂r r 2 q s = 0, 0 < r < R(t), (A.5a) γτ r ∂q s ∂t + q s + k r N -1 ∂T s ∂r = 0, 0 < r < R(t), (A.5b) ∂ ∂r r 2 q l = 0, R(t) < r < 1, (A.5c) γ ∂q l ∂t + q l + N -1 ∂T l ∂r = 0, R(t) < r < 1, (A.5d) which are identical to The solution is now expanded as an asymptotic series of the form T = T (0) + O(δ) and q = q (0) + O(δ). The matching conditions are given by T (0) (ξ → -∞, t) = T s (R(t), t), T (0) (ξ → ∞, t) = T l (R(t), t), (A.7a) q (0) (ξ → -∞, t) = q s (R(t), t), q (0) (ξ → ∞, t) = q l (R(t), t). (A.7b) The leading-order contributions to the bulk equations for the temperature and flux, (A.6a) and (A.6b), are -β -1 Ṙ ∂T (0) ∂ξ -Ṙ ∂φ ∂ξ + ∂q (0) ∂ξ = 0, (A.8a) -γτ (φ) Ṙ ∂q (0) ∂ξ + N -1 k(φ) ∂T (0) ∂ξ = 0. (A.8b) By solving (A.8b) for ∂q (0) /∂ξ and substituting the result into (A.8a), we find that the temperature across the diffuse interface varies according to (A.9) The temperature jump across the solid-liquid interface can be obtained by integrating (A.9) across the domain and using the matching conditions in (A.7a) to obtain dΦ. (A.10) The temperature profile in the interfacial layer can be written as The temperature of the solid at the melt front, T s (R(t), t), can be determined by imposing an admissibility condition or through a solvability condition that is derived from prescribing a governing equation for the order parameter Taking γ → 0 in In the case of constant thermal conductivity and relaxation time, the jump condition (A.10) is identical to Re-dimensionalising the conditions (A.12) yields ( The sharp-interface limit will remain valid provided that the radius of solid core of the nanoparticle is much larger than the width of the solid-liquid interface, /R(t) 1. As the solid core melts, the sharp-interface limit will eventually breakdown, at which point a diffuse-interface model would need to be considered. However, as discussed by Myers et al. material in roughly the same way. Thus, the results of this section, which are based on parameter values associated with tin, are likely to hold for other materials as well.