The first examples of single crystal epitaxial thin films of a high entropy perovskite oxide are synthesized. Pulsed laser deposition is used to grow the configurationally disordered ABO 3 perovskite, Ba(Zr 0.2 Sn 0.2 Ti 0.2 Hf 0.2 Nb 0.2 )O 3 , epitaxially on SrTiO 3 and MgO substrates. X-ray diffraction and scanning transmission electron microscopy demonstrate that the films are single phase with excellent crystallinity and atomically abrupt interfaces to the underlying substrates. Atomically-resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy mapping shows a uniform and random distribution of all B-site cations. The ability to stabilize perovskites with this level of configurational disorder offers new possibilities for designing materials from a much broader combinatorial cation pallet while providing a fresh avenue for fundamental studies in strongly correlated quantum materials where local disorder can play a critical role in determining macroscopic properties. The ABO 3 perovskite oxide structure and its derivatives are of broad interest to the study and application of magnetism Consequently, substitutional electron or hole doping on the A and B sites allows for a wide variety of charge and distortion states to be tuned through synthesis, with the cation size variance balanced by internal changes to Jahn-Teller distortions and octahedral tilts and rotations. This substitutional approach is a central pillar of materials design strategies-with the search for new functionally relevant materials often beginning with a parent ABO 3 ternary compound which is then partially substitutionally doped to an [A x A' 1-x ]BO 3 or A[B x B' 1-x ]O 3 quaternary compound of superior character or novel physical behavior Intentional modification of long range structure through global isovalent substitution, transient pressure, heterostructuring, or strain effects The lack of experimental studies on quinary or higher rank oxide perovskites is in large part due to the difficulty of stabilizing homogeneously doped single crystals. Typically, increasing the number of elements results in a higher probability of the formation of multiple phases or complicated microstructures. Approaches to predicting crystal stabilities are developing but are typically built upon calculations made at 0 K, which can be a severe limitation if entropy were to play a role in the stabilization process In this work, we demonstrate the first example of a single crystal high entropy perovskite oxide (HEPO) by stabilizing the multicomponent A(5B 0.2 )O 3 perovskite Ba(Zr 0.2 Sn 0.2 Ti 0.2 Hf 0.2 Nb 0.2 )O 3 in epitaxial thin film form. This HEPO has a Goldschmidt tolerance factor of t = 1.03 which makes it an excellent candidate to stabilize in a cubic form A ceramic target of stoichiometric Ba(Zr 0.2 Sn 0.2 Ti 0.2 Hf 0.2 Nb 0.2 )O 3 was synthesized using the conventional solid-state reaction method The crystal structure and growth orientation of the films were characterized by X-ray diffraction shows that the all three film thicknesses align near the same value with the 7 nm film displaying some slight asymmetry in peak shape. To map films' coherency relationship to the underlying substrate, X-ray reciprocal space mapping (RSM) measurements were performed around the asymmetric (204) Bragg's reflection of the film and substrate (Fig. A 1 (LO 3 )/E(LO)~ 730 cm -1 , corresponding to the tetragonal symmetry Utilizing a two-tint pump-probe setup the interface thermal resistances are included in the thermal resistance of the HEPO layer. The thermal conductivity of the film grown on MgO is 0.58  0.03 W/m-K and that on SrTiO 3 is 0.54  0.04 W/m-K. These values are nearly an order of magnitude lower than other single crystal perovskite oxides having only one or two different elements on the B-site lattice Laser molecular beam epitaxy is shown to be an effective route to obtaining high quality single crystal high-entropy perovskite oxide (HEPO) thin films. This is demonstrated by growing epitaxial thin films of Ba(Zr 0.2 Sn 0.2 Ti 0.2 Hf 0.2 Nb 0.2 )O 3 on SrTiO 3 and MgO substrates. X-ray diffraction and STEM imaging reveal that the films are single phase with excellent crystallinity and atomically abrupt interfaces to the underlying substrates. Direct atomic level STEM-EELS and macroscopic SEM-EDS confirm a uniform distribution of B-site cations in the films. Raman spectroscopy reveals weak phonon mode coupling and hints at the possibility of relaxor-like behavior. Time-domain thermoreflectance measurements show that this material has a thermal conductivity which is an order lower than the configurationally ordered BaTiO 3 parent material and approaches BaTiO 3 's amorphous limit in a single crystal form even though it possesses a fully configurationally ordered A-site sublattice. Since ABO 3 -type perovskites show such a wide range of physical properties, further studies of HEPOs are likely to lead to new functionalities due to their distinct highly-tunable chemistries. The ability to use entropy stabilization to introduce extreme configurational disorder opens new possibilities for designing materials from a much broader combinatorial cation pallet and should 