Molecular dynamics simulations based on the adaptive intermolecular reactive empirical bond order (AIREBO) were performed to probe hydrostatic pressure induced collapse of single-walled and double-walled carbon nanotubes. It was unveiled that the torsion term, which is a specific potential component involved in the AIREBO scheme, plays a vital role in stabilizing fully collapsed cross-sections of the carbon nanotubes. Evolution of the cross-sectional deformation along the loading-unloading curve was also elucidated, showing strong dependence on the presence of a structural defect on the outer carbon wall. Radial buckling of carbon nanotubes is one of the most important deformation modes that give rise to dramatic changes in their physical properties A primary example of the radial buckling mode is the one observed in pressurized many-walled carbon nanotubes. This mode is characterized by wavy-shaped cross-sections From the physics perspective, the significance of nanotube collapse lies in that it may cause semiconductor-metal transition In the present work, we perform molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of collapsing SWNTs and DWNTs with and without structural defects. Our MD simulation code is based on a broadly used interatomic potential (called AIREBO potential In this study we deal with zigzag SWNTs with the chiral index of (36,0) and DWNTs with (27,0)@(36,0). Figure We also deal with SWNTs and DWNTs endowed with a structural defect, called the Stone-Wales (SW) defect Forces exerted on atoms are calculated by implementing the adaptive intermolecular reactive empirical bond order (AIREBO) interatomic potential with i, j, k and being atom numbering. The three terms involved in the parenthesis in Eq. ( The first term, written by , is the second generation reactive empirical bond order (2g-REBO) potential The second term in the parenthesis, E LJ i j , accounts for the van der Waals (vdW) interaction between atoms that belong to different graphitic layers facing each other, as marked by thin arrows (colored in blue) in Fig. The third term, E tors ki j , the so-called "torsion term", is derived from the energy required for torsional displacement of a carbon atom relative to its third nearest neighbor in the same graphitic layer. Figure Among the three constituent terms in AIREBO, the working of the first two, E REBO i j and E LJ i j , on mechanical properties of collapsing carbon nanotubes has been intensively investigated. In particular, E LJ i j is known to play a crucial role in radial collapse of nanotubes, because the attraction and repulsion between opposing graphene walls are believed to stabilize collapsed crosssections. The remaining one, E tors ki j , however, has not been paid sufficient attention thus far. This fact motivated the authors to examine the impact of torsional atomic interaction represented by this term on the nanotube collapse. This subsection describes certain details in the mathematical expression of E tors ki j for later use. Suppose the local configuration of nearby six atoms, as depicted in Fig. Following Ref. and In Eq. ( In principle, application of external hydrostatic pressure to a CNT implies that forces are exerted on all the constituent car-bon atoms in the normal direction of the outmost wall. In practice, however, careful consideration is requisite for determining the normal direction of the wall at a given atom, since the wall is not a continuum layer but a discrete atomic network and thus there is no unique definition of the direction normal to the wall. In our simulations, the direction normal to wall is defined by the following procedure Since an atom in the honeycomb-shaped carbon network has three nearest neighbors, we find three isosceles triangles consisting of the atom and its two neighbors. We next define planes on which the three atoms lie and its normal vector. Then, a force vector parallel to the normal vector is applied to the three atoms that form the isosceles triangle. In this way, an atom receives three force vectors combined, each of which corresponds to the three planes on which the atom sits. The vector sum of the three force vectors determines the direction which we regard as the normal-to-wall direction at the given atom. For instance, when force vectors with a norm of 0.01 nN were assigned to the three atoms on the vertices of each isosceles triangle, they result in a load of 0.03 nN on an atom in the outmost graphene layer (note that each atom belongs to vertices of nine triangles). The structural relaxation was performed in the following manner. First, structural perturbation was given to the initial configuration of concentric nanotube cylinders by MD calculation at a temperature (T ) of 100 K for around 100 steps with the time step (∆t) of 2.0 fs. Then, the structure was relaxed employing the FIRE algorithm Figure A similar deformation pathway was observed for the (36,0) defective SWNT with a SW defect, as shown in Fig. Figure A noticeable difference from the case of SWNTs is the suppression of the overshoot in the loading-unloading curve near the state C shown in Figs. Figure In all the plots in Fig. ( 2 7 , 0 ) @ ( 3 6 , 0 ) D W N T w i t h d e f e c t ( c ) It is interesting to note that the interlayer distance which corresponds to the maximum position [e.g., 5.3 Å for pristine (36,0) SWNT ] is nearly equal to that realized in the second critical state in the deformation pathway [5.38 Å for pristine (36,0) SWNT as marked at the state D in Fig. The most important observation in Fig. We emphasize here that the absolute value of the torsion term contribution (negative) is always greater than that of the vdW term contribution (negative), as least in the range of interlayer distance we have considered. This fact indicates that the interatomic interaction described by the torsion term is fundamental for stabilizing the collapsed cross-section, together with the attractive interaction driven by the vdW forces between the two opposing walls. To the knowledge of the authors, the contribution from the torsion term to the radial deformation of carbon nanotubes has never been examined in detail thus far, compared with the intense studies on the counterparts regarding the REBO term and vdW term. In this sense, this is the first numerical evidence that the torsion term plays a significant role in the stabilization of collapsed cross-section of carbon nanotubes. The reason why the torsion term decreases monotonically with approaching the interlayer distance is explained by considering the dependence of V tors , defined by Eq. ( An important feature of the profile is the significant asymmetry in the peak width between the upward peak at ω = 0 (sharp) and the plateau-like downward peak around ω = π (quite broad). The upward peak at ω = 0 indicates that cistype geometry of a four-atom chain is energetically unstable and thus a feasible decline in the mechanical energy of chain will be observed if it is twisted (i.e., if ω deviates from 0). In contrast, the downward plateau around ω = π indicates that a trans-type chain will show only a slight change in energy even when it is twisted. Therefore, if both cis-and trans-type chains are twisted simultaneously with the same twist angle, then the energy decrease caused by cis deformation will overcome the energy increase by trans deformation, and thus the total energy of the two chains will be reduced. The above argument regarding a pair of cis-and trans-type chains holds true for a monoatomic carbon cylinder (i.e., a SWNT), in which many cis-and trans-type chains are embedded. Under cross-sectional deformation of a SWNT, therefore, accumulation of local energy reduction derived from many twisted cis-chains will overcome a slight energy increase derived from many twisted trans-chains. As a result, E tors ki j of the system will decrease as the cross-sectional deformation proceeds. Our finding provides a new insight into the atomistic-scale energetics of collapsing carbon nanotubes. It has been conventionally thought that the vdW force is a primary (and perhaps the only) driving force that stabilizes fully collapsed crosssections, because the attractive nature of vdW interaction between to opposing carbon walls may result in high mechanical stability of the full collapse. But as clearly demonstrated in Fig. We have seen that there is an activation barrier for stabilizing collapsed cross-sections. If the pressure-induced reduction in the interlayer distance at the closest point is not sufficiently small, then the system behaves elastically so that the initial circular cross-section will be recovered after complete unloading [see Fig. Figure We have conducted AIREBO-based MD simulations of collapsing SWNTs and DWNTs under hydrostatic pressure. The main finding is that the torsion term, one of the constituent potential terms in AIREBO, takes a vital role in stabilizing fully collapsed cross-section of carbon nanotubes. The novelty of this result stems from the fact that in established understandings, the vdW term is quite often considered as the only potential term that stabilizes collapsed cross-sections. Our simulation data clearly demonstrate that the sum of decreases both in the torsion term and the vdW term with progress of radial compression, not only the contribution from the vdW term, is the physical origin of carbon nanotube collapse. It was also found that the above conclusion holds true no matter whether the system contains a SW defect.