We present a theoretical study of the impact of oxygen diffusion in oxide crystals on metal dopants ionic state and the conduction type under dynamic changes. The slow changes under thermal equilibrium are provided in a companion, Part I paper. Oxygen vacancy formation acting as a shallow, double-electronic donor, is assumed to result from the crystal exposure to a low ambient oxygen pressure. Critical transitions from n-to a p-type at an oxygen partial pressure i P , and in ionization state of the metal dopant at an oxygen partial pressure M P , are usually not simultaneous, and depend on the different reaction constants. Invoking ambipolar diffusion for all participating species, it is shown that oxygen vacancy diffusion exhibits well defined characteristics in specific regions of the vacancy concentration related to the said critical pressures. Particularly, the oxygen chemical diffusivity is practically constant between i P and M P , and increases sharply for pressures This paper is a companion continuation of a paper published in this issue When the crystal is subjected to a change in the ambient oxygen pressure, oxygen vacancy diffusion is activated, inducing concentration changes of the other species (metal ions, free electrons and free holes) until a new equilibrium is established. In the following we consider the dynamics of these changes. Under local electro-neutrality and quasi-equilibrium of all chemical reactions, the oxygen chemical diffusivity  D should be used in the diffusion equations. Following Maier where . Once Eq. ( Tables , and when , respectively, for different regions of the ambient partial oxygen pressure. Also specified are the reaction equilibrium states for each region. The oxygen chemical diffusivity is constant between i P and M P ; beyond, it always depends on the pressure P , hence on the vacancy concentration V . ). The dependencies summarized in Tables Next we discuss the concentration and reaction rate profiles of various species during diffusion for the different regions defined in Tables We consider first the pressure regions in Tables 1 ( ) and 2 ( where  D is practically constant. The diffusivities may be readily interpreted as trapcontrolled free-hole diffusion per said region in Table ions, and in the second case by the V is the surface ( 0 x  ) vacancy concentration, and 0 V is the initial ( 0 t  ), spatially constant vacancy concentration throughout the sample. Eq. ( Notably, ) conditions in the region of constant effective diffusivity (Tables per Table per Table In both low-pressure regions i P P  and M P P  per Tables state, and the reaction equilibrium state is identical: . The effective diffusivities are described by the same expression, dependence on the vacancy concentration. We denote the surface concentration of where We invoke Seeger's parametric solution where and For demonstration of the above solution under reduction and oxidation we use , and the initial and boundary conditions per Table S e ] [  is the surface free electron concentration, a condition satisfied for Fig. (Tables ions, and free electron  e concentrations per Eq. ( , and for initial and boundary conditions Thus no reaction front may be defined. In some respects, the diffusion characteristics are similar to those obtained for a constant diffusivity (Fig. . Furthermore, the oxygen chemical diffusivities are described by the same expression, displaying a 2 V  dependence on the oxygen vacancy concentration. We denote the surface concentration of . Then, the oxygen chemical diffusivity may be written as In the present case one may readily use Eqs. ( ion concentration at 0 t  . Thus technically, solutions of these different cases are identical for properly symmetric cases. These symmetric cases are specified in Table Yes No Our present theoretical work proposes that carrying out of experimental measurements of metal-ion doped oxide crystals under dynamic conditions (namely during diffusion) would be useful for assessing the relevant reaction constants. Physically clear solutions of the oxygen vacancy diffusion are obtained in regions defined by i P and M P . These observations should be very helpful for an experimental work: provided the initial and final oxygen partial pressures are selected to fall within the well defined regions, utilization of the relevant expressions and effects is straightforward, calling for a concentration profile study of one or more of the participating species (electrons, holes, oxygen vacancies, or metal dopant ionic states). A more complex behavior would occur if the initial and final states belong to different regions (for example, Fig.  p M ion and free electron concentrations per Eq. ( ions, and free electron  e concentrations per Eq. ( Initial and boundary conditions used in Figs.