Solid-state cooling based on i-caloric effects is considered the most promising alternative to replace the conventional vapor-compression refrigeration systems. It is possible to define an i-caloric effect as a thermal response registered in a material upon the application of an external field, characterized by an adiabatic temperature change (ΔTS) or an isothermal entropy change (ΔST). Depending on the nature of the external field (magnetic field, electric field or stress field), the i-caloric effects can be categorized as magnetocaloric effect, electrocaloric effect, and mechanocaloric effect. We can still subdivide mechanocaloric effect in: elastocaloric effect, driven by uniaxial stress; barocaloric effect, driven by isotropic stress (pressure); and torsiocaloric effect, driven by a torque in a prismatic bar, causing a pure shear stress of torsion. The study of i-caloric effects dates from the beginning of 19 th century. Nevertheless, due to the independent development of investigations on each effect, there are no stablished standards regarding terminology or results evaluation up to now, making the understanding quite challenging for the community. In this context, we present a proposal for normalization of i-caloric effects, considering different aspects, such as nomenclature, thermodynamics and figures of merit. Modern refrigeration devices rely on vapor-compression cycles, a technology that dates to the early development of thermodynamics and can be thought as a barocaloric effect. Due to energy efficiency and environmental issues, alternative technologies are under development, and one promising option is solid-state cooling based on i-caloric effects. The general definition of i-caloric effect can be stated as a thermal response when a material is exposed to a change in external fields (where "i" stands for intensive thermodynamic variabledenoting the external fields). The nature of the response depends on the thermodynamic process performed on the material. The effects are characterized by: the temperature change (∆T S ), when the material undergoes an adiabatic process; or the entropy change (∆S T ), when the material undergoes an isothermal process. i-caloric effects have a somewhat erratic timeline, since research on each i-caloric effect was conducted independently. The first solid-state i-caloric effect observed was the elastocaloric effect in 1805, when J. After years of steady development, magnetocaloric effect gained new visibility in 1976, when G. Numerous findings were not mentioned on the short account presented above. Also, there are reviews that cover in detail the history of the i-caloric effects Depending on the nature of the external field (magnetic field (H), electric field (E), or stress field (σ)), it is possible to categorize the i-caloric effects as magnetocaloric (h-CE), electrocaloric (e-CE), and mechanocaloric (σ-CE), as illustrated in Fig. Here, it is important to emphasize and clarify that the σ-CE is a generic terminology for i-caloric effects driven by a stress field change. Particular cases are classified according to the non-zero components of the Cauchy stress tensor (σ = σij). For example, the elastocaloric effect (σe-CE; Fig. Multiple terms describing the same idea often leads to misunderstanding. This is particularly harmful when talking about scientific ideas. As an example, the "adiabatic demagnetization" was a cryogenic process developed independently, which is equivalent to what we understand today as magnetocaloric effect. Given the variety of ways a material can be mechanically deformed, the vocabulary related to mechanocaloric effects became large. Generically speaking, mechanocaloric effects are often called just "thermal effects" or "thermoelastic effects". Regarding polymeric materials and composites, "thermo-viscoelastic" properties are subject of study, result of their characteristic viscoelastic behavior. In the field of ceramic materials, "flexocaloric" and "piezocaloric" describe specific measurement conditions, from which thermal responses are monitored. To avoid unnecessary multiplicity in terminology, we propose i-caloric effect as a unified label that describes any thermal response induced by external fields, comprising magnetocaloric effect, electrocaloric effect and mechanocaloric effect. Let us consider the effect of a field X acting on a material, changing the corresponding conjugated specific quantity Y. The specific work done on the material by the external field is W = λ ∫ XdY Eq. ( and λ = ±1 indicates the effect of the external field on the internal energy. For instance, pressure increases the internal energy of a gas by reducing its volume (in this case, λ = -1); on the other hand, an electric field increases the internal energy of a dielectric by increasing its polarization (in this case, λ = +1). In order to understand the thermal response when an external field is applied on a material, let us regard the intensive internal energy (U) of a general closed solid-state system, without change in composition, as follows from the first law of thermodynamics: where T is the absolute temperature, S is the specific entropy. We can view the internal energy as a function of the intensive variables U = U(S, Y 1 , Y 2 , ... , Y n ) and, since dU is a total differential, the variables X i for the generalized external fields relates to the generalized intensive variables by Now, by applying a series of Legendre transformations, we introduce the Gibbs free energy, which is a function of the intensive variables, G = G(T, X 1 , X 2 , ... , X n ) ≡ U -TS -λ 1 X 1 Y 1 -λ 2 X 2 Y 2 -⋯ -λ n X n Y n . Its differential form is Eq. ( T,X≠X n dX n Eq. ( and we have by comparing Eq. ( Using Eq. ( Eq. ( Thus, to quantify the thermal response (∆T S and ∆S T ), we have to input in Eq. ( The growing interest on i-caloric effects has resulted in a vast literature, with various particularities in terminologies and different ways of presenting data. Mostly, it seems to us that an effort is required for a good comprehension of reported works concerning this area of knowledge. With this idea in mind, we have pointed out some topics in the following subsections, which aim to address some issues of this vast literature and propose ways to deal with them. For i-caloric effects, we strongly suggest the abbreviations proposed in Table Adiabatic temperature change (∆T S ) and isothermal entropy change (∆S T ) We have seen that the i-caloric effects are characterized by ∆T S (Eq. 10.1) or ∆S T (Eq. 10.2), then each material will present ∆T S or ∆S T values which depend on the process performed. If we want to compare two different materials, in their respective i-caloric properties (∆T S or ∆S T ), the ideal situation would be to compare their ∆T S or ∆S T values in the same applied field and temperature; but these direct comparisons are not usually possible, because the available data do not let us to do that. As a consequence, it is very common to show ∆T S or ∆S T values normalized by applied fields, but such comparison may lead to erroneous conclusions. Considering the equivalence of the thermodynamic equations for different i-caloric effects, we can understand the ideas stated above taking only σb-CE as example. Fig. • Circle 1: region near the origin (low ∆T S /∆σ b values with low ∆T S values). Not desirable; Mn3GaN and La-Fe-Si-Co as examples. • Circle 2: region near the upper-left corner (high ∆T S /∆σ b values with low ∆T S values). Some materials can exhibit striking normalized quantities under low applied fields, which do not guarantee high ∆T S . [TPrA][Mn(dca) 3 ] (Bermúdez-García et al., 2017), for example, reaches ~600 K GPa -1 , but its ∆T S value is 4.1 K. • Circle 3: central region (moderate ∆T S /∆σ b values with moderate ∆T S values). • Circle 4: region near the down-right corner (∆T S /∆σ b values with high ∆T S values). This region is the opposite to what was described for region 2. Some materials can exhibit striking ∆T S values, but the applied fields are so high (thus reducing the normalizations), which is almost inapplicable. • Circle 5: region near the upper-right corner (high ∆T S /∆σ b values with high ∆T S values). This is the ideal region of interest, because ∆T S /∆σ b and ∆T S must have high values, otherwise only ∆T S /∆σ b vs. T or ∆T S vs. ∆σ b data can mask the results by themselves. The same idea of normalization can be extended for ∆S T data, plotting ∆S T /∆X vs. ∆S T curves at different temperatures. There are different figures of merit that try to predict the most promising i-caloric material for a specific device. Recently, Eq. ( where ∆T h-c is the difference between the hot reservoir and the cold reservoir (∆T h-c ≡ T hot -T cold ) of the device, and T mid is the temperature which maximizes the integral. This method is very similar to another which is based on the maximization of Refrigerant Capacity (RC), and had been previously proposed and applied for magnetocaloric materials Eq. ( we can conclude by comparing Eq. ( Another figure of merit is the Normalized Refrigerant Capacity (NRC) Eq. ( Although Eq. ( Lastly, the Coefficient of Performance (COP) is another figure of merit widely used for i-caloric materials. This parameter can be defined as where Q = T∆S T is the heat that can be removed from the material in a certain temperature, and W is the specific work required for that. Since COP is dimensionless, it can be used to compare different i-caloric effects between them. Attention should be drawn during the calculation of the specific work (see Table The vast knowledge accumulated on i-caloric effects over the past decades demonstrate the relevance of this field for the current research towards novel cooling technologies. However, this intense activity has also brought up issues regarding the lack of standards for researchers to evaluate, compare and report their results. The present effort is the first attempt to unify the knowledge built by the i-caloric community, covering the topics: i) a general thermodynamic formalism for i-caloric effects; ii) a set of figures to display and compare the results; iii) new terminologies and abbreviations. Although several topics were addressed, there is still a lot work to be done, and we hope the present study encourage the community to take part in the discussion. Then, if we apply the Euler reciprocity relation in Eq. ( *