Measuring degeneracy and broken-symmetry states of a system at nanoscale requires extremely high energy and spatial resolution, which has so far eluded direct observation. Here, we realize measurement of the degeneracy and subtle broken-symmetry states of graphene at nanoscale for the first time. By using edgefree graphene quantum dots, we are able to measure valley splitting and valleycontrasting spin splitting of graphene at the single-electron level. Our experiments detect large valley splitting around atomic defects of graphene due to the coexistence of sublattice symmetry breaking and time reversal symmetry breaking. Large valley-contrasting spin splitting induced by enhanced spin-orbit coupling around the defects is also observed. These results reveal unexplored exotic electronic states in graphene at nanoscale induced by the atomic defects. Knowing degeneracy and exact nature of broken-symmetry states of a system is a central problem in physics. It also plays a vital role in understanding electronic properties of materials. Owing to the two-dimensional nature of graphene's structure and electrons, it is convenient to measure the degeneracy and exotic broken-symmetry states of graphene through a magneto-transport measurement of quantum Hall effect (QHE) In our experiment, the measurement is realized by using a recently developed edgefree graphene quantum dots (QDs) Because the confinement is achieved without resorting to physical edges, both the twofold valley and spin symmetries of the pristine graphene are preserved in the orbital states of the edge-free QDs Such a result has been demonstrated explicitly in previous studies Region 1 is free of defect and we can clearly observe atomic lattice of graphene in it. In region 2, the main feature in the STM image is triangular 3 3 30 R  interference pattern, which is the characteristic feature of intervalley scattering induced by the atomic defects 8,9,21 (see Fig. Besides the single carbon vacancy (marked by blue arrow in Fig. Figure To clearly show how the atomic defects affect the energy spacing between the four charging peaks of a confined orbital state, we measured E12, E23, and E34 (as defined in Fig. To qualitatively explore the spatial variation of the valley splitting, we plot the valley splitting Ev = E23 -Eadd as a function of positions in Fig. Besides the predominantly valley splitting, we find that the energy spacings between two charging peaks of the two doublets, E12 and E34, are slightly different in the studied area (Fig. Obviously, the two figures exhibit quite different features and there is an obvious valley-contrasting spin splitting: the E s K is much larger than that in the K' valley in the region 2. The maximum E s K reaches about 8 meV at 10 T, whereas it only about 2.5 meV at 10 T in the K' valley. The above experimental results are further confirmed in other different magnetic fields. Figure Our experimental observations can be understood within a theoretical framework that incorporates the effects of the sublattice-symmetry breaking and spin-orbit coupling (SOC) induced by the atomic defects in graphene Therefore, every single quadruplet arising from the confinement of the n = 0 LL will be separated into two doublets (the middle panel of Fig. To qualitatively understand the observed valley splitting and valley-contrasting spin splitting, we carried out tight-binding calculations by taking into account of the sublattice-symmetry breaking, the SOC and the magnetic fields (see supplemental materials for details of calculations). Figure In the n = 0 LL, the fourfold valley and spin degeneracy is lifted by the coexistence of the sublattice symmetry breaking and the SOC. Importantly, the SOC generates different spin splittings in the two valleys. As a consequence, we observe valley splitting and valley-contrasting spin splitting around the atomic defects. According to our experimental result and theoretical analysis, the SOC strengths induced by the atomic defects in the K and K' valleys of the n = 0 LL are about 4 meV and 1.2 meV, respectively. The generated spin splittings at the Dirac points of the K and K' valleys are about 8 meV and 2.4 meV, respectively, which are about 10 4 times larger than the expected SOC gap, ~ 810 -4 meV, at the Dirac point of pristine graphene Theoretically, hydrogen atoms hybridize directly with a carbon atom of graphene could lead to a significant enhancement of the SOC, which is predicted to be about 7 meV Previous transport measurement in weakly hydrogenated graphene observed an enhanced SOC strength of 2.5 meV In summary, we realize the measurements of valley splitting and valley-contrasting spin splitting in graphene at the nanoscale and the single-electron level. Our experiment provides a general strategy to probe the degeneracy and nature of exotic brokensymmetry states at nanoscale in graphene. This strategy is quite robust and could be extended to other two-dimensional systems. 