High-fidelity gate operations are essential to the realization of a fault-tolerant quantum computer. In addition, the physical resources required to implement gates must scale efficiently with system size. A longstanding goal of the superconducting qubit community is the tight integration of a superconducting quantum circuit with a proximal classical cryogenic control system. Here we implement coherent control of a superconducting transmon qubit using a Single Flux Quantum (SFQ) pulse driver cofabricated on the qubit chip. The pulse driver delivers trains of quantized flux pulses to the qubit through a weak capacitive coupling; coherent rotations of the qubit state are realized when the pulse-to-pulse timing is matched to a multiple of the qubit oscillation period. We measure the fidelity of SFQ-based gates to be ∼95% using interleaved randomized benchmarking. Gate fidelities are limited by quasiparticle generation in the dissipative SFQ driver. We characterize the dissipative and dispersive contributions of the quasiparticle admittance and discuss mitigation strategies to suppress quasiparticle poisoning. These results open the door to integration of large-scale superconducting qubit arrays with SFQ control elements for low-latency feedback and stabilization. Josephson qubits are a promising candidate for the construction of a large-scale quantum processor While brute-force scaling of current technology may work for moderate-sized superconducting qubit arrays comprising hundreds of devices, the control of large-scale systems of thousands or more qubits will require fundamentally new approaches. An attractive candidate for the control of large-scale qubit arrays is the Single Flux Quantum (SFQ) digital logic family In this manuscript, we describe the arbitrary coherent control of a superconducting transmon qubit driven by SFQ pulses. The SFQ pulses are generated by a dc/SFQ converter where C c is the coupling capacitance between the SFQ driver and qubit, C is the qubit self-capacitance, and ω 10 is the qubit fundamental transition frequency [see Fig. to an integer multiple of the qubit precession period, the state vector undergoes a coherent rotation on the Bloch sphere about a control vector whose direction is determined by the relative timing of the pulse sequence. In Fig. This manuscript is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the cofabrication of the SFQ pulse driver and transmon qubit on a single chip and discuss separate characterization of the driver and qubit circuits. In Section III, we discuss implementation of an orthogonal gate set using SFQ pulses and present the results of gate characterization using interleaved randomized benchmarking (RB) The experiment involves a transmon qubit cofabricated with an SFQ driver circuit on a high-resistivity Si(100) substrate. In Fig. The qubit capacitor, CPW readout resonator, and surrounding microwave ground plane are realized in a 180 nm-thick Nb film grown by dc magnetron sputtering. The dielectric materials required for the multilayer stack Throughout fabrication of the multilayer SFQ driver, a blanket layer of SiO x is used to protect the areas where the readout resonator and qubit capacitor and junctions will be formed. Following completion of the SFQ driver circuit, this dielectric protection layer is removed and the quantum circuit is patterned and etched. Formation of the qubit junctions is the final step of the process. The transmon junction electrodes are defined using electronbeam lithography with a standard MMA/PMMA resist bilayer. The qubit junctions are grown via double-angle Al evaporation with a controlled in situ oxidation between the two deposition steps. The device is wirebonded in an SMA-connectorized Al package and loaded on the experimental stage of a dilution refrigerator. Low-bandwidth coaxial cabling is used for the current bias I b of the SFQ driver and the flux bias I Φ of the transmon qubit. Prior to investigation of SFQ-based gates, the transmon qubit and SFQ pulse driver are characterized separately. The qubit is flux tuned to its upper sweet spot to reduce susceptibility to flux noise Bringup of the SFQ driver circuit involves measurement of the device IV -characteristic curves. In the absence of applied microwave drive at the trigger input, the critical current I c of the device is around 130 μA. Proper operation of the SFQ driver is determined by biasing I b near the critical current and applying microwave drive to the trigger input. For appropriate drive amplitude, the application of an oscillatory tone at frequency ω d induces a Shapiro step in the driver IV curve at voltage Φ 0 ω d /2π Following establishment of coarse operating points for the qubit and SFQ driver, the qubit itself is used to finetune SFQ-based gate operations. We apply a microwave tone at a subharmonic of the qubit frequency ω d = ω 10 /n, where n ∈ {2, 3, 4, . . . }, to the driver trigger input for varying time and sweep the converter bias I b I c while monitoring the state of the qubit [Fig. At this point, we use SFQ pulse trains to perform conventional qubit characterization. In Fig. By triggering the SFQ driver at a much lower frequency and delivering a dilute SFQ pulse train to the qubit, we can map out the terraced trajectory of the qubit state vector on the Bloch sphere evoked by the name of the DANTE pulse sequence. In Fig. rotation. For a second resonant pulse sequence that is shifted in time by τ with respect to the first, the qubit sees a control vector that is rotated by an angle φ = ω 10 τ in the equatorial plane. For example, the pulse train for the Y SFQ -gate is shifted by an amount τ = π/2ω 10 (one quarter of an oscillation period) with respect to that of the X SFQ -gate; see Fig. For SFQ drive at a subharmonic of the qubit frequency, timing shifts between sequences induce a faster rotation of the angle of the control vector by φ n = nω 10 τ , where n is the subharmonic drive factor. Figures With orthogonal control now established, it is possible to generate the full single-qubit Clifford set. We have used interleaved RB Nonequilibrium QPs are a well-known source of decoherence We investigate the influence of nonequilibrium QPs by intentionally poisoning the qubit with an off-resonant SFQ drive that generates QPs at a well-defined rate while producing negligible coherent excitation of the qubit. In the experiments described in this Section, all coherent qubit manipulations are performed using conventional microwave techniques, and the SFQ driver is used exclusively to generate QPs. Figure (2) here, 1/T 1,QP is the decay rate of the qubit per QP and 1/T 1,R is the residual decay rate from all other loss channels. In the absence of an explicit poisoning pulse, we find a background n QP = 0.10(1) [blue curve in Fig. In contrast, the 640-phase slip poisoning pulse leads to n QP = 1.03 The complex QP admittance seen by the qubit includes both real and imaginary parts; while the former leads to enhanced relaxation, the latter induces a qubit frequency shift. We have examined the connection between QP loss and dispersion in our device by performing both T 1 and Ramsey experiments following intentional QP poisoning pulses with a variable recovery time; these scans provide access to both the QP contribution Γ to the qubit relaxation rate and to the frequency shift δω 10 induced by the presence of nonequilibrium QPs. In Fig. where ω 10 is the qubit fundamental transition frequency in the absence of QPs and 2∆ is the superconducting gap of the junction electrodes. A fit to our data yields a slope δω 10 /Γ that is larger than that predicted by Eq. ( V. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK We have described a scheme for coherent qubit control using quantized flux pulses derived from the SFQ digital logic family. The approach offers a path to tight integration of a classical coprocessor with a large-scale multiqubit circuit for the purpose of reducing heat load, latency, and overall system footprint. In our current experiments, we access the full single-qubit Clifford set and achieve gate fidelities F ∼ 95%, measured using interleaved RB. This result is limited by QP poisoning induced by operation of the dissipative SFQ pulse driver. However, there are several straightforward modifications that could be employed in a future implementation to significantly suppress QP poisoning. For example, it should be possible to fabricate the classical SFQ driver circuit and the qubit on separate chips that are flip-chip bonded in a multichip module (MCM). With such an MCM arrangement, SFQ pulses would be coupled to the qubit chip capacitively across the chip-to-chip gap of the MCM. The natural choice for the MCM bump bonds, indium, would provide a low-gap barrier to direct QP diffusion between the chips, and recombination phonons generated by QPs in the bumps would have insufficient energy to break pairs in the niobium groundplane of the quantum chip. The MCM approach would have the additional advantage of allowing a modular fabrication, obviating the need to develop a process flow that the delicate quantum circuit from materials-induced loss associated with the complex, multilayer SFQ driver stack. Ultimately, we view the MCM approach as the most promising path to scaling the two-dimensional surface code A second straightforward modification to suppress QP poisoning would be to move from a high-J c process for the SFQ driver circuit to a low-J c , millikelvin-optimized process. SFQ control elements should remain robust against fluctuations at millikelvin temperatures for critical currents that are two orders of magnitude smaller than those used in the current work Finally, the incorporation of normal metal QP traps in the hybrid SFQ-qubit circuit or MCM is expected to significantly suppress QP poisoning. When QPs diffuse into a normal metal, they interact strongly with electrons and quickly relax below the gap edge, so that they are unable to re-enter the superconductor. The effectiveness of normal metal traps in removing nonequilibrium QPs has been demonstrated previously in a variety of contexts Once the problem of QP poisoning is addressed, we expect leakage out of the computational subspace to represent the dominant source of error in SFQ-based gates. While naive, resonant pulse sequences of the type explored here are expected to yield gate fidelity of order 99.9% The dc/SFQ converter and transmon qubit are cofabricated in a multilayer process on a high resistivity (> 20 kOhm-cm) Si(100) wafer. Fabrication is realized in the following steps, which are also summarized in Table I: 1. A bare intrinsic Si wafer is coated with a film of Nb (M1) after stripping the native SiO x with hydrofluoric (HF) acid. Here and below, sputter conditions are tuned to yield films with slight compressive stress 5. The SFQ JJs and bias wiring are formed in the following process (M3): (a) The wafer is transferred into the sputter system load-lock chamber and the chamber is pumped down for ∼ 1 hour. (b) While the load lock is pumping out, the primary vacuum chamber is "seeded" with pure O 2 using similar conditions to the actual junction oxidation. We find that this step improves the reproducibility of the junction specific resistance by ensuring as similar a chamber chemistry as possible from run to run. (c) The wafer is transferred into the primary vacuum chamber and the system is allowed to pump down to base pressure (about 5 × 10 -8 Torr). (d) An in situ ion mill is used to remove the NbO x from the M2 electrode layer. (e) An Al seed layer of thickness ∼ 8 nm is sputtered. (f) The barrier oxide is grown. The AlO x barrier layer is seeded by flowing O 2 at low pressure (∼ 1 mTorr) for 2 minutes. The chamber is then valved off from the pumps and the O 2 pressure is quickly ramped to the target value (typically ∼ 100 mTorr), where it remains for the duration of the oxide growth (typically about 10 minutes). (g) The growth chamber is pumped back to vacuum. An Al cap layer of ∼ 6 nm thickness is sputtered, followed by the 90 nm Nb junction counterelectrode. This layer is patterned with an i-line stepper. The Nb is removed with an SF 6 -based RIE plasma while the Al-AlO x -Al is removed with a TMAH-based photoresist developer wet etch. 6. At this point, it is possible to probe the 4-wire resistances of witness junctions cofabricated on the die with the SFQ/qubit circuit. The expected critical currents are extracted using the Ambegaokar-Baratoff relation 7. The SiO x layer protecting the area of the qubit and readout resonator is now patterned and etched as in step 2. 8. The readout resonators and qubit capacitor are defined in the M1 Nb layer using pattern and etch processes as in step 1. 9. A negative photoresist is patterned with an i-line stepper to define the shunt resistors (R). The resistors are formed by electron-beam evaporation of Pd following an in situ ion mill and deposition of a thin (∼3 nm) Ti adhesion layer. Liftoff is performed in acetone at room temperature over several hours with slight manual agitation of the wafer. 10. The qubit junctions are defined using a Dolan bridge process The measurement setup is shown in Fig. gate as a function of the number of Clifford operations. The (blue, orange) traces correspond to SFQ sequences with pulse rate ω10/3, while the (yellow, purple) traces correspond to pulse rate ω10/41. (inset) Table summarizing RB data for SFQ-based gates with ω d = ω10/{3, 41}. 2. A plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition