Certain excitations, especially ones of long-range charge transfer character, are poorly described by time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) when typical (semi-)local functionals are used. A proper description of these excitations would require an exchange-correlation response differing substantially from the usual (semi-)local one. It has recently been shown that functionals of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) type can yield unusual potentials, mimicking features of the exact exchange derivative discontinuity and showing divergences on orbital nodal surfaces. We here investigate whether these unusual potential properties translate into beneficial response properties. Using the Sternheimer formalism we closely investigate the response obtained with the 2013 exchange approximation by Armiento and Kümmel (AK13) and the 1988 exchange approximation by Becke (B88), both of which show divergences on orbital nodal planes. Numerical calculations for Na2 as well as analytical and numerical calculations for the hydrogen atom show that the response of AK13 behaves qualitatively different from usual semi-local functionals. However, the AK13 functional leads to fundamental instabilities in the asymptotic region that prevent its practical application in TDDFT. Our findings may help the development of future improved functionals, and corroborate that the frequency-dependent Sternheimer formalism is excellently suited for running and analyzing TDDFT calculations. Kohn-Sham (KS) density functional theory (DFT) In recent years, semi-local exchange functionals and model-potentials have been developed which yield physically interpretable eigenvalues Hence, the focus of the present work is a careful investigation of the response of the AK13 exchange energy functional, which shares many features with the Becke-Johnson model, yet is a functional dervative. In the present context, the most important feature that the AK13 and Becke-Johnson potential have in common is that for a finite system, the potential asymptotically goes to a value that is determined by the highest occupied eigenvalue. This leads to a discontinuity-like potential step structure similar to exact exchange. As such discontinuities are important for charge-transfer excitations Summarizing our findings, we have to note that on the one hand, the answer that our study gives is largely negative: The AK13 response yields instabilities in the asymptotic region that prevent its use in TDDFT. On the other hand, the outcome clearly demonstrates that semi-local functionals designed to mimic exact exchange potential features are capable of giving a response that deviates strongly from the one that is observed with usual semi-local functionals. Thus, our results motivate future work on semi-local functionals that achieve an improved response, yet circumvent instabilities. We also expect the methodology and in-depth analysis presented in this work to be useful for future work in the area of designing functionals with improved response properties. Furthermore, our comparison between analytical and numerical results also adds confidence in the ability of the Sternheimer linear response formalism to correctly describe the response of difficult potentials. The paper is organized as follows. We first review properties of exact and approximate exchange in TDDFT that are of particular relevance for excitations and thus motivate our study of the AK13 response in detail. Next we briefly review the functionals that we test, followed by a recapitulation of the Sternheimer linear response formalism that we use for our TDDFT calculations. After this we present numerical calculations for the sodium dimer as a simple test system. In order to explain the numerical findings that emerge, we then go through the analytically solvable case of the one-electron atom. We close by drawing our conclusions and offering an outlook. Fock exchange is very frequently employed in DFT as a part of hybrid functional constructions and ameliorates deficiencies of usual (semi-)local approximations, e.g., by providing some non-locality to the functional and by reducing self-interaction errors While the use of Fock exchange has proven beneficial in ground-state calculations, as testified by the success of hybrid functionals in questions of thermochemistry where spin indices have been suppressed for clarity of notation. From this perspective, two advantages of using Fock exchange in TDDFT become obvious. First, it typically leads to an eigenvalue spectrum of greater physical interpretability, and this can translate into improved TDDFT excitation energies The latter argument is at the heart of understanding one of the most notorious failures of TDDFT with usual (semi-)local functionals, viz. its massive underestimation of long-range charge transfer excitation energies The potential of the LDA and usual GGAs follow the density closely. Therefore, they do not show a rapid increase or divergence of the kernel in regions of vanishing orbital overlap. Consequently, these approximations fail utterly in the description of long-range charge-transfer excitations For a long time, it had been believed that closely following the density is an unavoidable feature of (semi-)local approximations. However, it recently has been demonstrated that a functional of the GGA type can have a functional derivative, i.e., a corresponding potential, that resembles exact exchange in several ways Therefore, we calculate and analyze the linear response of such semi-local approximations in this manuscript. In order to circumvent issues resulting from the previously reported possible difficulties in ground-state calculations with such functionals, and in order to focus on and bring out the effects of the xc corrections as clearly as possible, we resort to the Sternheimer linear response formalism The main interest of this work is the investigation of the linear response properties of AK13. However, in order to put the results into perspective, we also take a look at two well established, long-known GGAs: PBE as a paradigm example of a well-tested, usual GGA and the B88 GGA of Becke Exchange functionals of the GGA type are typically written in the form [60] where F (s) is the exchange enhancement factor, is a dimensionless density gradient. Different GGAs differ by different choices that are made for the enhancement factor. The PBE functional's construction was guided by the aim to fulfill energetically relevant exact constraints, such as the homogeneous electron gas limit, proper coordinate scaling and the Lieb-Oxford bound. These constraints go along with an enhancement factor that goes to a constant for s → ∞. A property of PBE that makes it a natural functional to compare AK13 to in the linear response context is the fact that PBE's enhancement factor was designed such that the functional recovers the linear response properties of LDA for the homogeneous electron gas. Therefore, the PBE response can be expected to be qualitatively similar to LDA in many cases. In other words, PBE is a GGA from which one expects predictable, unsurprising linear response properties. The B88 GGA is also considered a standard functional and it is a part of one of the most widely used hybrid functionals x [n] with respect to n does not diverge for large distances from a finite's system center. In contrast to the model potentials by which it was inspired, the AK13 approximation The most commonly used form of linear response TDDFT, often going by the name "Casida formalism" In practice, a Sternheimer linear response calculation boils down to self-consistently solving the set of equations for the orbital response components φ + jσ , φ - jσ and excitation energies hω. Here, is the usual unperturbed ground-state Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian, with the Hartree and exchange-correlation (xc) contributions υ σ Hxc (r) = υ H (r) + υ σ xc (r). The Kohn-Sham ground-state orbitals, which have been chosen to be realvalued, and eigenvalues of spin σ are denoted by φ jσ (r), ǫ jσ , respectively. A finite η ≪ ω is added The Fourier components V + ext of the external potential that appear on the right-hand sides of eqs. ( where The Hartree-and xc-contributions appearing on the right-hand sides of eqs. ( and computing Here, is the Fourier transform of the exchange-correlation kernel The density response enters into eqs. ( The chosen xc approximation enters the Sternheimer equations in two places. First, it is part of the groundstate Hamiltonian of eq. ( In practice, we solve the Sternheimer equations by starting with eqs. ( and E is a spatially homogeneous electric field. With n + σ calculated according to eq. ( Clusters of nearly-free-electron metals are in general reasonably well described by semi-local functionals The ground-state calculations were done with the Bayreuth version However, we found that we could not converge the selfconsistency iteration of the Sternheimer equations with the AK13 x potential response. The lower panel of fig. As a demonstration of how the xc response for a "usual" GGA looks like, the upper panel of fig. In order to understand what is going on, we evaluated the potential response again in a different way. Instead of trying to analyze the self-consistent AK13 potential response, we performed a self-consistent LDA groundstate and linear response calculation and subsequently evaluated eq. ( Summarizing these findings we note that the direction of the AK13's potential response slope depends on the direction of the external electrical field, and the slope is proportional to its modulus. The real part of the AK13 potential response becomes larger than the potential of the external electric field for large distances, making it the asymptotically leading term. These somewhat surprising findings call for further explanation. To this end, we take a look at the hydrogen atom, for which exact relations for the exchange response can be derived as shown below. x (a0) Fig. In the following section we contrast the exact analytical result for the hydrogen atom response with the one obtained from the different functionals. One may argue that a one-electron system is quite a challenging test for a semi-local functional because of the wellknown self-interaction problem, i.e., one might argue that failing the one-electron test may not necessarily imply that a semi-local approximation is useless. E.g., the LDA ground-state energy for the hydrogen (H) atom is not particularly accurate, yet LDA is nonetheless a useful approximation for a lot of many-electron systems. However, for our present purposes the H-atom is a good test case, and a very relevant one, because our aim here is not testing quantitative performance, but understanding qualitative features of the exchange response. For this, the H-atom is ideal because the exact potential response can easily be derived. For every one-electron system the exact exchange functional just cancels the Hartree contribution and consequently the exact x kernel is also just the negative Hartree kernel, from which the potential response follows. From eq. ( where the density response integrates to zero due to particle number conservation and p + := -e r ′ n + (r ′ )d 3 r ′ is the dipole moment of the density response (i.e., the transition dipole). Thus, the exact exchange potential response tends to zero asymptotically proportional to 1 r 2 or faster. In directions perpendicular to the dipole moment p + it decays proportionally to at least 1 r 3 . In order to calculate the asymptotic behavior for the exchangecorrelation approximations that we want to compare to eq. ( or explicitly, and In appendix 8.2 we derive this relation from the Sternheimer equations. Based on this density response we can proceed to evaluate the potential response of the PBE, AK13 and B88 approximations. Since all of these originate from the GGA form (2), we calculate the elements required for the evaluation of the potential response asymptotics for the general GGA form in appendix 8.1. One then just has to insert the enhancement factors F (s) for PBE , AK13 and B88, respectively, into the resulting equations to obtain the potential response for these functionals. The important equations are eqs. ( x,SL (r), where SL stands for PBE, AK13 and B88, in terms of the density, the density response and derivatives of these two. According to eqs. ( where With these two equations, we calculate the reduced density gradients (cf. eqs. ( The derivatives of the density response are (cf. eq. ( and analogously we obtain (cf. eqs. ( (30) Thus, we have derived all quantities that allow to evaluate the general form of the GGA potential response from eqs. ( where κ is the parameter fixed in the PBE construction . (Formally, LDA corresponds to the general GGA form of eq. ( and for B88 we obtain Comparing eqs. ( whereas for AK13 we find and for B88 Comparing this to the exact result given in eq. ( Finally, in order to really rule out that our non-converging AK13 calculations in section 5 are a consequence of numerical issues in our Sternheimer implementation, we check our numerics by reproducing the just derived analytical result with our Sternheimer program. To this end, we do a numerical quasi-exact ground-state calculation of the hydrogen atom with the code used in section 5, and also do the linear response calculation quasi-exactly for the hydrogen atom. By quasi-exact we mean that numerical convergence parameters were chosen very stringent and only the external perturbation potential in the Sternheimer eqs. ( According to eq. ( x (a0) Fig. - -10 -5 0 5 10 Fig. heimer implementation, and also confirm the conclusion that the non-converging Sternheimer iterations for AK13 are not a result of numerical problems, but are to be attributed to the strongly diverging response of the AK13 approximation. For the sake of completeness we depict the PBE potential response in fig. Finally, we take a look at the B88 response. As explained earlier, one has to keep in mind that B88, like AK13, is built with a diverging enhancement factor, yet the divergence is milder. Fig. Fig. Thus, the B88 response calculations show that a diverging enhancement factor and potential response need not necessarily lead to problems in TDDFT calculations. In order to clarify the situation further, in fig. We investigated the linear response of the AK13 GGA with the aim of exploring whether the unusual features of its functional derivative can be exploited beneficially in TDDFT calculations. We found that we cannot converge such calculations. Contrasting the AK13 response with the one of the PBE GGA, for which the Sternheimer equations can be solved without any problem, revealed that AK13 leads to an asymptotically increasing exchange response that is absent in PBE. By comparing this to the exact response, which we calculated for the hydrogen atom, we traced this finding back to AK13's diverging enhancement factor and identified the feature as not being in agreement with the proper exchange behavior. Comparison with the B88 exchange GGA, which also has a diverging enhancement factor but leads to a self-consistent solution of the Sternheimer equations, showed that a diverging enhancement factor in itself does not need to ruin the response properties, but the particular form that is chosen in AK13 is problematic for TDDFT applications. Our original hope was that the AK13 functional may have been useful for providing "kernel corrections" to the linear response in situations where usual GGAs, which closely follow the density, do not. Long-range charge-transfer excitations would have been a hallmark example. Our study showed that even much simpler excitations cannot be calculated with the adiabatic AK13 functional. The peculiar results found here for AK13 indicate that it is very difficult to develop a semi-local functional that leads to pronounced but beneficial response properties. Whereas it is clear that the GGA potential response would have to be sharply increasing in regions of vanishing orbital overlap in order to provide a non-vanishing correction, our results here showed that too much of a divergence can ruin the response properties altogether. A possible way out of this disaccord may be to try to model the response semi-locally, but not semi-locally in the density, but semilocally in the orbitals, such as done in meta-GGAs We here give some details about how to use functionals of the GGA form in the Sternheimer approach. It is an appealing feature of the Sternheimer equations that they do not require the xc kernel by itself, but only the xc potential response. This is advantageous as the potential response only depends on one three-dimensional spatial coordinate, whereas the xc kernel depends on two. Thus, it is easier to analyze the effects of a particular xc approximation on the linear response by looking at the xc potential response instead of the xc kernel itself. The starting point for the derivation of the AK13 potential response is the GGA form of the (semi-local) exchange energy functional from eq. ( δn(r) , which can be extracted from Ref. (40) (41) According to eq. ( with Aside from derivatives of the exchange enhancement factor, the functional derivatives of s, u and t are needed for δB(r) δn(r ′ ) . These are given by: Altogether these equations yield the functional derivative of B(r) in terms of the functional derivatives of δs(r) δn(r ′ ) , δu(r) δn(r ′ ) and δt(r) δn(r ′ ) : In none of the Sternheimer eqs. ( throughout this manuscript, eq. ( In the occuring integral, the integration variable is r ′ and the only dependences on r ′ in δB(r) δn(r ′ ) are buried in the δ-functions of δs(r) δn(r ′ ) , δu(r) δn(r ′ ) and δt(r) δn(r ′ ) . Thus, the r ′ integration in eq. ( where ζ is s, u or t, respectively. These integrals are given by: At this point the exchange potential response of eq. ( 3 I and -F ′′′ (s) 3 4 This is the potential response for a spin-independent calculation. The spin-scaling relation for the x kernel then leads to the spin-dependent potential response in the adiabatic approximation. For implementing a given GGA, it only remains to compute the first, second and third derivatives of the exchange enhancement factor, i.e., F ′ (s), F ′′ (s), F ′′′ (s). We start from the Sternheimer eqs. ( where |φ + and |φ -are the orbital responses of an orbital starting its propagation in the hydrogen atom 1s groundstate orbital |φ 1s , ǫ 1s is the eigenenergy of the hydrogen atom 1s ground-state orbital and h is the ground-state Hamiltonian of the hydrogen atom. The projector Q = 1 -|φ 1s φ 1s | is of no effect in this case, as φ 1s |V + ext |φ 1s = 0. This is because |φ 1s is an even function with respect to its spatial coordinates, but V + ext is a linear function with regard to its spatial coordinates according to eq. ( The calculation for the hydrogen atom is of course a spin-dependent one. However, as only one spin channel is occupied, and as there is no preference for either of the two possibilities, the spin index is omitted in this section. |φ + and |φ -are orthogonal to |φ 1s Inserting this into the Sternheimer eqs. ( where ǫ j is the corresponding hydrogen ground-state energy eigenvalue of |φ j . From this the coefficients c ± i can be determined as which by inserting these coefficients into eq. ( For the further derivation the matrix element = eE φ i |x|φ 1s has to be calculated, where the external electric field points in the x-direction (E = E e x ). In order to evaluate this, each of the three parts φ i , x and φ 1s , respectively, can be expressed by spherical harmonics. Ref. With this and eqs. ( As already mentioned in section 4, the parameter η is introduced to model the switch-on process of the external perturbation. In the adiabatic limit of η → 0, the density response for ω = ω In line with section's 6.2 objective to evaluate the potential response for the 1s → 2p x excitation, eq. ( i.e., drop the proportionality factors. Inserting the explicit, analytic forms of φ 1s (r) and φ 2px (r) 