Conventional scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is limited to a bandwidth of circa 1kHz around DC. Here, we develop, build and test a novel amplifier circuit capable of measuring the tunneling current in the MHz regime while simultaneously performing conventional STM measurements. This is achieved with an amplifier circuit including a LC tank with a quality factor exceeding 600 and a home-built, low-noise high electron mobility transistor (HEMT). The amplifier circuit functions while simultaneously scanning with atomic resolution in the tunneling regime, i.e. at junction resistances in the range of giga-ohms, and down towards point contact spectroscopy. To enable high signal-to-noise and meet all technical requirements for the inclusion in a commercial low temperature, ultra-high vacuum STM, we use superconducting cross-wound inductors and choose materials and circuit elements with low heat load. We demonstrate the high performance of the amplifier by spatially mapping the Poissonian noise of tunneling electrons on an atomically clean Au(111) surface. We also show differential conductance spectroscopy measurements at 3MHz, demonstrating superior performance over conventional spectroscopy techniques. Further, our technology could be used to perform impedance matched spin resonance and distinguish Majorana modes from more conventional edge states. Possible applications of scanning tunneling microscopy experiments in the MHz regime include high-frequency differential conductance measurements, scanning spin resonance experiments, and noise spectroscopy on the atomic scale. Conventionally, this is prevented in STM by the combination of a GOhm resistance of the tunnel junction and a capacitor from the cabling which form a low pass filter in the kHz regime. In this paper, we build a matching circuit including superconducting inductors and a home-built HEMT that allows us to measure STM currents at MHz frequencies while remaining in tunneling and with atomic resolution. We demonstrate the amplifier's superior performance for both scanning noise spectroscopy and MHz differential conductance measurements. We start with an introduction to noise spectroscopy. Measurements of electronic noise can yield information in mesoscopic systems that is not present in their time-averaged transport characteristics, including fractional charges in the quantum hall regime As for the application of MHz differential conductance measurements, we use a lock-in amplifier as it is done conventionally, but with 3MHz instead of the more common 400Hz -1kHz. The clear advantage is that in this way, one can perform the spectroscopy measurement in a frequency window where 1/f noise is much lower. In addition to this, we can clearly separate the high and low frequency signal, thus it is, for example, easier to measure in feedback. Bringing noise measurements to STM in the tunneling regime (Rjunction >~ 1GOhm) comes with unique challenges, which prevented any atomic resolution noise measurement in the tunneling regime thus far. The high impedance of the tunnel junction, formed by the few angstroms vacuum gap between the STM tip and sample, is the critical obstacle. Together with the capacitance of the interfacing coax cable, the junction acts as a low pass filter only allowing transmission of signals in the small frequency range Here, we report on a new amplifier circuit that allows us to overcome these challenges. The requirements for our amplifier were: (i) the amplifier should not interfere with traditional STM measurements, (ii) it should work in the GOhm regime, (iii), it has to be possible to easily implement the amplifier in a commercial STM, (iv) it has to be compatible with UHV, implying low outgassing so that the system can be baked and ultra-high-(cryogenic) vacuum can be achieved. Our key figures of merit are: (i) the low noise of the circuit, (ii) the most efficient separation of high and low frequency signals, and (iii) the highest possible Q factor of the resonator for highest amplification at 3MHz. This article is structured as follows. Noise in a STM junction is discussed in section II. A block diagram of the newly developed system for noisespectroscopy measurements in STM is presented in section III, followed by a discussion on the requirements for implementing such techniques in STM. Section IV describes the realization of this new amplifier. A demonstration measurement on an Au(111) surface is presented in section V. Differential conductance measurements with MHz voltage modulation are discussed in section VI. We start by considering the types of unwanted noise present in a STM setup: mechanical noise, thermal (Johnson) noise, amplifier noise, and flicker (1/f) noise. They have distinguishable frequency dependences, as shown in figure Our goal is thus to increase the bandwidth and move it to higher frequencies, all whilst retaining the conventional capabilities and staying in the tunneling regime. To achieve the requirements and goals of section I while avoiding the unwanted noise sources described in section II, we develop a resonance circuit based amplifier including a resonator-based bias-tee. We follow the principle of amplifier circuits built for noise spectroscopy measurements in mesoscopic systems The high-frequency part of the signal is then passed through the parallel RLC circuit (tank, indicated in purple fig. The heart of the circuit is built on a ceramic printed circuit board (Rogers Corp TMM10i, selected for the very low outgassing properties) as depicted in figure The board is located close to the STM head, at the base temperature of the liquid He 4 cryostat (Unisoku USM1500). Figure The input of the amplifier is connected to the STM tip via a coaxial cable (silver plated Cu mini-coax CW2040-3650F) with a total capacitance between inner and outer conductor of Cw=30pF. The bias-tee (indicated by green shading) and tank (purple shading) combination is formed by two home-built superconducting Niobium inductors L1= L2=66μH coupled by capacitors Cc=100pF (Murata GRM 0805-size surface mount). The low-frequency transmission of the bias-tee is shown in figure The resonance circuit is formed by the self-resonance of the superconducting Nb inductors in combination with the coaxial cable Cw, providing a resonance frequency of 3.009MHz. Parallel self-capacitances of the Nb inductors are also shown in figure The high-impedance part of the amplification scheme (tank circuit coupled to STM junction) is matched to the 50 Ω impedance of the spectrum analyzer by a home-built low-noise high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) made using molecular beam epitaxy. These specially designed HEMT's can reach unprecedented low noise levels at 1 MHz with a noise voltage of 0.25nV/√Hz and a noise current of 2.2fA/√Hz and under deep cryogenic conditions (≤ 4.2 K), and with an input capacitance of about 5pF The operation point of the HEMT is determined by R2 and R3 and the supply voltage. Since we aim to have a very low power dissipation we choose R2=1kΩ to give a saturation current of the HEMT of a few tenths of mA. To ensure that the HEMT is in saturation we measured the drain current as function of drainsource voltage at room temperature and 4K by varying the supply voltage, as depicted in figure 3c. In the following demonstration the HEMT is biased in saturation at V=0.5V. The voltage fluctuations in the 50 Ω line are amplified at room temperature by a +40dB current amplifier with an input current noise of 310 pV/√Hz (Femto HAS-X-1-40) and is finally terminated by the 50 Ω input impedance of a Zurich Instruments MFLI digital spectrum analyzer. The power spectral density measured at the input of the spectrum analyzer is plotted in figure To demonstrate the simultaneous use of the STM feedback system and noise sensitive measurements in the tunneling regime, we performed noise spectroscopy measurements on a gold on mica sample. We believe that the Au(111) surface is most ideal for characterizing our noise-sensitive measurement since the sample is metallic thus any electron correlations are negligible. Figure In the same field of view we performed noise-spectroscopy measurements to resolve the current noise with atomic-scale resolution. Even though several topographic features can be observed, the spatially resolved noise map (figure The single point noise spectra (figure A second application for our amplifier circuit is to measure differential conductance (dI/dV) which is proportional to the local density of states in a frequency range where 1/f noise is suppressed. In conventional STM differential conductance measurements, a voltage modulation has to be applied in the DC-1kHz range, now we can also perform dI/dV measurements at 3MHz. At this frequency, 1/f (and other) noise should be considerably lower, as we discussed in section II, figure Figure First, we compare the differential conductance measured over a period of 10s in tunneling (6mV, 200pA) with the feedback disabled. In this way we can check the influence of slow (1/f) fluctuations on the differential conductance signal. Comparing the conventional dI/dV measurement (figure We have built a low temperature, low noise amplifier to measure STM currents at 3MHz. We used two superconducting Nb inductors to form a bias-tee and tank resonator coupled to a home-built, low-noise HEMT which is essential for the impedance matching to 50 Ω coax cable. We demonstrated the performance of this amplifier by performing noise spectroscopy measurements on an Au(111) surface, showcasing simultaneous visualization of the surface topology and atomically resolved noise maps. We further demonstrated that the amplifier allows to measure differential conductance spectra at 3MHz where 1/f noise is strongly suppressed. We believe this newly developed technique will be useful for a variety of applications. Our immediate goal is to investigate many-body correlation effects in many quantum materials, including fluctuating stripes or orbital currents that have been proposed before Note: A very similar amplifier is reported by Massee et al.: "Atomic scale shotnoise using broadband scanning tunnelling microscopy". 