Superconducting nanowires undergoing quantum phase-slips have potential for impact in electronic devices, with a high-accuracy quantum current standard among a possible toolbox of novel components. A key element of developing such technologies is to understand the requirements for, and control the production of, superconducting nanowires that undergo coherent quantum phase-slips. We present three fabrication technologies, based on using electron-beam lithography or neon focussed ion-beam lithography, for defining narrow superconducting nanowires, and have used these to create nanowires in niobium nitride with widths in the range of 20-250 nm. We present characterisation of the nanowires using DC electrical transport at temperatures down to 300 mK. We demonstrate that a range of different behaviours may be obtained in different nanowires, including bulk-like superconducting properties with critical-current features, the observation of phase-slip centres and the observation of zero conductance below a critical voltage, characteristic of coherent quantum phase-slips. We observe critical voltages up to 5 mV, an order of magnitude larger than other reports to date. The different prominence of quantum phase-slip effects in the various nanowires may be understood as arising from the differing importance of quantum fluctuations. Control of the nanowire properties will pave the way for routine fabrication of coherent quantum phase-slip nanowire devices for technology applications. Superconducting nanowires have attracted interest for several decades, both fundamental interest in superconductivity in reduced dimensions and for the development of applications. Applications in technological devices have grown out of these studies, with photon detectors, relevant to application in both astronomy Quantum phase-slips may occur in superconducting nanowires with cross-sectional dimensions ξ, where ξ is the superconducting coherence length, the shortest characteristic length on which the properties of a superconductor can vary. A quantum phase-slip (QPS) process may actually be coherent or incoherent. Coherent quantum phase-slips involve coherent quantum tunnelling between states corresponding to different numbers of flux quanta on the two sides of the nanowire, such that the system may end up in superpositions of these states. This is the charge-flux dual of the Josephson junction, in which the behaviour results from coherent quantum tunnelling between states corresponding to different numbers of Cooper pairs on the two sides of a weak link. If, on the other hand, a QPS process is not sufficiently strong to lead to a final state that is a superposition of states corresponding to different numbers of flux quanta on the two sides of the nanowire, incoherent quantum phase-slips may still occur. These comprise individual 2π phase-slips occurring within the nanowire, with associated dissipation, which shows up as a measurable resistance for the nanowire. Each phaseslip event corresponds to the transfer of one quantum of magnetic flux from one side of the nanowire to the other. Incoherent QPS are conceptually related to (also incoherent) thermally activated phase-slips (TAPS) The characteristic macroscopic manifestation of coherent QPS in the DC geometry is zero conductance below arXiv:1806.07708v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 20 Jun 2018 a critical voltage V c . Although this has similarities to Coulomb blockade features in Josephson junctions and tunnel junctions In DC transport measurements on devices with related physics, measurements of the temperature dependence of resistance, R(T ), have historically been very useful for their characterisation. Measurements of a residual resistance remaining in superconducting nanowires just below the superconducting transition temperature T c in the 1970s revealed the presence of TAPS. In later studies of the superconductor-insulator transition in both thin films The absence of further reports of the V c feature that is characteristic of CQPS in DC I(V ) measurements, despite, anecdotally, experimental efforts by several research groups, hints at experimental challenges in realising all the requirements for CQPS in the technologically useful DC-transport geometry where l is the length of the nanowire, R ξ = R ξ/w is the normal-state resistance of a coherence length of nanowire, R = R N w/l its sheet resistance, R N the low-temperature normal-state resistance, w the nanowire width, R Q = h/(4e 2 ) = 6.45 kΩ the resistance quantum for Cooper pairs and a and b numerical constants of order unity. R ξ should therefore be maximised in order to maximise E S . Coherent QPS should only be expected in the limit E S k B T . The characteristic voltage scale for the critical voltage in a simple CQPS nanowire is V c = 2πE S /(2e), and V c is also the characteristic scale for the width of voltage steps at constant current in the proposed dual-Shapiro effect, which provides another motivation for maximising E S . Mooij et al. As shown by the form of Equation The detailed properties of materials at the nanoscale are often dependent on the means of fabrication, and so it is important that several means of generating nanowires are assessed. Experimental realisations of these superconducting nanowires have focussed either on the use of molecular templating techniques As already indicated, the nanowires should be embedded in a high-impedance environment. This also isolates the nanowire from environmental influence. Thin-film inductors may be formed by wider lengths of the same superconducting material, which have substantial kinetic inductance in the superconducting state, but which are wide enough that their quantum phase-slip rate is negligible. If thin-film resistors are required, these may be formed by depositing an additional material to form part of the circuit In practice, controlling the properties of the superconducting material close to the superconductor-insulator transition is far from trivial. The superconducting properties of a material are modified in very thin films and also in very narrow nanowires within such films. Inhomogeneities are present as a result of randomness in the film deposition process. Such inhomogeneities both may become accentuated during the etching process and also become more relevant to the electrical properties in a narrow nanowire as the width decreases towards the length scale of inhomogeneities in the film. Furthermore, close enough to the superconductor-insulator transition, an inhomogeneous electronic state of the film is expected on theoretical grounds In this article, we report investigations carried out in niobium nitride. We have investigated the variation in the properties of the material as its dimensions are reduced down to nanowires. We assess three different fabrication technologies for creating narrow nanowires and demonstrate their use for generating nanowires with width dimensions below 20 nm. We report a range of superconducting and CQPS properties that we have observed in such nanowires, interpret the results, discuss their implications and outline challenges that will be relevant to others seeking to carry out similar studies. In this section, we introduce the nanowires fabricated by the three different fabrication technologies we have employed. We report both investigations of the changes in properties of the niobium nitride films as the thickness is varied, revealed by R(T ) measurements, and then report representative I(V ) behaviour of a number of niobium nitride nanowires, showing a range of behaviours, including the emergence of behaviour characteristic of coherent quantum phase-slips. Properties to Thin-Film Behaviour We have studied the variation of the NbN properties away from the bulk properties as we reduce the thickness dimension The progressive suppression in T c in thinner films is in line with observations of other materials systems where, for unremarkable constant resistivity and T c , a coefficient B = 1 would be expected. The inset to Figure The results in Figure Nanowire Fabrication In this section, we describe how we have obtained narrow nanowires from films of niobium nitride and in the following sections present first the variation in the properties of the niobium nitride as they are formed into nanowires of decreasing width dimension and then the characteristics of nanowires with widths down to ∼20 nm. There are several options for defining very narrow nanowires. We have used three different techniques to define narrow nanowires, based either on electron beam lithography or on neon focussed ion-beam milling (Ne-FIB). These are shown schematically in Figure A second technique we have used for defining nanowires utilises a positive-tone resist rather than a negative resist. A "cut-out" strategy 30 is used, in which we use EBL to expose the resist to define the edges of the nanowires to be removed, then transfer the pattern to the film by RIE. A third fabrication strategy we have employed does not rely on either an e-beam resist mask or RIE when defining the nanowire. We use focussed neon ion-beam milling, which has resolution as good as 5 nm, in order to remove material from the film to define the nanowire. We will now present DC electrical characterisation of NbN nanowires obtained by all three techniques. I(V ) measurements at cryogenic temperatures on several NbN nanowires are shown in Figures Figure Figure The narrowest nanowire has a non-hysteretic I(V ) and does not display any jumps. The low-bias resistance is still non-zero, increasing as the current increases. This qualitative behaviour is one of the typical characteristic behaviours we observe in other NbN nanowires (see Figure Figure Figure Figure Tangents to the high-bias part of the I(V ) characteristics in both Figures Table I collects relevant parameters for several nanowires we have fabricated. It may be observed that the different types of behaviour do not show a simple correlation with variations in any of the nominal physi-TABLE I: Nanowire sample properties. Fab method = fabrication method, Cut-out = cut-out using PMMA resist and EBL, HSQ = fabrication by EBL using hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) resist, Ne-FIB = nanowires defined by neon FIB, sc = standard superconducting behaviour, PSCs = phase-slip centres, IQPS = successful fit of I(V ) to a model based on incoherent quantum phase-slips (see the main text). R is the sheet resistance above Tc. Indicated Tc values are defined as R(Tc) = 0.5Rmax, where Rmax is the maximum resistance and ∆Tc = T (R = 0.9Rmax) -T (R = 0.1Rmax). 'Circuit elements' indicate thin-film components included in series in the circuit; nanowires NbN80/1 and NbN81/2 have series resistance of 148 kΩ and series inductance with a length of 400 μm and a width of 200 nm. Nanowires 100414 and the films for which R(T ) is shown in Figure The observation of nanowire-to-nanowire variability of properties has apparent implications for technological applications. Sample-to-sample variability in properties has previously been observed in nanowire samples It is also possible that the relevant active cross-sectional dimensions of the nanowires are smaller than the measured physical dimensions. An interesting comparison for these samples is of the sample dimensions to the superconducting coherence length in NbN in the dirty limit, expected to be a few nanometres While the nanowire length has not been a major focus of this study, we are nonetheless able to make some inferences in relation to nanowire length. The nanowires investigated in this study were ∼1-10 μm long, similar to the lengths employed in References 9,10, but longer than the nanowires employed in References 8,11,12, which were in the range of 30-750 nm. Two previous works have argued that collective excitations in longer nanowires might suppress CQPS effects Nanowire NbN80/1, in which the substantial critical voltage ≈5 mV has been observed, was one of only two nanowires reported here in which series inductance and resistance were included. Nanowire NbN81/2, deposited in the same experimental run and nominally having a very similar width, as well as also similarly incorporating series inductance and resistance, shows no V c feature at all. It appears likely that a composition closer to the superconductor-insulator transition, as indicated by the R(T ) dependence, is a critical factor in determining the substantial V c for nanowire NbN80/1; the series inductance and resistance elements may also be important, but are clearly not sufficient. The different compositions in the two co-deposited samples may indicate that the thickness of nanowire NbN80/1 is smaller, as a result of thickness variations during deposition or more likely due to over-etching. It is clear that the observations of these two nanowires indicate variability in nanowire properties and highlight an outstanding challenge in reproducibly obtaining nanowires exhibiting strong QPS. The different fabrication methods we have utilised have different characteristic features and different advantages and disadvantages. Using both EBL and Ne-FIB, we have obtained nanowires with widths < 20 nm. Nanowire widths of 15-20 nm are routine to generate using the EBL negative-resist process using hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) as the resist. We have obtained nanowire widths of ≈20 nm via the cut-out technique, using polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as the resist. Ne-FIB is able to generate nanowires with widths below 25 nm, although fabrication becomes more challenging for the narrowest nanowires. Although the results we report showing a critical voltage feature have been measured in samples fabricated using the negative resist technique with HSQ, we believe that the ultimate widths obtainable by the other two techniques are small enough that they are also suitable for use for fabrication of nanowires for use as CQPS elements. The processes determining the morphology and roughness of the nanowires are different for nanowires fabricated via EBL and via Ne-FIB. For EBL-fabricated (negative resist or positive-resist cut-out) nanowires, the sidewall morphology is affected by the sidewall of the resist mask. The edges of a resist mask with non-vertical sidewalls will be etched through prior to completion of etching, leading to transfer of the resist mask profile into the NbN nanowire. Where nonuniformities in thickness of the resist are present, these might also be transferred into the nanowire profile -an issue that is more relevant for PMMA resist as the polymer molecule sizes are ≈20 nm, with inhomogeneities in the resist at shorter length scales limiting the uniformity of the feature definition at those scales. The chemistry of the reactive ion etch process and the isotropic element of its chemical action also affect the morphology and roughness of the NbN material remaining after RIE. In particular, since different components of the nanowire, such as oxides, etch at different rates, the RIE processing will tend to accentuate inhomogeneities present in the deposited film as the nanowire is defined. Etching by Ne-FIB, on the other hand, is directionally highly anisotropic, a feature that is beneficial for welldefined vertical sidewalls. Of course, this process is not, in practice, perfect. The ion beam has a Gaussian beam profile rather than being perfectly confined; however, the limiting factor for sidewall definition is actually scattering once the beam enters the material For samples fabricated using a negative-resist mask, with HSQ, several experimental challenges have informed the parameters we use. Firstly, the thickness of the HSQ layer should be chosen to satisfy two competing requirements. The HSQ layer is etched along with the NbN during the RIE stage, albeit at a slower rate, and therefore must be sufficiently thick to protect the NbN nanowire underneath it while the unwanted areas of NbN are removed. The maximum resist thickness is set by aspect-ratio considerations: an HSQ feature that, after EBL patterning, has a high aspect ratio, i.e., its thickness is much greater than its width, is mechanically unstable and may fall over during development or drying. The ideal thickness for the HSQ layer would be such that it is just removed at the end of the RIE stage. Adhesion during patterning is an issue that we have tackled. While good adhesion of HSQ to the underlying NbN film for features with both in-plane dimensions 1 μm is found, in some samples the narrow nanowire sections of the HSQ resist-mask apparently can float off the NbN film during development. While even long nanowire sections of the resist-mask may sometimes land intact on the substrate following development I(V ) measurements should be made using careful filtering Another highly relevant issue in measurements of nanowires undergoing coherent quantum phase-slips is the presence of long time-constants before the steady state response is reached following a change in bias A further consideration in circuit design relates to mitigating self-heating in the devices. Since coupling between electron and phonon systems is weak at mK temperatures, such devices are prone to overheating when dissipation is present. In order to minimise such heating, thin-film resistors should be designed to have as large a volume as possible to achieve the required resistance value NbN films are deposited at room temperature on sapphire or silicon substrates using reactive DC magnetron sputtering from a Nb target in a nitrogen-containing atmosphere. Using a pressure of 5 × 10 -3 mbar with a 1:1 flow of Ar and N 2 gas, 150-W sputter power gives a deposition rate of around 10 nm/min. In this section, we present the experimental details of the three methods we have used to fabricate nanowires. These are shown schematically in Figure Our first technique for defining nanowires employs a negative resist to define a mask. We use hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) resist, diluted to 1% HSQ in methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) and spun at 2000 rpm to give a 35-nm HSQ layer. To achieve nanowires with widths as low as 15-20 nm, we used a 10-kV electron beam to write single-pixel lines in the resist using a line dose set at some multiple of a default value of 1280 pC/cm, followed by development for one minute in MF-26A developer. The nanowire is then formed using reactive ion etching (RIE) at 100 W and 100 mTorr using flows of 35 sccm of CHF 3 and 14 sccm of SF 6 for approximately 120 s in 20-s bursts to mitigate potential overheating during etching. Since removal of exposed HSQ requires the use of HF, we do not remove any HSQ remaining after RIE. For the second technique we have used for defining nanowires via EBL, we utilise polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), a positive-tone resist, and follow a "cut-out" strategy The third fabrication technique we have used is based on neon focussed ion-beam milling. This does not rely on either an e-beam resist mask or RIE when defining the nanowire and allows milling with 5-nm resolution. Although some damage is inevitable in focussed ion-beam milling, since neon ions are inert (unlike the more commonly-used gallium), poisoning from implanted ions is expected to be avoided when milling using neon. We typically use a Ne ion beam accelerated to 15 kV, providing a beam current of ∼2 pA, to supply a dose of 0.5-1 nC/μm 2 to remove material from the NbN film to define the nanowire. Because of the relatively slow speed of milling, it is not practicable to fabricate the whole structure by FIB, so the deposited NbN film is first coated with PMMA and patterned by EBL, then etched by RIE to define the coarse features of the structure, in a similar way to the "cut-out" strategy. A wider nanowire (with a width of 300 nm) is patterned in this step, and this nanowire is then milled using the Ne-FIB to remove material in order to define a nanowire. In previously published work, we have also used this technique successfully to fabricate NbN nanowires as elements within superconducting co-planar waveguide resonators For some nanowire samples, we fabricate additional components in series with the narrow nanowire. Wider sections of NbN, deposited and patterned in the same steps as the narrow sections of nanowire, may, as a result of the high kinetic inductance of the NbN, conveniently be used to provide series inductance for the circuit. The wires are narrow in order to provide the maximum amount of inductance in the shortest length, but are made wide enough that they do not themselves experience significant QPS effects. Typically, we fabricate these inductor wires with widths of ≈200 nm. To provide series resistance for the nanowire circuits, we use electron beam lithography, reactive DC magnetron sputtering and lift-off to produce thin-film chromium oxide resistors with typical sheet resistance ∼ 1 kΩ, in a process we have described in detail elsewhere We have presented three different techniques for fabricating superconducting nanowires suitable for use as coherent quantum phase-slip elements. We have obtained nanowires with a width < 30 nm using all three techniques, and all three appear promising for fabricating nanowires for use as CQPS elements. We have characterised the effect of reducing both thickness and width dimensions on the superconducting properties of NbN and have studied several NbN nanowires with a composition approaching the superconductor-insulator transition. We have observed a variety of behaviours in the nanowires; these behaviours include standard superconducting behaviour as would characterise wide and thick superconducting tracks and phase-slip centres, as well as current-voltage characteristics as characterise incoherent QPS and zero conductance below a critical voltage V c as characterises coherent QPS. We have observed critical voltages V c up to 5 mV, an order of magnitude larger than in previous reports. We have confirmed both that the V c feature is accompanied by a critical-current feature at higher bias and that the V c feature develops over the same temperature range as the superconductivity, indicating that the V c feature has a superconducting origin, as expected for a feature associated with CQPS. We have observed V c features in nanowires with lengths ∼10 μm, suggesting that it is not essential that CQPS elements are constituted from short nanowires. We have observed a V c feature in nanowires with cross-sectional dimensions exceeding the superconducting coherence length, suggesting the importance of materials inhomogeneity in determining the properties of nanowires. Our results also indicate the importance of material composition in the properties of superconducting nanowires with dimensions 20 nm, with the use of filtered measurement lines and a high-impedance environment being preferable to promote CQPS behaviour. The success of the presented fabrication technologies and observation of enhanced critical voltage are promising for applications of superconducting nanowires in coherent quantum phase-slip applications, and the variety of behaviour observed in similar nanowires also points to a remaining challenge of reproducibly controlling the properties of fabricated nanowires.