We propose a solid state maser based on Cu2O, where ensemble of highly excited Rydberg exciton states serves as a gain medium. We show that the system is highly tunable with external electric field, allowing for a wide range of emission frequencies. Numerical simulations of system dynamics are performed to optimize the conditions for efficient masing and estimate the emission power. Excitons, bound pairs of electrons and holes, are the basic excitations of semiconductors. Rydberg excitons (RE) in cuprous oxide, discovered in 2014 by Kazimierczuk et al The majority of research involving in Rydberg excitons, both theoretically and experimentally Due to the fact that high Rydberg excitons can interact resonantly and very strongly with milimeter-wave radiation, we aim to investigate the dynamics of such a medium in the situation of population inversion, which leads to possible realization of a solid state analogue of Rydberg atom maser Recent experimental verifcation of solid state maser based on diamond We recall a simple semiclassical theory of maser operation with respect to the specific case of RE in Cu 2 O and optimize the maser parameters discussing the geometry, cavity and choice of excitonic states. Our numerical simulation demonstrates that masing and microwave amplification are feasible in accessible conditions (submillimetre sample size, Q∼ 10 5 , pump power density 10 -3 W/mm 2 with the 571 nm optical pump), obtaining up to 10 -6 W emission power in the sub-and millimetre wavelength range. be used to tune the energy levels via Stark shift where is the cavity dissipation rate, b is pump absorption quenching factor which depends on exciton density and drops to 0 then Rydberg blockade is reached. is the Einstein cofficient. This quantity depends on the dipole moment d 12 and is further modified by the so-called Purcell factor P 12 where V is the mode volume of the cavity. In the limit of closed system, e. g. Q >> 1, it is similar to the geometric volume Therefore, by applying external electric field, one can use the Stark shift to match the transition frequency to the cavity, e. g. ω 23 -ω c ≈ 0 and obtain P 23 ∼ Q. The damping rates in Eqs (1) depend on the Einstein's coefficient for spontaneous emission which is also influenced by the factor P 12 . This means that transition rate γ 32 can be amplified by a factor of Q ∼ 10 5 . This is the key idea of our paper; we take advantage of the fact that the exceptionally long lifetimes of higher Rydberg excitonic states make the n 2 level metastable. At the same time, the lifetime of n 3 is shortened by Purcell factor, so that the n 3 → n 2 transition becomes dominant. Therefore, a large population N 2 can be maintained even for relatively low pump power, leading to the population inversion. Note that the n 1 level is short-living, so that in most cases N 1 ≈ 0. When a steady state is reached, e. g., ∂W ∂t = 0, one can calculate the emission power It is important to note that due to the Rydberg blockade, there is an upper limit of exciton density, which can be estimated as ρ max = (4/3πr 3 n ) -1 ∼ n -6 , where is the excitonic radius For the spontaneous emission rate to the ground state, we have used value from data fitting The above values are taken from experimental data and include the effects of scattering on acoustical and optical phonons For n 2 → n 1 transitions, one can use the estimation since the transition probability scales as ω 3 In general, the transition dipole moment is highest for nearby states and scales with the exciton radius Due to multiple accessible Rydberg excitonic states, there is a significant number of possible combinations of n 3 , n 2 , n 1 states which need to be examined for choosing the optimal conditions for masing. In particular, there are 2300 systems with energy levels n 1 < n 2 < n 3 < 25. The Cu 2 O crystal is placed in a metallic cavity (see Fig. The pump irradiates the crystal from sides, with power density of ρ p =1 mW/mm 2 to avoid excessive quenching of high n resonances is beneficial due to the high surface to volume ratio; the absorbed pump power is proportional to the side area, while the maximum number of RE depends on crystal volume. For very small r, the number of excitons which can be created within considered volume is limited due to the Rydberg blockade. This is particularly important for the considered 18 → 13 → 11 system, which cannot sustain masing below r ≈ 0.15 mm. To sum up, there is an interplay between the size of the upper level excitons, crystal geometry and the number of excitons. Basing on these results, we have chosen r = 0.2 mm to include the higher n states and ensure that the systems based on lower states operate well below Rydberg blockade limit. With above mentioned parameters, the emission power has been calculated for all level configurations. The results are shown on the Fig. We have demonstrated a proposal for obtaining masing action in RE Cu 2 O system. The device can be tuned by external electric field and due to the high density of available energy levels, a wide range of wavelengths can be generated. The proposed system is robust and operates in a wide range of pumping power and cavity Q factor. 