We report a THz reflectarray metasurface which uses graphene as active element to achieve beam steering, shaping and broadband phase modulation. This is based on the creation of a voltage controlled reconfigurable phase hologram, which can impart different reflection angles and phases to an incident beam, thus replacing bulky and fragile rotating mirrors used for terahertz imaging. This can also find applications in other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, paving the way to versatile optical devices including light radars, adaptive optics, electro-optical modulators and screens. Metasurfaces are planar devices based on a periodic or quasi-periodic bi-dimensional array of cells (typically dielectric or metallic elements placed on a layered substrate) capable of manipulating impinging light to obtain various functionalities, such as focusing SLG is ideally suited to modulate terahertz waves because of its high mobility and easy integration on Si technology. The mobility is linked to the massless nature of carriers in SLG and allows for a larger conductivity tuneability range than Si, for a given carrier density interval We report a THz reflectarray metasurface exploiting SLG as active element to achieve beam steering, shaping and broadband phase modulation. Our device achieves dynamical beam steering thanks to an array of cells (including metal and gated SLG) built on a reflective substrate, see Fig. The beam steering RA can work as intended only if the cell can modulate its reflection coefficient between two values (Γ ON , Γ OFF ) with a phase modulation π (see Methods M3). The amplitude of the reflection coefficient should be maximized and remain constant in the two states. This is equivalent to creating a metasurface where each cell has a tuneable surface impedance, since the reflection coefficient Γ and the surface impedance Z S are related by where η = μ 0 ε -1 377 Ω is the free space impedance, μ 0 is the vacuum magnetic permeability and ε 0 is the vacuum dielectric permittivity. The cell can then be designed to obtain suitable values of Z S starting from the SLG's sheet impedance Z g = σ -1 , where σ is SLG's conductivity. This can be changed via electric field gating between a maximum (σ ON ) and minimum (σ OFF ). It is possible to control the reflection phase in a binary way (two opposite values of the phase) if the metasurface is designed to have complete absorption (Γ = 0) for Z S = Z S,ON • Z S,OFF . Because Γ = 0 implies Z S = η, the approximate design condition becomes Z S,ON • Z S,OFF = η. The geometric average is used here, to ensure that Γ ON = -Γ OFF , providing binary phase modulation with the same amplitude in two states. The metasurface design must therefore achieve Z S = η when Z g = Z g,ON • Z g,OFF . For our samples we measure Z g,ON = 800 Ω, Z g,OFF = 4000 Ω. Therefore Z g,ON • Z g,OFF = 1789 Ω = 4.75η. This implies that the cell must be designed to scale down SLG's impedance to a factor 4.75 to be at the optimal working point. To achieve this, we first chose a Salisbury screen configuration where f 0 = 1 THz is the design frequency, λ 0 is the corresponding free space wavelength, c is the speed of The metallic structure in Fig. The cells (20 × 100 μm 2 ) are smaller than half of the wavelength (300 μm at 1 THz). Each reflects the incident waves with a reflection coefficient that can be modulated applying different voltages to SLG. Numerical simulations and measurements of the reflection coefficient are in Fig. The unit cell geometry is optimized so that, at the target design frequency of 1.05 THz, different σ cause the reflection coefficient to vary from one value to its opposite, passing close to the total absorption condition (Γ = 0). In this way, by switching the cell between these two states (ON and OFF) a local phase modulation of π can be achieved. This is similar to the concept proposed in Refs.15, 16 and demonstrated experimentally at microwave frequencies in Refs.3, 19. The slight shift measured reflection coefficient with respect to the simulations visible in the figures is due to fabrication tolerances. Beam steering can then be achieved by switching the cell state in the array so that a dynamical and reconfigurable phase hologram is created, obtaining a fully reconfigurable RA. We focus on beam steering and shaping in one plane. This allows for a simplification of the control network, whereby all cells belonging to the same column are connected together, and each column can be controlled by an individual voltage. The far electric field radiation pattern obtained illuminating the array with a plane wave having electric field amplitude E 0 and angle of incidence θ i (in our case fixed to 45 • ) can be estimated based on the interference of discrete radiators Γ n e jnk0L(sin θ-sin θi) (3 where θ is the deflection angle, f C (θ) is the radiation pattern of a single isolated column, f A (θ) is called array factor where λ is the wavelength. If P is an even integer the pattern consists of a repetitions of a supercell of P cells (with P/2 cells set to phase 0 and P/2 to π). Fig. Beam-steering with integer P (from 4 to 8) is shown in Fig. Our device can also reconfigure the beam shape. This is achieved by smoothly changing the local P from one extreme to the other of the array using a chirped pattern, as shown in Fig. Besides focusing and widening the beam, more complex operations can be performed. E.g., Fig. We now consider the effect of shifting a periodic pattern (with P = 2, 4, 6) of a finite number of cells, and we verify that the corresponding time domain sinusoid is similarly de-phased. This is equivalent to the phase shift associated to a lateral translation of an optical grating In summary, we reported a reconfigurable RA metasurface for terahertz waves using SLG. Beam steering, shaping and modulation were achieved. Our results demonstrate that graphene can be embedded in metasurfaces providing an unprecedented control and modulation capabilities for THz beams, with applications for adaptive optics, sensing and telecommunications. Our approach can be extended to mid infrared, and to two dimensional beam steering, by using individual cell control. The starting point is a Si on insulator (SOI) wafer (produced by Ultrasil Corp.) having a device layer with the required characteristics for our dielectric spacer with 20 μm thickness and high resistivity ∼ 1 kΩ•cm, Fig. The aim of the following steps is to eliminate the SOI handle and box layer, to expose the device layer. This is done by first grinding the Si handle wafer down to 100 μm (Fig. The gate oxide (200 nm Al 2 O 3 ) is prepared using atomic layer deposition (ALD) on all the wafer, as shown in Fig. SLG is grown on Cu foil (99.8% purity) by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on a tube furnace as for Ref. The RA is characterized using a commercial fiber coupled THz time domain setup (by Menlo Systems, model TERA K15 mark II). The THz emitter is mounted at 45 degrees of incidence with respect to the RA, while the detector is placed on a motorized rotation stage. The system is first aligned in transmission to maximize the THz signal intensity, and subsequently in reflection, using a reference mirror mounted on the sample holder. This is mounted on a translation stage (motorized XY linear stages plus manual Z stage), to automatically alternate between sample and reference mirror. All measurements are normalized with respect to the reference mirror, created on the same chip of the RA during the optical lithography process on the full wafer. Two different measurement modes are used, Figure • Collimated The beam is collimated and impinges on a large area of the sample (∼1 cm 2 ). The reduced spread of the angular components of the beam (when decomposed into a superposition of plane waves) ensures precise measurement of angles and radiation patterns, but part of the beam interacts with the area around the RA. • Focused: The beam is focused by an additional pair of lenses so that it impinges completely inside the array. However, this requires larger spread of the angular components, hence this mode is not accurate for angles and radiation pattern measurement. Instead, it is used to measure the reflection coefficient and the efficiency of the array. The measurements in Fig. The drawback of the collimated mode is the interaction of the beam with areas outside the RA metasurface. This can be addressed with the following postprocessing method. For radiation pattern characterization, two measurements are performed, one with the chosen control sequence, and the other with the opposite (logical NOT) control sequence. In this way, the steered beam will have opposite phase in the two cases (see Method M3) and the radiation pattern can be extracted by subtracting (frequency by frequency and angle by angle) these two measurements. Any contribution from the area outside the array is canceled by the subtraction. For the G-PSK case, the same is accomplished by subtracting from all the signals the average in the complex plane (frequency by frequency). An overall phase factor e -j(ωτ +φ) is removed from all the traces. A unique value of the delay τ is used for all the symbols in each G-PSK measurement. This is done to remove the free-space phase delay of the measured beam, due to slight differences in the paths when measuring the array and the reference mirror. Similarly, the removed phase factor φ is unique for all the traces, and it is used to align the symbols to the real and imaginary axes of the complex plane. The array geometry does not depend on the y direction since the array has a periodicity smaller than half wavelength in that direction, independently of the control pattern. We assume that the incident wave is propagating in the xz plane (i.e. k y = 0). In the low cell-to-cell coupling approximation w n e jnk0L sin θ where we assume for simplicity and without loss of generality that the RA is in the z = 0 plane. The electric field E i of an incident wave (with incident angle θ i with respect to the normal) is given by: Combining Eqs.7,6,5 we get: Γ n e jnk0L(sin θ-sin θi) = where we define the array factor f A (θ) as: Γ n e jnk0L(sin θ-sin θi) We notice that, if all the reflection coefficients are phase-modulated of π (thus reversing their sign), the total phase of the scattered field will also be out of phase of π, which is used to suppress the background in our measurements. If all the cells have the same Γ, then: A maximum in the reflection is obtained for θ = θ i (which is the direction of the specular reflection) where all the contributions of the summation add in phase. More generally, a maximum is obtained if: for λ = 2π/k 0 : Because λ/L = 3 in our case, only the specular reflection l = 0 satisfies this condition, for any θ i . Super-cells can be implemented by creating periodic patterns of reflection coefficients, fulfilling the condition Γ n = Γ n+P , where P is a positive integer number of cells in the super-cell. If a super-cell with periodicity P is implemented, then the array factor can be rewritten, by splitting the summation in two levels: an external sum over all the super-cells, and an internal one over the cells in a super-cell: Γ m e j(nP +m)k0L(sin θ-sin θi) = P m=1 Γ m e jmk0L(sin θ-sin θi) N/P n=0 e jnP k0L(sin θ-sin θi) Γ m e jmk0L(sin θ-sin θi) ( and the superarray factor f SA : and use them to decompose the array factor as f A (θ) = f SC (θ)f SA (θ). The final expression for the electric far field is then: The angular part of the radiation pattern f (θ) is decomposed in three factors (ordered here from the most directive to the least): • f SA , associated to the super-array, identifies a set of possible directions where light can be scattered, and behaves as a diffraction grating. • f SC , associated to the super-cell, gives different weights to the possible diffraction orders accordingly to the phase of the cells in the supercell. • f C , associated to the cell, slowly varying with θ in the subwavelength case and does not affect significantly the final pattern. The directions of diffracted beams launched by the array is then given by f SA (θ), and for each beam the following must be satisfied: Evaluating f SC for each of the diffracted beams: Γ m e jmk0L(sin θ-sin θi) = P m=1 Γ m e j2πml/P l ∈ Z In our case θ i = 45 • and we are operating at 1 THz. Also, let us consider the simplest case, with N even integer and with a supercell formed by N/2 cells with reflection phase 0 • followed by N/2 cells with reflection phase 180 • . l = -1 represents the steered beam of interest. The specular reflection (l = 0) is suppressed because f SC vanishes for θ = θ i . This is due to the fact that in our super-cell half of the cells have a reflection coefficient Γ and the remaining ones -Γ, so the total sum is zero. Then evaluating the summation for the considered supercell: The same cancelation holds for any even value of l. Any beam for odd values of l different from 1 and -1 is also strongly attenuated. For all our choices of period (P between 4 and 8) the l = 1 beam does not exist, since no real θ solves Eq.17 for the chosen beam wavelength and incident angle. Imperfections in the array may still cause smaller side lobes, i.e. unwanted beams for l = -1. This is especially true for odd and fractional values of P , where the analysis of Eq.19 does not apply rigorously (though it still describes qualitatively the situation). The geometric PSK operation can be understood inspecting f SC for l = -1, and noting that a translation of any supercell pattern described as Γ m ← Γ (m+1)modP creates a phase shift 2π/P (for an infinite array approximation): Γ r e -j2π(r-1)/P = e j2π/P P r=1 Γ r e -j2πr/P (21) The software Ansys HFSS is used to compute and optimize the reflection coefficient of the cells. In particular, the effect of the metallic bias lines on the cell impedance is reduced thanks to the optimization. Simulations are performed using the Floquet boundary conditions (equivalent to Bloch periodic boundary conditions, see for example The RA is glued on a support PCB substrate and each column is wirebonded to a PCB trace. Both ends of each column are connected to a high voltage transistor stage, and all the stages are controlled by two Arduino units. Fig. Tables I, II, III, IV show the control sequences used in each of our experiments. These are programmed into the Arduino module by the control computer. The latter can control the Arduino modules, the rotary stage, the XY stage, the high voltage generator and the terahertz setup, so that the measurements are completely automatized. ON and OFF states (or equivalently 1 and 0) correspond to the following voltages between SLG and retroreflector: V ON = 26V , V OFF = -44V . The sequences are generated by discretizing sinusoids and chirped sinusoids with different periods, which leads to quasi-periodic signals for odd and fractional P values. 8-GPSK Symbol 5 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 00111100 8-GPSK Symbol 6 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 01111000 8-GPSK Symbol 7 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 11110000 To column Control Our RA is based on the modulation of the reflected signal from each cell due to the variation of σ with voltage. Ref.6 demonstrated that specific upper bounds to the efficiency of such two-state modulators exist, and depend uniquely on the conductivity σ ON and σ OFF of graphene in the two states. If the corresponding cell reflection coefficients in the two states are Γ ON and Γ OFF then this bound is given by the following inequality σ at THz frequencies can be estimated analytically with the Drude model, as In our samples we have R ON = 800 Ω, OFF = 4000 Ω, τ = 45 fs. From Eq. 22 we get: For the RA, ideally, the reflection coefficients must have opposite phases and same absolute values. In practice this happens only approximately, and the actual deflected signal is proportional to the difference D Γ ON -Γ OFF , while the sum S Γ ON + Γ OFF is responsible for an unwanted specular reflection component. Expressing the bound in S and D we get from Eq. 22: and: Eq. 26 can now be inverted to find the maximum achievable |D| with our SLG parameters. We get: From the measurements in Fig. 