The impurity Green's function exact to the first order in the vacancy concentration has been calculated in the framework of the five frequency model (5FM). The solution in terms of determinant ratios has been obtained with the use of the Cramer's rule. The determinant sizes varied from 54 for the most general case to three for the four frequency model. Both analytical and numerical techniques has been used to analyze the solution. Special attention has been devoted to the case of strong impurity-vacancy (I-v) binding in order to substantiate the picture of diffusion via bound I-v pairs developed earlier in a phenomenological approach. Complete agreement with the phenomenological theory has been established thus providing its rigorous justification. The solution has been also applied to the calculation of the diffusional broadening of the Mössbauer resonance in FeAl system and good agreement with available experimental data and calculations within the encounter model has been found. The decay of the density of the nearest neighbor I-v pairs has been discussed in detail and suggested to be used as an additional constraint on the parameters of the 5FM. The possibility of experimental observation of the decay with the use of the positron annihilation technique has been pointed out. In Ref. 1 (in the following referred to as I) the impurity Green's function (GF) of the five-frequency model (5FM) of the vacancy-mediated diffusion The aim of the present paper is to justify the pair diffusion picture suggested in I within a rigorous master equation and Green's function formalism. In the 5FM all interactions in the system comprising the host crystal, the solute impurities, and the vacancies are reduced to interactions within one I-v pair. Because 5FM is a stochastic model, it can be exactly described by a suitable master equation (ME) (see Ref. 27 and Appendix A). Its direct solution, however, usually is efficient only in the case of a few-body system, like the bound two-particle I-v pair treated in I with the use of ME. In the case of the infinite number of vacancies a straightforward use of ME would require dealing with the coordinates of all c v N = O(N ) vacancies in the system which is superfluous and practically unfeasible. An appropriate way of proceeding is to average over positions of all vacancies that do not participate in the I-v encounter. This can be achieved within the rate equations (REs) approach which is, in fact, a method of solution of the ME, as explained in Appendix A. To derive the necessary REs let us define the impurity GF G l (t) as the probability density of finding the impurity at time t at the lattice site described by vector l with the integer coordinates (l X , l Y , l Z ) if at time t = 0 it was located at site 0 = (0, 0, 0) This choice of the initial position was made for convenience because GF for arbitrary initial position l ′ can be trivially obtained by the substitution l → ll ′ . To express GF as a statistical average let us introduce the occupation number îl which is equal to unity when site l is occupied by the impurity and is zero otherwise. In this notation where the angular brackets denote the average over the time-dependent nonequilibrium statistical ensemble defined in Eq. (A5). Thus, besides c v N vacancies the ensemble contains the inhomogeneous impurity density distribution G l (t). The evolution continues until the impurity occupies all sites of the crystal with equal probability 1/N in which case the density gradient vanishes and the macroscopic diffusion ceases. Because the I-v exchanges are restricted only to NN sites, the rate of change of the impurity density on site l is determined solely by the I-v configuration on this site and its NNs. Thus, the average impurity density at site l may grow when the site is occupied by a vacancy while the impurity occupies one of the NN sites, so that the impurity can jump at the vacant site by the I-v exchange and the density may diminish when site l is occupied by the impurity and there is a NN vacancy for the impurity to leave the site. The exchanges occur with frequency w 2 and their rates are proportional to the joint probability density of simultaneous presence of the I-v pair at the NN sites as where e is the set of 12 vectors connecting NN sites in the FCC lattice and vl = 0, 1 is the vacancy occupation number. The joint pair probability density is defined as where n is the relative position of the vacancy with respect to the impurity at site l; the time dependence on the right hand side (r.h.s.) is implicit in the nonequilibrium average Eq. (A5). Thus, as could be expected on the basis of the general rate equation Eq. (A6), the time derivative of the average impurity density îl in Eq. (3) depends on the average densities in Eq. ( The second (and the last in the approximation chosen) RE reads It is derived as follows. By the chain rule, the time derivative on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( where the first factor on the r.h.s. accounts for the initial impurity position. The initial value problem for a linear equation with constant coefficients can be conveniently solved by means of the combined integral Laplace and Fourier transform (the LF-transform) that for an arbitrary function φ can be defined as e -iaK•l/2 φ l (t). (7) Under the transform Eq. (5) becomes where The first line on the r.h.s. in Eq. ( which in the thermodynamic limit becomes infinitedimensional. In the next section it will be shown that if the jump rates w n,m in Eq. ( To conclude this section let us derive an expression for the impurity GF in terms of the solution of Eq. ( (1 -e -iaK•e/2 )ρ(K, z, e), (11) where use has been made of the fact that summations over e and -e are equivalent due to the lattice symmetry. Casting Eq. (11) in the form where is the diffusion kernel, one can recognize in Eq. ( as discussed in Sec. IV in I. In the theory of vacancymediated diffusion Eq. ( The method of solution presented below is a generalization to the case of the 5FM of the method suggested in Refs. 18 and 19 for the cases of self-diffusion and for the impurity diffusion in a two-frequency model. As will be seen, the method can be applied to any model with I-v interactions of finite range. Its essence is the reduction of the infinite (in the thermodynamic limit) set of equations Eq. ( To begin with, we note that one component of ρ K can be found immediately. Examination of Eq. (8) shows that ρ(K, z, n = 0) = 0 satisfies the equation independently of the values of other components of ρ K . Indeed, only the terms on the third line on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( (15) Here the fictitious sixth frequency w 5 = 0 was introduced in order to formally treat the jumps between all sites in the lattice on the same grounds. Thus, ρ(K, z, n = 0) = 0 satisfies Eq. ( where W 0 is the matrix from Eq. (B2) that describes the vacancy diffusion in the pure host crystal. The last line in Eq. ( Because beyond the forth coordination shell (CS) the rates in W are equal to those of W 0 (see the discussion following Eq. ( As can be seen from the definition of the 5FM and from Fig. where in the 55 × 55 matrix V we gathered all matrix elements of Eq. ( However, on the l.h.s. of Eq. (18) all components of the vector ρ K are still present after the subtraction: The components are mutually coupled because of the structure of matrix W 0 in Eq. (B2) which always connects the vector components in a given CS to higher CSs. To overcome this difficulty, let us multiply both sides of the equation by the matrix with the matrix elements given by Eq. (B7). Under the multiplication the number of unknown components of ρ K on the r.h.s. will not change but on the l.h.s. the components now decouple from each other So by retaining only those equations that contain on the l.h.s. the same vector components that are present on the r.h.s. one arrives at a finite system of linear equations which in the conventional form reads where I is the unit matrix. The size of the system can be restricted to 54 equations because the component ρ K (n = 0) = 0 is already known. As is easy to see, to obtain the 54 × 54 matrix P V for the reduced equation it is sufficient to multiply 54 × 55 matrix P by 55 × 54 matrix V by omitting the row and the column corresponding to n = 0 in the initial 55 × 55 matrices P and V , respectively. The free term on the r.h.s. can be found explicitly with the use of Eqs. ( With the matrix on the l.h.s. and the inhomogeneous term given by Eq. ( The GF obtained from the solution of the 54 equations Eq. ( An important advantage of the rigorous solution for the impurity GF is that it is not restricted to small values of the Fourier momentum as the phenomenological GF but is valid for arbitrary K. This makes possible theoretical description of such techniques as the quasielastic neutron scattering, the coherent X-rays and the Mössbauer spectroscopies. Diffusional behavior contributes to the Mössbauer broadening through the van Hove correlation function which at small impurity concentrations coincides with the single impurity GF calculated in Sec. III. In the Mössbauer studies it was found that the line broadening can be adequately described in the framework of the EM 16,23-25 so we first establish connection of our approach with the EM. To this end we note that an important parameter of the EM is the average number of steps z enc that the impurity makes during one I-v encounter. Physically z enc is akin to the mean diffusion distance λ of the phenomenological theory and establishing a formal relationship between the parameters should facilitate comparison between two approaches. Formally the diffusional contribution to the Mössbauer line broadening is given by the real part of the impurity GF at z = γ/2 + iω, where γ is the natural width of the Mössbauer line and ω is the energy transferred to the system by the gamma ray, so our solution for the GF should be sufficient for the task. So to a good approximation ∆t enc can be neglected on the scale of t a and the impurity transfer during the encounter from the initial to the final position may be considered as instantaneous. This picture can be translated into the following approximation to GF. The diffusion equation satisfied by GF in Eqs. ( Because Σ varies on the time scale O(∆t enc ) which is much shorter than t, the self-energy will differ from zero only in a narrow region of its argument where t ′ ≪ t so in the argument of G in Eq. ( (the correction due to the natural line width γ was found to be negligible in the experimental conditions of Ref. 16). In this approximation the real part of GF becomes a Lorentzian of width 24 ∆Γ = -2Σ(K, 0), (28) and is a real non-negative function of K. The quantity 16 with K corresponding to the Mössbauer gamma rays and with Σ from the Cramer's rule solution of Sec. III has been calculated and smeared with the experimental resolution. In Fig. In the phenomenological approach τ enc is equal to the association time t a = 1/g so comparing Eqs. (31) and (30) one may conclude that The equality here may be achieved only for asymptotically small |K| → 0 in the region of validity of the phenomenological theory. In the Mössbauer experiment, on the other hand, |K| is finite and comparatively large so W enc in Eq. (32) cannot be found in the small-K limit. However, below we will see that the number of impurity jumps z enc depends only on the small momenta, Eq. ( The relationship can be found with the use of the expression which is a slightly rearranged Eq. ( where dimensionless momentum K = aK/2 was introduced to simplify notation and the use has been made of the cubic symmetry. Substituting this into Eq. ( it can be seen that z enc depends only on the behavior of W enc (K) at small |K|. Indeed, the sum over l in Eq. ( where we replaced general f by f ∞ from Eq. (D7) because the phenomenological approach was developed for the case of strong I-v binding. Now substituting λ from Eq. (D4) into Eq. ( where use has been made of the definition of r Eq. (D6). As will be discussed below, this expression does not agree with the qualitative conclusions about the dependence of z enc on the 5FM frequencies reached in Ref. 16 on the basis of the MC simulations. The comparison may be not warranted because Eq. ( To clarify this issue let us calculate z enc for the general 5FM within the approach of Ref. 24. In this approach the mean number of the impurity jumps is calculated as where p R is the probability for the vacancy to return from the first CS on the impurity site. p R can be found as follows. The rate of the vacancy return on the impurity site is equal to the rate of I-v exchanges w 2 irrespective of the binding. The rate of the definite departure of the vacancy away from the impurity is equal to the product of the total rate of the vacancy jumps from the first CS to higher shells 7w 3 multiplied by the probability to diffuse infinity far from the impurity p ∞ . Each factor in the product r = 7w 3 p ∞ (w 4 /w 0 ) can also be calculated for any values of the frequencies, not only for the strong binding case. With all rates being known, the return probability is found as the ratio of the return rate to the total rate 30 Substituting this into Eq. ( From Fig. Another apparent disagreement concerns roughly Gaussian diffusion profiles obtained in the MC simulations in Ref. 16 despite the large I-v attraction which according to our findings might lead to NGDPs. This, however, is explainable by the small value of the parameter λ = 0.4a that can be calculated with the use of Eqs. ( A major goal of the present study is to give a rigorous justification to the phenomenological theory of impurity diffusion in the FCC host developed in I. The theory has been based on the notion of the mobile intermediate state of the impurity introduced in Ref. 4 which in the case of the 5FM has been identified in I with the tightly bound I-v pairs. This has made possible derivation of simple formulas for the impurity GF and the diffusion profiles in stark contrast with the complicated expression for the rigorous solution of Sec. III. So our aim in this section is to show that the phenomenological expressions do agree with the rigorous approach in the limits of strong I-v binding and the macroscopic diffusion that corresponds to small values of z and |K| in the frequencymomentum space or, equivalently, to macroscopic spatiotemporal scale. In cubic crystals diffusion is isotropic in the limit of small |K| so instead of a general momentum K that re-quires solution of 54 equation, the momentum along a symmetry axis can be chosen in order to reduce the system size. To this end let us chose the direction along Z axis with K = (0, 0, K). In this case the components of vector ρ K in Eq. ( where on the r.h.s. only 13 components of vector Eq. ( as can be seen from Fig. where Matrix U has the familiar gain-loss structure (see Appendix A) with the barred frequencies wi in the offdiagonal matrix elements having plus sign and the diagonal terms with the minus sign, but not necessary positive or negative values because of the subtraction of w 0 . Thus, for example, U 41 is equal to 4 w3 because there is exactly four sites that are NN to a site in 4th class from which a vacancy may jump at this site with the rates different from w 0 and similarly U 44 is equal to -4 w4 because there is four sites (all from class 1) where the vacancy can jump from a site in class 4 (see Fig. Because our goal is to find the impurity GF, we are interested only in those components of vector ρ K=(0,0,K) ≡ ρ K that enter into Eq. (11), that is, only in the components belonging to the first and the third classes. Moreover, because for any NN vector e it is easily seen that one can express the solution for G(K, z) in terms of only one of the components because the FCC lattice is centrosymmetric. Because the initial value Eq. ( Applying the LF-transform Eq. ( Thus, in view of Eq. ( where is the determinant of the system in Eq. ( (1 -e ∓iaK/2 )zρ(±K, z, e (51) where the summation is over the upper and the lower signs in the summand and e In the axisymmetric case the impurity GF is fully determined by the diffusion kernel Σ Eq. (51) which in the limit K → 0 in FCC lattice can also describe macroscopic diffusion for any K with small absolute value. In the phenomenological theory only the macroscopic diffusion can be treated. The corresponding diffusion kernel can be found from Eqs. ( where K 2 was replaced by K 2 to facilitate comparison with the above rigorous expression. Thus, in order to prove equivalence of the phenomenological approach and the rigorous theory in the diffusion limit in the case of strong I-v binding it is necessary to show that Eq. ( To this end let us first compare the values of the diffusion constant in both approaches. Using Eq. ( Applying this to Eq. ( where the diffusion constant was supplied by the subscript ∞ to remind that the phenomenological expression is valid only in the case of strong I-v binding. Eq. ( 33, below we present its numerical calculation which has an advantage of admitting generalization to the extended versions of the model. Correlation effects are conventionally accounted for in the diffusion constant through the correlation factor f defined as where f in the 5FM case was shown to have the general form This expression has been thoroughly studied in literature and so may serve as a stringent test for new calculation techniques. The limit K → 0 in Eq. ( In this notation The limit is straightforward to calculate for the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (57). As is easily seen from the definition of the LF transform Eq. ( where c (eq) n is the equilibrium vacancy concentration at site n relative to the impurity; the factor 1/N appears due to the fact that as t → ∞ the only impurity in the system occupies any of N sites with equal probability 1/N . The LF transform Eq. ( (60) Thus, the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( where use have been made of Eqs. (D1) and (D2). The limit z → 0 in the last term of Eq. ( where ∆1 differs from ∆ 1 in that instead of P c 0 the limiting value Eq. ( of matrix Eq. ( Similar contributions to column one from the matrix element U 31 disappear from ∆1 because this column is replaced by unities. Thus, differentiation of ∆1 with respect to K in the limit K → 0 amounts to the following expression for the second term in the diffusion constant Eq. ( ) where ∆ 13 is the determinant of matrix I -HU where the first column is replaced with unities and the third one with the terms w 2 H j1 . Now adding the two terms in Eq. (57) in the limit z → 0 with the use of Eqs. (60), (D2), and (66) and using the definition of the correlation factor Eq. ( To compare with f in Eq. ( and f from Eq. (67) was calculated for more than 10 5 randomly generated quartets of the ratios 10 -5 < w i /w 0 < 10 5 , i = 1 -4. The calculated values were substituted in Eq. ( B. Diffusion kernel in the strong-binding limit The expression for D obtained from Eqs. ( As is seen from Eq. (D2), strong I-v binding means either small value of w 3 , or large value of w 4 , or both. The difficulty in studying the tight-binding limit within the rigorous approach is that the cases w 3 → 0 and w 4 → ∞ should be studied separately because the frequencies enter in a different manner in both the decay rate Eq. (D6) and in the determinants that define the diffusion kernel, as can be seen from Eqs. ( where r and D m are underlined to indicate that in this expressions they in general are functions of z and K. When the latter variables are equal to zero the underlined quantities would coincide with the constants r and D m . The function Ψ is fixed by the condition that z in the second factor has the coefficient equal to unity when z, K, and w 3 are equal to zero and Ψ(0, 0, 0) = 0; for brevity, only the variables that change their values in the expressions below are explicitly shown as the arguments of Ψ with other parameters being treated as constants. From Eq. (69) one can derive the derivatives of the determinant over its arguments as ∂∆/∂z| z,w3,K=0 = Ψ(0, 0, 0), (additionally assuming that r ∝ w 3 ) so that if the decay rate has the form of Eq. (D6) then should be the function of only the ratio w 4 /w 0 and should agree with the runaway probability defined in I. In Fig. calculated for ∼ 10 5 randomly generated frequency ratios agreed with Eq. (D5) to within the accuracy of the calculations. With the use of Eq. ( To finalize comparison with the phenomenological theory in the w 3 → 0 case it remained to consider the contribution due to the associated pairs that may be present in the initial state. The contribution is given by the term in Eq. ( In Eq. ( In the Cramer's rule solution it can be separated from the rest of the terms because determinants are linear functions of the column vectors. Explicit expression for δΣ can be derived from Eqs. ( where notation is the same as in Eq. ( Similar transformation of Eq. ( The limit K → 0 in the expression for δΣ in terms of the determinant ratio can be found similar to the case of the diffusion constant in Sec. VI A. But a simpler route is to calculate it numerically. For K = 0.01 10 5 trios of the ratios w 1 /w 0 , w 2 /w 0 , and w 4 /w 0 has been generated and Eq. ( In the second case of tight-binding w 4 /w 0 → ∞ all calculations were performed along the above lines with a few technical modifications. From the computational point of view the main difference between the two cases is that the determinants in Eq. ( The phenomenological theory developed in I has been based on the notion of the mobile impurity state which in the case of the 5FM has been identified with the tightly bound I-v pairs. Unfortunately, the rigorous solution is difficult to deal with because of its complexity. Even in the simpler uniaxial case it has been expressed through complex 13 × 13 determinants which apparently can be calculated only numerically. Besides, to find the diffusion profiles the solution has to be inversely LF-transformed back to the space-time variables which is a nontrivial task even in the simple 1D geometry. Explicit expression for the transformed impurity GF reads: where L is the number of planes along the chosen 100 direction. The contour in the integration over z in Eq. ( (the star means complex conjugate) we can restrict the integration only to one of the contour branches as where in the limit ε → 0 the integration is over the negative real axis with E = Re z and E -= E -iε. Thus, to calculate the diffusion profile at time t one has to first integrate the imaginary part over E for every Fourier momentum K and subsequently recover G(X = al/2, t) via the inverse Fourier transform. Even for small diffusion length of ∼ 10 nm in aluminum where a/2 ≈ 0.2 nm one will have to cover the spatial range ∼ 100 nm ≃ 500 lattice planes in 100 direction which gives an order of magnitude estimate of the number of K-points (hence, integrations over E) needed in the calculation. Farther, in performing the integrations over E one has to calculate at every mesh point the complexvalued functions P n (z) from Eq. (B7) that enter into the determinants via matrix H and vector P c 0 which can also be calculated only numerically. And the mesh in E should be sufficiently fine because, as will we seen below, ImG(K, E -) may vary rather steeply. The problem somewhat alleviates in the diffusion limit t ≫ 1/w 0 when the exponential function in Eq. ( To see this, let us first consider the phenomenological theory where the diffusion of the bound pair can be described by the LF-transformed pair GF that in the continuum space satisfies the initial condition (see Eqs. ( where the last equality was obtained with the use of the identity In the lattice case the definition of the pair GF is not completely straightforward because NN I-v pair cannot be placed on one site but occupies two sites. The point pair of the phenomenological approach is natural to associate with the smallest pair occupying two NN sites. But because there are 12 such sites around the impurity on the FCC lattice, the total density of NN pairs should be equal to the sum of 12 densities from Eqs. (4) and/or (9) with n = e. In the K = 0 case in Eq. (83) all 12 densities are equal so the total pair density can be calculated with any of the NN vectors e. In this definition the vacancy concentrations in the initial state Eq. ( The density ρ on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( The time evolution of the NN density can be found by substituting G p (K = 0, E -) into Eq. ( From Eq. ( that formally coincides with its phenomenological homologue Eq. ( where H 10 was replaced by P e . 32 A comment is in order about the dimensionalities in Eq. (88) and in equations below. The expressions needed in derivation of the analytic solution in Appendix E are rather cumbersome so it was found convenient to set w 0 = 1 to simplify them. This can be achieved either by introducing the "natural" time unit w (87) and (88) at the negative real values of z. In both panels the values of w3 in units of w0 are 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1 and 2 in order from the largest to the smallest curves maximums (note difference in scale). For further explanations see the text. the final expressions. This should not cause difficulty because all relevant quantities have dimensionality of time or its inverse (the rate or frequency) while the quantities of dimension of length enter only via the dimensionless combination K = aK/2. Eq. (B8) connects P e (z) in Eq. (88) with the extended Watson's integral P 0 (z) which analytic properties are well known (see Ref. 39 and references therein). The most important to us is that P 0 (z), hence, P e (z) have the square root singularities at z = 0 (in 3D lattices to which the discussion below will be restricted) which engenders important consequences. Namely, because for E < 0 √ E is imaginary, the imaginary part of GF in Eq. ( These observations are fully confirmed by the curves in the lower panel of Fig. where C r is a positive real constant of order unity. We dropped the 4FM superscript because in Sec. VI B the validity of Eq. ( which can be satisfied for sufficiently small r. Thus, according to Eq. (89) the pole singularity which in the phenomenological theory is positioned at the real z axis at E = -r in the rigorous theory is shifted to the complex plane on the distance ∝ r 3/2 ≪ r from the real axis, so as r → 0 the width of the peaked structure in the imaginary part of GF shrinks to zero and acquires delta-functionlike shape. It will dominate the integrand at not too large values of the time variable t and the NN pair density will behave as ≃ e -rt , thus justifying the phenomenological approach for tightly bound I-v pairs. However, at small but finite values of r the exponential factor in the integrand sooner or later will suppress the quasiparticle contribution, so at very large times the singularity at E = 0 will still determine the t → ∞ asymptotic behavior. This is illustrated in Fig. As is seen, at some stage the end-point contribution becomes dominant and the quasiparticle behavior ceases to define the physics of the pair dissociation. This can be used for establishing the range of validity of the phenomenological theory by estimating the time interval during which the quasiparticle picture remains adequate for a given value of the decay rate r. It seems reasonable to assume that the peaked structure dominance ends when the value at the local maximum of the integrand near E = -r becomes equal to the maximum near E = 0. The value of the latter is found by standard means from the approximate expression Up to O(1) factors it scales at small r and large t as ∼ 1/(r √ t). Near the peak at E = -r the integrand behaves as ∼ e -rt /r 3/2 so the crossover time between the two regimes scales as Thus, for t < t c the phenomenological description should be valid while for larger times the power-law behavior should be observed. In more physical terms this time interval can be estimated from the exponential decay law in Eq. ( In Table In the opposite case when the decay rate is of order unity the square root behavior in the integrand of Eq. (83) will also extend over O(1) region of E near E = 0 (see the lower panel in Fig. Experimental observation of the decay could be helpful in experimental and theoretical validation of the 5FM. The usefulness of the model is hampered by the large number of parameters in its definition which cannot be measured experimentally. In Ref. 41 on the basis of EM it was argued that in cubic lattices only two of the five frequencies can be found. This can be seen from the phenomenological solution Eq. (D3) in which the diffusion kernel is fully characterized by only two parameters λ and g. As we saw in Sec. IV, the encounter approximation corresponds to setting z = 0 in the diffusion kernel while keeping its full momentum dependence. In contrast, in the pair GF which is closely related to the diffusion kernel (cf. Eqs. ( 41 it has been shown that w 2 and w 3 cannot be uniquely defined from the experimental data because they are linearly correlated and the same data can be described by different frequency sets. The authors discussed FeCu In Ref. 41 it was suggested that information about internals of I-v pairs can be obtained from the measurement of the impurity hyperfine interactions. Another prospective approach for the experimental study of the NN pairs may provide the positron annihilation technique (see Ref. 42 and references therein). In most cases the electron density inside a vacancy depends on whether the vacancy is associated with an impurity or is surrounded only by the host atoms. As a consequence, the lifetime and/or the momentum distribution of the gamma radiation produced by the annihilation of the positron caught within the vacancy will depend on whether the vacancy is associated or not. The contribution of the associated vacancies can be separated from the annihilation spectra and its time evolution may provide direct information about the decay of NN pairs. In the present paper a rigorous solution of the 5FM for the FCC lattice has been obtained. Formally the solution is exact only to the first order in the vacancy concentration but because of the small vacancy concentration in solids this accuracy most probably exceeds the accuracy of the model itself; besides, in order to account for higher order corrections that may be necessary in some cases the 5FM should first be extended to include additional manybody interactions that contribute to higher orders of the expansion. The method of solution developed in the present paper is applicable only to the models with finite-range interactions. In this case the infinite set of REs can be reduced to a finite system of linear equations and solved by the Cramer's rule. But because the equations are linear, a rigorous solution in the case of long-range interactions that appear, e. g., in some problems of dopant diffusion in semiconductors 40 should be also feasible. A major goal of the present study was to rigorously justify the phenomenological approach developed in I on the basis of the mobile state concept of Ref. 4 that was introduced for the description of dopant diffusion in silicon. By assuming that the mobile state in the 5FM coincides with the tightly bound I-v pairs, a complete agreement between the phenomenological expression for the impurity GF in I and the tight-binding limit of the rigorous solution has been established. Thus, the possibility of observation of the most interesting phenomena such as the NGDPs 4,5 and the non-Fickian diffusion 4 in the FCC systems with the vacancy mediated diffusion has been rigorously substantiated. But the rigorous solution can be also used when the conditions of validity of the phenomenological approach are not fulfilled. The approach is applicable only to the macroscopic diffusion at large spatiotemporal scale and only in the case of strong I-v attraction. These conditions are not satisfied, for example, in such techniques as the quasielastic neutron scattering, the coherent X-rays, and the Mössbauer spectroscopy where experimental data on the impurity diffusion are gathered at large Fourier momenta that in the real space correspond to microscopic distances. Farther, in view of the ongoing advancement of experimental techniques toward the microscopic scale, an important advantage of the rigorous solution is that it describes the impurity density at the lattice sites, i. e., at the atomic level. Thus, in addition to the macroscopic diffusion describable also within the phenomenological theory the rigorous approach is able to describe the microscopic diffusion. From the results of Refs. 9, 10, 14, and 15 it may be concluded that the microscopic NGDPs should exist in practically all host-impurity systems, including those with I-v repulsion. So the phenomenon should be ubiquitous and the rigorous approach provides adequate means for its theoretical description for any values of the 5FM parameters. But there exist important differences between the behavior of the NN pairs in the presence of strong binding and its absence. In Sec. VII it has been shown that the NN pairs decay follows the exponential law in the tight-binding case and the power law otherwise. More important difference concerns the non-Fickian diffusion predicted in the phenomenological theory. In I it was shown that large λ at the room temperature may be found in about 20% of impurities in the aluminum host studied in the first-principles calculations in Refs. 11 and 12. Unfortunately, at present the 5FM parameters obtained in such calculations are not reliable enough to predict even the sign of the I-v interaction in some cases. For example, in FeAl system the calculations predict I-v repulsion 12 while experimentally the interaction is attractive and quite strong. (notation is explained in Sec. E 1). This expression is exact up to the first orders in c v and can be used to confirm by explicit formulas the qualitative discussion of Sec. VII and the numerical findings of Sec. VI, as well as relevant expressions obtained in I within the phenomenological theory. However, because in the 4FM w 4 = w 0 , only the small-w 3 case of the tight binding can be considered. To establish correspondence with the phenomenological theory we have to find the behavior of GF in Eq. (E4) in the region of validity of the phenomenological approach which is restricted to small values of z, K 2 , and w 3 . To this end below we will approximate all necessary expressions by only leading terms in the small quantities. It is to be noted that we do not intend to develop a systematic expansion but simply keep the most important terms to simplify Eq. (E4) to reveal its physical content. In case the accuracy might seem to be insufficient, additional terms from the exact expression can be added to improve the approximation. Thus, below we will see that the terms in the numerator of the phenomenological GF in Eq. ( where use has been made of Eq. (E19). The approximate expressions for A i in Eqs. (E18), (E18), (E19), and (E24) read (E6) As is seen, A 3 to the leading order is linear in both z and w 3 so the first term in the braces in the denominator of Eq. (E4) can be dropped because it is further multiplied by K 2 and thus will give a quadratic contribution. Under the approximations Eq. (E4) simplifies to where Now substituting the approximate expressions Eqs. (E6) into Eq. (E7) and remembering that K = aK/2 one finally gets where D m is given by Eq. (D5) and η N N by Eq. (E5). Eq. (E9) will agree with Eq. ( The coefficients of w3 in Eq. (E1) are the following combinations of the matrix elements H ij : Though the determinant of a 3 × 3 matrix can be calculated analytically with the use of known elementary formula, in the case of Eq. (E1) the resulting expressions will be still too awkward for analysis. In this Appendix several tricks are suggested to simplify the task. The main tool to use is the identity Eq. (B8) satisfied by functions P ijk (z). In Refs. 37-39 it was shown that P ijk (z) with any indexes can be expressed through only three of them. In ). (E16) Using explicit expressions for d ij from Eqs. (E15) and (E14) it is easy to transform Eq. (E16) to where The calculation of ∆ is more complicated but it can be simplified by the observation that at K = 0 all columns sum to the same value With A 3 given by Eq. (E18) it is seen that in the limit of strong binding w 3 → 0 and the diffusion limit z, K 2 → 0 all terms in the row are small being of the first order in all these quantities. Because ∆ can be calculated as the sum of these terms multiplied by corresponding minors, where this shows that the general form of the determinant Eq. (69) can be rigorously justified at least in the 4FM. The derivations above are rather cumbersome but their validity can be checked numerically. Because all identities used are purely algebraical, they can be verified for real values of both z and iK (i. e., for complex K). As was pointed out in Sec. B, for z ≥ 0 all P ijk can be efficiently computed with the use of the special points technique. i = 1, 2, 4, w3 = 0; symbols: MC simulations from I.