Experiments show that the Cooper pair transport in the insulator phase that forms at thin film superconductor to insulator transitions (SIT) is simply activated. This activated behavior depends on the microscopic factors that drive the localization of the Cooper pairs. To test proposed models, we investigated how a perturbation that weakens Cooper pair binding, magnetic impurity doping, affects the characteristic activation energy, T0. The data show that T0 decreases monotonically with doping in films tuned farther from the SIT and increases and peaks in films that are closer to the SIT critical point. These observations provide strong evidence that the bosonic SIT in thin films is a Mott transition driven by Coulomb interactions that are screened by virtual quasi-particle excitations. This dependence on underlying fermionic degrees of freedom distinguishes these SITs from those in micro-fabricated Josephson Junction Arrays, cold atom systems, and likely in high temperature superconductors with nodes in their quasiparticle density of states. The activation energy characterizing a process in a condensed matter system provides a window into its quantum many body ground state. For example, the resistance of fractional quantum hall states decreases with decreasing temperature at a rate dictated by the energy to create spatially separated quasiparticle-quasihole pairs out of the Laughlin ground state In most, T 0 results from a competition between either potential disorder or Coulomb interactions that localize pairs and pair tunneling, characterized by a hopping rate t or a Josephson coupling energy, E J , that delocalizes pairs. Potential disorder drives Anderson localization 9,10 of pair states with energies below a mobility edge in the density of states. The activation energy corresponds to the gap between localized and mobile pair states In the limit, E c E J , a Mott gap appears in the transport, T 0 ≈ E c (1 -βE J Ec ), in which the second term arises from screening by Cooper pair motion We have employed a thin film platform 8 that enables unique methods for probing the origins of T 0 . The films can be systematically doped with magnetic impurities, which reduces the Cooper pair binding energy, 2∆ and can be subjected to magnetic frustration, which reduces the average Josephson coupling between localized regions 16 (see Figs. Since T c depends on film thickness 26 the thickness variations correspond to coupling constant inhomogeneities that localize Cooper pairs to form the Cooper pair insulator state. Insulating films on flat substrates, by contrast, consist only of localized, unpaired electrons 2728, Film sheet resistances were measured as a function of temperature, R(T ) in situ using standard four-point ac and dc techniques with sufficiently low current bias(0.2 nA) to ensure that the measurements were performed in the linear portion of the current-voltage characteristics. A superconducting solenoid applied magnetic fields perpendicular to the films. The array of pores in the films produced by the AAO templates enable us to explore magnetic field induced frustration effects on the Cooper pair insulator phase. In fact, the appearance of oscillations in the magnetoresistance was an early direct sign of localized Cooper pairs in a thin film system 8 . The activation energy and location of the SIT critical point (see Fig. Magnetic impurity doping involved depositing Gd atop the Cooper pair insulator film to represent doping amount. The estimated maximum Gd doping in these experiments corresponded to < 0.03 monolayers. We studied the effects of magnetic impurity doping and magnetic frustration on two films, I and II, that had different activation energies to explore how proximity to the SIT critical point influences the response. Points for films I and II are indicated on the schematic phase diagram in Fig. We break the discussion of the primary experimental results shown in Figs. On the other hand, T 0 's decrease with doping for three cases (film I at f=0 and f=1/2, and film II at f=1/2) opposes simple expectations. Pairbreaking reduces 2∆, which should again reduce E J or t to make T 0 rise as with frustration. Similarly if the impurities were to randomly transform links into π junctions A possible explanation for T 0 decreasing with pairbreaking is that the charging energy depends directly on ∆. Such a dependence emerges in small single Josephson junctions when the bare charging energy, E C0 , which is set by the island geometry and tunnel barrier dielectric constant, greatly exceeds ∆, i.e. E C0 ∆ 13,38-40 . In that limit, virtual inter island tunneling of quasiparticles above the energy gap ∆ renormalizes the capacitance of single junctions 39 or effectively screens the Coulomb interaction where g = G/(2e 2 / ) is the dimensionless normal state conductance between grains. With this form for the charging energy, T 0 becomes: for films close enough to the SIT that Cooper pair screening reduces T 0 through the Josephson energy term E J ∝ g∆. A rough estimate of E C0 for the dots that form in films on AAO suggests that this model applies here. The dots have characteristic diameters below 30 nm, which gives E c0 ≈ 200K for a dielectric constant of 10, which greatly exceeds ∆. Model predictions embodied in Eq. 5 qualitatively capture the experimental results in the low doping regime. Fig. A vexing question has been why does Cooper pair insulator transport appear simply activated in disordered films? The disorder suggests that variable range hopping models, which produce a fractional power (e.g. 1/2) in the activation energy exponent It is also interesting to consider the implications of the present results for the bosonic SITs in high temperature superconducting cuprates Finally, the disappearance of T 0 's frustration dependence at higher doping levels signals a crossover from transport that involves Cooper pairs to quasiparticle dominated transport. The crossover is smooth: the R(T ) (Figs. FIG. 2. Magnetic Impurity Doping Response of Resistance and Activation Energy.