In the laboratory study of extreme conditions of temperature and density, the exposure of matter to high intensity radiation sources has been of central importance. Here we interrogate the performance of multi-layered targets in experiments involving high intensity, hard x-ray irradiation, motivated by the advent of extremely high brightness hard x-ray sources, such as free electron lasers and 4 th -generation synchrotron facilities. Intense hard x-ray beams can deliver significant energy in targets having thick x-ray transparent layers (tampers) around samples of interest, for the study of novel states of matter and materials' dynamics. Heated-state lifetimes in such targets can approach the microsecond level, regardless of radiation pulse duration, enabling the exploration of conditions of local thermal and thermodynamic equilibrium at extreme temperature in solid density matter. The thermal and mechanical response of such thick layered targets following x-ray heating, including hydrodynamic relaxation and heat flow on picosecond to millisecond timescales, is modeled using radiation hydrocode simulation, finite element analysis, and thermodynamic calculations. Assessing the potential for target survival over one or more exposures, and resistance to damage arising from heating and resulting mechanical stresses, this study doubles as an investigation into the performance of diamond-anvil high pressure cells under high x-ray fluences. Long used in conjunction with synchrotron x-ray radiation and high power optical lasers, the strong confinement afforded by such cells suggests novel applications at emerging high intensity x-ray facilities and new routes to studying thermodynamic equilibrium states of warm, very dense matter. Matter with an atomic density similar to that of the solid state, at temperatures of thousands to millions of degrees Kelvin and pressures exceeding millions of atmospheres, and undergoing rapid changes on microsecond to femtosecond timescales, is central to our understanding of planetary and stellar interiors, fusion energy technologies, and fundamental materials physics and chemistry. These warm dense matter states are not well described by the theoretical simplifications of traditional condensed matter physics or plasma physics. Laboratory experiments are thus critical for developing a physical understanding of this regime of temperature, density, pressure, and timescale. The creation and probing of warm dense matter in the laboratory often relies on central facilities capable of delivering highbrilliance irradiation, which can rapidly generate extreme temperatures in dense (i.e. solid or liquid) targets by ultrafast (fs-ps) 'isochoric' heating, or by the production of dynamic compression waves within the target facilitated by the expansion of heated matter on longer (ps-ns) timescales A common strategy uses electromagnetic radiation, often in the optical or UV range, to deliver the intense energy burst. In such photonic experiments energy is delivered directly to electrons, which then transfer energy to the ions (lattice) as the system relaxes toward a state of local thermal equilibrium (LTE), a prerequisite for reaching local thermodynamic equilibrium conditions. The timescale of equilibration between the ions and electrons is typically on the order order of ps One strategy to extend the lifetime of an irradiation-driven warm dense state is to provide a tamper material around samples through which energy may be deposited and which delay, prevent, or otherwise control expansion Intense x-rays also rapidly heat matter Free electron lasers and other high-brightness x-ray sources operating in the hard x-ray regime above ∼10 keV (Table Many interesting and poorly understood phenomena at warm dense matter conditions are found at elevated densities, i.e. exceeding that of the solid state, including metallization of molecular insulators 35 and phase separation in warm dense mixtures The purpose of this study is several-fold, and motivated by the increasing brightness of hard x-ray sources providing fast pulsed (nanosecond to femtosecond) hard x-rays (to tens of keV) at high power (10 11 -10 12 photons per pulse). The main objective is to explore the thermal and mechanical evolution of pulse-irradiated targets involving particularly thick tampers, a configuration suggested by the ability of hard x-rays to pass unimpeded through low-Z tampers to a high-Z target layer confined within, to which energy is delivered. One application of interest is extending isochoric radiative heating studies by delaying or inhibiting altogether hydrodynamic expansion, so that matter can be observed at thermal, and plausibly thermodynamic, equilibrium while at extreme temperature and near-solid density. A related objective is to characterize the performance of diamond anvil high-pressure cells (DACs), long used to great effect in synchrotron x-ray science, at higher intensity pulsed x-ray sources where heating during the x-ray exposure could be an unavoidable byproduct of x-ray probing or used deliberately to heat pre-compressed matter to extreme temperature, as an alternative to optical laser heating Targets simulated here consist of a sample layer or layers (μm thickness) between thick (mm thickness) tampers. The advantages of this configuration are: (1) exceptionally long confinement of samples at extreme conditions, so that the approach to, and properties of, thermodynamic equilibrium states of high density and temperature can be studied; (2) efficient control of sample temperature by using high thermal conductivity tampers, enhancing sample stability and promoting sample survival after irradiation; and (3) the ability to pre-compress samples with strong tampers, and resist thermomechanical stresses developing during the irradiation. The thermomechanical response of these micron-to-millimeter scale x-ray heated layered targets evolves on a range of timescales. We consider a high-brightness monochromatic hard x-ray source, with a FEL-like beam diameter and pulse duration, delivering heat energy by x-ray absorption in ∼ 100 fs. Pressure waves generated by thermal expansion propagate on ps-ns timescales, adiabatically mediating pressure and temperature evolution in the dif-ferentially heated target; the timescale 43 is set by the scale length of the heated volume divided by the sound speed c, i.e. /c. Adiabatic conditions break down on ns-μs timescales, with heat conduction cooling heated areas toward the initial temperature, at which the surrounding target remains; the timescale 43 of this process is roughly the square of the heated volume size divided by the thermal diffusivity coefficient κ, or 2 /κ. On these lengthscales (micron to millimeter) and timescales (ps and longer) LTE can be assumed, and target conditions develop primarily as a result of conventional hydrodynamic processes and diffusive heat transport in locally equilibrated matter; near-isochoric conditions are assumed to be maintained throughout by stable tampers. To study heat conduction, we use a two-dimensional finite element (FE) model including conduction along and lateral to the x-ray beam path, both important on the associated (μs) timescales for tightly focussed radiation (Sec. II A). To study the hydrodynamic processes, which can take the form of shock discontinuities, we separately employ one-dimensional radiation hydrodynamics models to study the mechanical and associated thermal evolution of the system for the first few ns (Sec. II B); this approach is chosen because finite element models are not well suited to stress waves of larger magnitude, and because, if beam diameter is kept greater than the thickness of the relevant layers, the initial evolution of sample conditions is accurately treated as a one-dimensional process in the direction of the beam. A. Finite Element Models In order to describe the pulsed x-ray heating and cooling of a tamped sample configuration, we used a simulation software (comsol Multiphysics) based on finite element analysis to implement a two-dimensional, time-dependent heat transfer model Assuming a multilayer target of layers perpendicular to the incident x-ray beam (Fig. where T is the temperature, t is the time, k is the thermal conductivity, ρ is the density, and C P is the heat capacity at constant pressure. For constant physical properties, and considering the period after heating, Eq. 1 reduces to where κ is the thermal diffusivity, Radiative (photon) heat transfer is generally negligible compared to diffusive (phonon and electron) heat conduction at the presently examined temperatures and timescales 43 , and is not included. The source term Q(r, z; t) (typical units of W/m 3 ) is given by volumetric heat generation when the incident x-ray beam passes through, and is absorbed within, the semi-transparent materials. Due to this absorption the beam intensity decays exponentially with depth (Lambert-Beer law). At the considered x-ray energies, the contribution of diffuse scattering to total attenuation is small and is neglected in our calculations. Coherent scattering (i.e. Bragg diffraction) could become important particularly where thick single crystals are used as tampers, affecting attenuation and radiation trajectory, though, as it can be avoided in practice where α is the absorption coefficient, constant in the layer, z s is the z position of the layer surface the radiation is incident on, R s is the reflectivity of the leading surface or interface, and I s (r; t) is the incident intensity on the surface (typical units of W/m 2 ). For x-ray radiation, reflectivities of interfaces are exceedingly small, of order R s ∼ 10 -9 -10 -13 , and may be neglected. Thus the attenuation of x-rays as well as the energy deposition is accurately estimated by considering absorption only. The absorption in the target is given by computing the sequential absorption in several such layers. At the downstream surface of a layer, boundary conditions establish that any light reaching that boundary will leave the domain and pass to the next layer and this is repeated until the beam reaches the downstream target surface and leaves the geometry. For example, in the center of the sample (and target), we have where S, M , and T refer to the sample, medium, and tamper values, respectively, I(r; t) is the incident intensity on the target assembly, d refers to the thickness of particular layers, and z c refers to the center of the sample layer (and target assembly), hence only half of the sample's thickness is included. The model considers heating induced during a ∼100 fs duration x-ray pulse, and the conductive heat transfer following the rapidly imposed temperature distribution in the target. The heating pulse intensity is assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution in time and space, with incident intensity I(r; t) (Eq. 6) reaching a maximum, I max , at t = μ and r = 0 as where σ r is a Gaussian radius parameter, such that the FWHM (full width at half maximum) diameter of the pulse is and σ t defines the temporal width of the pulse (FWHM) as For the parameters of this simulation (Table and the peak energy density per area Λ max (in J/m 2 , and occurring at r = 0) as The number of photons per pulse N is and is equivalent to ∼10 12 for the peak energy per pulse (3.5 mJ) and x-ray energy (25 keV) simulated here. In our models we specify E pulse (Eq. 9), which when integrated over the pulse duration (Eqs 5 and 6) leads to Q(r, z; t >> μ) independent of the pulse duration, such that T (r, z) immediately after the pulse (and before significant heat transport occurs) depends only on total pulse energy and its spatial distribution, i.e. temperature achieved is independent of pulselength so long as the pulselength is shorter than heat conduction timescales. This implies any pulse duration less than the heat conduction timescales (roughly in the ns range or less) will achieve similar peak temperature and show identical cooling behavior. The initial temperature of the entire system is assumed to be ambient (300 K). As a boundary condition, the external surface of the simulation cell shown in Fig. where q 0 is the convective heat flux and h is the convective heat transfer coefficient (h = 5 W/m 2 /K, for natural convection in air). This has no significant effect for the cooling timescale of these experiments; similar results could be expected in vacuum. A free triangular mesh is employed, which is kept very fine at interfaces due to the need to stabilize the model during the initial phase of large temperature gradients at interfacial regions, at heating times 10 -12 to 10 -9 s; the heat transfer starts at approximately on 10 -9 s time scales, and temperature is stable before this if the simulation is configured properly. A coarser mesh is used away from the interfaces. The accurate modeling of interfaces on shorter timescales is validated analytically (Sec. III A 8). As the simulations seek to establish general trends for the effects of target composition, geometry, and beam parameters, a number of physical assumptions are made in our calculations. We assume a direct relationship between the amount of x-ray energy deposited in the target at a given location and the amount of heating at this location. Further, the models assume that thermal equilibrium (i.e. between electrons, which initially absorb energy, and ions, which heat more gradually on the ps timescale of electron-ion equilibration) occurs instantly. Thus our simulations should be accurate at timescales of ∼10 -12 s and longer, i.e. sufficiently greater than electron-ion equilibration times, while only approximating the initial (fs) heating process. Implicitly, we also assume localization of hot electrons during the equilibration period, i.e. that any hot electrons produced ultimately equilibrate with nearby ions. This is a reasonable approximation since the typical mean free path of ballistic hot (eV) electrons in condensed matter tends to be of order 10 -2 μm 11,26,37 , which is much less than the sample dimensions and heating beam diameter (1-10 3 μm), consistent with a diffusive heat transfer model being sufficiently accurate on these time and lengthscales. While not included here, hydrodynamic (Sec. II B) and radiative processes, longer-distance hot electron transport (e.g. Refs. A suite of materials with varying properties are included in the models to examine the possible range of heating and cooling behavior under x-ray irradiation. As the degree of x-ray absorption in a substance is roughly given as where atomic number and mass are Z and A respectively, we sought to explore samples over a wide range of Z, and lesser variances in the surrounding low-Z materials, as well as a range of photon energy which has a similarly strong effect on absorbance. Material properties are assumed to be constant with temperature, in order to provide a representative and simplified picture of material response for a range of possible materials. More detailed materials modeling could include temperature (and pressure) sensitivity of parameters, effects of phase transformations, and effects of electronic excitations (e.g. electronic heat capacity 45 ), for example. These models thus provide a representative picture of the lifetime and properties of hot states in strongly-tamped targets following a comparatively rapid emplacement of equilibrium temperature by irradiation. All material properties are taken to be isotropic. The model calculations were performed most commonly with a standard material system comprising a primary sample of iron, a surrounding medium of alumina (Al 2 O 3 ), and diamond as the tamper (Tables x-ray absorption levels, including a range of metals across a range of Z (Fe, Mo, Pb), a representative low-Z material (H 2 O) which is also an insulator, and a representative high-Z insulator (gadolinium gallium garnet, Gd 3 Ga 5 O 12 , or 'GGG'). The additional material at the outside edge of the sample area, referred to as a gasket, is composed of rhenium (Table VI). Representative thermo-physical and optical bulk material parameters (Tables Diamond was selected as an ideal tamper due to its high x-ray transparency, high thermal conductivity, and high strength to withstand mechanical stresses generated by heating or pre-compressing samples, as in a diamond anvil cell 40 . Diamond has an extremely high mechanical damage threshold beyond that of all known substances 13 with ability to withstand localized stresses exceeding a TPa 46 . It has the highest thermal conductivity of all known bulk matter, allowing it to act as an excellent heat sink which, when properly configured, allows the tamper to remain at very low temperature even when adjacent to very high temperature matter As the temperature is increased in the targets, hot areas are subject to thermally-driven expansion, and local stresses can develop which are roughly proportional to the amplitude of the temperature change. On short timescales (fs-ps), heating is fully isochoric, or nearly so. On the longer term (ps-ns), expansion where β and K T are the volumetric thermal expansivity and isothermal bulk modulus, respectively. This implies an isochoric thermal pressure change ∆P V , for a given imposed temperature change ∆T , as With K T of order 1 -10 3 GPa and β 10 -5 K -1 for condensed matter, and considering maximum achieved temperatures in the range of 10 3 -10 5 K, thermal stresses produced in typical experiments can reach values between 10 -2 and 10 3 GPa, compatible with the creation of high pressure shock waves. In an unconfined target, the expansion of the heated sample via pressure waves can reduce the amplitude of dynamic stress to zero; for a tamped target free expansion is prevented leading to a more complex system of compression and release. We have employed the hyades hydrocode 47 to study the 1D evolution of the stress, strain, and temperature in the adiabatic initial part of the experiment following heating. Experiments are initialized at T =300 K and ambient pressure and density for the different target layers. We use tabular equations of state (Sesame 7830 for diamond, Sesame 2980 for Mo, and Sesame 7410 for Al 2 O 3 ) in the models. We model only the first several μm of the tamper closest to the sample; where wave interactions with simulation cell boundaries produce unphysical conditions, very late in the simulation, the results are removed. An average atom ionization model is used to generate opacities. LTE is not assumed in these simulations a priori, as done for the conduction calculations, due to the faster nature of hydrodynamic phenomena leading to timescales adjoining the picosecond regime of equilibration processes. However these equilibration effects occur rapidly only in the first moments of the simulation, and are as expected not relevant to bulk hydrodynamic processes in a target of this size, where shock durations are of order hundreds of picoseconds. We have not modeled 2D effects which would be important to include to describe accurately the later-time behavior of this system, roughly as wave propagation distances exceed the beam radius. A. Finite Element Heat Transfer Results The baseline simulation, on which other simulations are perturbations, uses the standard target materials arrangement, radiation of 25 keV and a net pulse energy of 0.35 mJ (Fig. Varying the beam intensity (Fig. Varying the x-ray wavelength (photon energy) through the hard x-ray range will vary the differential absorption in samples, and the temperature gradients established (Fig. Without an interfacial medium layer between the sample and tamper, the temperature of the tamper is maximized by direct exposure to the hot sample; the sample is also cooled rapidly, but the tamper interface remains relatively hot (Fig. The samples were generally selected (Fig. The tampers chosen for modeling (Fig. The interfacial medium layer material selected (Fig. Excluding the heat deposited by the x-ray irradiation, targets of the length scales described are effectively adiabatic on timescales up to 1-10 ns. As a consequence, considering irradiation on the timescales of typical FEL (10-100 fs) or synchrotron bunch (10-100 ps) sources, there should be little difference between peak temperature and subsequent thermal evolution, once LTE is achieved. Differences will appear only in the heating rate and potentially arise from nonlinear and ultrafast phenomena sensitive to this rate, but broadly, pulsed x-ray heating in the fs-ns range (Table Thus for fast sources, the principal parameter for assessing the temperature following x-ray illumination is the total pulse energy and its spatial distribution. Therefore the thermal evolution calculations made here are relevant for pulses of any length, up to the adiabatic limit of ∼ 10 ns. In these simulations interface temperatures between differentially heated surfaces are effectively constant on shorter (adiabatic) timescales. Immediately after heating, the interface achieves a temperature intermediate to that in the bulk of the contacting layers, defined in part by the bulk temperatures and in part by the layer thermal transport. These results are confirmed by the analytical solution for interfacial temperatures following rapid emplacement of an interfacial temperature discontinuity where subscripts indicate the contacting layers A and B. This closely predicts the simulated constant interface temperatures before cooling begins (after ∼10 -8 s); e.g. in the baseline model at the leading interface between sample and medium, Eq. 18 predicts an initial interface temperature of ∼ 3200 K, compatible with the modeled value (Fig. For targets involving an additional low-Z (medium) layer between the sample and the tamper, a late rise in tamper temperature occurs as the heat wave from the high-Z sample reaches the tamper surface. The associated heating is often relatively minor, even where extreme sample temperatures are reached: e.g. for ∼55,000 K in a Pb sample (Fig. Comparison of the temperature at the sample center and near the interface between the sample and its surroundings provides some indication of the temperature gradient occurring in the sample. On shorter timescales the temperature distribution in the sample is defined exclusively by the absorption profile (Fig. For harder x-rays (15 keV and above), peak temperatures in the low-Z tamper are generally produced adjacent to the sample layers, either immediately upon heating (due to interfacing with a hotter medium (Fig. Coincident with the heating, the sample layer experiences an increase in pressure to 55-70 GPa, whereas minor heating in the surrounding layers produces weaker initial pressurization. Due to the differential heating and resulting differential pressures, waves of compression or release emerge from interfaces between the heated layers 2 . In this hydrodynamic model, the hot, and hence high pressure sample layer undergoes release of pressure as it expands and compresses the cold surrounding layers, driving them to higher pressure. The sample expands beginning at its surfaces via an inward-moving release wave, while shock waves are driven outward through the medium and toward the tamper. While this initial process reduces the pressure in the sample, it is not to zero due to the presence of the medium and the requirement of impedance matching at the sample-medium interface (Fig. The outward moving shocks reflect off the tampers and back toward the sample (at ∼0.6 ns), producing a stress maximum on the tamper comparable in magnitude to the initial thermal stress induced in the sample (Fig. Compression and release is nearly symmetric about the sample center in Fig. As confirmed by the simulations, hydrodynamic timescales relevant to a target of this thickness are sufficiently large that LTE conditions can be assumed in the materials. The hydrodynamic processes are thus comparable to those in conventional shock experiments of durations of order nanoseconds, such as those produced by optical laser pulses In such experiments, assuming conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium (i.e. in which materials follow an equilibrium equation of state) is a reasonable approximation. Simple thermodynamic calculations can thus predict essential details of the hydrodynamics, and find results consistent with the numerical models. For example, the magnitude of initial pressure can be reasonably predicted as an isochoric thermal pressure, after Eq. 16. For the 17700 K temperature rise in the Mo foil, having K T = 268 GPa and β = 1.50 × 10 -5 K -1 , Eq. 16 gives ∆P V 70 GPa; this compares well with the ∼62 GPa initial pressure rise calculated using hyades (Fig. Dynamic stresses should largely relax in ∼10 -9 s, before heat conduction initiates but with permanent and potentially significant effects on the temperature distribution in the target. Both shock (adiabatic) and release (isentropic) processes modify temperatures (Fig This expansion cooling can be described accurately with a thermodynamic model, taking an isentropic expansion (entropy S constant) of the Grüneisen form where V is the specific volume. The Grüneisen parameter where C V is the specific heat capacity at constant volume, is often found to follow the relationship where the subscript '0' indicates reference (here ambient) conditions and the exponent q is of order 1. Taking starting conditions of temperature and volume as T 0 and V 0 , initial isochorically-heated equilibrium conditions T 1 and V 1 = V 0 , and hydrodynamically-released conditions T 2 and V 2 , and assuming constant thermal expansivity and complete release of thermal pressure, we have i.e. the volume of the expanded state V 2 is equivalent to that produced on isobaric heating to the same temperature. Taking q = 1 we obtain Solving for an initial temperature T 1 = 17700 K in Mo, with γ 0 = 1.51 (taking we obtain a release temperature of T 2 = 13200 K (a reduction of 25%), in agreement with that calculated using hyades for this initial condition (Fig. As the inertial confinement time in such samples is in the range of picoseconds, radiation pulses significantly longer than the picosecond level will not produce shock waves or large pressure excursions, remaining at or close to the initial pressure. IV. DISCUSSION Many high-power x-ray sources involve high-repetition-rate pulse trains, up to the MHz level (pulse separations in the range of hundreds of ns, Table pulses for an Fe sample to be driven in a step-wise fashion to its melting point (1811 K) from room temperature, in ∼11 μs, assuming the temperature increases linearly with time. As thermal pressures delivered during pulses have time to dissipate between pulses, concomitant with thermal expansion, this type of heating can be thought of as being nearly isobaric, though the transient thermal pressurization and expansion process itself may have effects where ρ is density and c S is a wave velocity). Uniform heating in each layer is assumed. A, Compression and release response of the high-Z sample (S) and a low-Z tamper (T), where the tamper is assumed to also have lower impedance. Lines indicate achievable states on compression from initial state P 0 = 0, U P = 0; the dots represent particular compressed states. B, Case of a freestanding sample layer in vacuum under x-ray heating. The sample foil is immediately driven to a high thermal pressure at zero velocity, and releases from both sides (Fig. on the sample state (Sec. III B, Sec. IV B 3), while residual thermal pressure is possible in well-confined samples 40 . A representative finite element model of the stepwise heating due to x-ray pulse trains for the baseline experimental arrangement is shown in Fig. The sample temperature grows in a sawtooth fashion, with each pulse producing a new temperature peak followed by a gradual cooling until the next pulse. Cooling rates increase with temperature, limiting achieved temperatures through a balance between heat added by the x-ray pulses, and energy loss by conduction between pulses, such that peak temperatures rise nonlinearly during the pulse train, and rapidly approach a limiting value. In this case the temperature maximum is about three times greater than that achieved following a single pulse. Similarly, at the lowest fluence (0.0035 mJ/pulse as used in the earlier estimate) the sample would never reach melting, remaining below ∼500 K in the limit. Pulse train experiments may be useful for both probing and heating. For nominally noninvasive probing applications, extending the duration between pulses can reduce the heat accumulated in a fixed target, and ensure the sample temperature rise is minimized at the time of each probing. On longer timescales, the sample temperature at the time of probing is constant, so the data obtained can be treated as isothermal but at an elevated, saturation temperature (after the initial pulses during which stabilization occurs). For deliberate heating, minimizing pulse delay can increase the maximum achievable temperature, and the functional length of the pulse train may be the number of pulses required to reach a saturation value (e.g. ∼15 pulses for a 4.5 MHz train, Fig. Either in a single-or multiple-exposure experiment, the target lifetime can be of central importance. In a traditional isochoric heating experiment on thin layered targets, the lifetime is set by hydrodynamic expansion of the hot target, occurring as the ions gain energy from electrons and expand into vapor. By confining the hot target in a tamper, this time can be increased. Use of very massive tampers surrounding a hotspot can lead to total confinement of even a dense plasma state, and reliable target survival Significant damage in targets can result from thermal effects, which include reversible and irreversible phase transformation (e.g. melting), reaction, strength reduction (i.e. in the tamper), and for free surfaces, or at gaps, the possibility of vaporization. While some of these effects are certain to occur in higher-Z (strongly heated) samples, the survival of the target assembly will likely depend on tamper integrity. The temperature at the surfaces of the tamper generally determine the peak temperatures to which the tampers are subject, and thus the ability of tampers to survive the thermo-mechanical cycle and successfully confine the sample throughout. This includes the tamper surfaces facing the sample, heated by close contact with a hot sample layer, and the free surface facing the beam, heated by peak fluence (Figs 2 -10). Many of the temperature conditions found in these simulations are in principal such that the tampers can survive irradiation. Except for softer x-rays (Fig. Ultrahigh intensity laser sources can have substantial direct influence on materials including radiative damage and electronic excitation: insulators can be rapidly and transiently transformed to metals 52 , bonds can be disrupted where A is atomic mass (Eq. 14) and peak energy density per area is Λ max (Eq. 11). Use of this criterion then leads to rough constraints on acceptable irradiation conditions. Considering again tamper integrity, direct radiative ablation is possible at free surfaces where unconfined atoms may easily escape the target, at Q atom ∼1 eV; however, for the low-Z tampers considered here, such as Be and C polymorphs, this limit is not easily reached 42 . For diamond, nonthermal breakdown of diamond to graphite occurs at relatively lower absorbed energy, ∼ 0.7 eV/atom At 25 keV (Fig. With the rapid, bulk heating of samples occurring faster than pressure wave propagation in our simulations (i.e. σ t << d S /c), thermal pressure develops as a consequence of heating. The large mechanical stresses associated with target heating can introduce immediate or cumulative damage to targets, including irreversible deformations, flow, fracturing, delamination at interfaces, and spall. Thus, target survival after a single pulse or series of pulses will depend on the integrity of the target under mechanical stresses as temperature and pressure are raised, and as pressures dissipate hydrodynamically as stress differentials relax (Fig. The magnitudes of mechanical stress initially generated in the target (Eq. 16) will be similar to those associated with subsequent pressure waves. In the present examples, while this value can be large, relatively lower stress is applied to the surrounding materials and tampers due to impedance matching requirements. In our example, for the ∼60 GPa initial stress in the Mo sample, shock waves forming in conjunction with the release of the hot sample layer and striking (and reverberating from) the tamper (diamond in this instance) are ∼30 GPa in amplitude (Fig. As the target configuration discussed here is broadly identical to that of static high pressure cells, this application is considered in detail below. In an anvil cell type design, the sample is configured to withstand high stresses in the sample area via confinement by thick, hard materials. Diamond anvils provide unmatched capabilities for pressure application and resistance, for up to ∼1000 GPa 46 , while other strong, low-Z candidates for high-strength tamper-anvils include sapphire (single crystal Al 2 O 3 ) and Moissanite (SiC) 38 . The prior considerations for limiting target damage suggest that improving sample confinement, i.e. using a pressure cell configuration, could enhance target stability and survival. In this configuration, thermal expansion of the hot sample is limited 40 ensuring the material remains at or near its initial density regardless of heating. Cracks or voids which can be present in multilayer target assemblies or ordinarily develop due to thermal stresses can be suppressed. The ability of anvil cells to resist the heating and associated mechanical stresses in hot samples have long been demonstrated using infrared lasers to heat samples, to temperatures in the range of several eV, over timescales of microseconds and longer With similar conditions of temperature, pressure, and timescale found in the present x-ray heating simulations, many advantages and techniques of the anvil cell configuration may be useful in thickly-tamped target experiments generally. In one possible experiment, a tamped sample could be placed under some small initial stress (to ensure good initial confinement, and void elimination). Thermal stresses intro-duced by x-ray heating could be controlled by the anvil's high strength and potential stress resistance. So long as the anvils can withstand the additional mechanical stresses (on the order of GPa or higher for conditions considered here, Sec. III B) and any heating (Sec. III A), the target could be stabilized indefinitely. The anvil cell provides a built in way to safely relieve thermal stresses in samples to a mechanical equilibrium confinement state 40 without hydrodynamic expansion, solving a principal issue in tamped laser-driven targets that may only be partially mitigated by tamping alone. The extended target stabilization would permit studies over a wide range of timescales, accessing phenomena including electron-ion thermalization, structural transitions and thermal conduction, and enable repeated exposures of the same sample on arbitrary timescales, and sample recovery. This approach would require some apparatus to apply a compressive force across the target, as in a standard pressure cell configuration, with suitable windows for admittance and observation of radiation. The ability to pre-compress samples to elevated densities can also provide, in conjunction with x-ray irradiation, a route to studying laser-plasma interactions and warm dense matter at conditions of very high density, exceeding that of conventional solid states. Static pre-compression of matter to hundreds of GPa confining pressure, or larger using modern double-stage anvils 46 , is a widely used method, compatible with a variety of strategies to further modulate sample conditions (e.g. temperature) and probe sample properties at extremes. Our models demonstrate that coupling a high density sample with intense x-ray irradiation on modern light sources can offer a new approach for exploring ultra-dense and hot states, complementary with dynamic compression and traditional optical-laser-heated DAC, in terms of achievable pressure-temperature-timescale conditions. Indeed, x-ray heating may serve as an alternative to optical laser-heating This study describes the thermo-mechanical response of macroscale targets subjected to irradiation by intense, brief x-ray pulses, similar to those now produced by the current generation of x-ray free electron lasers. These targets use thick, light-element tamper or anvil layers, which are transparent at hard x-ray energies, to confine a thin target assembly, comprising one or more layers which may be strongly absorbing to x-ray radiation. The thermal and mechanical evolution of the x-ray heated target after the rapid deposition of heat is treated using finite-element and radiation-hydrodynamics calculations. We find that conventional hydrodynamics, classical diffusive heat transfer, and equilibrium thermodynamics can accurately treat the principal thermo-mechanical phenomena for the length and time scales characteristic of such large targets. coupling parameter) and of Fermi energy to thermal energy Θ (the degeneracy parameter) approach unity. That these conditions could be sustained for up to microsecond timescales using suitable target configurations offers a potential way to study properties of warm dense matter under total thermodynamic equilibrium conditions, on timescales exceeding those of modern experiments that use laser-driven shock waves or unconfined isochoric heating. Using thick tampers to apply initial pressure on samples and taking advantage of serial irradiation can enable further exploration of novel regimes of density, temperature, and timescale in warm dense matter. Target survival over one or more exposures is controlled by targets' potential resistance to temperatures on the order of an eV (thousands of degrees Kelvin), mechanical stress close to one million atmospheres (100 GPa), and radiation levels close to damage thresholds, all found to be survivable depending on target design. For thick targets of the considered design (μm-thick samples with mm-thick tampers), the thermal response due to intense x-ray illumination should be similar at different facilities offering sub-nanosecond pulses, including modern free electron laser and synchrotron sources. Due to the thermal inertia of samples of this scale, temperatures achieved and cooling behavior are not strongly dependent on pulse lengths, but on total energy dose. Thus modern synchrotron sources with ∼100 ps pulse duration may produce a similar level of heating to that at an XFEL with ∼100 fs pulses, for equivalent pulse energy. Heat accumulation over pulse trains with MHz repetition rates characteristic of such facilities can lead to further temperature rise, though this effect is somewhat mitigated by equilibrium between heating and cooling that leads to effectively isothermal experiments on longer timescales. Thus, consideration of x-ray heating effects may be necessary even in nominally non-invasive xray measurements at many modern, high brightness, high repetition-rate x-ray sources, including synchrotron facilities. Certain related processes could be more sensitive to the radiation intensity and pulse duration, including shock-wave generation, which would occur under 100-fs XFEL but not 100-ps synchrotron irradiation. The multilayer target configuration discussed here is informed by, and mimics, the configuration of a static high pressure anvil system, of which the diamond-anvil cell uniaxial press is the most relevant. Anvil cells have the ability of preparing initial states of elevated density and pressure in samples, including different structural states, prior to excitation to more extreme states; their wide use in preparing samples for shock-wave compression x-ray probe alignment with heated areas, and insensitivity to target optical thresholds. The confinement afforded through an anvil cell design is another way to stabilize tamped targets against thermomechanical stress generally and extend experimental lifetimes by limiting them with conductive rather than hydrodynamic dissipation, and ensure target survival for continued exposure and recovery of samples from extremes. Ultimately experiments must be performed to assess the accuracy of the models developed here, as are currently possible at modern x-ray sources. Further improvements in these models will likely be required to compare with experiments, including coupling of thermomechanical and thermal conductive processes and more accurate treatment of radiation coupling in the sample, which are likely to be essential at higher radiation intensities. . Comparison of typical operating parameters of pulsed, focused x-ray facilities, with representative first-harmonic capabilities of current-generation XFELs and a representative 4th generation synchrotron upgrade. . Model input parameters, with standard configuration at top and sets of varying simulation parameters explored shown at the bottom.