The spin susceptibility of strongly correlated Sr2RuO4 is known to display a rich structure in reciprocal space, with a prominent peak at Qi=(0.3, 0.3, 0). It is still debated if the resulting incommensurate spin-density-wave fluctuations foster unconventional superconductivity at low temperature or compete therewith. By means of density functional theory combined with dynamical mean-field theory, we reveal the realistic multi-orbital signature of the (dynamic) spin susceptibility beyond existing weak-coupling approaches. The experimental fluctuation spectrum up to 80 meV is confirmed by theory. Furthermore, the peak at Qi is shown to carry nearly equal contributions from each of the Ru(4d)-t2g orbitals, pointing to a cooperative effect resulting in the dominant spin fluctuations. Introduction. -The Ruddlesden-Popper series of the strontium ruthenates Sr n+1 Ru n O 3n+1 , with n labeling the layers of corner-sharing RuO 6 octahedra separated by SrO rocksalt layers, poses a formidable correlated-electron problem in a realistic scenario. Intricate competitions between Fermi-liquid, Mott-critical and superconducting behavior are accompanied by a complex metallic magnetism. While the perovskite SrRuO 3 (n→∞) as series end member is ferromagnetic (FM) below T C ∼ 165 K, a ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic transition occurs by lowering the number of layers n. This transition takes place between the orthorhombic n = 3 and n = 2 systems. The Sr 4 Ru 3 O 10 compound is verified FM The tetragonal n = 1 compound Sr 2 RuO 4 stands out, since it displays unconventional superconductivity (most probably triplet pairing), below T c ∼ 1.5 K In this letter we advance on the understanding of the pecularities of Sr 2 RuO 4 by connecting the strong correlation specification to the spin-fluctuations phenomenology. From the merger of density functional theory (DFT) with DMFT, we have a realistic many-body theory at hand that goes beyond existing studies Calculational procedure. -Single-layer Sr 2 RuO 4 has ideal tetragonal symmetry (space group I4/mmm) with fourfold rotation C z 4 around the c-axis. Our firstprinciples many-body calculations are based on the structural data of Walz and Lichtenberg In order to access the two-particle response, we compute the complete three-orbital particle-hole susceptibility tensor χ σσ mm m m (q, ω), with m, m m , m = 1, 2, 3 and σ, σ =↑, ↓, at finite temperature, with full generality in the frequency-dependent structure To cope with the multi-orbital character, we focus on the eigenvalues/modes of the susceptibility tensor χ κκ in the superindices κ = {σmm } and κ = {σ m m } Due to the possibility of producing very clean samples for single-layer ruthenate, inelastic neutron scattering (INS) experiments elucidated the magnetic excitations in great detail To identify the dominant particle-hole fluctuation in an unbiased way, the dominant eigenvalues of the susceptibility tensor χ σσ mm m m are monitored in the static limit ω = 0. The maximum eigenvalue in Sr 2 RuO 4 corresponds to a mode that is diagonal in the orbital components throughout the BZ. The eigenmode is indeed related to S z and exhibits the form V max (q) ∼ v xz (q)S z xz + v yz (q)S z yz + v xy (q)S z xy , where the normalization Σ κ v 2 κ (q) = 1 /2 holds. Note that the orbital diagonality is not trivial and there are other cases with a more complex structure A full 2D mapping of the dominant-eigenvalue intensity within the irreducible wedge of the BZ readily marks Q i as the hot spot for spin-like fluctuations (see Fig. Hence a straightforward d xz -d yz nesting scenario cannot explain the Q i -peak. Spin flucutations at the latter qpoint have a manifest multi-orbital character. Our finding is supported by the recent work of Arakawa Summary. -Our realistic many-body approach based on DFT+DMFT allows for an extended study of the multi-orbital electronic properties in the singlelayer Ruddlesden-Popper compound Sr 2 RuO 4 . By means of generic lattic susceptibilities at strong coupling, i.e. including vertex contributions, we examine the spinfluctuation spectrum depending on wave vector, frequency and temperature. Good agreement with available INS data is obtained, the experimental findings concerning the relevant energy and temperature scales are confirmed. From an eigensystem analysis of the generic particlehole susceptibility tensor it is indeed possible to designate a magnetic eigenmode proportional to S z as the dominant one. The orbital contributions to that mode vary over the Brillouin zone, describing some anisotropy in the spin response. Importantly, at the major peak position Q i = (0.3, 0.3) in the q z = 0 plane the latter has an intrinsic multi-orbital nature, involving fluctuations in all three t 2g orbitals equally, in contrast to a combination of 1D-nesting pictures. This finding is important not only for a deeper understanding of the magnetism in Sr 2 RuO 4 , but moreover for theoretically approaching the pairing mechanism at very low temperatures. Therefore advancing the present scheme towards an assessment of the particleparticle susceptibility would be promising. Investigating the influence of spin-orbit coupling 