The direct domain coupling of spontaneous ferroelectric polarization and net magnetic moment can result in giant magnetoelectric (ME) coupling, which is essential to achieve mutual control and practical applications of multiferroics. Recently, the possible bulk domain coupling, the mutual control of ferroelectricity (FE) and weak ferromagnetism (WFM) have been theoretically predicted in hexagonal LuFeO 3 . Here, we report the first successful growth of highly-cleavable Sc-stabilized hexagonal Lu 0.6 Sc 0.4 FeO 3 (h-LSFO) single crystals, as well as the first visualization of their intrinsic cloverleaf pattern of vortex FE domains and large-loop WFM domains. The vortex FE domains are on the order of 0.1-1 μm in size. On the other hand, the loop WFM domains are ~100 μm in size, and there exists no interlocking of FE and WFM domain walls. These strongly manifest the decoupling between FE and WFM in h-LSFO. The domain decoupling can be explained as the consequence of the structure-mediated coupling between polarization and dominant in-plane antiferromagnetic spins according to the theoretical prediction, which reveals intriguing interplays between FE, WFM, and antiferromagnetic orders in h-LSFO. Our results also indicate that the magnetic topological charge tends to be identical to the structural topological charge. This could provide new insights into the 2 induction of direct coupling between magnetism and ferroelectricity mediated by structural distortions, which will be useful for the future applications of multiferroics. Multiferroic materials, in which two or multiple ferroic orders coexist, have drawn a great deal of attentions due to their fundamental importance and potentials for the next generation devices Therefore, multiferroics with the direct domain coupling between spontaneous magnetization (M) and polarization (P) are highly sought after. The direct domain coupling can result in giant ME coupling, enabling the mutual control in the sense that flipping one of M or P can induce the flipping of the other. This direct domain coupling effect has been partially achieved, for example, at the hetero-interfaces of bilayer films. M in one film layer can be flipped by flipping P in the other film layer by electrical fields, however not the other way around Meanwhile, the recent ME coupling study on h-LuFeO 3 /LuFe 2 O 4 superlattices For the possible giant ME coupling, h-LuFeO 3 systems in the P6 3 cm polar structure (Figure Note that alternating FE domains are clamped to the six structural vortex domains around one topological defect, forming an intriguing cloverleaf pattern in h-RMnO 3 (ref. 19). Although magnetic domains in h-RMnO 3 can be coupled with FE domains Compared with h-RMnO 3 , the strong magnetic interaction between Fe 3+ spins in h-LuFeO 3 induces a high antiferromagnetic ordering temperature (T N = 440 K in ref. 12, 170 K in ref. 13). Even though the exact T N is still under debate, the presence of net ferromagnetic moment along the c axis is evident below 160-170 K. The magnetic state below 160-170 K is confirmed in both theory and experiment to be the A 2 -dominant spin configuration (Figure Despite all of these extensive investigations, the intrinsic FE domain structure in h-LuFeO 3 is still unexplored, and the direct experimental study of the ME coupling in h-LuFeO 3 is absent. One of the main reasons is the instability of the h-LuFeO 3 phase at ambient synthesis conditions, which makes it challenging to synthesize bulk single crystals. Here, we report a successful growth of high-quality highly-cleavable h-Lu 1-x Sc x FeO 3 (nominal x=0.4) single crystals for the first time, using a floating zone technique and subsequent extensive annealing with different cooling rates (see Methods and Supplementary Information, note 2). The X-ray spectrum obtained using a PANalytical diffractometer (Figure Although most of our samples have FE domains with +P and -P domains in 50/50 ratio, 6 known as type-I domains, some cleaved samples closed to the surface of crystals do show type-II narrow domains (Figure We plotted the density of topological defects (vortices and antivortices) in PFM images vs. the cooling rate (Figure Meanwhile, the poor R-Square value (~0.84) of the linear fitting in h-Lu 0.6 Sc 0.4 FeO 3 (Figure 7 We obtained good polarization loops (Figure The magnetic susceptibility of LSFO2 in magnetic fields along and perpendicular to the c axis Our results of decoupled FE and WFM domains can be understood in terms of magnetic domain wall energy. It is expected that the domain wall energy with the in-plane spin rotation of large |2/3| likely costs larger than that with the small |/3| rotation. This can also be understood in terms of topology. Structural distortions such as oxygen distortions all the way around one vortex (antivortex) core rotate by +(-)2, so the relevant structural topological charge (or the winding number, n s ) of one vortex (antivortex) is +(-)1. Similarly, magnetic topological charge (or the winding number, n m ) for the in-plane spins of a vortex (antivortex) in the domain-decoupled case (Figure In summary, we have found that the intrinsic FE domain structure of h-LSFO is of fine topological vortex configuration. In contrast, weak ferromagnetic domains are of a loop shape with a much larger size. The distinct sizes and shapes demonstrate the decoupling between ferroelectricity and out-of-plane weak ferromagnetism, even though in-plane antiferromagnetic spins likely correlate with structural modulations around topological vortices according to theoretical predictions. Our results indicate that the magnetic topological charge tends to be identical with the structural topological charge. This observation is consistent with the absence of any FE and WFM domain-coupled ME effects in h-LSFO. Our results provide new insights into induction of direct coupling between magnetism and ferroelectricity mediated through structural distortions, which will be useful for the future applications of multiferroics. High-quality h-Lu 0.6 Sc 0.4 FeO 3 single crystals were grown using a floating zone method under 0.8 MPa O 2 atmosphere. The feed rods were prepared using the standard solid-state reaction (ref. Experimentally, it is also true that our h-Lu 0.6 Sc 0.4 FeO 3 has a slightly higher weak ferromagnetic transition temperature at 160 K-170 K, comparing to pure h-LuFeO 3 thin films (140 K-150 K). Except for that small difference, bulk Sc-doped h-LuFeO 3 shows similar magnetic properties to pure h-LuFeO 3 thin films, based on the magnetic susceptibility and neutron diffraction study in ref. 13 We could estimate the minimum induced current (I min ) if a 180° polarization flipping happens when sweeping the field by having the following experimental parameters: electrode contact area (S=0.00021 cm 2 ), sweeping speed of magnetic fields (v=0.02 T/s), the saturated polarization according to PE loops (p=1 μC/cm 2 ). For the worst case, we assume the polarization flips during the whole field sweeping process (from 0 T to 9 T) which takes t= 9 T/ (0.02 T/s) = 450 s. Then I min = 2PS/t = 0.9 pA, which is at least 9 times of our current sensitivity (< 0.1 pA) in the measurement. Therefore, the absence of magnetoelectric current when sweeping magnetic fields is the strong evidence of the decoupling between WFM and FE domains. In addition, antiferromagnetic spins also rotate around a merging point, similar to what happens with structural distortions. Thus, magnetic domains can also be considered as a 32 32 topological object and its magnetic topological charge is well defined 2 . However, two spin configurations are possible: in one case, spins rotate by 60° between two adjacent domains (i.e. the magnetic topological charge n m of 1 around a merging point, Figure 14)