Prior ultralow thermal conductivity () materials(1-7) are not suitable for thermoelectric applications due to the limited electronic transport in the materials. Here, we present a new class of ultralow  materials with substantial electronic heat transport. Our samples are graphene/metal heterostructures of transferred graphene and ultrathin metal films (Pd, Au and Ni) deposited by either thermal evaporation or rf magnetron sputtering. For the evaporated samples, we achieve an ultralow  of 0.06 W m -1 K -1 , with phonons as the dominant heat carriers. The ultralow  is due to a huge disparity(8, 9) in phonon energy in graphene and metals. Interestingly, for the sputtered samples, we find that 50 % of heat is carried by electrons, even when   0.1 W m -1 K -1 . We attribute the electronic contribution to transmission of electrons across atomic-scale pinholes(9) in graphene. With the ultralow  and substantial electronic transport, the new materials could be explored for thermoelectric applications. Traditionally, the lowest thermal conductivity is found in amorphous materials in which heat is carried by quantized vibration modes that randomly diffuse and relax with a relaxation rate on the order of their vibration frequencies For these layered structures, the thermal conductivity can be approximated by a simple expression assuming that the thermal resistance of interfaces adds in series; Λ = Gd/2, where G is the thermal conductance of a single interface and d is the period of the layered structures. Thus, ultralow thermal conductivity, in principle, could be achieved by choosing interfaces that effectively impede transmission of phonons (low G) and using thin films (low d). However, when d is surpassingly small (e.g., 3 nm), this simple expression breaks down and the thermal conductivity saturates Here, we successfully demonstrate the use of graphene for thermal insulation through a series of fully dense graphene/metal heterostructures with a thermal conductivity and a thermal diffusivity as small as 0.06 W m -1 K -1 (2 times of that of the air) and 2.610 -4 cm 2 s -1 respectively, comparable to the world record lowest values. Despite the low thermal conductivity, prior ultralow thermal conductivity materials are not suitable for thermoelectric applications. To qualify to be efficient thermoelectric materials, two criteria in term of heat transport (in addition to the requirement for a high Seebeck coefficient) must be met, i.e., a low thermal conductivity and a high electronic contribution. The criteria can be understood by evaluating a figure-of-merit for thermoelectric efficiency, ZT. Often, ZT is expressed as ZT = S 2 σT/Λ, where S is Seebeck coefficient, T is temperature, and  and  are electrical and thermal conductivity, respectively. For a power factor of S 2   25 μW cm -1 K -2 (a typical value for good thermoelectric materials) and ZT 1 at room temperature, this translates to   1 W m -1 K -1 . Thus, the criterion of a low  can be easily met by the ultralow thermal conductivity materials. However, ZT can also be expressed as ZT = (S 2 /L)/(1 + Λ ph /Λ e ), where L = 2.4410 -8 W  K -2 is the Lorenz number, and ph and e are the phononic (lattice) and electronic components of the thermal conductivity, respectively and  = ph + e. In other words, ZT approaches a limit of S 2 / L, but is reduced by a large ratio of phononic to electronic thermal conductivity. In good thermoelectric materials, the reduction due to ph / e is minimized and thus electronic heat transport is always substantial. In this respect, we successfully prepared graphene/metal heterostructures with ph / e of only 1, despite the ultralow thermal conductivity of 0.1 W m -1 K -1 . We attribute the high electronic transport to transmission of electrons across atomic-scale pinholes in graphene. Since Seebeck coefficient across atomic-scale pinholes A schematic diagram showing the cross sectional view of our metal/graphene heterostructures. The heterostructures consist of 5 layers of CVD-grown transferred graphene (trG) and 6 layers of metals (i.e., Pd, Au or Ni) stacked alternatingly with one another. (b) Determination of the conformity of graphene in the Pd/metal (h = 1.3 nm) heterostructures by rf magnetron sputtering, from plots of relative height H as function of accumulative percentage area A. Transferred graphene is considered conformal when H compared to previous layer is < 0.5 nm, see ref. heterostructures prepared by thermal evaporation (Evp, h = 1.8 nm) and rf magnetron sputtering (Spt, h = 1.3 nm), as labeled. Our graphene/metal heterostructures consist of alternating layers of monolayer transferred graphene (trG) and ultrathin metal films (Pd, Au and Ni), see Fig. We perform graphene transfers with poly(bisphenol A carbonate) (PC) as the support layers Information. We also quantify conformity of the transferred graphene to the underlying metal films, using an approach that we developed, see ref. We deposit the ultrathin metal films in the graphene/metal heterostructures by either thermal evaporation or rf magnetron sputtering. To determine the average thickness of the films in the heterostructures, we measure the total thickness of metal films on thermal oxide substrates that were included in the chamber during the deposition, see Methods in the Supplementary Information for details. To achieve the thinnest metal films and thus the lowest thermal conductivity, we deposit a series of ultrathin metal films with different intended thicknesses on thermal silicon dioxide, and measure the root-mean-square (rms) roughness  of the thin films by AFM. We then plot the ratios of the rms roughness to film thickness h, /h, of the films in Fig. To check the quality of the transferred graphene (trG) in our trG/metal heterostructures, we performed Raman spectroscopy on two trG/Pd heterostructures (with the Pd films either evaporated or sputtered), see Fig. We found that the phase-contrast images of the ion-bombarded graphene and pristine graphene are almost identical, indicating that the damages that ion-bombardment creates are on atomic scale. We thus infer that the only difference between our sputtered and evaporated trG/metal heterostructures is that sputtering creates atomic-scale pinholes in graphene. We measure the thermal conductivity () of the trG/metal heterostructures by timedomain thermoreflectance (TDTR), see Methods in the Supplementary for details. In our measurements, we employ a pump-leak correction approach to eliminate artifact signals from the diffusely scattered pump beam To understand  of the heterostructures, we compare our measurements to a simple estimation of Λ = Gd/2 in Fig. Interestingly, for a similar period d, we find that  of samples prepared by sputtering is substantially higher than those prepared by thermal evaporation, see Fig. Finally, we evaluate the potential of our trG/metal heterostructures as thermal insulators and thermoelectric materials in Fig. represent layered structures, fullerene and amorphous material respectively. The dashed line is the calculation of equation Λ = Cv × α using a thermal diffusivity α value of 2.5x10 -8 m 2 s -1 . (b) Compilation of ratios of electronic thermal conductivity and lattice thermal conductivity Λe/Λph as a function of total thermal conductivity Λ of our sputtered Pd/trG (solid squares, h = 1.3 nm) and sputtered Au/trG (solid triangle, h = 1.6 nm) heterostructure samples at 300 K. We compare our results to thermoelectric (TE) measurements obtained from literature (open symbols). Open circles, triangles and squares represent bulk TE materials, 24-27 nanostructures TE materials 33,34 and bulk TE materials with nanostructures precipitates, 28-32 respectively. The figures in the bracket are the dimensionless figure of merit (ZT) values of the respective thermoelectric materials. The blue lines are values of  and e / ph that give a ZT of 1, see the text for discussion. For thermoelectric applications, two important criteria are a low  and a high e / ph, as explained in the introduction of the paper. We thus plot the e / ph vs  for our sputtered trG/metal heterostructures, compared to a wide range of thermoelectric materials (bulk(24-27), bulk with nanoscale precipitates In summary, we present novel graphene/metal heterostructures with an ultralow thermal conductivity of 0.1 W m -1 K -1 and a substantial electronic heat transport of e / ph  1. We attribute the electronic heat transport to transmission of electrons through atomic scale pinholes in graphene. Due to the low thermal conductivity and a substantial electronic transport, our graphene/metal heterostructures could be explored for thermoelectric applications. Certainly, a high Seebeck coefficient must be achieved for any thermoelectric applications, which is a great challenge for metals. We however think that the Seebeck coefficient could be significantly enhanced at atomic scale, as previously theoretically discussed To determine the thickness of metal films in the graphene/metal heterostructures, we always include a SiO2 (100 nm)/Si substrate with rectangular trenches in the sputtering or evaporation chamber during the preparation of the heterostructures. After all metal films were deposited, the metal films on the SiO2 (100 nm)/Si substrate have a total thickness of the sum of the thicknesses of all metal films in the heterostructure. We then derive the average thickness of metal films in the heterostructures from measurements the thickness of metal films on the substrates. We accurately measure the thickness of the metal films on the substrates by AFM. Rectangular trenches of size 100 μm x 50 μm are fabricated on SiO2 (100 nm)/Si substrates using the following photolithography method -(a) A layer of positive photoresist S1805 is spincoated on SiO2 substrate and baked dry. (b) The photoresist with an area of 100 μm x 50 μm is exposed to laser with wavelength of 532 nm during laser writing. (c) The trench is formed after the photoresist is been removed during the developing process. After the subsequent deposition of metals (i.e. Pd, Au or Ni) by either thermal evaporation of rf magnetron sputtering, we performed lift off process to remove the photoresist and measure the thickness of the metals using tapping mode AFM. The thermal conductivity of the metal/graphene heterostructures is measured using timedomain thermoreflectance (TDTR) 1/e 2 radii of 6 μm and a total laser power of 60-90 mW to limit the steady-state temperature rise to <10 K. We measure the total thickness of the metal (i.e., Au, Pd, and Ni) films by tapping mode AFM as mentioned in Thickness Determination and we assume the thickness of each layer of graphene is 0.5 nm (37 