The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) is studied on the surface of a 3D magnetic topological insulator. By applying a modified semi-classical framework, all three contributions to the AHE, the intrinsic Berry phase curvature effect, the side-jump effect and the skew scattering effects are systematically treated, and analytical expressions for the conductivities are obtained in terms of the Fermi level, the spatial orientation of the surface magnetization and the concentration of magnetic and non-magnetic impurities. We demonstrate that the AHE can change sign by altering the orientation of the surface magnetization, the concentration of the impurities and also the position of the chemical potential, in agreement with recent experimental observations. Hence, each contribution to the AHE, or even the whole AHE, can be turned off by properly adjusting the given parameters. For example, one can turn off the anomalous hall conductivity in a system with in-plane magnetization by pushing the system into the fully metallic regime. Topological insulators are a new class of matter that resemble band insulators in the bulk while capable of conducting along gapless states on the surfaces or edges The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) as one of the most fundamental transport properties of magnetic materials, is the manifestation of the Hall effect in systems without time-reversal symmetry. This effect has been an enigmatic problem for almost a century and still remains a poorly understood phenomenon. A magnetic topological insulator with strong spin orbit coupling is a valuable host medium for realizing both the quantized version of the anomalous Hall effect While this time reversal symmetry breaking makes the system topologically trivial, the chiral nature of the surface states could still play an important role in the transport properties of the system. In the current effort, the magnetic and non-magnetic impurities on the surface of the TI are the source of scattering for the itinerant massive Dirac Fermions on the surface. In fact, we ignore the likely induced small gap by the magnetic scattering on the surface, compared to the already existing gap induced by the magnetic impurities in the bulk or by any other mechanism. In this work, we comprehensively investigate the three different contributions to the AHE arising from the intrinsic berry-phase curvature, the extrinsic side-jump and skew scattering. Exerting an external electric field determines the momentum direction of the charge carriers which is locked to their spin. Therefore, novel phenomena can be expected in the spin dependent interaction of itinerant electrons with these surface magnetic impurities. Furthermore, by altering the orientation of TI's surface magnetization by an applied field, the strength of the scattering potential can be changed, and by changing the Fermi level, the spin orientation can be altered. As a consequence, the relative importance of the different contributions to the AHE will also depend on the surface magnetization direction and the Fermi level. Therefore we also address in this work how the orientation of the surface magnetization, the material's Fermi level and also the impurity concentration control the side jump, skew scattering and anomalous velocity contributions to the AHE. In this study we rely on the semi-classical Boltzmann formalism. The semiclassical description of transport through a Boltzmann equation does lead to a Hall contribution if skew scattering is accounted for in the collision term, but the other contributions, the anomalous velocity and the side-jump effects, are ignored. Therefore we included the anomalous velocity to the formalism. Furthermore, in Ref. 20 it was also shown how the ad hoc addition of a gauge invariant expression for the coordinate shift leads to a semi-classical description of all contri-butions to the anomalous Hall effect and that the same final results can be obtained as in a more complicated approach using the microscopic perturbative approach of Luttinger We have organized the rest of this paper as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the effective model of massive Dirac fermions on the surface of a magnetically doped three-dimensional topological insulator. In addition, we present the semi-classical approach to correctly incorporate the side jump and skew scattering contributions in the AHE dynamics of the charge carriers. The obtained results are shown in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we summarize our findings and conclude with our main results. Finally, some important relations are derived in the appendix to ease tracing some results presented in the previous sections. The minimal effective Hamiltonian describing massive Dirac fermions on the surface of a 3D TI is given by where the ẑ-direction is chosen normal to the surface of the TI. Here, v F , k = (k x , k y ), and M are respectively the Fermi velocity, the wave vector, and the mass of the surface Dirac electrons, and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the vector of Pauli matrices acting on the spin of the electrons. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H D are where α labels the conduction (α = +1) and valence (α = -1) bands, k = |k |, ξ k = (1 -γ k )/(1 + γ k ), with γ k = M/ε k , and φ k = arctan( ky kx ) refers to the direction of the wave vector of the surface electrons. In the following we will also label the eigenstates and energies with the index l ≡ (k , α) as the combined (momentum, band) index. The presence of dilute and randomly placed magnetic impurities on the surface of a 3D TI, scatter electrons and influence the transport properties of the system. We model the interaction between an electron located at r and a single magnetic impurity at R m as where S m and s = hσ/2 are the spins of the impurity and the electron, respectively. J is the exchange coupling and the Dirac delta function refers to the short-range nature of the electron-impurity interaction we have considered in this study. In the regime of large magnetic spin |S| → ∞, weak interaction J → 0 and J|S|=constant, we can treat the spin of the magnetic impurities classically. We assume that the magnetic impurities are all aligned in the same direction and lie in the yz-plane, with the z-axis perpendicular to the surface of the magnetic TI. Since the system is usually not pure and often also contains non-magnetic impurities, we also consider, in addition to the term V m , as another source for scattering of itinerant electrons off non-magnetic impurities located at R nm . We relied on the modified Boltzmann formalism Within the semi-classical Boltzmann approach, the rate of change of the surface electrons' distribution function f , due to the scattering from impurities, can be obtained from where v 0l = ∂ε l ∂k is the velocity of the incident wave packet, E is the external applied electric field, and f 0 (ε l ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Considering only elastic scattering events, and using the detailed balance principle, we obtain where w ll is the transition rate between states l and l . Combining Eq. ( The semi-classical Eq. ( To study the transport of electrons in a quantum regime, we need to find the scattering matrix (or Tmatrix) of the electrons. Within the semi-classical framework, the scattering rate, as a classical object, can be obtained by its connection to the scattering matrix through Fermi's golden rule. However, it should be noted that only the absolute value of the T -matrix elements are present in the scattering rate. Consequently, all the phase information of the T -matrix elements is lost. In this section we forget about this insufficiency of the golden rule, but in the following sections we will discuss how we can restore all the missing phase information. The scattering rate between two different quantum states is connected to the T -matrix elements and is given by in which the scattering T -matrix is defined as where |l is an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian H D , V sc is the scattering potential operator and |ψ l is an eigenstate of the full Hamiltonian H = H D +V sc , that satisfies the Lippmann-Schwinger equation For weak disorder, |ψ l can be approximated by a truncated series in powers of V ll = l|V sc |l . By applying Eq. ( Substituting this expansion for T ll into Eq. ( where w (2) ll is symmetric under changing l ←→ l , and is given by where dis denotes averaging over all possible distributions of impurities in our system. For dilute and randomly placed impurities, it has been shown that |V ll | 2 dis ∼ n im V 2 0 , with n im the impurity concentration is symmetric, the first asymmetric term in the transition rate w ll appears at the order of V 3 0 . Now w ll is given by ll itself can be written as a sum of a symmetric term w (3s) and an asymmetric term w (3a) . Then, w ll , where w just renormalizes w ll , it does not introduce a new physical contribution to the scattering and is further not considered. P in the above equation refers to the principal value. The remaining asymmetric term w (3a) ll can be expressed as This contribution scales (for a so-called non-Gaussian disorder model Two different scattering processes contribute to the fourth order expression for the scattering rate. A fourth order scattering process can occur at a single defect, but also two second order scattering processes can occur at two different defects. As the sequence of scatterings that lead to these two second order pair scattering events is arbitrary, this process leads to three contributions in the expression for w (4) The factors like V l l V ll dis are all proportional to n im , and therefore these contributions to w (4) ll are proportional to n 2 im . The fourth order contribution due to a scattering event at a single impurity contains factors like V ll V l l V l l V l l dis which are proportional to n im . This contribution is therefore physically similar to w (3a) ll (with respect to the concentration of impurities) but much smaller. Therefore we only consider the contribution of the two second order pair scattering events in w (4) ll . This contribution due to the fourth-order V 0 in skew scattering leads to an intrinsic, disorder-independent term in the conductivity of the system, as will be shown later. In this work, we are interested in the zero temperature regime. Furthermore, in the weak disorder limit that we consider, the energy width of the Bloch state spectral peaks is smaller than the gap, allowing us to ignore direct interband scattering. Therefore we will only consider intraband transitions in calculating w (2) ll and w (3) ll . We consider electron transport in electron doped systems, thus the chemical potential μ lies inside the conduction band, thus α = +1 for all states in Eqs. ( To obtain the current density of the system J = l v l f l , we need to calculate the velocity v l of the itinerant electrons and also their distribution function f l in the presence of an external electric field and randomly placed dilute magnetic and non-magnetic impurities. The conventional semi-classical approach just studies electrons at scattering events and ignores the evolution of the wave packets during the scattering time interval where a side jump can occur. Furthermore, in a system with broken either time reversal or inversion symmetries, an additional term should be added to the velocity expression of electrons to incorporate properly the effect of the nonzero Berry curvature in the electron dynamics. If we incorporate both extra effects, which are missing in the conventional semi-classical approach, the velocity can be written as in which v an l = -k × (∇ k × A l ) is the anomalous velocity, with A l = i u l |∇ k |u l the Berry connection where u l (r) = e -ik •r ψ l (r), and v sj l = l δr ll w ll is the side jump velocity. Here, δr ll denotes the anomalous deflection which electrons experience during scattering time. The gauge invariant expression of this anomalous displacement is given by 20 where arg(V ll ) is the argument of V ll . While the phase information of the scattering amplitude is absent in the first-order Born approximation, the third term on the right hand side of Eq. ( After obtaining all terms for the velocity expression of the electrons, the next step is to calculate the distribution function of the electrons. Therefore we write the electron distribution function as follows The largest deviation from the Fermi-Dirac distribution is given by g s l . It arises from the symmetric part of the scattering rate w (2) ll and also describes the longitudinal conductivity. g a1 l is defined as the deviation due to the asymmetric part of the scattering rate w (3a) ll , and g a2 l due to w (4) ll . Finally, g ad l is responsible for capturing the effect of the side jump which changes the energy of the scattered electrons and consequently their distribution function. Substituting the transition rate w ll expressed in Eq. ( l w (4) In the presence of an external electric field E, electrons acquire an extra potential energy ∆U ll = -eE•δr ll during the side jump δr ll . Since the energy of the electrons is conserved during elastic scattering, this change in potential energy during a side jump event should be compensated by a change in the kinetic energy of the electrons given by ∆ε ll = ε l -ε l = eE • δr ll . Therefore, based on conservation of energy, one obtains l w ll [(f 0 (ε l ) - -∂f 0 ∂ε l , which reduces to Eq. ( ll ∼ n im , then based on Eq. ( ∼ n 2 im and g s l ∼ n -1 im we come to the conclusion that g a2 l ∼ n 0 im . The next step is to calculate the relevant terms in the current density. Using Eqs. ( where J in = -e l f 0 (ε l )v an l is the intrinsic current density, J s = -e l g s l v 0l is the regular contribution to the charge current, arising from impurity scattering events within the first-order Born approximation, J ad = -e l g ad l v 0l and J sj = -e l g s l v sj l are consequences of the side jump effect on the distribution function and the electron velocity, respectively. J sk1 = -e l g a1 l v 0l and J sk2 = -e l g a2 l v 0l result from skew scattering. In the second line of Eq. ( In order to solve the integral equations ( Here, p stands for s, a1, a2 and ad. χ is the angle of E with the x-direction, λ p il (i = 1, 2) are the generalized mean free paths of the charge carriers . Considering now an electric field in the x or ŷ direction E = E xi (x 1 = x, x2 = ŷ) and substituting g p l from Eq. ( (2) ll To solve the above equations, all mean free paths λ p i are expanded in Fourier series. Finally we obtain the Fourier coefficients of λ m.p i , the general mean free path of the Dirac fermions due to scattering off magnetic impurities, and also the Fourier coefficients of λ nm.p i , the general mean free path of the Dirac fermions due to scattering off non-magnetic impurities. In this section we present our results for the different contributions to the AHE on the surface of a 3D topological insulator. In subsection III A, we first investigate the contribution to the charge conductivity of massive Dirac fermions arising from the non-zero anomalous velocity. Next in subsection III B, we include the corrections in the velocity and the electron distribution function that are responsible for the side jump effect and consequently calculate their associated contributions to the conductivity of the system. In subsection III C we discuss the skew scattering contribution to the charge conductivity of the system. Finally, the sum of all these contributions, the total conductivity is discussed in subsection III D. To calculate the intrinsic contribution to the current density J in = -e l f 0 (ε l )v an l , one has to know v an l . In contrast to the two other contributions associated to the side jump and skew scattering effects, one has to consider all electrons residing in the whole Fermi sea instead of just in the conduction band in order to calculate this anomalous velocity. Using the eigenstates in Eq. ( Therefore, the intrinsic contribution to the velocity of the electrons due to this anomalous correction is given by with σ in yx = -σ in xy and m = μ M . Note that all contributions to the AHE, like the expression above, are given in the unit of e 2 h . This contribution can be regarded as an "unquantized" version of the quantum Hall effect which is given by σ in xy = -1 2 . As we indicated before, there are two distinct effects due to the anomalous coordinate shift: the side jump δr kk and a change in the energy of the electron. After averaging over many scattering events, side jumps do not cancel out and give rise to a non-zero contribution v sj k to the velocity of the electrons given in Eq. ( where the two vectors k and φk are unit vectors in spherical coordinates, respectively in the radial and polar direction, θ is the tilting angle of the randomly placed magnetic impurities on the surface of magnetic . Since electrons undergo two distinctive and independent scattering events, magnetic and non-magnetic, we treat them separately. As Eq. (34) shows, the side jump of an electron during a magnetic scattering strongly depends on its incident angle φ k , scattering angle φ k and also θ, the tilting angle with respect to the ẑ-direction of the magnetic orientation of the surface impurities. In Fig. Blue corresponds to zero probability, beige with the highest probability. In the first row in Fig. with n an odd number, and is minimal when φ k ≈ φ k ± nπ, with n an integer. In panel b of this figure the side jump and the corresponding probabilities for a magnetic scattering event are shown for a magnetization direction rotated in the yz-plane with θ = π 4 . Note that the probability for many scattering events increases, however just in a small region of the (φ k , φ k ) space the electrons feel a considerable side jump coordinate shift. Increasing θ further to In panel g and h of Fig. . We can deduce that the general trend for δr nm kk is that the size of the side jump and the corresponding scattering event probability are π out of phase. Fig. Using the derived side jumps δr kk and scattering rates w kk for magnetic and non-magnetic scattering events, we can obtain the following side jump velocities: where and n inm the concentration of the nonmagnetic impurities. Both of these velocity expressions are only non-zero for gapped systems (i.e. γ k = 0) and therefore this effect is a consequence of the gap opening. Also note that Eq. (38) and Eq. (39) show that v k nm.sj is always perpendicular to the band velocity v 0k (directed in the k direction), in contrary to v k m.sj . Only when all magnetic impurities are aligned perpendicular to the surface of the TI (i.e. θ = 0) or when the electrons move on the surface of the TI in the direction perpendicular to the in-plane component of the magnetization (i.e. φ k = 0) we find v m.sj k v nm.sj k . To better trace the behavior of the side jump velocity of the electrons during a magnetic scattering event, As we previously predicted by looking at the profile of side jump of electrons in Fig. Therefore, we can expect that σ m.sj yx < 0 and σ m.sj xy > 0 for the corresponding transverse conductivities. Furthermore, from the background color of Fig. 2 than for φ k = π. Therefore we expect |σ m.sj xy | >|σ m.sj yx |. Now we are ready to derive all side jump contributions in the charge conductivity of the massive Dirac fermions due to the magnetic impurities J tot.m.sj = J m.sj +J m.ad and the non-magnetic impurities J tot.nm.sj = J nm.sj + J nm.ad . In order to find J m.ad and J nm.ad , we need to solve the corresponding Eq. (29). We obtain all the mean free paths λ m.ad i and λ nm.ad i by relying on their Fourier expansions (see appendix) and obtain the following corresponding charge conductivities |m 2 + cos 2θ| . Because J sj = -e k g s k v sj and using the already reported distribution function g s k in Ref. 30, we come to the conclusion that σ m.sj ij = σ m.ad ji and σ nm.sj ij = σ nm.ad ij , for i = j. How a contribution to the correction of the transverse charge conductivity of a system is linked to the longitudinal conductivity has always been a vital question in this context. The following connections are found ). σ m.sj is plotted against θ for some different values of m in panel a of Fig. Based on Eq. (43) and Eq. (44) we come to the conclusion that σ tot. σ tot.m.sj xy = σ tot.m.sj yx and hence the side jump itself has an isotropic feature relative to the direction of the external electric field, this transverse conductivity somehow measures the anisotropy of the system when θ = 0, being the difference between the two components of the longitudinal conductivities σ m.s xx and σ m.s yy . In addition, using Eq. (43) and Eq. ( Finally, we consider the non-magnetic scattering events, and using Eq. (45) and Eq. ( where σ tot.nm.sj ij = σ tot.nm.sj ij + σ tot.nm.ad ij . Thus also this contribution to the side jump conductivity is isotropic (ignoring the sign difference). Fig. Finally we consider the last contribution to the AHE, the skew scattering. Recall that skew scattering gave rise to two terms in the current density. Let us first consider J sk1 = k v 0k g a1 k , due to magnetic impurities and nonmagnetic impurities. This contribution is also called the conventional skew scattering. Since g a1 k is inversely proportional to the concentration of the present impurities, this contribution dominates conductivity in a very dilute regime. From Eq. ( Substituting w (3a.m) kk in Eq. (30) gives us the corresponding mean free paths λ m.a1 i (k)(i = 1, 2), from which we obtain the distribution function g m.a1 k using Eq. ( Above we compared the side jump contribution with its corresponding longitudinal conductivity, here Fig. 4 for all values of m. In the interval , the absolute value of this ratio undergoes a significant decrease with increasing θ, and finally becomes zero for θ = π 2 . The distinct behavior of this ratio within the interval 0 ≤ θ ≤ π 4 and out of this interval can be traced back to the trends of the numerator and denominator in these two intervals. Since the numerator and denominator are both very smooth with respect to θ in the interval 0 ≤ θ ≤ π 4 , the ratio σ m.sk1 xy /σ m.s yy is almost constant. However, out of this interval, the absolute value of the numerator decreases while the denominator increases, leading to a decreasing behavior with respect to θ beyond θ = π 4 . We observe that aligning the surface magnetization at θ = π 4 and simultaneously pushing the system into a fully metallic regime (m → ∞), will lead to the highest possible value for σ m.sk1 4 . This difference is rooted in the fact that here the numerator is again smooth with respect to θ, but the denominator varies rapidly in this interval. Hence this ratio is not as smooth as in panel a. Also, the value of θ at which these ratios obtain their maximal value is different. In panel b it is reached for θ = 0. Repeating the same calculations for the skew scattering contribution due to scattering of non-magnetic impurities, we obtain the following expression for the conductivity with η nm = μ ninmV0 . Like all the previously discussed contributions, this contribution is zero for an insulating surface m = 1. In contrast to σ m.sk1 ij , this contribution is absent in the perfect metallic regime m → ∞. Again these transverse conductivities can be related to the corresponding longitudinal conductivities. We obtain The total conventional skew scattering conductivity is now given by h and as a function of ν = η m η nm . Since this contribution is inversely proportional to concentration of present impurities, it will dominate the anomalous hall conductivity in a very dilute regime. However, in a doped system with a low concentration of just magnetic impurities, one can turn off this contribution by simply setting θ = π 2 . By considering n im = n inm , Fig. Also note that, in contrary to the total contribution of the side jump effect to the AHE, the total contribution of the conventional skew scattering never changes its sign, whatever the value of θ, m or E. Let us now consider the contribution J sk2 = -e k g a2 k v 0k to the skew scattering. As g a2 k ∼ n 0 im , this contribution is independent of the impurity concentration, and therefore also called intrinsic. In order to find the contribution of the intrinsic skew scattering in the conductivity of the system, we first need to calculate w (4) kk through Eq. ( . Inserting these scattering rates in Eq. ( In case that the external electric field is exerted along the ŷ-direction and the surface magnetization is aligned perpendicular to the surface of the TI, we find . In the other interesting situation that the external electric field is along the same direction but the surface magnetization lies on the surface of the TI, one can show that σ tot.sk2 xy 6m(m 2 +3) In the other interesting situation that the external electric field is still in the x-direction, but the surface magnetization lies on the surface of the TI, σ tot.sk2 yx 6m(m 2 +3) 2 . Also, like σ tot.sk2 xy , the conductivity σ tot.sk2 yx vanishes at the insulator and perfect metallic condition. While σ m.sk2 ij behaves isotropically with respect to the external electric field direction, not only at θ = 0 but also at θ = π 2 , σ tot.sk2 ij is isotropic just at θ = 0. σ tot.sk2 xy and σ tot.sk2 yx are illustrated respectively in panel a and b of Fig. 2 ) causes the system to reach its maximum value for σ tot.sk2 xy . It is also clear from panel a that there is just a small (θ, m) region with a significant σ tot.sk2 xy , while in panel b a broad region shows a significant conductivity σ tot.sk2 yx . To obtain the total value of the anomalous hall conductivity in this system, we need to add up all contributions derived in the previous sections. The total conductivity can be written as an intrinsic part and an extrinsic part where σ tot.ext ij is extrinsic and depends on the concentration of impurities, and the intrinsic part σ tot.int ij that is independent of the concentration of presentt impurities. Based on our results we can write In this section we will discuss the AHE in three distinct regimes. First, we assume that the surface of the TI is lightly doped and thus that the intrinsic term dominates the AHE. Secondly, we assume that the system is completely out of the first regime, hence that the extrinsic term dominates the anomalous hall conductivity. Finally, we assume that the system is in the intermediate regime, where we need both the intrinsic and extrinsic terms to properly study the AHE on the surfsce of the system. As we already indicated, the only contribution in the extrinsic regime is σ tot.sk1 ij which is inversely proportional to the concentration of impurities. Since we already devoted Sec. III C 1 to this contribution, we skip over the details and just describe some general important observations. In the absence of the non-magnetic impurity, the resultant magnetic conventional skew scattering varies between 0 JSmnim . The minimum value occurs for systems which have a chemical potential very close to the bottom of the conduction band, regardless of θ, or have an in-plane magnetization, regardless of m. The maximum value of this magnetic contribution is reached in those systems which are in a fully metallic regime with θ = π 4 . In the absence of magnetic impurities, this term changes within 0 < V0ninm . The minimum value of this non-magnetic contribution of the conventional skew scattering term is obtained in those systems with the chemical potential just above the bottom of the conduction band, and the maximum value is reached in a system with m = 3.5. In presence of all types of impurities, the total value of this contribution depends not only on the mass of the Dirac fermions, the spatial orientation of the surface magnetization and the concentration of the present impurities, but also on the strength of the magnetic and non-magnetic scattering of itinerant electrons during their skew scattering. There is some experimental and theoretical evidences that the surface magnetization of a TI is preferentially orientated in the plane of the surface or perpendicular to it Fig. In this regime the total anomalous hall conductivity does not depend on the concentration of the impurities and contains three contributions: the intrinsic conductivity arising from the non-zero Berry curvature, the total side jump conductivity and the conductivity produced by intrinsic skew scattering. Our results show that the first intrinsic contribution Since this term is inversely proportional to m = μ M , it obviously turns off in the gaples regime (M = 0). However, the second contribution σ tot.sj ij = σ tot.m.sj ij + σ tot.nm.sj ij is a consequence of the presence of impurities and definitely does not appear in a pure system. In the absence of nonmagnetic impurities, by changing the spatial orientation of the surface magnetization within 0 ≤ θ ≤ π 2 and also tuning the mass of the Dirac fermions, this contribution varies within 0 ≤ σ tot.m.sj ij [m, θ] < 0.07. The small value of this contribution is caused by the fact that σ m.sj ij and σ m.ad ij partially cancel each other in σ tot.m.sj ij . For example, at θ = 0 and θ = π 2 , this contribution turns off. In the presence of only non-magnetic impurities the absolute value of the corresponding conductivity is limited within 0 ≤ |σ tot.nm.sj xy [m]|≤ 0.45. Therefore, we can say that in the presence of both magnetic and non-magnetic impurities, we can ignore the contribution of the magnetic impurities in σ tot.sj ij . We also want to stress that, although concentration of impurities does not appear in the final expression for σ tot.sj ij , this contribution does originate from the present impurities. There are two parameters which play an important role in the transport of electrons during their side jump, the so called side jump relaxation times and the side jump velocity. The first one is inversely proportional to the concentration of impurities, though the second one is directly proportional to the concentration of impurities. Therefore, interestingly, their product is independent on the concentration of impurities. The last effect which contributes to the AHE in this regime originates from the intrinsic skew scattering. In the absence of non-magnetic impurities, this term varies as 0 ≤ σ m.sk2 xy [m, θ] ≤ 2.2, which minimum value occurs for a system with (m, θ) = (1, θ), and the maximum value for a system with (m, θ) = (1.04, 0.48π). In addition, -0.34 ≤ σ m.sk2 yx [m, θ] ≤ 1.33 , where the minimum and maximum values are obtained in systems with (m, θ) = (2.5, 0) and (m, θ) = ( 1.01, π 2 ), respectively. In the absence of magnetic impurities, the conductivity corresponding to non-magnetic intrinsic skew scattering changes as 0 < At the end of this section, we consider again the two special magnetization orientations θ = 0 and π 2 . The total intrinsic anomalous hall conductivities corresponding to these two important cases are Fig. In this regime, extrinsic and intrinsic terms both contribute to the AHE with comparable sizes. corresponding conductivity, if we increase m from 1 to 5, regardless of θ. In panel c, this crossover happens if θ is larger then θ = π 4 . In addition, the maximum value of σ tot xy occurs if we place the chemical potential close to the bottom of the conduction band and also adjust the surface magnetization close to π 2 . Surprisingly, in contrast to σ tot xy , the second column illustrates that σ tot yx is positive. This term in panel d gets its maximum value for large values of m (close to 5) and a magnetization away from θ = π 2 . However, by increasing the concentration of the impurities till n im = 1 in panel f , σ tot yx acquires its maximum value in a system with θ π 2 and a small value of m 1. Then, although these two components of σ tot ij behave differently respect to given parameters, they share this feature that at n im = 1 they get their maximum value if m 1 and θ π 2 . In addition, there is a region in panel a with a positive conductivity, while it has the opposite sign in panel c. Therefore, it can be inferred that if we exert the external electric field parallel to the in-plane component of the surface magnetization, one can change the sign of anomalous conductivity in the intermediate regime via changing the concentration of the present impurities. To go further into the detail of this sign change via the change in concentration of impurities, Fig. xy undergoes a sign change by tunning the impurity concentration. This sign change in the anomalous Hall conductivity has recently been observed experimentally Finally, like in previous sections, we briefly discuss the two cases σ tot. xy [θ = 0] and σ tot. xy [θ = π 2 ]. As all red curves in Fig. In this work, the anomalous hall conductivity of a 3D TI is investigated using the semi-classical Boltzmann approach along with a modified relaxation time scheme, in terms of the Fermi level and the band gap, the spatial orientation of the present surface magnetization θ (an orientation perpendicular to the surface corresponds to θ = 0, an orientation in the ŷ-direction to θ = π 2 ) and also the concentration of magnetic and non-magnetic impurities. There are three contributions to the AHE, namely the intrinsic effect (arising from nonzero Berry curvature), the side jump effect and the skew scattering effect. They are competing to dominate the anomalous hall conductivity of the system. In this work by applying a fully analytical method we investigate how the spatial orientation of the surface magnetization and also the value of m influence the transport of the massive Dirac Fermions on the surface of a 3D TI, doped with point like, randomly placed, magnetic and no-magnetic impurities. Since the contribution of non-magnetic impurities to the AHE has been investigated by others before Next, the contributions coming from conventional and intrinsic skew scattering are investigated. Our results show that in the absence of non-magnetic impurities, the conventional skew scattering is isotropic. In contrary to the total magnetic side jump contribution, which vanishes in a fully metallic regime, the conductivity corresponding to magnetic conventional skew scattering surprisingly gets its maximal value in this regime. However, similar to the side jump magnetic contribution, it disappears in a system with in-plane magnetization. In the presence of non-magnetic impurities, the total contribution of the conventional skew scattering is still isotropic, and in the metallic regime it reaches a significant value if the magnetization is out of plane. In addition, the skew scattering effect ontributes to the AHE through an additional correction, called the intrinsic term. Our results show that the correction arising from the magnetic intrinsic skew scattering is anisotropic. And in contrary to the previous conventional contribution does not vanish at θ = π 2 . Besides, this intrinsic contribution disappears at the fully metallic regime, just like the side jump contribution. Remarkably, by applying an external electric field perpendicular to the in-plane component of the magnetization, and setting θ = π 3 , one can turns off this term. The presence of non-magnetic impurities allows one to have more degrees of freedom in engineering the total contribution of the intrinsic skew scattering. For example, if we exert an electric field along the in-plane component of the magnetization, the total intrinsic conductivity arising from skew scattering can always be turned off, regardless of θ. If we exert the electric field perpendicular to the in-plane component of the magnetization, we can still turn off this contribution, but just for those systems with θ ≤ π 3 . Therefore, by considering all these observations, we come to the conclusion that in the metallic regime (or the gapless regime) the conventional skew scattering dominates the AHE of a system with a low concentration of magnetic impurities. Out of this very dilute regime, by tuning θ around π 2 and m around 1 and also exerting an external electric field perpendicular to the in-plane component of the magnetization, the AHE gets its maximum reachable value. If the extrinsic and intrinsic terms both contribute to the AHE with comparable sizes (the intermediate regime), one can observe a sign change in the anomalous Hall conductivity not only via tuning the Fermi level or the spatial orientation of the surface magnetization, but surprisingly also via tuning the concentration of the impurities, for a certain range of the other parameters. Appendix A: Longitudinal magnetic mean free paths λ m.s i To calculate the current density of the system J = -e k v k f k , we need to find the following three terms in the velocity of the electrons v k = v 0k + v an k + v sj k and also the following five terms in the distribution function of the Dirac Fermions f k = f 0 + g s k + g a1 k + g a2 k + g ad k . These terms in the velocity of the electrons are calculated in the main text of this work. The next step is to calculate the equilibrium distribution function of the Dirac Fermions. As the dynamics of these Fermions during scattering off non-magnetic impurities is isotropic, it can be treated by the widely used relaxation time scheme. Here we go through the details of the calculation of all introduced corrections to the conductivity of the system that arise from scattering by magnetic impurities. Based on Eq. ( where w (2.m) kk is transition rate of magnetic scatterings. Replacing the mean free path with its Fourier expansion where x1 = x and x2 = ŷ. Before continuing our discussion, note that conservation of the number of particles imposes Therefore, k (g s k + g ad. k + g a1 k + g a2 k ) = 0, and hence all the constant terms in the Fourier expansions for λ 0 i are zero. After some calculations we obtain where As it is clear from the equations above, λ m.s,c i,1 and λ m.s,s i,1 are the only two required Fourier coefficients of λ m.s i , as the other higher order Fourier coefficients (n > 1) are a function of these two primary coefficients. These crucial Fourier coefficients can be obtained straightforwardly as follows: After solving the above set of integral equations, we arrive at: . Putting the found nonzero Fourier coefficient λ m.s,c 1,1 and λ m.s,s 2,1 in Eq. (A.4) gives where ). Therefore, the resultant correction to the distribution function of the electrons due to the conventional scattering of electrons from magnetic impurities is (A.10) Appendix B: Side jump associated mean free paths λ m.ad i As it was indicated in the main text, electrons during scattering off magnetic impurities undergo a side jump which changes the velocity of the electrons and also their distribution function. This leads to the following two corrections to the conductivity σ m.sj ij , σ m.ad ij . Since we have already found the associated distribution function g m.s k , we needn't to calculate σ m.sj ij , thus in this section we just present the details of calculating σ m.ad ij . As before, we ignore the side jump of the electrons during their skew scattering. As we did to calculate g m.ad k , we replace λ m.ad i in Eq. 29 with their Fourier expansions λ By assuming that the external electric field is exerted along xi , Eq. ( Using the already found functions v m.sj k in Eq. (38) and using Eq. (36), we arrive at where α m.ad,0 Finally we have to solve the set of equations Their solution is where k sin 2θ. Finally, the associated correction to the distribution function of the electrons arising from the side jump can be written as, based on Eq. ( (D.8)