Crystal structures play a vital role in determining materials properties. In Li-ion cathodes, the crystal structure defines the dimensionality and connectivity of interstitial sites, thus determining Li-ion diffusion kinetics. While a perfect crystal has infinite structural coherence, a class of recently discovered high-capacity cathodes, Li-excess cation-disordered rocksalts, falls on the other end of the spectrum: Their cation sublattices are assumed to be randomly populated by Li and transition metal ions with zero configurational coherence based on conventional X-ray diffraction, such that the Li transport is purely determined by statistical effects. In contrast to this prevailing view, we reveal that cation short-range order, hidden in diffraction, is ubiquitous in these long-range disordered materials and controls the local and macroscopic environments for Li-ion transport. Our work not only discovers a crucial property that has previously been overlooked, but also provides new guidelines for designing and engineering disordered rocksalts cathode materials. The development of cost-effective Li-ion batteries depends on the discovery of high-energydensity cathode materials composed of nonprecious elements. Disordered rocksalt materials were recently shown to have facile Li-transport enabled by a percolating network of Li-rich environments Li 1.2 Ni 1/3 Ti 1/3 Mo 2/15 O 2 Figure In this study, we compare two Li-excess DRXs, Li 1.2 Mn 0.4 Ti 0.4 O 2 (LMTO) and Li 1.2 Mn 0.4 Zr 0.4 O 2 (LMZO). Based on their chemical similarity, these materials would be expected to have comparable electrochemical properties, as Zr We synthesized LMTO and LMZO using a solid-state method and verified the compositions of the products to be nearly identical to the target compositions using elemental analysis (Table Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of shaker-milled LMTO and LMZO (Figure The Li diffusion is a key factor in determining the observed capacity The discovery that two almost identical materials exhibit significantly different Li transport led us to investigate the subtle structural differences between LMTO and LMZO. Figure whereas that in LMZO is likely associated with tetrahedral cation clusters Neutron pair distribution function (NPDF) measurements were performed to precisely characterize the SRO in LMTO and LMZO. In NPDF analysis, Fourier transformation of the total scattering data to real space is performed, thereby providing additional information about SRO that is hidden in diffraction patterns Combining the analysis of ED and NPDF, we find that LMTO and LMZO differ in their SRO and that the ab initio MC structures simulated near the synthesis temperature are precise manifestations of the SRO in these materials. The structures obtained from MC simulation uncover the atomistic nature of the SRO, enabling further analysis of the local and macroscopic Li-transport environments in LMTO and LMZO. In DRX materials, local environments can be characterized by the occurrence of cation clusters, among which the ones most relevant to Li transport are tetrahedral clusters, i.e., Li migration channels While the population of Li 4 tetrahedra is critical for local Li migration, a sufficient connectivity between these environments is another key criterion to ensure macroscopic Li transport. Figure To With the understanding of how SRO affects Li transport in LMZO and LMTO, we can investigate other combinations of TMs to determine how the SRO-affected Li transport environments vary with chemistry. Figure The rationale behind the chosen conditions is that although sufficient 0-TM channels are required for macroscopic Li transport, in reality, on the atomic scale Li ions can occasionally overcome higher migration barriers through 1-TM channels on the time scale of battery charge and discharge. Consistent with the connectivity analysis, LMTO has a high accessible Li content of 35% with only 0-TM jumps, which increases to nearly 58% by allowing 1-TM jumps, whereas LMZO is not percolating under either condition. The accessible Li contents for Mn 3+ -Nb 5+ are worse than LMTO but still significantly better than those of LMZO, consistent with the good performance of the Mn 3+ -Nb 5+ materials at elevated temperatures. We have shown that SRO is critical in controlling Li-conductive environments and has a general dependence on chemistry. The remaining questions are thus what the microscopic origin of these trends is and how we can predict and manipulate SRO for the benefit of Li transport. Although the use of MC simulation is necessary to precisely reproduce SRO, empirical rules can be derived for intuitive prediction. We find that the charge and size effects, which determine the stability of solid-state materials, also explain the trends in SRO. On the one hand, the high-valent TMs (e.g., Mn 3+ , Ti 4+ , Nb 5+ ) in DRXs tend to repel each other and intimately mix with Li + in order to keep local electroneutrality, thereby inhibiting Li segregation into Li 4 tetrahedra. This charge effect becomes more pronounced with increasing metal valence. On the other hand, the size mismatch between high-valent TMs and Li + facilitates Li segregation in order to minimize strain, counteracting the charge effect. The competition between the two effects is best demonstrated in the case of LMTO and LMZO, where Zr 4+ exhibits a stronger net attraction to Li + than Ti 4+ despite their common valence (Figure However, the prediction of SRO becomes elusive when comparing DRXs with non-isoelectronic TMs, e.g., Li 1.2 Mn 0.4 Zr 0.4 O 2 and Li 1.2 Mn 0.6 Nb 0.2 O 2 . In this case, there is a more complex tradeoff between interaction strengths and TM concentration in determining the degree of local ordering and Li segregation. Figure DRXs containing divalent TMs form another unique class because divalent ions have the proper average metal valence in a DRX oxide and therefore do not require mixing with Li + to keep local electroneutrality. Additionally, they do not repel high-valent metals as much as trivalent ions do (Figure Overall, we find that SRO controls the Li transport in DRXs by altering the distribution of 0-TM, 1-TM, and 2-TM channels as well as the connectivity between them. This observation is in contrast to stoichiometric layered oxides (e.g., LiNi 0.5 Mn 0.5 O 2 where Li and TMs are well separated and any SRO in the TM layer imposes minimal impact on overall Li transport kinetics. We have also identified a few guidelines for the manipulation of SRO. (i) For DRXs containing high-valent metals, the average TM ionic radius is an important metric to measure the degree of Li segregation. The use of large metal ions such as Zr 4+ , Sc 3+ , and In 3+ should be minimized. (ii) DRXs containing divalent TMs often facilitate Li segregation compared to their trivalent analogues due to the buffer effect of divalent TMs. This effect likely weakens as the ionic radius of the divalent TM increases. Therefore, divalent TMs such as Co 2+ , Ni 2+ are more favorable than Mn 2+ and possibly Fe 2+ , Cu 2+ , Zn 2+ . These guidelines are contrary to the common intuition that larger metal ions expand the lattice and are therefore favorable for Li transport. We further propose that the manipulation of SRO can also be relevant for the design and engineering of voltage profiles and oxygen activity through altering the local environments around Li, thereby enabling future optimization of this class of new cathode materials with unprecedentedly high capacities and compositional flexibility. Motivated by an experimental puzzle where two extremely similar compounds exhibit different electrochemical performance, we prove that cation short-range order (SRO) exists in longrange-disordered rocksalt cathodes. We have demonstrated how the SRO controls Li transport through altering local and macroscopic environments. More generally, we observe that electrostatics and ionic sizes strongly affect the SRO in disordered rocksalts of different chemistries. Our findings uncover an important direction for future engineering and optimization of disordered rocksalt cathodes to achieve higher capacities and energy densities. To synthesize LMTO and LMZO, stoichiometric Mn 2 O 3 , TiO 2 , Zr(OH) 4 , and Li 2 CO 3 (with 5% excess) were dispersed into ethanol and thoroughly mixed using a planetary ball mill (Retsch PM 200) at 300 rpm for 16 h. The mixture was then dried, pelletized, and calcinated at 1100 °C in an argon atmosphere for 2 h, followed by furnace cooling. The XRD patterns were collected using a Rigaku MiniFlex diffractometer equipped with a Cu source in the 2θ range of 10-85°. Rietveld refinement was performed using the HighScore Plus software package. Elemental analysis was performed by Luvak Inc. using direct-current plasma emission spectroscopy (ASTM E 1097-12) for the quantitative identification of metal species. The oxygen contents were confirmed using the inert gas fusion method (ASTM E 1019-11). SEM images were obtained on a Zeiss Gemini Ultra-55 analytical field-emission scanning electron microscope. ED patterns were taken after a grain was oriented properly on JEM-2100F using selected area electron diffraction in TEM mode. Time-of-flight (TOF) neutron powder diffraction was performed at room temperature on the Nanoscale Ordered Materials Diffractometer (NOMAD) at the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The samples for the neutron experiment were synthesized using a 7-Li enriched Li 2 CO 3 source. The PDF patterns were analyzed using the PDFGui software package To fabricate electrodes, the product powder was first shaker-milled (SPEX 8000) for 1 h in an argon atmosphere. The milled active material (70 wt%) was then manually mixed with Super C65 carbon black (Timcal, 20 wt%) in a mortar for 30 minutes, followed by mixing with polytetrafluoroethylene (Dupont, 10 wt%) in an Ar-filled glovebox. The mixture was then rolled into a thin film to be used as the cathode. A coin cell was assembled using 1 M LiPF 6 (in a volumetric 1:1 mixture of ethylene carbonate and dimethyl carbonate), glass microfiber filters (grade GF/F, Whatman), and Li metal foil as the electrolyte, separator, and anode, respectively. The coin cells were tested on an Arbin battery testing station. PITT measurements were performed on a Solartron Analytical 1470E Celltest System. All the DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab-Initio simulation package (VASP) Cluster expansion Hamiltonians For the connectivity analysis, the definitions of 0-TM, 1-TM, and 2-TM channels of reference The LMZO and LMTO atomic configurations equilibrated with Monte-Carlo simulations at 1000°C as described above were used to simulate electron diffraction (ED) images. For this purpose, cubic sections with an edge length of 50 Å (>12000 atoms) were truncated from the periodic bulk structures defined by 960-atom unit cells. Electron diffraction patterns for the cubic [100] zone axis were computed for each cubic cell using the methods and potentials given by Kirkland, Because LMZO is a new compound first reported in this work, we performed ex-situ XRD on the cycled products to determine its stability over cycling. The patterns show a reversible change in lattice parameters, with X-ray peaks recovered to the initial positions of the pristine film. After 6 cycles, the cation-disordered rocksalt structure was retained although the lattice parameter slightly shrank as compared to the pristine sample, indicated by the right-shifted X-ray peaks. The lattice contraction may be associated with lattice densification, which is a common reason that leads to capacity fading in cation-disordered Li-TM oxide cathode materials For each composition, 600 atomic configurations sampled from MC simulations as previously described were analyzed and averaged to obtain the reported nearest-neighbor statistics. The NNP parameter is defined as following: where A and B are two types of cations; n B is the number of cations of type B within the first neighboring shell around cation A averaged over 600 MC structures; and n B is the number of cations of type B within the first neighboring shell surrounding cation A based on a random model. If NNP(A-B) < 0, the effective interaction between A and B ions is attractive; if NNP(A-B) > 0, the interaction is repulsive; and if NNP(A-B) = 0, the interaction vanishes. For example, if we consider the pair of Li + and Ti 4+ in LMTO, the statistical number of Ti 4+ ions within the first neighboring shell of Li + is 12 0.2 2.4, whereas the average number of Ti 4+ ions counted from the MC structures is 2.769. Therefore, NNP(Li + -Ti 4+ ) is -0.154, indicating net attractive interaction between the two species. * δ 1 is a high-temperature vibrational correlation parameter and modifies peak widths at short-r values. Therefore, δ 1 was only refined within the short-r range. The obtained value was then used for the long-r range without further refinement. * Only Li-rich tetrahedral clusters relevant to Li migration (0-TM, 1-TM, 2-TM) are listed.