Semiempirical molecular orbital (SEMO) models based on the neglect of diatomic differential overlap (NDDO) approximation efficiently solve the self-consistent field equations by rather drastic approximations. The computational efficiency comes at the cost of an error in the electron-electron repulsion integrals. The error may be compensated by the introduction of parametric expressions to evaluate the electron-electron repulsion integrals, the one-electron integrals, and the core-core repulsion. We review the resulting formalisms of popular NDDO-SEMO models (such as the MNDO(/d), AM1, PMx, and OMx models) in a concise and self-contained manner. We discuss the approaches to implicitly and explicitly describe electron correlation effects within NDDO-SEMO models and we dissect strengths and weaknesses of the different approaches in a detailed analysis. For this purpose, we consider the results of recent benchmark studies. Furthermore, we apply bootstrapping to perform a sensitivity analysis for a selection of parameters in the MNDO model. We also identify systematic limitations of NDDO-SEMO models by drawing on an analogy to Kohn-Sham density functional theory. The driving force for the development of semiempirical molecular orbital (SEMO) models has always been the desire to accelerate quantum chemical calculations. At the outset of the development of SEMO models in the middle of the last century, The central NDDO approximation drastically reduces the computational effort associated with the calculation of electron-electron repulsion integrals (ERIs), and hence, leads to a significant speed-up. Figure In recent years, a variety of semiclassical correction terms was designed to correct for specific flaws of NDDO-SEMO models, e.g., for hydrogenbonding interactions, This review is organized as follows: We first briefly introduce the notation and the quantum chemical foundations necessary to discuss NDDO-SEMO models which makes this review self-contained (Section 2). NDDO-SEMO models share, apart from the NDDO approximation, the application of a minimal basis set and the restriction of the number of explicitly considered electrons. We outline the formalism essential to all NDDO-SEMO models (Section 3) before moving on to specific NDDO-SEMO models (Sections 4-6). After discussing how NDDO-SEMO models are assembled, we discuss how (static and dynamical) electron correlation effects are captured. Generally, there are two strategies to tackle this problem: The calibration of parameters incorporated in NDDO-SEMO models against accurate reference data and the explicit description of electron correlation effects (Sections 7 and 8). We summarize the current state of knowledge with respect to both of these aspects and draw some more general conclusions for the prospects of NDDO-SEMO models (Section 9). Electronic structure methods aim at the solution of the electronic Schrödinger equation, which asserts that we can calculate the electronic energy E ({r i }) depend parametrically on the fixed (indicated by the tilde and by giving them as superscripts) coordinates of the N atomic nuclei ({ RI }) of a system. The electronic wave function Ψ { RI } el ({r i }) depends on the coordinates of n electrons ({r i }). The Hamiltonian operator H el contains operators for the n kinetic energy contributions of the electrons and for the electrostatic pair interaction energies of electrons and the N atomic nuclei (in Hartree atomic units (a.u.)), The gradient defined for the coordinates of electron i is denoted as ∇ i and Z I denotes the nuclear charge of the I-th nucleus (note that capital letters denote quantities defined for atomic nuclei). It is convenient to collect the first two terms in a one-electron operator h i , the third term in a two-electron operator g (i,j) , and the nuclear interaction energy in V , Since the early days of quantum mechanics, various approximations were developed to solve Eq. (1). In the following, we focus on Hartree-Fock (HF) theory to lay the foundation for the discussion of NDDO-SEMO models (see, e.g., Ref. 99 for a detailed presentation of HF theory in a one-electron basis set). The exact wave function Ψ { RI } el ({r i }) is approximated by the HF wave function Φ HF,{ RI } el ({r i }), which is constructed as the antisymmetrized product of one-particle functions ψ { RI } i (r i ) (i.e., molecular spin orbitals), Antisymmetrization of the product of one particle-states by means of the antisymmetrization operator A implements the Pauli principle. For the sake of brevity, we drop the superscripts { RI } and RI in the following. We require the χ-basis to be locally orthogonal, i.e., the overlap χ S μν = χ I μ χ J ν of different basis functions centered on the same atom must be zero, in order to be able to apply the NDDO approximation. This is no general requirement for HF theory, but the introduction of another basis would complicate the notation. We will discuss this requirement in detail in Section 3.1. The following equations are given for the spin-restricted formulation for the sake of simplicity. The central step underlying a canonical HF calculation in basis-set representation is then the iterative solution of the nonlinear Roothaan-Hall equation, for which we first need to calculate the Fock matrix χ F = χ F ( χ C) and the overlap matrix χ S. We obtain the matrix of basis set expansion coefficients χ C and the diagonal matrix of orbital energies as the solution of this generalized eigenvalue equation. The left superscript 'χ' continues to indicate that the calculations are carried out in the χ-basis. It is necessary to explicitly specify the basis because we will operate with different bases throughout this work. The matrix of orbital energies is invariant under unitary matrix transformations by which one basis is transformed into another one. Consequently, does not carry a superscript. We can transform Eq. ( which may be re-written in a simpler way as where and This constitutes a transformation of the Fock and coefficient matrices to the Löwdin orthogonalized 101 φ-basis (indicated by a left superscript 'φ'). The Löwdin orthogonalized basis functions φ = {φ μ } and the locally orthogonal basis functions χ = {χ I μ } are related through Obviously, the basis functions φ μ are not centered on a single atom and therefore do not carry a superscript 'I'. The solution of the Roothaan-Hall equations in either basis (Eqs. (7) and ( and the ERIs, in the χ-basis. A Fock matrix element in the χ-basis is then evaluated as, where the ERIs are contracted with elements of the density matrix χ P . The elements of the density matrix in closed-shell systems are given by χ (assuming real expansion coefficients). The Fock matrix elements in the φbasis are assembled analogously, Eqs. (7) and ( For the following discussion, it is convenient to divide the Fock matrices into one-electron matrices H and two-electron matrices G. The two-electron matrices G can be further divided into the Coulomb matrices J and the exchange matrices K, so that and After reaching self consistency, the total electronic HF energy E { RI },HF el = E HF el is calculated from the resulting density matrices, Fock matrices, and the nucleus-nucleus repulsion energy, and 3 General Considerations for the Formalism of NDDO-SEMO Models All NDDO-SEMO models describe a way to efficiently approximate the Fock matrix. Formally, the assembly of the Fock matrix in the course of the iterative solution of the SCF equations requires the calculation, repeated processing, and (if possible) storage of M 4 ERIs. Consequently, a lot of effort was put into the development of strategies to reduce the computational cost associated with this step. One of these strategies is the NDDO approximation The NDDO approximation, Figure specifies how ERIs in the φ-basis may be approximated based on the values of the respective ERIs in the χ-basis. It is not immediately obvious why Eq. ( Evidently, the NDDO approximation emulates a basis transformation for the ERIs, and hence, also for the two-electron matrix, i.e., and χ G NDDO ≈ χ G. (24) This means that the matrix elements φ G μν can be approximately determined based on ERIs in the χ-basis by The NDDO approximation may also be formulated in the φ-basis, which is, however, not very illuminating in the context of NDDO-SEMO models as it is not obvious what the meaning of I, J, K, and L in Eq. ( The NDDO approximation leads to uncontrollable errors for the ERIs in the φ-basis In NDDO-SEMO models, the NDDO approximation is coupled to multiple other approximations, not least to correct for the errors introduced by the NDDO approximation itself. NDDO-SEMO models further reduce the computational effort by restricting the number of explicitly considered electrons. When restricting the number of explicitly considered electrons, it is necessary to specify for each atom I which of its n I electrons are considered valence ('v') electrons (n v,I ) and which ones are considered core ('c') electrons (n c,I = n In v,I ). Accordingly, each atomic core then exhibits a core charge Q I , Note that a rigorous distinction between core charge Q I and nuclear charge Z I is crucial for NDDO-SEMO models. Both quantities are required in parametric expressions in the formalism of some NDDO-SEMO models (see, e.g., Eq. ( and n v,I = 6 for hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen atoms, respectively. In ab initio theories, one may approximate the effects of the core electrons by an effective core potential (ECP), or in short notation, The core-core repulsion energy is denoted as V v and the effective one-electron operator is denoted as h v,i . The effective one-electron operator h v,i incorporates an effective core potential describing the interaction with the core electrons of atom I, ECP I . We will not specify the different functional forms for the ECPs which are applied in ab initio theories here (see, e.g., Refs. 124,125 for recent reviews) because they differ strongly from the ones which are applied in NDDO-SEMO models today. Another way of reducing the computational effort is the restriction of the number of basis functions M in Eq. ( All NDDO-SEMO models apply only one s-type basis function for hydrogen. For carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, the NDDO-SEMO models activate one s-type basis function and three p-type basis function. The basis functions which are considered for an atom of a certain element type are given in Table The application of such a minimal valence-shell basis set has the practical advantage that the basis functions are inherently locally orthogonal (Eq. ( The MNDO model is the first successful SEMO model which is based on the NDDO approximation. At most, one s-type basis function and three p-type basis functions are centered on one atom. Altogether, six unique nonzero one-center ERIs χ I μ χ I ν |χ I λ χ I σ may arise. Five of the six ERIs are substituted for elementand orbital-type-dependent parameters, and where we only indicate the orbital type (s or p) of the basis functions when specifying the ERIs. The magnetic quantum numbers do not need to be explicitly specified because otherwise rotational invariance could not be guaranteed. If γ Z I pp < γ Z I pp , p I p I p I p I will be negative which leads to issues in the determination of the two-center ERIs (see also Section 10.3). In the original MNDO model, p I p I p I p I is always positive so that no issues arise, but γ Z I pp may be smaller than γ Z I pp for extensions of the MNDO model. The two-center ERIs χ I μ χ I ν |χ J λ χ J σ , I = J, can be interpreted as the electrostatic interaction between a charge distribution χ I μ χ I ν centered on atom I and a charge distribution χ J λ χ J σ centered on atom J. Each possible charge distribution χ I μ χ I ν in the s, p minimal valence-shell basis is approximately represented as a truncated classical multipole expansion Figure when the distance between the atomic nuclei, becomes small. We illustrate this at the example of the two-center ERI s I s I |s J s J which is approximated by the electrostatic interaction of a point charge located on I and one located on J. If RIJ = 0, a singularity would arise for the electrostatic interaction between the two point charges. This would not be the case if we considered the electrostatic interaction of a charge distribution centered on I and one centered on J. As a consequence, the expression to calculate the electrostatic interaction between point charges is modified in an empirical manner in such a way that it yields the one-center ERIs (Eqs. ( In the following, we denote an ERI calculated in the Klopman approximation by square brackets to easily distinguish them from analytically calculated ERIs (denoted in angle brackets). From Eq. ( in an H 2 molecule described by an MNDO-3G basis. We applied a Gaussian-type basis set (denoted MNDO-3G) to calculate the analytical ERI values instead of the Slater-type basis set inherent to the MNDO model. We generated the MNDO-3G basis based on ζ Z I . For the other two-center ERIs, similar formulae as the one in Eq. ( Issues with the presented approach were detected years after the introduction of the MNDO model. It was remarked Moreover, the Klopman approximation causes distinct errors in the ERIs which culminates in an infinite error in periodic electronic structure calculations. An example discussed in Refs. 58,59,151,152 explains why this is not generally possible (see Figure in the φ-basis, or analogously in the χ-basis, We now want to know whether it is possible to obtain the same = param when solving an eigenvalue equation of the type χ where we neglect χ S. When solving Eqs. (42) | when solving Eq. ( Apart from this example, it is evident that orthogonalization effects, cannot be captured by introducing element-dependent parameters which was, for instance, pointed out in Refs. 121, 153-155. The matrix element φ H μν depends on contributions from all matrix elements of χ H. Consequently, the parametrization would need to depend on the chemical environment of each atom in some manner. The MNDO parameters, however, are only elementdependent and do not depend on the chemical environment. Despite this inherent limitation, MNDO has been a very successful model and we will continue to discuss how the contributions to φ H MNDO are evaluated in the following Sections (Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2). We assume that the inclusion of empirical parameters accounts for orthogonalization effects in some average manner, and hence, retain the superscript φ for φ H MNDO . The parametric expressions applied for the evaluation of the matrix elements φ H MNDO μν differ depending on the number of atoms on which the corresponding basis functions χ I μ and χ J ν are centered: (i) χ I μ and χ I ν are centered on a single atom I (one-center one-electron matrix elements) and (ii) χ I μ and χ J ν are centered on different atomic nuclei I = J (two-center one-electron matrix elements). In the case that χ I μ and χ I ν are centered on the same atom, the analytical matrix elements in the χ-basis are given by χ These first two terms in the right hand side of Eq. ( The element-and orbital-type-dependent parameter U Z I l(μ)l(ν) comprises all one-center one-electron contributions in Eq. (46). The one-center one-electron terms are exactly zero in a locally orthogonal basis when μ = ν, The parameter U Z I l(μ)l(ν) may not depend on the magnetic quantum number to ensure rotational invariance, In the φ-basis, the first two terms obviously depend on the chemical environment of the atom I which is neglected by introducing constant U Z I ss and U Z I pp . It is assumed that the calibration of U Z I ss and U Z I pp will implicitly lead to a modeling of average orthogonalization effects and will also absorb the effects from the core electrons. The first two terms in Eq. ( approximately cancel the orthogonalization effects, φ μ which are required to transform χ H μν from the χ-into the φ-basis (see Figure where the first and fifth basis functions are 2s, the second and sixth are 2p x , the third and seventh are 2p y , and the fourth and eighth are 2p z basis functions). a) φ H 15 The mean of two element-and orbital-type-dependent parameters β Z I l(μ) and β Z J l(ν) yields the proportionality factor. In analogy to the parameters U Z I ss and U Z I pp , at most two parameters arise per element, β Z I s and β Z I p . Taking φ H MNDO μν to be proportional to χ S μν has a long history The core-core repulsion energy in the MNDO model, V MNDO v , is also determined from a parametric expression. The substitution of the analytical expression, for a parametric one cannot be physically motivated. Empirically, it was determined that a parametric expression needs to be introduced to decrease the average core-core repulsion energy to define a useful NDDO-SEMO model. features two key modifications with respect to Eq. (53). Firstly, the pairwise point-charge interaction is substituted by a scaled interaction of the charge distributions s I s I and s J s J which is evaluated in the Klopman approximation (cf. Eq. ( where α Z I is an element-dependent parameter. The introduction of these modifications provides a large flexibility for the MNDO model, but this flexibility comes at a high price. Most strikingly, V MNDO v is finite for RIJ = 0. More specifically, f MNDO IJ = 3.0 and V MNDO v = 3Q 2 I γ Z I ss in the limit RIJ = 0 for a homonuclear diatomic system (see also Figure The scaling factor is not calculated according to Eq. ( Because there is no theoretical foundation for the introduction of Eqs. ( The number of unique nonzero one-center ERIs increases from six (see Eqs. ( The two-center ERIs are also applied to calculate the core-core repulsion energy (Eq. ( where θ Z J core = 1/(2γ Z I ss ) for elements which do not activate d-type orbitals and θ Z J core = 1/(2γ Z I ss ) for elements which activate d-type orbitals. Similar adjustments are necessary for the formula to calculate the one-electron matrix (Eq. ( Additionally, we have to specify the parameters U Z I dd , β Z I d , and ζ Z I d to assemble the one-electron matrix. The Austin model 1 (AM1) The scaling factor f AM1 IJ is defined as the sum of the scaling factor f MNDO IJ (Eq. ( The shape of the a-th Gaussian function is characterized by the elementdependent parameters K Z I a , L Z I a , and M Z I a . The sign of K Z I a determines whether the a-th Gaussian increases (positive sign) or decreases (negative sign) f AM1 IJ at a given RIJ . L Z I a determines the width of the Gaussian; it must be positive because f AM1 would otherwise tend to infinity for large RIJ . M Z I a specifies where the a-th Gaussian is centered and, hence, for which RIJ additional repulsive or attractive interactions are added. If more than one 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 6 Å (orange dashed line), and Gaussian is added to the scaling factor (A Z I > 1), f AM1 IJ becomes a quite involved function. It can decrease the core-core repulsion energy at certain distances (e.g., at RIJ = 1.6 Å in Figure so that it contains element-pair-dependent parameters x Z I ,Z J (denoted as δ in Ref. 167) and α Z I ,Z J . Eq. ( It also contains element-pair-dependent parameters x Z I ,Z J and α Z I ,Z J . In comparison to Eq. ( Disturbingly, the PM6 model contains special corrections to the heats of formations at 298 K, ∆H 298K f , for several compound classes. In the PM6 model, the predicted ∆H 298K f in kcal mol -1 is empirically modified depending on a measure for the non-planarity of the amine nitrogen atom, φ, 56 The measure for the non-planarity of the amine nitrogen atom is determined as 2π minus the sum of the three bond angles involving the amine nitrogen atom. For a perfectly planar amine, ∆H 298K f is reduced by 0.5 kcal mol -1 . With an increasing pyramidalization of the amine, ∆H 298K f is reduced by a smaller amount. Additionally, the PM6 model (as implemented in Mopac) includes an undocumented modification to ∆H 298K f when the computed bond order for a carbon-carbon bond exceeds 2.5, as for example, in acetylenic bonds. A contribution of 12.0 kcal mol -1 is added to ∆H 298K The PM7 model was introduced as the successor of the PM6 model in 2013. The value 7.0 Å was apparently chosen as some random distance which is far larger than usual bond lengths. In Eq. ( The OMx (x = 1, 2, 3) models activate one s-type basis functions for hydrogen and one s-and three p-type basis functions for carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and fluorine. In analogy to MNDO-type models, the five one-center ERIs χ I μ χ I ν χ I λ χ I σ arising in the minimal s, p basis are substituted for the parameters γ Z I ss , γ Z I pp , γ Z I sp , γ Z I pp , and γZ I sp (see also Eqs. ( The Klopman-Ohno factor f KO IJ is given as the quotient of the MNDO-type ERI s I s I |s J s J (Eq. ( When χ I μ , χ I ν , χ J λ , and χ J σ are s-type basis functions, the product of f KO IJ and s I s I |s J s J reduces to the MNDO-type model, In the case of one basis function, χ I μ , χ I ν , χ J λ , or χ J σ , not being an s-type basis function, the two-center ERI is still scaled with f KO IJ . Let us now examine how this Klopman-Ohno scaling affects the value which enters the two-electron matrices. Generally, f KO IJ tends to one in the limit RIJ → ∞, i.e., the unscaled analytical value for χ I μ χ I ν χ J λ χ J σ is applied. It would be theoretically satisfactory if we had a smooth transition from the one-center ERIs χ This situation would occur if the analytical onecenter limits were chosen for γ Z I ss , γ Z I pp , γ Z I sp , γ Z I pp , and γZ I sp . If γ Z I ss = s I s I |s I s I , f KO would be one in the limit RIJ = 0, Hence, all two-center ERIs are scaled with a factor of one in the limit RIJ = 0 and the analytical one-center limit is recovered. In this case, the scaled two-center ERIs differ negligibly from the analytical two-center ERIs (see Figure An exact orthogonalization of χ H (e.g., by the transformation χ S - 2 ) was initially attempted, but did not provide a useful model to claculate electroni energies where χ S is defined as The transformation of χ H to φ H, is then approximated as Accordingly, a matrix element φ H μν is approximated as Gray and Stone showed 191 that this power series expansion is nonconvergent in the general case. More specifically, the power series expansion fails to converge when the largest eigenvalue of χ S exceeds 1.0 Analogously to the MNDO model, different parametric expressions are applied for the evaluation of the matrix elements φ H OMx μν depending on the number of atoms on which the corresponding basis functions χ are centered (one-center one-electron and two-center one-electron matrix elements). We first discuss how φ H OMx μν is determined when the corresponding basis functions χ are centered on the same atom, i.e, χ I μ and χ I ν are both centered on the atom I. In this case, the matrix elements φ H OMx μν are given by φ where F Z I 1 and F Z I 2 are element-dependent parameters. Additionally, Eq. ( The relation of the third contribution to Eqs. ( We now examine how the contributions to φ H OMx μν are evaluated. Its first contribution, χ H OMx μν , on the right-hand side of Eq. ( where the element-and orbital-type-dependent parameter the MNDO model). Kolb and Thiel explicitly stated that U Z I l(μ)l(μ) is also assumed to include all contributions from the core electrons. In this expression, we introduced an auxiliary set of basis functions ω = {ω I } (no additional subscript index is necessary because there is at most one additional s-type basis function per atom). Each basis function ω is characterized by an orbital exponent ζ Z I ω . Note that an orbital ω I is generally not locally orthogonal to χ I μ . An additional element-dependent parameter W Z(K) enters Eq. (78). The last contribution to Eq. ( because the first two remaining terms in Eq. ( If either χ I μ or χ I ν are not s-type orbitals, Eq. ( where the first and fifth basis functions are 2s, the second and sixth are 2p x , the third and seventh are 2p y , and the fourth and eighth are 2p z basis functions). a) θ(s C 1 , s C 2 ) with the best-fit parameters β 6 s = -38.9 a.u. and a 6 s = 1.0 a.u. The contributions to θ(s C 1 , s C 2 ) are divided into the scaled square-root contributions (dashed gray line) and the Gaussian contribution (dashed-dotted gray line). b) θ(s C 1 , s C 2 ) with β 6 s = -38.9 a.u. and a consists of the product of a phase vector, (-1) l(λ)+m(λ) , the scaled squareroot of the interatomic distance RIJ , and a Gaussian contribution depending on R2 IJ (see Figure Finally, we need to evaluate the function η(χ I μ , χ J λ ) to assemble Eq. ( (cf. Eq. ( is not rotationally invariant, so that the functions have to be averaged when χ I μ is a p-type basis function, 151 While Kolb and Thiel explicitly pointed out that θ(χ I μ , χ J λ ) is assumed to contain orthogonalization corrections, which contains the element-dependent parameters G Z I 1 and G Z I 2 . This equation significantly differs from the analytic expression for the transformation of the matrix elements (Eq. ( 2 which is, however, generally not the case. In the earliest variant, OM1, G Z I 1 = 0 and G Z I 2 = 0, i.e., orthogonalization corrections are only considered when χ I μ and χ J ν are centered on a single atom. The latest version, OM3, sets F Z I 2 = 0 and G Z I 2 = 0. The OM2 model considers all orthogonalization corrections. The contribution of each pairwise repulsion of atomic cores I, J = I is scaled with the Klopman-Ohno factor f KO IJ , 58-60, 152 It is argued Several other models, which have not found widespread popularity, introduce new conceptual ideas beyond the MNDO-type and OMx models. In the following sections, several of these ideas are reviewed and discussed without providing the complete formalism for these models. This list is by no means complete. We selected models which feature conceptually large differences to the introduced models, but are still built around the NDDO approximation. For other NDDO-SEMO models see also Refs. 104, 146-148, 185, 193-198. 6 which can be reformulated to when applying Eq. ( and (see Figure In any case, it appears promising to attempt the construction of a similar (MNDO-type) model which does not share the conceptual difficulties of NO-MNDO. Without considering the parametrization, the corresponding SCF for a benzene molecule described in an MNDO-3G basis. The entries are colored according to their values from negative (blue) to zero (white) to positive (red). It might be possible that such an attempt could result in a model which is more accurate than NO-MNDO, and hence, significantly more accurate than MNDO. The Polarized Molecular Orbital (PMOx, x = 1, 2) models 62-66 were developed in an attempt to provide a more accurate description of noncovalent interactions and polarization effects than possible with the standard NDDO-SEMO models. It is built upon the MNDO model, but features a key difference in its formalism: The PMOx models activate one s-and three p-type basis functions for hydrogen (compared to only one s-type basis function for MNDO). Truhlar and co-workers determined that the activation of diffuse p-type basis functions for hydrogen atoms is already sufficient to obtain a significant improvement in the description of polarization effects in ab initio studies. So far, we have discussed how NDDO-SEMO models approximate the SCF equations in the φ-basis (Eq. ( A comparison to correlation functional derivations of KS-DFT is likely to highlight insufficiencies in the description of electron correlation in a parametrized single-determinant approach. The comparison of the elements of the Fock matrix for KS-DFT in the χ-basis, highlights the connection between KS-DFT and HF (through Λ). The parameter Λ quantifies the amount of exact (HF) exchange χ K. For 0 < Λ ≤ 1, we have a contribution of a (approximate) DFT contribution to the exchange potential, V x , to χ F KS-DFT . Historically, NDDO-SEMO models are built upon considerations for isolated atoms. Oleari et al., In general, parameters p = (p 1 , p 2 , ..., p p ) T are calibrated against a reference data set D which comprises D data triples, consisting of (i) target observables y d , (ii) input variables x d (e.g., atomic coordinates, charge, and spin multiplicity of a molecule), and (iii) weights w d . Traditionally, the target observables are measured heats of formation ∆H 298K f at 298 K, where w d are the weights. The minimization of E with respect to p in a nonlinear ordinary least squares fit, yields an optimal parameter set p D with respect to the reference data set D. Different optimization algorithms, e.g., the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm, As we already noted, D traditionally incorporates measured ∆H 298K f for a variety of molecules. The heat of formation of the atom at 298 K is taken from experimental data (for instance from Ref. 215). We can examine which approximations are included in Eq. ( Compared to Eq. ( Hicks and Thiel studied 211 the severity of this conceptual inconsistency by reparametrizing MNDO with respect to electronic atomization energies (∆E at el ), Hicks and Thiel found 211 that the errors between reference and predicted ∆H 298K f and the errors between reference and predicted ∆E at el are similarly large. They therefore concluded For the prediction of properties for molecules not included in D, one needs to estimate the uncertainties of p. We recently demonstrated The fact that there is no single transferable parameter set has been noted before. Not surprisingly, NDDO-SEMO models are unable to describe systems with strong electron correlation. Such systems are, however, present in D for some NDDO-SEMO models (see, e.g., the chromium dimer and CrO 3 which both exhibit a very strong multiconfigurational character The PM6 ligand dissociation energy for reaction 4, for instance, is strongly negative (∆E = -579.8 kJ mol -1 ). Figure NDDO-SEMO models are mostly applied to study organic compounds which do not exhibit strong electron correlation. Recent benchmark studies show A way to reduce the error is the restriction of the domain of applicability. Rossi and Truhlar proposed to adjust the parameters to describe specific reactions yielding specific reaction parameters. A focused reparameterization is, however, plagued by problems. Obviously, it cannot resolve systematic errors (cf. Section 7.1). Additionally, it may be difficult to curtail the domain of applicability adequately, i.e., to decide for a specific system whether it is similar enough to the ones for which it was parametrized. To define such a structure-based metric has been a long-standing goal in machine learning applied to chemistry Contemporary NDDO-SEMO models have limitations which cannot be addressed by reparameterization and overcoming these limitations requires the adoption of novel parametric functions. Unfortunately, the NDDO approximation causes large and uncontrollable errors in the ERIs in the φ-basis and these errors propagate to all quantities calculated on the basis of the ERIs. We recently introduced 116 a strategy to directly correct for the error caused by the NDDO approximation in φ G which we call the correction inheritance for semiempirics (CISE) approach. We drew inspiration from the work carried out by Roby and Sinanoǧlu who suggested The goal of Roby and Sinanoǧlu in 1969 was to speed up single-point HF calculations for a diverse set of small molecules, and hence, they attempted to define universal rules to assemble Γ which, not surprisingly, turned out to be impossible. Obviously, we will then not achieve a speed-up with respect to the reference calculation. We found for which we achieved a speed-up at a negligible loss of accuracy. We also showed The CISE approach has a potential for application whenever we are interested in obtaining electronic energies for sequences of related structures, e.g., in the context of kinetic modeling, The last question which we address in this work is whether one could, in principle, obtain FCI quality results in a given one-electron basis when applying an NDDO-SEMO reference wave function. It was suggested that all of the developed wave function methods can be (and many have been Previous results by Thiel and co-workers and Clark and co-workers showed that the correlation energy calculated with single-reference perturbation theories evaluated for an NDDO-SEMO reference is about one order of magnitude too small, It is no surprise that single-determinantal NDDO-SEMO models do not adequately capture static electron correlation effects and that static electron correlation effects have to be considered explicitly. The success of NDDO-SEMO models is largely based on the effectiveness with which they allow one to solve the SCF equations. Contemporary NDDO-SEMO models yield electronic energies about three orders of magnitude faster than HF or KS-DFT models. We outlined the systematic limitations which NDDO-SEMO model face. First, severe limitations are caused by the application of a small basis set. The drastic restriction of the basis set size will, in general, prohibit the determination of accurate relative electronic energies, force constants, and polarizabilities. The increase of the basis set size is, however, challenging within the framework of contemporary NDDO-SEMO models for practical reasons. Second, systematic errors are caused by the adoption of a parametrized mean-field framework. The examination of the parallels to KS-DFT revealed that NDDO-SEMO models fail to describe the general behavior of electronic energy as a function of the electron number, in the same way as in HF and KS-DFT models. We may therefore anticipate that NDDO-SEMO models will be plagued by the same difficulties in describing electron correlation, irrespective of their specific parametrization. In general, the parameters of NDDO-SEMO models are calibrated with respect to experimental reference data. When calibrating the parameters, one first encounters difficulties associated with the current practice of calculating heats of formation which leads to a contamination of the parameters with nuclear-motion contributions. Consequently, the electronic energy calculated with an NDDO-SEMO model cannot be considered a pure electronic energy which, however, does not appear to have severe practical consequences. This conceptual inconsistency could simply be alleviated by adjusting the parametrization procedure. Recent benchmark studies We briefly reviewed our recent proposal for system-focused NDDO-SEMO models that yield accurate results for structures related to a reference structure. Our CISE approach has the advantage that we are able to determine the parametrization of a corrective matrix directly for a given structure from a reference calculation. We, hence, do not have to apply a statistical procedure to calibrate parameters. This convenience obviously comes at the cost that the approach is restricted to the investigation of sequences of related structures which, however, are key areas of application for NDDO-SEMO models (e.g., structure optimization, Born-Oppenheim molecular dynamics, and real-time reactivity exploration). To conclude this overview, we would like to stress that the age of NDDO-SEMO models is far from being over. Although we pointed out several (conceptual and practical) difficulties, we want to highlight again that contemporary NDDO-SEMO models achieve, overall, a remarkably high accuracy with respect to experimental data. To make NDDO-SEMO models useful for predictive work, we, however, have to know when, and why, they fail. This may, for instance, be achieved through statistical learning models. The parameters for the OMx models were determined with the (not freely available) MNDO2005 program. Furthermore, Thiel and co-workers denote θ(χ I μ , χ J λ ) with β μλ in Refs. 58-60, 152 and η(χ I μ , χ J λ ) is denoted as 58 H IJ μμ or as The one-center ERI p I p I p I p I is calculated from γ Z I pp and γ Z I pp with Eq. (37). A practical issue with Eq. ( • MNDO -Ga, Sr, Xe, Ba, and Tl 139 • AM1 -Li, Be, Mg, Ga, Sr, Sb, Xe, Ba, and Tl 139 • PM3 -Be, • PM6 -He, Be, F, Ne, Na, Mg, Ar, K, Ca, Ga, Kr, Sr, In, Xe, Hg, and Tl 56 • PM7 -He, B, Be, F, Ne, Na, Mg, Ar, K, Ca, Ga, Kr, Sr, In, Xe, Hg, and Pb 57 The two-center ERIs χ I μ χ I ν |χ J λ χ J σ , I = J can be interpreted as the electrostatic interaction between a charge distribution χ I μ χ I ν centered on atom I and a charge distribution χ J λ χ J σ centered on atom J. The different possible charge distributions χ I μ χ I ν in the s, p minimal valence-shell basis are listed in Table The multipoles Θ μν t may be a monopole q I , a dipole μ I x,y,z , a linear quadrupole Q I xx,yy,zz , and a square quadrupole Q I xy,xz,yz (see also Figure The specification of the positions of the point charges which make up the dipoles and the quadrupoles necessitates the specification of D μ,sp and D Q,pp (see also Figure After the specification of the position and value of the point charges, we can straightforwardly assess the electrostatic potential energy U (Θ μν t , Θ λσ s ) of the interaction of the C t and C s point charges making up Θ μν t and Θ λσ s , respectively (in atomic units), As stated in the main text, this interaction is not calculated analytically, but within the empirical Klopman approximation. The term θ I c depends on the multipole to which the point charge q c belongs (see Table and The parameters cannot be calculated analytically, but have to be determined in an iterative numerical procedure. The values for θ I q,ss , θ I q,pp , θ I μ,sp , and θ I Q,pp can be compared to those provided for P01, P07, P02, and P03, respectively, when specifying the keyword Hcore in Mopac. The implementation of the procedure to calculate the two-center ERIs can be compared to the implementation in Mopac when specifying the keyword Hcore for the calculation of the electronic energy of a diatomic molecule which is aligned along the z-axis. The values of the two-center ERIs are then listed under TWO-ELECTRON MATRIX IN HCORE (note that these values really are the values for the ERIs and not the two-electron matrix entries). The first one hundred entries are the one-center ERIs for the first atom (i.e., γ ss , γ sp , γ pp , γ pp , γsp , γpp , and zeros). The next one hundred entries are the two-center ERIs which arise between the first and the second atom. The order in which the two-center ERIs are given is described in Ref. 288 The one-center ERIs χ I μ χ I ν |χ I λ χ I σ will be calculated analytically if s-, p-, and d-type basis functions are activated for the atom I. For this purpose, the one-center ERIs are re-written as 83 ) denotes the so-called angular coefficients and where ζ μ is the auxiliary orbital exponent and n μ the principal quantum number associated with the basis function χ I μ . Pelikán and Nagy determined 84 the values of the 58 unique nonzero onecenter ERIs ) by explicitly evaluating Eq. (114). For this purpose, they used the angular coefficients C k (l(μ)m(μ), l(ν)m(ν)) which are presented in Table and to simplify the notation. The formulae for the one-center ERIs are presented in Table ) The typographical mistakes in Ref. 84 which we corrected here can be summarized as follows: • The factor 12 has to be substituted for √ 12 in Eq. ( • The radial integral R 2 sppd has to be replaced by R 2 sdpp in Eqs. ( Conceptually, the calculation of the two-center ERIs in the s, p, d basis is similar to the one in the s, p basis. To fully describe the point charge interactions when a d-type orbital is involved in a two-center ERI, Thiel and Voityuk specified an additional point charge configuration Qxy,yz,xz (see Figure Note how the multipoles specified for the charge distributions p I x p I x , p I y p I y , and p I z p I z are different than the ones specfied in Table Additionally, we are now in a situation where a dipole moment μ I x is applied to describe different charge distributions, e.g., s I p I x and p I x d I x 2 -y 2 . As a consequence, we need to specify different distances for the multipoles which appear in the multipole expansions describing a charge distribution. In addition to D μ,sd and D Q,pp , we must define the distances D μ,pd , D Q,sd , and Q μ,dd . These distances are again defined with respect to A(χ I μ , χ I ν , a) (Eq. ( and The implementation of the formulae to calculate D μ,pd , D Q,sd , and D Q,dd can be verified by comparison to the respective values supplied by Mopac 178 when specifying the keyword HCORE. For each element, the value tabulated as DD2 corresponds to D μ,sp , DD3 to D Q,pp , DD4 to D Q,sd , DD5 to D μ,pd , and The positions of the point charges arising for a monopole q, a dipole μ x,y,z , a linear quadrupole Q xx,yy,zz , and a square quadrupole Q xy,yz,xz are listed in Table Table Now we can again straightforwardly apply Eq. ( The values for θ I q,ss , θ I q,pp , θ I q,dd , θ I μ,sp , θ I μ,pd , θ I Q,pp , θ I Q,sd , and θ I Q,dd can be verified against the values for P01, P07, P08, P02, P05, P03, P04, and P06, respectively, when specifying the keyword Hcore in Mopac. In Ref. 53, M 20 is defined as Hence, the interaction of two multiples M 20 is calculated to be This formulae can be simplified to when inserting Note that Ref. 53 appears to contain a misprint because it specifies that [ Qzx , Qxy ] = 0. Apparently, Mopac implements a different formula, which is derivable when one defines The values of two-center ERIs that involve at least one of the following charge distributions, p Instead, one would have to determine a new set of parameters when implementing the other equation (Eq. ( The implementation of the procedure to calculate those two-center ERIs can be compared to the implementation in Mopac when invoking the keyword Hcore for a calculation of the electronic energy for a diatomic molecule which is aligned along the z-axis (for which s-, p-, and d-type basis functions are activated). The values of the two-center ERIs are then listed under text. A local coordinate system is defined for each pair of atoms I and J = I which are positioned at RI = ( RI,x , RI,y , RI,z ) and RJ = ( RJ,x , RJ,y , RJ,z ), respectively. The standard basis x loc , y loc , z loc of the local coordinate system can then be determined, e.g., as described in Ref. 86 or in Ref. 289. The first unit vector z loc is defined as the normalized vector connecting RI and RJ , The vector z loc can be applied to construct a perpendicular vector y loc , The cross product of z loc and y loc yields x loc , We can then construct the rotation matrices which transform the results from the local to the global coordinate system. For certain element pairs, a scaling factor different from f PM6 IJ (Eq. ( For N-H and O-H interactions, the scaling function f ,PM6 IJ reads, As there exists no theoretical foundation for the introduction of the modified expressions to calculate the core-core repulsion energy, we do not know why the application of these modified scaling factors yield a better agreement with experimental data. During the parameter optimization, certain constraints have to be imposed on the parameter values to keep the parametric expressions sensible from a physical point of view. Several parameters, for instance, determine the sign of an exponential functions which depends on the internuclear distance RIJ . The sign of the argument of the exponential function must be negative so that it does not become infinite for large RIJ which means that ζ Z I l(μ) > 0, ζ Z I l(μ) > 0, α Z I > 0, α Z I ,Z J > 0, a Z I l(μ) + a Z J l(λ) > 0, and L Z I a > 0. Furthermore, the scaling factors for the core-core repulsion must not become negative (which would correspond to an attractive interaction between two cores), i.e., x Z I ,Z J and K Z I a have to be constrained such that the scaling factors are positive. These constraints are fulfilled by all NDDO-SEMO models. To our understanding, it is not simply possible to constrain the values of the other parameters in a meaningful way. Interestingly, the parameters appear to vary regularly with the atomic number for lighter elements. Dewar and Thiel noted that the MNDO parameters change in a remarkably regular manner with the atomic number of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen 50 (see also Figure For this work, we re-optimized the β Z I l(μ) parameters in the MNDO model for carbon and hydrogen. The applied reference data set D m contains 12 heats of formation at 298 K (∆H 298K f ) of hydrocarbon compounds which are also present in the original reference data set of MNDO 50 (see Table Charge Distribution T μν Multipoles s • R 1 spdd has to be replaced for R 1 sppd in Eq. ( IJ