Thermal properties of graphene display peculiar characteristics associated to the two-dimensional nature of this crystalline membrane. These properties can be changed and tuned in the presence of applied stresses, both tensile and compressive. Here we study graphene monolayers under tensile stress by using path-integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) simulations, which allows one to take into account quantization of vibrational modes and analyze the effect of anharmonicity on physical observables. The influence of the elastic energy due to strain in the crystalline membrane is studied for increasing tensile stress and for rising temperature (thermal expansion). We analyze the internal energy, enthalpy, and specific heat of graphene, and compare the results obtained from PIMD simulations with those given by a harmonic approximation for the vibrational modes. This approximation turns out to be precise at low temperatures, and deteriorates as temperature and pressure are increased. At low temperature the specific heat changes as cp ∼ T for stress-free graphene, and evolves to a dependence cp ∼ T 2 as the tensile stress is increased. Structural and thermodynamic properties display nonnegligible quantum effects, even at temperatures higher than 300 K. Moreover, differences in the behavior of the in-plane and real areas of graphene are discussed, along with their associated properties. These differences show up clearly in the corresponding compressibility and thermal expansion coefficient. Two-dimensional materials, and graphene in particular, have attracted in last years a great deal of attention in the scientific community, due to their peculiar electronic, elastic, and thermal properties. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the computational method employed in the simulations. Results for the internal energy and enthalpy of graphene are given in Sec. III. The thermal expansion is discussed in Sec. IV. In Sec. V we present results for the specific heat, whereas in Sec. VI the compressibility of graphene is discussed. In Sec. VII we summarize the main results. We use PIMD simulations to study equilibrium properties of graphene monolayers as a function of temperature and pressure. The PIMD procedure is based on the Feynman path-integral formulation of statistical mechanics, where the brackets • • • indicate an ensemble average and u ij are staging coordinates, , U is the instantaneous potential energy, and ǫ xy is an element of the 2D strain tensor. The stress P , conjugate to the in-plane area A p , is given by the trace of the stress tensor: Effective algorithms have been employed for the PIMD simulations, as those described in the literature. As explained above, in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble used here we fix the applied stress P in the xy plane, allowing fluctuations in the in-plane area of the simulation cell for which periodic boundary conditions are ap-plied. Carbon atoms are free to move in the z coordinate (out-of-plane direction), and in general any measure of the real surface of a graphene sheet at T > 0 should give a value larger than the in-plane area. In this respect, it has been discussed for biological membranes that their properties should be described using the notion of a real surface rather than a projected (in-plane) surface. where T j kn is the area of triangle n in hexagon k, and the sum in k is extended to the 2N hexagons in a cell containing N carbon atoms. Here, the triangles are defined with the coordinates r ij corresponding to bead j of atom i. The area A is then calculated as It is clear that A coincides with A p for strictly planar graphene, and in general one has A ≥ A p . Both areas display temperature dependencies qualitatively different. In fact, A does not present a negative thermal expansion, as happens for the in-plane area in a large temperature range The internal energy E is obtained from the results of our PIMD simulations as a sum of the kinetic, K, and potential energy, V , at a given temperature. The kinetic energy has been calculated by employing the virial estimator, The rise in internal energy with an applied tensile stress is presented in Fig. The change in internal energy with temperature and pressure can be described from variations in the elastic and vibrational contributions to E. This is analyzed in the following sections. An important part of the internal energy corresponds to the elastic energy due to changes in the area of graphene. It is directly related to the actual interatomic distance, i.e., to the real area A, rather than to the inplane area A p (or in-plane strain ǫ). Then, the internal energy E(T ) at temperature T can be written as 11 where E el (A) is the elastic energy for an area A, and E vib (A, T ) is the vibrational energy of the system. The area A is a function of the stress P and temperature T , but this is not explicitly indicated in Eq. ( We define the elastic energy E el corresponding to an area A as the increase in energy of a strictly planar graphene layer with respect to the minimum energy E 0 (for an area A 0 = 2.61888 Å2 /atom). By definition E el (A 0 ) = 0, and for small changes of A we found that it follows a dependence in agreement with the result found earlier in classical calculations at T = 0. In Fig. For P = 0 we find a positive elastic energy in the zerotemperature limit, E el = 1.7 meV/atom, due to zeropoint lattice expansion, which causes that A > A 0 . This low-T limit appreciably increases for P < 0 due to the stress-induced increase in area A, which yields values of 12 and 52 meV/atom for the elastic energy at P = -0.2 and -0.5 eV Å-2 , respectively. For finite temperatures, one observes in Fig. After calculating the elastic energy for an area A resulting from PIMD simulations at given T and P , we obtain the vibrational energy E vib (A, T ) by subtracting the elastic energy from the internal energy: The three curves for E vib (T ) shown in Fig. We note that in the language of membranes and 2D elastic media there appears an energy contribution due to bending of the surface, that is usually taken into account through the bending constant κ, which measures the rigidity of the membrane. In our present formulation, the bending energy is included in the vibrational energy associated to the flexural ZA modes, as can be seen in their contribution to the specific heat (see Sec. V). Anharmonic couplings between in-plane and out-of-plane modes are also expected to show up, especially at high temperatures. Since we are working in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble, it is natural to consider the enthalpy as a relevant thermodynamic variable, in particular to calculate the specific heat of graphene at several applied stresses (see Sec. V). For a given stress P , we define the enthalpy H as H = E + P A p . As a reference we will consider H 0 (P ) = E 0 + P A 0 , such that H converges in the classical limit to H 0 (P ) at T = 0. In Fig. we have plotted in Fig. To better appreciate the low-temperature region, in Fig. In the low-temperature limit (T → 0), the real area A and in-plane area A p derived from PIMD simulations converge to 2.6459 Å2 /atom and 2.6407 Å2 /atom, respectively. Comparing these values with the classical minimum A 0 = 2.6189 Å, we find a zero-point expansion in A and A p of about 0.02 Å2 /atom (∼ 1%), due to an increase in the mean C-C bond length (an anharmonic effect). There also appears a difference of 0.2% between real and in-plane areas at low temperature, caused by out-of-plane zero-point motion, so that the layer is not strictly planar. This is a genuine quantum effect, as in classical simulations for T → 0 one finds a planar layer in which A and A p coincide. For P = 0, the area A displays an almost constant value up to T ≈ 200 K, and increases at higher temperatures. However, A p decreases in the temperature range from T = 0 to T ≈ 1000 K, reaches a minimum and then increases at higher T . To analyze the thermal expansion of graphene, and following our definitions of the areas A and A p , we will consider two different thermal expansion coefficients. The first of them, α, refers to changes in the real area: This coefficient takes mainly into account changes in the interatomic distances, and is rather insensitive to bending of the graphene layer. The second coefficient, α p , is a measure of variations in the in-plane area and has been widely used in the literature to analyze results of classical simulations and analytical calculations: In Fig. It is interesting to note that the difference α-α p , which vanishes at T = 0, rapidly increases for rising temperature, and for P = 0 it takes a value ≈ 1.0 × 10 -5 K -1 at temperatures higher than 1000 K. For larger tensile stress, this difference is smaller, since the amplitude of out-of-plane vibrations is reduced, and A p is closer to A. Thus, for P = -0.2 and -0.5 eV Å-2 , we find at high temperatures α-α p ≈ 8 × 10 -6 K -1 and 6.5 × 10 -6 K -1 , respectively. The results presented here for α p at zero external stress display a temperature dependence similar to those found earlier using other theoretical and experimental techniques. Jiang et al. Our results for the thermal expansion of graphene, derived from atomistic simulations, can be related with an analytical formulation of crystalline membranes in the continuum limit, for which the relation between A and A p may be written as Here h(x, y) is the height of the membrane surface, i.e. the distance to the reference xy plane. In this classical approach, the difference A -A p may be calculated by Fourier transformation of the r.h.s. of Eq. ( This expression was obtained in the classical limit, so it does not take into account atomic quantum delocalization. Nevertheless, it is expected to be a good approximation to our quantum calculations at relatively high temperature, T Θ D , with Θ D ∼ 1000 K the Debye temperature corresponding to out-of-plane vibrations in graphene. We have calculated the specific heat of graphene monolayers as a temperature derivative of the enthalpy H derived from our PIMD simulations (see Sec. III.D): c p (T ) = dH(T )/dT . One may ask if our simulations can yield reliable results for this thermodynamic variable, mainly because electronic contributions to c p are not taken into account in our numerical procedure. This is, however, not a problem for the actual precision reached in our calculations, as the electronic part is much less than the phonon contribution, actually considered in our method. The former was estimated in various works, and turns out to be three or four orders of magnitude less than the phonon part in the temperature range considered here. At room temperature the specific heat of graphene is about three times smaller than the classical limit, and c p is still appreciably lower than this limit at T = 1000 K. This is in line with the magnitude of the Debye temperature of graphene, which amounts to about 1000 K for out-of-plane modes For a comparison with our numerical results for c p (T ) at zero and negative stress, we present a harmonic approximation (HA) for the lattice vibrations. This approximation is expected to be rather accurate at low temperatures, provided that a reliable description for the phonon frequencies is used. A comparison between results of the HA and PIMD simulations yields an estimate of anharmonic effects in the specific heat of graphene, given that both kinds of calculations employ the same interatomic potential. The HA assumes constant frequencies for the graphene vibrational modes (calculated for the minimum-energy configuration), and does not take into account changes in the areas A and A p with temperature. Thus, it will give us the constant-area specific heat per atom, c v (T ) = dE(T )/dT , which for a cell with N atoms is given by where the index r (r = 1, ..., 6) indicates the six phonon bands of graphene (ZA, ZO, LA, TA, LO, and TO), As shown in Sec. III, a part of the internal energy (and the enthalpy) corresponds to the elastic energy E el , i.e., to the cost of increasing the area A of graphene by thermal expansion or an applied tensile stress. The contribution of this energy to the specific heat is given by dE el /dT , which is not included in the HA. This contribution can be calculated from the results of our PIMD simulations displayed in Fig. In our present context, the most relevant effect of an applied stress P in the phonon bands is a change in the low-frequency region of the ZA modes, for which The zero-stress band ω 0 ZA (k) calculated for the minimumenergy structure (area A 0 ), follows for small k: ρ ω 0 ZA (k) 2 ≈ κk 4 . Thus, for P < 0 the small-k region is dominated by the quadratic term (linear in P ) in Eq. ( To obtain deeper insight into the low-temperature dependence of the specific heat, c p (T ) is shown in Fig. The low-temperature behavior of the heat capacity can be further analyzed by considering a continuous model for frequencies and wavevectors, as in the well-known Debye model for solids. Alofi and Srivastava 89 calculated the specific heat of few-layer graphene by using a semicontinuum model and analytical expressions for phonon dispersion relations. In particular, for single-layer graphene they found a temperature dependence c v ∼ T 1.1 for T 10 K, with an exponent that coincides with the mean μ value derived from our results for P = 0 in the region from 10 to 50 K. For comparison with our results for graphene, we also present in Fig. To compare with the results for c p of graphene derived from our PIMD simulations, we have also calculated the specific heat c v from constant-A p simulations. For each considered temperature, we took the equilibrium area A p obtained in the isothermal-isobaric simulations, and calculated c v as a numerical derivative of the internal energy from temperature increments ∆T (both positive and negative). One expects that c v ≤ c p at any temperature, but the difference between them turns out to be less than the statistical error bars of our results. A realistic estimation of this difference can be obtained from the thermodynamic relation where χ p is the in-plane isothermal compressibility (see Sec. VI). Using Eq. ( -0. We finally note that a calculation of the low-T specific heat of solids using this kind of path-integral simulations is in general not straightforward. The verification of the Debye law c p ∼ T 3 has been a challenge for pathintegral simulations of 3D materials, because of the effective low-frequency cut-off corresponding to finite simulation cells. The in-plane isothermal compressibility is defined as The variables in the r.h.s. of this equation refer to inplane quantities, as the pressure P in our isothermal-isobaric ensemble is a variable conjugate to the in-plane area A p . χ p has been calculated here by using the fluctuation formula 20,95 where σ 2 p are the mean-square fluctuations of the area A p obtained in the simulations. This expression is more convenient for our purposes than obtaining (∂A p /∂P ) T , since a calculation of this derivative by numerical methods requires additional simulations at nonzero stresses. We have verified at some selected temperatures and pressures that both procedures give the same results for χ p (taking into account the statistical error bars). Similarly, for the real area A one can define a compressibility χ = -(∂A/∂P ) T /A, which will be related to the fluctuations of the real area A. In Fig. For comparison with the results of our simulations, we also present in Fig. where c vr (k) is the contribution of mode (rk) to the specific heat, and γ rk are mode-dependent Grüneisen parameters. For P = 0, the results of our PIMD simulations yield γ = -2.2 at 300 K, and at 1000 K, γ ≈ 0 within the precision of the numerical results. At T = 300 K, α p and γ are negative because the mode-dependent Grünesien parameter of the out-of-plane ZA modes is negative. In this paper we have presented and discussed results of PIMD simulations of graphene in a wide range of temper-atures and tensile stresses. This technique has allowed us to quantify several structural and thermodynamic properties, with particular emphasis on the thermal expansion and specific heat. Nuclear quantum effects are clearly appreciable in these variables, even at T higher than room temperature. Zero-point expansion of the graphene layer due to nuclear quantum motion is not negligible, and amounts to about 1% of the area A. This zero-point effect decreases as tensile stress is increased. The thermal contraction of graphene discussed in the literature turns out to be a reduction of the in-plane area A p (α p < 0), caused by out-of-plane vibrations, but not a decrease in the real area A. In fact, the difference A -A p rises as temperature increases, since the amplitude of those vibrations grows. On one side, the in-plane thermal expansion α p is negative at low temperature, and becomes positive for T 1000 K. On the other side, the thermal expansion α of the real area is positive for all temperatures and tensile stresses discussed here. The thermal contraction of A p is smaller as the tensile stress increases, due to a reduction in the amplitude of out-ofplane vibrations. Our PIMD simulations give α p < 0 at low T for stresses so high as -0.5 eV Å-2 (-8 N/m). For this stress, α p becomes positive at T ∼ 350 K. The anharmonicity of the vibrational modes is clearly noticeable in the behavior of A and A p . The increase in real area A for rising T (α > 0) is a consequence of anharmonicity of in-plane modes, similar to the thermal expansion in most 3D solids. Moreover, the peculiar dependence of α p (negative at low T and positive at high T ) is an indication of the coupling between in-plane and out-of-plane modes. Other thermal properties of graphene can be well described by an HA at relatively low T , once the frequencies of the vibrational modes are known for the classical equilibrium geometry at T = 0. This is the case of the specific heat, for which our PIMD results indicate that the effect of anharmonicity appears gradually for temperatures T 400 K. Part of this anharmonicity is due to the elastic energy E el , associated to the expansion of the actual graphene sheet, which is not taken into account by the HA. At low T the specific heat can be described as c p ∼ T μ . At the lowest temperatures studied here (T 10 K) we find an exponent μ = 1.05 and 1.85, for P = 0 and -0.5 eV Å-2 , respectively. These values are close to the corresponding low-temperature (T → 0) values, i.e., μ = 1 for stress-free and μ = 2 for stressed graphene. We note the consistency of the simulation results with the principles of thermodynamics, in particular with the third law. This means that thermal expansion coefficients have to vanish for T → 0, as found for both the in-plane area A p and the real area A derived from our simulations for P = 0 and P < 0. The same happens for the specific heat, i.e., c p → 0 for T → 0. FIG.