We used x-ray absorption spectroscopy to study the orbital symmetry and the energy band splitting of (111) LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 and LaAlO 3 /EuTiO 3 /SrTiO 3 heterostructures, hosting a quasi two-dimensional electron system (q2DES), and of a Ti-terminated (111) SrTiO 3 single crystal, also known to form a q2DES at its surface. We demonstrate that the bulk tetragonal Ti-3d D 4h crystal field is turned into trigonal D 3d crystal field in all cases. The symmetry adapted a 1g and e π g orbitals are non-degenerate in energy and their splitting, Δ, is positive at the bare STO surface but negative in the heterostructures, where the a 1g orbital is lowest in energy. These results demonstrate that the interfacial symmetry breaking induced by epitaxial engineering of oxide interfaces has a dramatic effect on their electronic properties, and it can be used to manipulate the ground state of the q2DES. Introduction Transition metal oxides are renowed for the novel physical phenomena emerging at their surfaces and interfaces, like the formation of a quasi-two-dimensional electron system (q2DES) at the interface between (001) 1 , (110) and (111) The D 4h symmetry is on the other hand naturally broken at the (111) SrTiO 3 surface, where the crystal field becomes trigonal owing to the D 3d symmetry (Fig. As matter of fact, interesting phenomena were theoretically predicted in (111) oxides, like non-trivial topological effects and the possibility of quantum Hall effect up to room temperature ARPES studies of the (111) STO surface state showed a Fermi surface interpreted as originating from the projection on the (111) plane of the confined and degenerate 3d xz , 3d yz , and 3d xy bands Here we have determined the orbital symmetry and splitting of the Ti-3d states at the (111) STO surface and at the (111) LAO/STO and LAO/ETO/STO interfaces by measuring, in total electron yield (TEY), the titanium L 2,3edge and the oxygen K-edge x-ray absorption spectra (XAS) and related x-ray linear dichroism (XLD). The TEY XAS and XLD spectra probe the interface electronic properties within a depth of about 3 nm from the interface. In all the (111) heterostructures we find that a D 3d symmetry replaces the tetragonal D 4h symmetry of bulk SrTiO 3 . Moreover, the a 1g and e π g orbitals are non-degenerate, and their splitting depends sensitively on the specific system analyzed, so that it is opposite in sign in the heterostructures compared to the bare (111) STO surface state. The XAS measurements were performed at the ID32 beamline of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) The samples were mounted on the XAS setups with the (111) surface in the vertical laboratory plane, and the vertical axis (V) parallel to the [101] crystallographic direction determined by x-ray diffraction, i.e. parallel to one of the three equivalent Ti-Ti bonds within the hexagonal surface lattice (Fig The XAS and XLD experimental spectra were compared to theoretical spectra obtained by atomic multiplet scattering calculations using the CTM4XAS code. In Fig. From the spectra acquired between 35° and 70°, we can determine the experimental out-of-plane dichroism, coincide, confirming that the dichroic signal is due to the inplane/out-of plane anisotropy. Moreover, the XLD 3 spectral shape of (111) heterostructures, shown in Fig. Before comparing the data to theoretical calculations, we discuss what would be the expected XLD 3 in case of D 4h symmetry, i.e, in a case where the bulk symmetry of STO is preserved up to the interface/surface unit cells probed by TEY-XLD (around 3 nm). Then the XLD 3 would be a combination of the I [001] and I [100] Ti L 2,3 XAS along the [001] and [100] directions, calculated in the D 4h symmetry. For example, the out of plane dichroism, XLD 3,000,@AB , would be given by [20]: while the in plane XLD ∥,000,@AB dichroism would be: Thus, if the tetragonal symmetry is preserved, with consequent degeneracy of the t 2g states, the dichroism would be zero also for the (111) STO surface. Moreover, even in the case of non-degenerate t 2g states, the non-vanishing XLDs would have opposite sign with respect to the XLD 3 = I [220] -I [022] of (001) heterostructures, and their shape would be similar to the one measured in the case of (110) LAO/STO In order to understand the effective symmetry of the novel electronic configuration, we fit the XAS and the XLD 3 spectra using atomic multiplet scattering calculations by the CTM4XAS code. Starting from the XAS analysis shown in Figure with It turns out that peaks A and C are roughly influenced by D τ , while B and D depend mainly on D σ . For (111) STO the best agreement is for D τ = -2.2 meV and D σ = 2 meV, corresponding to Δ = +8 meV, implying that the orbitals of e π g symmetry are the lowest in energy. We remind that the a 1g orbital is an equal weight linear combination of the pristine 3d xz 3d yz and 3d xy orbitals with real coefficients, while for the e π g the coefficients are complex numbers. Therefore, the orbital symmetry is quite different from the one expected in the case of bulk t 2g states simply projected on the (111) surface. The opposite case, is the one of the (111) LAO/ETO/STO (and LAO/STO) heterostructure, where we find Δ = -20 (-8) meV, i.e. the lowest energy lying orbitals have a 1g symmetry. It is important to underline that from the analysis it emerges that STO-based heterostructures are characterized by an electronic configuration which is close to a perfect t 2g 0 (3d 0 ) occupation. However, the integral of the XLD 3 spectra is not null, and in particular we find it small and slightly FIG. According to theory )( ) Therefore, the XAS intensity along a generic direction n = (n x , n y ,n z ) can be written as: where α x , α y , α z , are the angles formed by n and the base vectors, and: If the bulk symmetry of STO were preserved up to the interface/surface, it should happen that I [1,0,0] = I [0,1,0] ≠ I [0,0,1] , and therefore we could write: In our experimental setup, the direction of Linear Vertical (LV) polarization of the incident light is always parallel to the ] [ 1 10 crystallographic direction, independently on the angle θ between the normal to the sample surface (i.e., the [ ] 111 crystallographic direction) and the propagation vector of the incident light. On the contrary, the direction of Linear Horizontal (LH) polarization of the incident light forms an angle θ with the ] [ 1 2 1 crystallographic direction, lying in the ] [ 1 2 1 -[ ] 111 plane (cfr. Fig. 