In the context of NMR spectroscopy and MRI, the principle of reciprocity provides a convenient method for determining the reception sensitivity from the transmitted rf field pattern. The reciprocity principle for NMR was originally described by Hoult et al. [J. Magn. Reson. (1976),24, 71], and can be seen as being based on the broader Lorentz reciprocity principle, and similar theorems from antenna theory. One frequent application of the reciprocity principle is that for a single coil used for both transmission and detection, the transmit and receive fields can be assumed to be equal. This aspect is also where some of the conceptual difficulty of applying the theorem may be encountered. For example, the questions of whether one should use the complex conjugate field for detection, or whether one should apply the theorem in the rotating frame or the laboratory frame are often where considerable confusion may arise, and incorrect results may be derived. We attempt here to provide a helpful discussion of the application of the reciprocity principle in such a way as to clarify some of the confounding questions. In particular, we avoid the use of the 'negatively rotating frame', which is frequently mentioned in this context, since we consider it to unnecessarily complicate the matter. In addition, we also discuss the implications of the theorem The principle of reciprocity for magnetic resonance One particularly illustrative demonstration of the reciprocity principle consists of describing an experiment wherein one uses two coils, with one being driven by an ac or rf field and the other one connected to a detector/oscilloscope The electromotive force (emf) E induced in the receiving coil is given by where Φ is the flux through the coil determined by B M is the field produced by the magnetization, and the integral runs over the receiving coil area. The central NMR reciprocity expression is then where the integration is carried out over the sample volume V , M is the sample magnetization, and B 1 is the rf field generated by the receive coil at the position of the magnetization if a unit current were passed through it Considering that a derivative with respect to time in Eq. (3) needs to be carried out, it is convenient to express all relevant quantities in timeharmonic form, that is For simplicity, and in order to avoid introducing a new notation, we refer to all following field and magnetization quantities as time harmonic quantitites without introducing new symbols. Using this approach, the reciprocity relationship becomes Figure as shown in the Appendix. Here, ω is the Larmor frequency, I here would indicate the current passed through the receive coil to produce the B 1 field -it can be simply set to 1 A in order to adjust for the units correctly. It is also important to recognize that the most confusing aspects of reciprocity start from these expressions, not from their derivation. Here and in the following, it will be understood that M, and B 1 depend on position, but this will not be written explicitly for brevity of notation. A further notational simplification will be to consider for now only a single point in space (without taking the integral), the integral over the whole sample volume can be taken at the end without loss of generality. Thus, the starting point for the following discussion will hence be the time-harmonic expression with the proportionality constant being c = 1 I iω. As a consequence of considering a single point in space, the units for the E here would also be V/m 3 . Again, we refrain from using a new symbol or differential quantities for the benefit of readability. The most useful aspect of this expression for NMR purposes is obtained when one uses for M the magnetization produced as a result of the application of the rf field, which is further discussed below. Let's assume that we apply an rf field of the form which is written in terms of position-dependent amplitudes C x , C y , and phases α, and β. The field is modulated with the Larmor frequency ω and it may be rotated in the x -y plane at a given position (for example, further near the edges of a solenoid coil or a loop coil). There may also be positiondependent phase delays (for example, due to traveling wave, permittivity, or conductivity effects), which give rise to the phase angles α and β. These angles would also describe the situation where one may choose to delay one field with respect to the other, e.g. in a quadrature coil, for example, which will be discussed later. The phasor components B 1x and B 1y can be determined by comparing Eq. ( in which case one obtains with the phasor field given also as One can then decompose this expression into co-rotating and counterrotating field components to obtain where +C which is equivalent to As is common practice in NMR and related fields, one can safely discount the effect of the counter-rotating field, since it is away from resonance by twice the Larmor frequency. Keeping only the co-rotating component, one therefore obtains for the phasor B 1 by comparing Eqs. ( and to relate to a more familiar notation, one could also write using the definitions of Eq. ( For the purposes of this discussion, we will be neglecting relaxation, assume that we have a single resonance at ω, that the rf pulse is applied directly on resonance, and that we are applying the pulse to equilibrium z-magnetization. Furthermore, we do not consider any other internal interactions (e.g. couplings). According to the Bloch Equations, such a field will produce a magnetization where M 0 is the equilibrium magnetization, and θ = γ|B 1+ |τ , with τ being the pulse duration. The incurred phase of (-i) indicates that the magnetization lags the excitation field by 90 • . In vector notation, this expression would be At this stage, one may use the reciprocity relation to calculate the detected signal from Eq. ( with the second part indicating that the magnetization now contains only one rotating component. Plugging in the expression for M + and B 1 = B 1x x + B 1y y, one obtains This equation suggests that any position-or delay-dependent phases in the B 1 field would be eliminated by the scalar product, which is, however, not the case, because B 1-= B 1x -iB 1y = C x e iα -iC y e iβ (the exponentials are not conjugated), and thus with the result of phase doubling in α and β. This effect is also in line with Eq. (28) of Ref. If both the coil and the spins were physically rotated by the same angle around the static magnetic field (by rotating the whole apparatus, for example), no global phase factor would arise, because the procedure of the scalar product in Eqs. (22, 8) would eliminate such a phase. In the general case, however, say if the coil and the spins were rotated by different amounts, an additional phase would arise in the complex-valued emf E. Both, relative physical rotation (between coil and magnetization), and time delay in the transmit field can produce a phase, and hence one can compensate one with the other, which is the strategy employed with quadrature coils (see below). The property of uncanceled phases lies at the heart of the ability to detect material-induced phases, and is used in electrical property tomography (EPT) A simple example of the application of Eq. ( √ μ being the speed of the wave in the medium. In this case α = β = kx. Applying the expression from Eq. ( and the phase originally contained in B 1+ is doubled as noted before! This is in stark contrast with the phase originating from a global rotation, which cancels out. As has been mentioned by Hoult 4 Using different coils for excitation and detection We will now distinguish between transmit and receive fields, so all relevant quantities, such as B ± , C x,y , α, β, θ will receive a superscript of either t for transmit-or r for receive-related quantities. Following the same procedure as above to derive the emf, but keeping the transmit (B t 1⊥ ) and the receive fields (B r 1⊥ ) separate, one obtains for the equivalent of Eq. ( with θ t = γ|B t 1+ |τ . The equivalent of Eq. ( Here again, it is obvious that any propagation-related phases (due to delays) would add with the same sign. For a rotation in space, we have for a counter-clockwise rotaiton by φ r , and φ t , respectively and if both were reotated by the same angle φ = φ t = φ r , then the phase would be canceled in the product B t 1+ B r 1-of the reciprocity relation (Eqs. (22,27)). Quadrature coils are often employed by placing two coils at an angle of φ = π/2 with respect to each other (Fig. Because the receive phase φ r enters the equation with the opposite sign (Eqs. (29)), in receive mode, the situation is exactly reversed. Therefore, to make sure that the signal combines constructively in detection mode, the signal induced in the second coil now has to be advanced in phase by π/2 relative to the signal of the first coil before combining them. Therefore, for the recorded signal, the overall phase difference between the signals acquired from each coil would be eliminated. It is clear that this constructive interference in both the transmit and receive mode will not work perfectly over the whole volume but will only be observed in those locations where the geometrical relationship between the two fields is matched by the phase advance (or lag) in the signals supplied to (or received from) the coils. Along the same lines, one can analyze a birdcage coil or phased arrays that are supplied with appropriately phase-shifted fields such that the fields they produce combine constructively in the region of interest. In these situations, it is customary to speak of the transmit "B 1+ " field and the receive "B 1-" field. It should be emphasized that the "B 1+ " and "B 1-" labels here refer simply to the way in which the supplied signals are timeshifted with respect to each other in order to compensate for geometryinduced phases and do not represent the actual quantities in the rotating frame! It is more correct to speak of 'a coil polarization' mode. This is a point of much confusion, stoked by the use of multiple conventions and notions of the 'counter-rotating frame' in the context of reciprocity, because it creates the impression that one should use these quantities directly in Eq. ( For example, in electric property tomography The problem of determining transmit and receive fields under these circumstances is rooted in practical and fundamental limitations. If the phase compensation were working perfectly for all locations of interest, there would be no overall transmit or receive phase. One limitation arises from misalignment, spatial distribution of field directions, and the fact that quadrature coils cannot be completely isolated, and a more serious problem arises from the influence of the sample on the fields. Specifically, a significant conductivity in the sample will produce an imbalance between the B 1-and B 1+ fields Note, that it may seem that there should be no difference in B 1-and B 1+ fields if a single coil were driven with linear polarization. A sample displaying a significant amount of conductivity would again produce an imbalance between those two fields as described by Vaidya et al. We now examine the case where the rf field enters a conductive region, and specifically focus on the situation of a good conductor for the purposes of illustrating the phase doubling effect. We follow here closely results presented in Ref. ??. In such a case, one obtains the expression for the rf field from the Maxwell equations, The solution to these equations leads to the plane-wave expression with B 10 the rf field at the surface of the conductor, n, a unit vector, denoting the propagation direction, r the location vector, and κ + and κ -the real and imaginary parts of the wave vector, κ = κ + + iκ -, defined by Here, ε is the dielectric constant of the conductor and c the speed of light in a vacuum. For a good conductor 2σ νε 1 and κ + ≈ κ -≈ 1/δ (the inverse of the skin depth constant defined in Eq. ( where ν is the frequency of the field, μ the permeability of the conductor and σ its conductivity. As an example, for lithium metal, σ = 1.08 × 10 7 S/m and ε ≈ ε 0 = 8.85 × 10 -12 F/m at radio frequencies, defining Li as a good conductor in the frequency regime ν 2.44 × 10 18 Hz, and thus well beyond the radio-frequency and microwave regions. When incident on a well-conducting surface, assuming that the surface extends to infinity, the boundary conditions dictate that only the rf field parallel to the surface remains, and the field within the conductor in the rotating frame can be described by B1 (r) = B 10 e -r/δ e ir/δ , ( where r denotes the penetration distance from the surface. The rf field decays exponentially and it also acquires a phase shift linear in the propagation depth, as illustrated in Fig. where θ(0) is the flip angle at the surface of the conductor. Using this field in Eq. ( e 2ir/δ e -r/δ sin [θ(r)] dr. The phase term e 2ir/δ illustrates the aforementioned phase-doubling effect, and governs the extent of constructive or destructive interference between the signals from different depths. An expression equivalent to Eq. ( A sensitive verification of Eq. ( The nutation curve for lithium metal was obtained on a Bruker Ultrashield 9.4 T Avance I spectrometer operating at 155.5 MHz for 7 Li, using a Bruker 1 H 7 Li WB40 birdcage coil for acquisition. The nominal flip angle was calibrated to LiCl(aq) (τ π/2 = 38 μs). The sample consisted of a strip of natural abundance lithium metal (Aldrich 99.9%) cut to ca. 0.4 x 8 x 15 mm and sealed inside a 10 mm NMR tube. Spectra were acquired on resonance with the center of the metal peak and the plotted intensity profiles corresponding to the on-resonance position in the spectrum. There is excellent agreement between the experimental curve and the calculated one, particularly at lower flip angles < 3π. Bloch equation simulations including relaxation during the pulse and rf inhomogeneity (20% variation in B 10 We have attempted to provide here a concise summary of the issues encountered in discussions of NMR reciprocity. We specifically avoid the discussion of the negatively rotating frame, which we believe is the source of some confusion, and attempt to delineate other related topics, such as quadrature Figure We show here one particular derivation of the reciprocity principle. This one is based on Ref. The fields used in the expressions below will be the time-harmonic fields, given by the definitions The fields generated by the magnetization M will be labeled H M 1 , B M 1 , and E M , and the expression κ = σ + iω will be used. With these definitions, we have for the relevant Maxwell Equations in the space without magnetization (including a contribution from a filamentary current flow J c ), and in the space where magnetization is present, but without current. To derive the reciprocity expression, one can start by calculating the emf induced by unit current. The induced emf (also time-harmonic here) is then given as follows: The integrals on the right-hand-sides go over all space. The first term in the last expression can be cast into a surface integral by the Divergence theorem, It is standard practice then to take the surface integral at infinity. Using the fact that the terms under the integral drop off faster than 1/r 2 , one can then assume this term to become zero. Continuing with this adjustment, one obtains Other recommended derivations include those by Haacke 