In this article, we study non-trivial topological phase and electron-hole compensation in extremely large magnetoresistance (XMR) material YSb under hydrostatic pressure using first-principles calculations. YSb is topologically trivial at ambient pressure, but undergoes a reentrant topological phase transition under hydrostatic pressure. The reentrant behavior of topological quantum phase is then studied as a function of charge density ratio under pressure. From the detailed investigation of Fermi surfaces, it is found that electron to hole densities ratio increases with pressure, however a non-trivial topological phase appears without perfect electron-hole compensation. The results indicate that the non-trivial topological phase under hydrostatic pressure may not have maximal influence on the magnetoresistance, and need further investigations through experiments to determine the exact relationship between topology and XMR effect. Topological insulators (TI) are of supreme interest to the scientific community in recent years because of their extraordinary properties for applications in quantum computing and spintronics More recently, extremely large magnetoresistance (XMR) materials like WTe 2 Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) is used for electronic structure calculations within the framework of Density Functional Theory (DFT) YSb is found to have rocksalt crystal structure at ambient pressure with a space group of Fm 3m (225) in which 'Sb' atom is present at the origin (0, 0, 0), and 'Y' atom is present at (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) It is found that valence band and conduction band of YSb are crossing the Fermi level for both the functionals, and are semi-metallic in nature On increasing the pressure in YSb, there is an increase in the overlap between their valence band and conduction band, and a band inversion between p-orbitals of 'Sb' atom and d -orbitals (t 2g ) of 'Y' atom is observed on X point at 2.5 GPa using PBE functionals, while at 15 GPa using HSE functionals [Figure We have also calculated the Z 2 topological invariant for YSb to confirm the non-trivial topological phase at different applied pressures. In three dimensions, the topological insulator has four Z 2 invariants (ν 0 ; ν 1 ν 2 ν 3 ), and value of the first Z 2 topological invariant ν 0 = 1 implies a strong topological phase, while ν 0 = 0 implies either a weak TI phase or topologically trivial At ambient pressure, band structure of YSb shows no band inversion at any TRIM point using both the functionals, and its first Z 2 topological invariant (ν 0 ) comes out to be 0, according to Kane and Mele criterion The above results demonstrate that multiple topological phases can be realized in the same material on increasing pressure, which can be verified experimentally by performing Berry phase measurements. The observation of reentrant behavior in topological phase under hydrostatic pressure in XMR material YSb provides another platform to study it with electron-hole compensation, which may help in determining the correlation between topology and XMR effect. To investigate electron to hole density ratio (n e /n h ) as a function of hydrostatic pressure, Fermi surface needs to be plotted at different applied pressures. For this, first we calculated the Fermi surface of YSb at ambient pressure using both GGA and HSE functionals including the SOC effect. For PBE functionals, a k-mesh of 20×20×20 is used to construct the MLWF, while 10×10×10 is used for HSE functionals. The n e /n h ratio for YSb at ambient pressure using PBE and HSE functionals comes out to be 0.947 and 0.819, respectively, where the value calculated from HSE functionals is well below the experimental value of 0.95 It can be seen from the band structures of YSb at ambient pressure and their corresponding pressures of topological phases [Figure No. (a) Ambient pressure of the valence bands are crossing the Fermi level at Γ point, thereby leading to three hole pockets at Γ point. Meanwhile, only one of the conduction bands are crossing the Fermi level at X point in both the band structures of YSb, thereby forming only one electron pocket at X point [Figure It is observed that the values of electron density (n e ), hole density (n h ), and their ratio calculated for YSb increases with pressure. From two-band model, magnetoresistance (MR) deduced for materials having both types of charge carriers is where, n e and μ e represents electron density and electron mobility, respectively, while n h and μ h represents hole density and hole mobility, respectively; and B is the external magnetic field. For a given mobility of charge carriers, the magnetoresistance would be maximum for perfect electron-hole compensation It is concluded that XMR material YSb undergoes reentrant topological quantum phase transition under hydrostatic pressure. From the detailed Fermi surface calculations, it is found that the ratio of n e /n h increases with the pressure, but perfect electron-hole compensation is absent in non-trivial topological phase. It indicates that non-trivial topological phase may appear without a maximal effect on the magnetoresistance under hydrostatic pressure, and need further experimental investigations to understand the exact relationship between non-trivial band topology and XMR effect.