In most superconductors the transition to the superconducting state is driven by the binding of electrons into Cooper-pairs. The condensation of these pairs into a single, phase coherent, quantum state takes place concomitantly with their formation at the transition temperature, Tc. A different scenario occurs in some disordered, amorphous, superconductors: Instead of a pairing-driven transition, incoherent Cooper pairs first pre-form above Tc, causing the opening of a pseudogap, and then, at Tc, condense into the phase coherent superconducting state. Such a two-step scenario implies the existence of a new energy scale, ∆c, driving the collective superconducting transition of the preformed pairs. Here we unveil this energy scale by means of Andreev spectroscopy in superconducting thin films of amorphous indium oxide. We observe two Andreev conductance peaks at ±∆c that develop only below Tc and for highly disordered films on the verge of the transition to insulator. Our findings demonstrate that amorphous superconducting films provide prototypical disordered quantum systems to explore the collective superfluid transition of preformed Cooper-pairs pairs. While a small amount of (non-magnetic) disorder weakly affects superconductivity Recently a body of tunneling experiments performed on different disordered thin films On these grounds theory predicts that a second energy scale, ∆ c , may be at play to drive the collective, BCS-type, superconducting transition of the preformed pairs As earlier proposed in the context of high T c superconductors Here we report on Andreev spectroscopy performed on superconducting thin films of amorphous indium oxide (a:InO) on the verge of the insulating state The chief result of this work is presented in figure We begin by noting that for the low point-contact conductance (botton curve in Fig For conventional, low disorder superconductors, Andreev process at the interface leads to a monotonous increase of conductance inside the gap ultimately reaching, for perfect transparency, twice the contact conductance The termination of the Andreev peaks at T T c that we observe in all our samples clearly indicates that they relate to coherent superconductivity. This is in stark contrast with the T -evolution of the single-particle tunneling gap E g , which remains unchanged at T c , and only vanishes further at several times T c , resulting in the appearance of the pseudogap in the single-particle densityof-states On a theoretical standpoint a body of works on disordered superconductivity now converges to account for the pseudogap by the pre-formation of Cooper-pairs above T c The two energy scales discussed in this work span on two clearly distinct ranges that are illustrated in Figure Finally, to demonstrate that the Andreev peaks stem from the high level of disorder in our films and the proximity to the insulator, we conducted identical measurements on a low disorder a:InO film (sample InO-4) that behaves in all points as a conventional dirty superconductor To conclude, the scenario drawn by our observations contrasts with standard BCS superconductors. The second energy scale we uncover together with the pseudogap comply with a two-step transition to superconductor, which develops, first, far above T c with the preformation of Cooper-pairs and follows at lower T by the collective condensation of the preformed pairs into a macroscopically phase coherent superconducting state. The nature of such a superconducting state that develops in disordered superconductors bordering insulators, defies conventional theories and shall inspire new theoretical paradigms for superconductivity. Our samples are disordered thin films of amorphous indium oxide. The films are prepared by electron-beam evaporation of high purity (99.99%) In 2 O 3 onto SiO 2 in an O 2 partial pressure. Samples were patterned into Hall bridges via a shadow mask to perform in-situ four-terminal transport measurements in the STM set-up and thus direct comparison between macroscopic and microscopic superconducting properties. Measurements Tunneling and Andreev spectroscopy measurements were performed with a home-built STM cooled down to 0.05 K in an inverted dilution refrigerator. By varying the STM setpoint current from 1 nA to 1 μA with a bias voltage of a few millivolts, we tuned the junction resistance in the range 1 -1000 kΩ and thus explored continuously the whole transition from tunneling to contact regime. The differential conductance G(V ) = dI dV of the junction was measured with a lock-in amplifier technique with a voltage modulation of 10 -30 μV. The T -evolutions of the resistivity for the samples are shown in Figure In order to estimate the spectral gap E g of the oneparticle density of states, we fit the low conductance point-contact data with BCS theory. Figure This section is devoted to a detailed characterization of InO-4 sample, whose disorder, according to its T c (see supplemental section I), is much weaker than the critical disorder of the superconductor-insulator transition in a:InO films. The thermal evolution of the one-particle density of states was measured in tunneling regime (tunneling conductance of 0.09 e 2 /h) and is displayed in the two-dimensional color plot of Figure 