The anomalous Hall effect, observed in conducting ferromagnets with broken time-reversal symmetry, offers the possibility to couple spin and orbital degrees of freedom of electrons in ferromagnets. In addition to charge, the anomalous Hall effect also leads to spin accumulation at the surfaces perpendicular to both the current and magnetization direction. Here we experimentally demonstrate that the spin accumulation, subsequent spin backflow, and spin-charge conversion can give rise to a different type of spin current related magnetoresistance, dubbed here as the anomalous Hall magnetoresistance, which has the same angular dependence as the recently discovered spin Hall magnetoresistance. The anomalous Hall magnetoresistance is observed in four types of samples: co-sputtered (Fe1-xMnx)0.6Pt0.4, Fe1-xMnx/Pt multilayer, Fe1-xMnx with x = 0.17 -0.65 and Fe, and analyzed using the drift-diffusion model. Our results provide an alternative route to study charge-spin conversion in ferromagnets and to exploit it for potential spintronic applications. Magnetoresistance (MR) in ferromagnetic (FM) materials and related heterostructures plays essential roles both in fundamental understanding of magnetism and electron transport in these structures and in various technological applications Recently, anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in FM has attracted attention as an alternative mechanism for generating spin current or SOT in FM/NM multilayers. When a charge current j c flows in an FM in the longitudinal direction, spin-up and spin-down electrons are deflected to opposite transverse directions via extrinsic mechanisms like skew scattering and side-jump or intrinsic mechanism related to band structure of the material Angle dependent magnetoresistance. As depicted in Figs. To illustrate the difference in two cases, we illustrate in Figs. 1a and 1b the distribution of net j s t in a colormap, the deeper the color the larger the net spin current. On the other hand, in the case of m||x (see Fig. To experimentally characterize the AHMR, we fabricated four types of samples (see Fig. 2b -2e for fitting). Furthermore, the magnitude of MR(θxy) is the sum of the magnitude of MR(θzx) and MR(θzy) (the small difference may be due to slightly different saturation state in the three rotation directions). These features are in good agreement with the SMR observed in metallic FM/HM bilayers Before ending this section, it is worth pointing out that there is a small deviation from the sin 2 θ zx or -sin 2 θ zy dependence in the fitting data shown in Figs. 2b -2e, and the deviation increases with the saturation magnetization. Numerical simulation by using the experimentally derived demagnetizing field in z-direction (Hd) confirms that this is caused by the slight deviation of the magnetization direction from the external field direction when it is rotating in the zx-or zy-plane, though the latter (30 kOe in this case) is much higher than Hd where d and l s are the thickness and spin diffusion length of FM, respectively, β is the polarization for longitudinal conductivity, θ AH is the anomalous Hall angle, and A is the AMR ratio. Apparently, Eq. ( contains both AMR and AHMR contributions. In order to have an anatomical view of the spin-charge conversion process that leads to the AHMR, we plot the normalized spin accumulation μ s /μ s (0), spin (2) where j c is the original applied charge current in x-direction, σ xx is the conductivity, e is the electron charge, and the rest of parameters are already defined as above. The second term in the brackets of Eqs. (3) and ( In contrast, in the case of m||z, the cancellation is mainly confined in the vicinity of the two side edges: j s t in the remaining region remains almost intact because w >> ls (see Fig. ) , exhibits a quadratic relationship with θ AH , which is in good agreement with the ADMR data shown in Fig. The range for β and l s are chosen to cover most of the ferromagnets. Therefore, besides (Fe1-xMnx)0.6Pt0.4, we also added the results for Fe1-xMnx, Fe1-xPtx, and Fe in the same figure (all have a thickness of 9 nm). The anomalous Hall angle were varied by changing either the Mn or Pt composition (except for Fe). Despite the variation in composition, the AHMR for all these Fe-based films indeed show a quadratic dependence on θ AH , as manifested in the dotted line, which is the fitting result for (Fe1-xMnx)0.6Pt0.4 obtained by using β = 0.55 and l s = 3.5 nm. As we will discuss shortly, similar range of values can also fit the thickness-dependence of AHMR as predicted by Eq. ( Thickness dependence of AHMR. Fig. ], here ρ xx0 is the bulk resistivity, p is the specular reflectivity, d 0 is the roughness, and lf is the electron mean free path As discussed above, the AHMR has been observed in co-sputtered (Fe1-xMnx)0.6Pt0.4, Fe1-xMnx/Pt multilayer, Fe1-xMnx with x = 0.17 -0.65 and Fe. The resistivity and magnetization of these samples were varied systematically using both the Mn composition and layer thickness, which in turn allows us to use scaling analysis to examine the AHE origin of the observed MR. Both the magnitude and thickness dependence of the MR (> spin diffusion length) are in reasonable agreement with those calculated from an analytical model based on the drift-diffusion formalism. The FeMnPt based materials were chosen because they exhibit a relatively large AHE, and importantly the size of AHE can be tuned by adjusting the chemical composition. However, on the other hand, these materials are relatively new and their magnetic and electrical properties are less understood across the composition range. It will be of importance to confirm if the AHMR is also present in other others whose magnetic properties have been thoroughly investigated and well understood. One possible approach is to tune the AHE of Py by adjusting the Fe composition and see if there is any correlation between AHE and MR(θzy), though the weak AHE may pose a challenge in interpreting the experimental data. Another candidate for investigating the AHMR is the class of materials with giant AHE reported recently Sample preparation. All samples were deposited on SiO2(300 nm)/Si substrates using DC magnetron sputtering with a base and working pressure of 2×10 [Fe1-xMnx(0.6)/Pt(0.4)]10 multilayer samples were prepared by sequential deposition of Fe1-xMnx and Pt layers in a repeated manner, while (Fe1-xMnx)0.6Pt0.4 samples were deposited by co-sputtering of Fe0.8Mn0.2, Mn, and Pt. The chemical composition of all the samples was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Standard photolithography and liftoff techniques were used to fabricate the Hall bar, which consists of a mesa 1.1 mm long and 100 m wide, with four 50 m wide and 200 m long protrusions placed at sides of the bar as voltage probes. A Microtech laserwriter system with a 405 nm laser was employed to directly expose the substrates after coating the negative photoresist Microposit S1805. After exposure, the substrates were then soaked in developer MF319 to form the Hall bar pattern. After deposition using sputtering, the photoresist was removed by the mixture of PG remover and acetone, and the metallic patterns are left on the substrates. Characterization. Structural properties of the samples were characterized using a Rigaku X-ray diffraction (XRD) system with Cu Kα radiation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on PHI Quantera II XPS Scanning Microprobe from Ulvac-PHI with a beam spot size of 50 μm. In addition, high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM, a JEOL ARM200F) was employed to directly image the multilayer samples. Magnetic properties were characterized using a Quantum Design vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) with the samples cut into a size of 4 mm × 3 mm. The resolution of the system is better than 6×10 -7 emu. The electrical measurements were also performed using the same Quantum Design system at a bias current of 100 μA. To confirm the structure of the multilayer sample, we employed high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM, a JEOL ARM200F) to directly image a multilayer sample consisting of [Fe0.5Mn0.5(0.6)/Pt(0.6)]30. For a better recognition of the individual layer, the Pt thickness is slightly increased to be equal to that of FeMn, and the repetition period is also increased to 30. Supplementary Figure Supplementary Figures where M(0) is the magnetization at T = 0 K, TC is the Curie temperature, s is the so-called shape parameter with a value in the range of 0 -2.5, and b is the critical exponent whose value is determined by the universality class of the material: 0.125 for two-dimensional Ising, 0.325 for three-dimensional (3D) Ising, 0.346 for 3D XY, 0.365 for 3D Heisenberg, and 0.5 for mean-field theory for FeMn and FeMn/Pt multilayers and x = 0.6 for FeMnPt alloy). However, at higher Mn compositions, the M-T curves tend to deviate from that described by Supplementary Equation 1 with the s value out of its normal range; therefore we did not fit these curves and leave the parameters as N.A. in the table. The deviation is presumably caused by the onset of AFM ordering, and therefore, understandably, their M-T curves will not follow that of the FM. According to M. D. Kuz`min et al., for 3D Heisenberg magnets, s is determined by the dependence of exchange interaction on interatomic distance Supplementary Table As a supplementary reference, FDMR results are shown in Supplementary Figures here δ and χ are the misalignment polar and azimuth angles, respectively. The free energy density (normalized to saturation magnetization) is given by 2 2 2 d cos (sin cos sin cos sin sin sin sin cos cos ) sin cos where θ and φ are the polar and azimuth angles of the magnetization, respectively; is the anisotropy field; and Hd is the demagnetizing field. Here, due to the sample geometry, the easy axis is assumed to be in x-axis, parallel to the current direction. Supplementary Equation 3 can be solved numerically to obtain the equilibrium angle φ and θ as a function of H.      , the MR ratio can be written as: sin cos sin sin By using ) deviation of the magnetization with respect to the external field during zx-or zy-plane rotation in the presence of a moderate demagnetizing field (Hd). In a similar way, Supplementary Equation 3 can be used to numerically calculate the equilibrium angle φ and θ during the field rotation. Here, we look at the zyplane rotation case as an example, and the zx-plane rotation case is similar. We let χ = 90 ̊, H = 30 kOe and vary δ from 0 to 360 ̊. From the AHE measurements in Supplementary Figure Supplementary Figures Hall resistivity in FM metals can be empirically written as 14 : 0 z s ( ) Previous reports suggested that such kind of behavior may come from the geometric size effect (GSE) in thin films When m is in y-direction, the spin current flows in z-direction. In this case, the spin is accumulated at the surface or interface of the film. Since now d is comparable to s l , the spin accumulation leads to a backflow of spin current which would greatly reduce the total spin current, and it cancels some of the AHE induced extra resistance. The general solution of spin diffusion equation ( Average the above spin current over the thickness, one has the total transverse spin current, longitudinal charge current and resistivity in this case as When m is in x-direction, there is no transverse spin current and thus no extra-resistance. However, the conventional anisotropy magnetoresistance (AMR) would appear, and this leads to the total transverse spin current, longitudinal charge current and resistivity as To examine whether the observed MR(θzy) originates from AHE, we conducted scaling analysis by measuring MR(θzy) in samples with fixed thickness but different AHE strength. Specifically, we varied the AHE strength by adjusting the Mn composition in FeMn/Pt, FeMnPt z M H