Converse magnetoelectric coupling in artificial multiferroics is generally modelled through three possible mechanisms: charge transfer, strain mediated or ion migration. Here we demonstrate a novel and highly reliable approach, where electrically controlled morphological modifications control the ferromagnetic response of a magnetoelectric heterostructure, specifically FexMn1-x ferromagnetic films on ferroelectric PMN-PT (001) substrates. The ferroelectric PMN-PT substrates present, in correspondence to electrical switching, fully reversible morphological changes at the surface, to which correspond reproducible modifications of the ferromagnetic response of the FexMn1-x films. Topographic analysis by atomic force microscopy shows the formation of surface cracks after application of a positive electric field up to 6 kV/cm, which disappear after application of negative voltage of the same amplitude. In-operando x-ray magnetic circular dichroic spectroscopy at Fe edge in FexMn1-x layers shows local variations of dichroic signal up to a factor 2.5 as a function of the electrically-driven morphological state. These findings highlight the role of morphology and surface topography as a key aspect in magnetoelectric coupling, whose proof of electrically reversible modification of the magnetic response adds a new possibility in the design of multiferroic heterostructures with electrically controlled functionalities. In recent years, the possibility of controlling the magnetization of a thin film with an electric field has driven a tremendous research effort. Here we present evidence of a new mechanism responsible of converse magnetoelectric coupling. By combining x-ray magnetic dichroism (XMCD) and atomic force microscopy, we observed a correlation between electrically induced mesoscopic morphological transitions and magnetic response. Specifically, samples showed the appearance and annihilation of surface cracks by electrically switching the ferroelectric state of the substrate; the two morphological states display significantly different magnetic properties, which are fully reversible after ferroelectric switch. To this scope a series of 4 nm thick FexMn1-x films were deposited on 0.6Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3-0.4PbTiO3 (PMN-PT) (001) single crystal substrates by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) via codeposition from Fe and Mn evaporators. FeMn thin films were then capped by 3 nm MgO protecting layer (Figure repeating the same half electric loop several hours after the switch gave no sign of electrical peak. This demonstrates that the time stability of the PMN-PT substrate largely exceeds the XMCD and atomic force microscopy measuring time. To define the x ratio at which the AFM/FM transition takes place, we carried out Kerr effect measurements on different samples. Figure Figure Figure In order to verify if such a behavior is characteristic of the proximity of FeMn layer to the AFM/FM transition, we repeated local in-operando XMCD investigations on the pure iron sample. Whereas in the pristine case the Fe film showed full magnetization, the effect of electrically polarizing the sample led to local variations of the dichroic signal intensity, similarly to what observed in the case of x = 0.89, but with reduced intensity. Indeed, we measured variations of L3 XMCD intensity which span from an increase of a factor 1.12 ± 0.03 passing from Pdown to Pup states (Figure The PMN-PT(001) substrates present a rich surface morphology, which is transferred to the thin layers deposited onto them. The surface is covered by island-like areas of different dimensions, ranging from tens to fractions of μm width. The height of the islands (in green in Figures In addition to such morphology, the sample presents a second mesoscopic morphological feature, whose characteristics are sensitive to the electrical history of the sample. Indeed, Figure These variations were even visible by the optical microscope of the atomic force microscopy instrument. Figure Such impressive electrically-driven morphological features are extremely intriguing from both the ferroelectric and the magnetoelectric points of view. Regarding the former one, it is known that ferroelectric/elastic materials tend to be fragile; As known, local defects and dislocations play an important role in magnetism, acting either as nucleation points for domain wall or at the opposite as pinning points during magnetization reversal; at remanence, they can modify both the coercive field and the total magnetic moment by locally creating non-uniform magnetization or spin glass states. The reproducibility of the magnetic responses after morphological modifications shows that such changes of the magnetic interactions can be reversibly broken and reformed, despite mechanical fractures take place on the surface of the sample and across the FeMn thin film. Since the density of cracks formed after electrical switch is randomly distributed over the sample surface, its effects on the magnetic response varies randomly according to the probed zone. For this reason, the amplitude of the converse magnetoelectric effect on a probed area is affected by the local morphology, spreading from huge coupling effects to none. These findings add a new player in the interfacial coupling of artificial heterostructures, whose amplitude, as it is the case for our study, can overpass the one attributed to charge or strain effects. Also for our case of study, we cannot exclude the presence and contribution of other coupling mechanisms in our system. As previously stated, on one side charges are accumulated at the interface with FexMn1-x after the current peak measured in I(E) curves, and on the other one polarization reversal of PMN-PT creates large strains at ferroelectric boundaries because of the 109° angle of polarization switching between domains. Ongoing studies of the relative weight of these aspects are under investigation. Nonetheless, such effects do not explain the huge variations of magnetoelectric response depending on the measurement zone on the sample, which arrive to invert completely the observed effect, thus demonstrating the dominant role of the morphology in this system. This new mechanism of electrically-induced variation of magnetic response offers a wide range of possibilities through which the morphological driven magnetoelectric coupling could be maximized, such as using magnetostrictive materials (FeGa or Ni) as a metallic layer or patterning the ferroelectric substrate to gain control on the induced modifications. In summary, we have reported how FexMn1-x/PMN-PT samples experience electrically induced reversible morphological changes, with the formation and annihilation of surface cracks of tens of nm depth. Such morphological modifications of the substrate are transferred from the PMN-PT substrate to the thin FexMn1-x layer, leading to huge and reversible modifications of its ferromagnetic response. These findings add a new degree of control of magnetism driven by an electrical field and make surface morphology an additional important parameter that opens new promising possibilities in the design of new multiferroic heterostructures with enhanced performances. FexMn1-x thin films of 4 nm thickness were deposited by MBE co-deposition from Fe and Mn crucibles on (001)-oriented PMN-PT single crystal substrates (5 x 5 x 0.5 mm 3 ) at room temperature, with a base pressure of 1 x 10 -9 mbar. x ratio was modulated by varying the deposition rates of the two evaporators, which were calibrated by quartz microbalance. Deposition rate was fixed at 1.9 Å/min for Fe evaporator and ranged from 0.19 to 1.9 Å/min for Mn evaporator. Samples were then capped by 3 nm thick MgO layer with 0.57 Å/min deposition rate. All substrates were in pristine state during deposition. PMN-PT single crystal substrates were purchased from SurfaceNet GmbH. Longitudinal Kerr effect measurements were done at ambient pressure, room temperature condition using a s-polarized blue laser (435 nm) and intensity modulation at 815 Hz. All measurements have been taken ex situ after MBE deposition. Laser spot size is about 500 μm 2 . Coercive field is calculated as hysteresis loop half width at zero magnetization. Electrical contacts onto FeMn film were made via contacting a gold wire on top of the surface and using a conductive silver paint contact on the bottom part. The two electrically isolated contacts of the sample holder were connected to a Keithley 6485 picoammeter /voltage source at room temperature. Measurements were taken both in UHV conditions and in air, with no changes in the electrical response. I(E) curves shown in the article were taken with a NPLC of 1. Atomic force microscopy measurements were acquired by A100 microscope of A.P.E. Research. Cantilevers with stiffness of 40 Nm and lenght of 125 micrometers were used.The sample was measured at ambient pressure at zero voltage, after cycling the electric field to positive or negative saturation using the sample holder connections in the measurement position. Tip was lifted during the application of the bias to avoid surface damaging during the morphological transitions. All measurements were performed at room temperature, in total electron yield (TEY) mode, normalizing the intensity of the sample current to the incident photon flux current at each energy value. Absorption spectra were taken in circular polarization, with the sample surface at 45° with respect to the incident beam. In this condition, the footprint of the x ray on the sample surface covers an area of ~150 μm 2 . XMCD spectra were recorded at remanence, alternating magnetic field pulses of ±300 Oe in the surface plane at each energy point of the spectra, to saturate sample magnetization. The spectra are presented normalizing to 1 the sum of the intensity of the L3 lines. The difference between the two resulting curves gives the dichroic signal; XMCD signal expressed structural transitions