We have studied the domain wall resistance in W/Ta/CoFeB/MgO heterostructures. The Ta layer thickness is varied to control the type of domain walls via changes in the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interaction. We find a nearly constant domain wall resistance against the Ta layer thickness. Adding contributions from the anisotropic magnetoresistance, spin Hall magnetoresistance and anomalous Hall effect describe well the domain wall resistance of the thick Ta layer films. However, a discrepancy remains for the thin Ta layer films wherein chiral Néel-like domain walls are found. These results show the difficulty of studying the domain wall type from resistance measurements. The Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) Local changes in the DMI at the HM/FM interface has been reported to be non-negligible Here we study DW resistance in Sub/W/Ta/CoFeB/MgO heterostructures. A thin Ta layer is inserted between the W and CoFeB layers to vary the strength of the DMI. We compare the DW resistance with calculations that includes contributions from the AMR, the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) Despite the large SMR, these results show the difficulty of evaluating the type of DW using simple resistance measurements. Films are grown on Si substrates using magnetron sputtering. Figure Figures The transport properties of the films are summarized in Figs. Hall loop shift One well known DW resistance that may influence the measurements is the so-called intrinsic contribution due to spin accumulation at the DW As the intrinsic contribution is typically positive Recently, it has been reported that a chiral DW resistance appears in system with large spin orbit coupling According to Ref. We estimate R nop ~2 mW for chiral Néel DWs if we take R Vr from the thicker Ta films wherein no chiral DW resistance is assumed. As a few approximations are made in the formula above, further investigation is required to clarify contribution from the chiral DW resistance. In summary, we have studied the DW resistance in W/Ta/CoFeB/MgO heterostructures as a function of Ta insertion layer thickness. The thickness of the Ta layer influences the DW type (Néel-like walls or Bloch walls) via changes in the Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interaction. In constrast, we find the DW resistance shows little variation with the Ta layer thickness. The DW resistance of the thick Ta layer films can be accounted for by taking into consideration the SMR and AHE of the heterostructures. However, a discrepancy remains for the thin Ta layer films, wherein the DWs are chiral Néel-like DWs. We infer that chiral DW resistance, or other unknown source, contributes to the resistance in such systems. These results show that, despite the large SMR, DW resistance measurements cannot be used to identify the type of DWs. 