In this present work, friction and wear behavior of UNCD thin film has been studied against three different sliding counterbodies i.e. Al 2 O 3 , SiC and steel balls. UNCD/steel sliding pair showed high friction coefficient in the beginning of the sliding process which decreased to the lower value after longer sliding passes. This behavior might be explained by oxidation mechanism. However, high friction value was observed in the case of UNCD/SiC and this was attributed to strong adhesive force acting across the sliding interfaces. Stable and low friction value was measured in UNCD/Al 2 O 3 sliding combination. This was governed by chemically inert interfaces and graphite tribolayer formation. Carbon based thin films are important for tribological applications due to their tunable microstructure and chemical properties. Nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) and ultra-nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD) thin films showed improved friction and wear resistance properties The UNCD film was grown on mirror polished silicon (100) substrate in microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (MPECVD, 2.45 GHz 6'' IPLAS-CYRANNUS) system. The UNCD film was deposited using CH 4 (1%)/Ar plasma media with a microwave power delivery of 1200 W, a pressure of 120 Torr and a substrate temperature of 450 ̊C. The detailed deposition process is reported elsewhere The surface topography and roughness of film were analyzed by atomic force microscope (AFM, Park XE-100). The chemical properties of the film were examined by the micro-Raman spectrometer (Andor SR-500i-C-R, wavelength 532 nm). The hardness and elastic modulus of film were evaluated by nanoindentation (Triboindenter TI 950, USA) coupled with Berkovich diamond indenter with a tip having a radius of curvature 150 nm. A maximum load of 6 mN and a loadingunloading rate of 1.5 mN/minute were used. Rutherford Back Scattering technique with α particle (energy 3.8 MeV) as the projectile was used to have elemental analysis in UNCD film. The scattering angle was kept as 165o. Tribological testing on UNCD thin film has been carried out using ball-on-disc microtribometer (CSM-Switzerland) working in linear reciprocating mode. The tribological properties of UNCD film have been studied against three different standard balls (diameter 6 mm). The standardized hardness value of Al 2 O 3 , SiC and 100Cr6 steel balls are 18 GPa, 26 GPa and 5 GPa, respectively. The normal constant load of 2 N, sliding speed of 4 cm/sec was used in each experiment. All tests were being run for the total sliding distance of 500 m which equals to 62,500 numbers of sliding cycles. The data acquisition rate of 10 Hz and stroke length of 4 mm were used for all experiments. The tests were carried out in ambient (dry and unlubricated conditions). During the tribology test, in-situ electrical contact resistance (ECR) measurement was performed to describe the tribolayer formation in UNCD/Al 2 O 3 sliding combination. The wear tracks and ball scars developed after tribology testing were examined using an optical microscope. Three-dimensional wear profiles in tracks were also obtained using 3D optical profilometer (Taylor Hobson). Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD, Bruker D8, Germany) was used for crystal structure analysis of UNCD film. For this measurement, incident angle of 6 o , a step size of 0.1 o and 2θ angular range of 30 o to 80 o was used. The same GIXRD measurement was carried out inside wear track also. The topography of UNCD film showed homogeneous distribution of diamond particles (Fig. Other two peaks designated by G and D band correspond to graphite and an amorphous carbon phase. These phases are occupied by grain boundary of UNCD. RBS analysis indicates distinct signature of C and Si interfaces with film thickness 1.8 μm (Fig. The friction results of UNCD film sliding against Al 2 O 3 , SiC and 100Cr6 steel balls are shown in Fig. SiC ball is also chemically stable but C-C strong chemical bond formation with UNCD film across sliding interfaces is possible during the sliding process. This may enhance the friction value (average 0.26) and in the response, wear of the ball is significant (Fig. 