Recent atomic force microscopy (AFM) experiments [ACS Nano 2014, 8, 12410-12417] conducted on graphene-coated SiO2 demonstrated that monolayer graphene (G) can effectively screen dispersion van der Waals (vdW) interactions deriving from the underlying substrate: despite the singleatom thickness of G, the AFM tip was almost insensitive to SiO2, and the tip-substrate attraction was essentially determined only by G. This G vdW opacity has far reaching implications, encompassing stabilization of multilayer heterostructures, micromechanical phenomena or even heterogeneous catalysis. Yet, detailed experimental control and high-end applications of this phenomenon await sound physical understanding of the underlying physical mechanism. By quantum many-body analysis and ab-initio Density Functional Theory, here we address this challenge providing theoretical rationalization of the observed G vdW opacity for weakly interacting substrates. The non-local density response and ultra slow decay of the G vdW interaction ensure compensation between standard attractive terms and many-body repulsive contributions, enabling vdW opacity over a broad range of adsorption distances. vdW opacity appears most efficient in the low frequency limit and extends beyond London dispersion including electrostatic Debye forces. By virtue of combined theoretical/experimental validation, G hence emerges as a promising ultrathin shield for modulation and switching of vdW interactions at interfaces and complex nanoscale devices. The advent of graphene Understanding vdW interactions in G and 2D materials is essential for predictively modeling structural, response Unexpectedly, experiments ther demonstrated that G, despite single-atom thickness, can effectively screen the dispersion interaction due to the underlying substrate. The AFM tip employed to probe the surface was almost insensitive to the presence of SiO 2 , so that the tip-substrate attraction was essentially determined only by G. Moreover, this result is compatible with the very recent observation In this paper we provide theoretical rationalization of the observed G vdW opacity to weakly interacting bulklike supports, by means of quantum many body analysis, supported by ab-initio Density Functional Theory (DFT) electrostatic calculations. By overcoming standard local permittivity approximations to the LZK theory we provide a correct non-local treatment of physical adsorption of small adsorbates (atoms, molecules or nanoparticles), where both London dispersion (induced dipole -induced dipole coupling) and Debye forces (permanent dipole -induced dipole coupling) are considered. We find that three-body-like repulsive terms, involving static or low-frequency dynamical polarization of both G and substrate can effectively contrast the attractive substrate contribution. In the same frequency regime, stark G non-locality ensures ultra-slow interaction power law decay, mimicking the long-ranged vdW contribution due to the bulk-like underlayer. Finally, DFT computation of electrostatic Debye interactions between a polar water molecule and SiC-and Cu(111)-supported G substrates confirms the predicted trends, further highlighting the role of electronic structure and hybridization effects. We conduct our calculations (details in Supplementary Material) by first deriving the fully coupled substrate response function, according to the geometry depicted in Fig. Here iω is the imaginary frequency, q the inplane momentum, v F the Fermi velocity, and χ 0 G = -q/(4v F (1 + x 2 )), with x = ω/qv F . By assuming weak interaction between graphene and substrate we can neglect hybridization effects, and treat the two interacting response functions as distinguishable. Accordingly, no doping in graphene is initially included in the calculation. The interacting substrate response function χ 1 S (z 1 , z 2 , q, iω) (z 1,2 being the coordinates orthogonal to the interface plane) is then coupled to χ 1 G (q, iω) in the RPA fashion via the Fourier transformed interaction v GS (z 1 -z 2 , q) = exp(-q|z 1 -z 2 |)2π/q. Within a matrix formulation we can thus express the total (G+substrate) response function χ T as The total susceptibility matrix χ T contains the standard graphene and substrate response functions on the diagonal, where the multiplicative term to the right-hand side corresponds to a screening renormalization. As discussed in the following, when considering adsorption on substrate-supported graphene, the two diagonal response terms both provide attractive contributions, and screening alone could not fully justify the observed vdW opacity, given its equal influence on both χ 1 G and χ 1 S . In order to compute the full London dispersion interaction (labeled with L hereafter) of a small-size adsorbate we will thus further include the two off-diagonal χ T terms. The full dispersion interaction between an adsorbate with response function χ A (r, r ′ , iω), at large distance D from the G-coated substrate can be expressed within a second order perturbative approach (corresponding to a second order expansion of the adiabatic connection fluctuation-dissipation formula) as where the response function χ AT now comprehends both adsorbate and total substrate susceptibility χ T , while V AT is the Coulomb interaction between the two (see Supplementary Material). Making use of the above formulation one can express the total interaction energy of Eq. ( IV , essentially corresponding to the coupling between the adsorbate response and the four χ T components. To proceed with our analysis we approximate the adsorbate response at the dipole level (polarizability α A ), and express χ 1 S in terms of the average dynamical dielectric function ǫ S (iω) of the material as proposed by Zaremba and Kohn The first term in the E L vdW expansion corresponds to the expected renormalized G-adsorbate interaction, which can be recast in the following form: where F G (definition in the Supplementray Material) accounts for the renormalized diagonal G response in χ T and for the G-adsorbate interaction, exponentially decaying with respect to qD. Analogously, the second term derives from the renormalized bulky substrate-adsorbate interaction, and can be expressed as: where F S (see Supplementary Material) now accounts for the renormalized bulky substrate diagonal response in χ T and for the corresponding (exponentially decaying) substrate-adsorbate interaction. As previously mentioned, two additional terms (E L III , E L IV ) contribute to E L vdW , which derive from the off-diagonal χ T terms. These can be interpreted as renormalized three-body contributions, involving two-fold dynamical polarization of both G and substrate, induced by the quantum charge fluctuations in the adsorbate A. Intuitively, while the polarization induced over a single isolated substrate can be antialigned to the fluctuating dipole in A, thereby causing net dipole-dipole attraction, the contextual polarization of two superposed materials can result in dipolar alignment of one of those with respect to the adsorbate A, thus generating a net repulsive contribution (see Fig. II and E L III have opposite sign, and only differ by a single factor, namely q/2π versus χ 1 G (q, iω). It is thus expedient to analyze the explicit expression for the G interacting response. The low dimensionality of G and the presence of relativistic-like π electrons strongly influence the χ 1 G momentum dependence. Accordingly, at limited adsorption distances D where relatively high q values contribute to the integrals of Eqs. ( Notably, χ 1 G exhibits the same linear dependence on momentum as the q/2π term in E L II . Contextually, the multiplicative factors 1/2π and 2/(2π + 4v F ) (by summation of E L III with E L IV ) show comparable size, resulting in large cancellation of the two terms, compatibly with experimental findings Limiting behaviors and dependence on adsorbate moiety: We note that the limiting behaviour of Eq. ( From Fig. Depending on ωA both interaction scaling laws and vdW opacity, can also vary Interestingly, vdW opacity is not restricted to London dispersion forces only, but also extends to Debye interactions, arising in the presence of polar adsorbates. This is understood given the evident analogies between E L vdW and the Debye interaction where The absence of frequency integration in E D vdW (cfr. Eq. ( Graf and E D I , hence confirming once more the effectiveness of static vdW opacity. The results presented so far rely on approximate πelectron G susceptibility (neglecting σ orbitals), and do not include possible G-substrate hybridization effects. In order to test the reliability of our predictions and better assess both validity and limits of vdW opacity in realistic materials, we thus complement our study with abinitio DFT calculations, within the semi-local Perdew Burke Ernzerhof We conduct our analysis by first studying the opacity of a G buffer layer on Silicon Carbide. As from Fig. While lifting the G buffer might be experimentally challenging, the growth of G on G-buffer-coated SiC is routinely accomplished Given the growing relevance of transition metal surfaces for large scale fabrication of high quality G layers via chemical vapor deposition The present results are expected to extend to further 2D materials exhibiting Dirac cone dispersion, such as Silicene, Germanene and Stanene In conclusion, we provided theoretical confirmation and rationalization of the experimentally observed vdW opacity, caused by G on weakly interacting substrates upon physical adsorption. A repulsive three-body-like contribution contrasts the expected attractive term deriving from the underlying substrate, so that the total vdW adsorption energy is well approximated by the sole G-adsorbate contribution. Stark non-locality of the G electron density response plays a main role in this mechanism, enforcing the correct interaction scaling law, and ensuring effective compensation. The phenomenon is most effective in the low frequency regime, and extends beyond London dispersion, encompassing electrostatic Debye forces. Owing to the present insights and the combined theoretical/experimental validation, G and related quasi 2D materials emerge as a promising and accessible tool for filtering, modulating or effectively switching vdW interactions at interfaces, thus opening novel perspectives for detailed experimental control of heterostructures, surface phenomena and assembly of complex nanomaterials.