In this Letter, we first formulate an effective theory, which generally captures long-range proximity effects of a surface system weakly coupled to an s-wave superconductor. The long-range proximity effects include both the emergent long-range pairing and hopping interactions in the surface system. We then model the Rashba spin-orbit-coupled nanowire in proximity with an s-wave superconductor by taking into account the emergent nonlocal effects in the weak-coupling limit. In this limit the induced superconducting pair potential is found much smaller than that of the host superconductor, which is in good agreement with recent experiments. Compared with the previously considered strong coupling limit with local proximity effects, the long-range interactions can significantly modify the topological phase diagram, and considerably lower the threshold magnetic field for the emergence of Majorana zero modes. Introduction-Thanks to the development of nanofabrication techniques, the hybrid structure of nanoscale material such as quantum dots and nanowires in proximity with superconductors can be readily realized experimentally All these researches underlined the importance of the superconducting proximity effect in understanding and exploring the novel quantum effects in hybrid nanostructures. Most of previous works concerning the proximity effect adopted the scenario that the induced superconducting pairing potential (SPP) is approximately equal to that of the host superconductor, which can be derived from strong couplings between the surface system and the host superconductor In this Letter, we establish an effective theory for the proximity effect by taking the weak-coupling limit, which gives arise small SPPs in good agreement with the experimental evidences. Furthermore, the resultant interactions feature long-range pairings and hoppings. It is worth to note that long-range pairings and hoppings of various forms in topological superconductors have re-cently attracted much attention We then apply the uncovered long-range interactions to study a 1D Rashba nanowire in proximity with an s-wave superconductor, whose importance has been addressed above. Compared with the previously considered strong-coupling limit with local proximity effects The effective theory-Let us start with a binary system consisting of two adatoms A and B in proximity with an s-wave superconductor. Then, the Hamiltonian can be written as arXiv:1806.03399v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Jun 2018 Here, ĤN is the Hamiltonian of the attached system, where i = A or B labeling the two adatoms, and the on-site energy ε 0 can be controlled by the gate voltage. ĤSC is the Hamiltonian of the host superconductor with the Nambu spinor Ψ(r) = [ψ ↑ (r), ψ † ↓ (r)] T . The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is given by h SC = [p 2 /(2m) -μ F ]τ 3 + ∆ 0 τ 1 , where μ F and ∆ 0 are the chemical potential and SPP, respectively. ĤT describes the coupling between the surface system and host superconductor, where η In contrast to previous works, we consider the weak coupling limit, namely, that the characteristic energy scale of surface system is much smaller than ∆ 0 , so is the coupling strength between the surface system and host superconductor. This condition corresponds to physics in the subgap region, since the excitations of the host superconductor have much higher energies than those of the attached system. In fact, there are experimental evidences favoring the weak-coupling limit, rather than the strong-coupling limit. For the later case, the two adatoms together with the superconductor are tightly bounded, approximately with the same SPP, ∆ 0 Different from the renormalization method in the strong-coupling limit with and h sc (k) can be diagonalized by a unitary transformation, by employing the contour integral trick for the summation over the Matsubara frequencies, we can explicitly calculate G(τ -τ , k) as where T is the temperature, and Θ(τ ) is the step function. Hence, the imaginary-time correlation length is 1/ε k ∼ 1/∆ 0 , which is very small, because ∆ 0 is large in the weak coupling limit. This actually reflects the uncertainty principle, since the time uncertainty can be evaluated as 1/∆ 0 . As a result, at low temperatures and time scale much larger than 1/∆ 0 , we can approximate that G(x -x ) ≈ -δ(τ -τ )K(r -r ), where K(r) is the Fourier transform of 1/h sc (k). In other words, the imaginary-time correlation is effectively instantaneous in the weak-coupling limit, and accordingly, the effective Hamiltonian reads The result can also be understood as following. As a result of the weak coupling limit in Eq. ( The effective Hamiltonian of Eq. (S7) can be derived explicitly. Since h SC (k) is isotropic, K(r -r ) depends only on the distance l = |r -r |. Then, we can proceed straightforwardly to obtain where k = k F (1+ξ/μ F ) 1/2 with k F the Fermi momentum, and N (0) is the density of states near the Fermi energy. Since the main contribution comes from the states near the Fermi energy with ξ μ F , we can approximate that k ≈ k F [1 + ξ/(2μ F )], and extend the integration interval of ξ to be (-∞, ∞), which gives Finally, substituting Eq. ( t and ∆ depend on the distance l between the two adatoms as where the on-site SPP is given by ∆ 0 = πt 2 0 N (0), and the coherence length of the host superconductor ξ 0 = 2μ F /(k F ∆ 0 ). Several comments are ready for the result of Eq. ( An application to nanowires-As an application of the effective long-range hopping and pairing above, we consider a 1D Rashba spin-orbit-coupled nanowire in proximity with an s-wave superconductor, which has been widely used for realizing Majorana zero modes The first term is a nearest neighbor hopping term, and the second term is an on-site energy term, where we have suppressed the spin index on the electron operators. The third term is a nearest neighbor Rashba term, and the fourth term corresponds to the Zeeman effect under the parallel magnetic field, where σ i with i = 1, 2, 3 are the Pauli matrices. By taking into account the long-range pairing and hopping terms from the proximity effect, the total Hamiltonian can be written as Ĥtot = Ĥ0 + Ĥeff , where The coefficients t(r) and ∆(r) are given by Eq. ( The dependences of t(k = 0/π) and ∆(k = 0/π) on k F and ξ 0 are plotted in the Supplemental Material (SM) Topological phases-We proceed to discuss the topological invariant of the system. The nanowire with longrange interactions belongs to class D in the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry classification where In the SM 40 , we also numerically solve the Majorana zero modes at the ends of the nanowire, which is consistent with the bulk topological invariant. Compared with the strong-coupling limit, the weakcoupling limit with the long-range interactions leads to three significant differences. First, the symmetry of the phase diagram under ̄ to - ̄ is violated by the longrange interactions. Taking ξ 0 → 0, the model with the strong coupling limit in Ref. Second, as a result of the asymmetric phase diagram, the threshold magnetic field at about ̄ = -2.5 in Fig. Third, in the weak-coupling limit, changing k F leads to topological phase transitions as shown in Fig. Summary-In summary, we have rigorously derived the effective Hamiltonian for a surface system weakly coupled to an s-wave superconductor. The induced long-range pairing and hopping are much smaller than the SPP of the host superconductor, in consistent with recent experiments. They exhibit exponentially damped oscillation with the characteristic length equal to the coherence length of host superconductor. Taking into account the long-range effects, we studied a Rashba spin-orbitcoupled nanowire in proximity with an s-wave superconductor. Several experimental consequences on the topological phase diagram have been discussed. Finally, we note that the established framework is applicable to other hybrid systems of superconductors, where weak coupling takes place. Supplemental Materials: "Effective Long-Range Pairing and Hopping in a Surface System Weakly Coupled to an s-Wave Superconductor" In this section, we present technical details for the derivation of the effective theory S ef f in the main text. After integrating out the fermionic fields of the host superconductor, the effective action is given as where x = (τ, r) and The Green's function G(iω n , k) = 1/ (iω n -h SC (k)) with ω n the Matsubara frequencies. We can diagonalize the Hamiltonian of host superconductor by a unitary matrix U k as where The summation of Matsubara frequency can be derived by contour integral trick and the Green's function in real space and imaginary time can be written as where Θ (τ -τ ) is the step function. As discussed in the main text, because of the factor e -ε k| τ -τ | in Eq. (S5), the time correlation length is about 1/ε k ∼ 1/∆ 0 , which is very small in the weak coupling limit. As a result, the interaction of effective action in Eq. ( In the second line, we have used η(τ , r ) ≈ η(τ, r ), since time correlation length is very small as being discussed in the main text. In the third line, we integrated out τ . The fourth equality was derived by using Eq. (S3). From the effective action in Eq. (S6), the effective Hamiltonian is given by Ĥeff = -t 2 0 where K(r -r ) is Since h SC (k) has rotational symmetry, K(r -r ) in Eq. (S8) depends only on the distance l = |r -r |, namely, that where N (0) is the density of states of the host superconductor near the Fermi energy. Because the main excitations of the host superconductor relevant to the effective Hamiltonian is near the Fermi energy, we have ξ μ F and k ≈ k F [1 + ξ/(2μ F )]. Hence, we can evaluate Eq. (S9) by extending the integration domain from (-ω D , ω D ) to (-∞, ∞) with ω D being the Debye frequency of the host superconductor. Although the diagonal term of K(l = 0) becomes divergent for ξ ∈ (-∞, ∞), it can be absorbed into the renormalized chemical potential, which is determined by equilibrium with the host superconductor. Consequently, only the off-diagonal terms corresponding to an induced s-wave pairing potential are physically interesting. In the main text, the emergent pairing and hopping terms in a nanowire are given by For discussions on the topological phase diagram, we plot t(k = 0, π) and ∆(k = 0, π) with ξ 0 = 10 as functions (S24) which is equivalent to the formula of Eq. ( To demonstrate the bulk-end correspondence, we numerically calculate the energy spectrum as a function of ̄ under the Dirichlet boundary condition with 100 lattice sites, where we choose h Z = 1, λ R = 0.8, and the same values of t, ∆ 0 , ξ 0 , k F as those in Fig. 