The lighter group-V element phosphorus forms the As-type (hR2) structure under pressure, above 5 GPa, and at 10 GPa transforms to the simple cubic structure (cP1), similar to arsenic. Despite of its low packing density, the simple cubic structure is stable in phosphorus over a very wide pressure range up to 103 GPa. On further pressure increase, the simple cubic structure transforms to a simple hexagonal structure (hP1) via a complex phase that was solved recently as incommensurately modulated. Structural transformations of phosphorus are connected with the changes of physical properties. Above 5 GPa phosphorus shows superconductivity with Tc reaching ~9.5K at 32GPa. The crystal structures and properties of high-pressure phases for phosphorus are discussed within the model of the Fermi sphere and Brillouin zone interactions. Recent high-pressure x-ray diffraction studies revealed unusual complex and low symmetry structures in some simple elements All IM structures were observed when elements become metallic under pressure. This implies the importance of the two main contributions to the lattice energy: electrostatic (Ewald) and electronic (band structure) energies. The latter can be lowered due to a formation of Brillouin zone planes near the Fermi level and an opening of an energy gap at these planes. This effect is important for stability of so-called Hume-Rothery phases in Cu -Zn and related alloys For a classical Hume-Rothery phase Cu5Zn8, the Brillouin zone filling by electron states is equal to 93%, and is around this number for many other phases stabilized by the Hume-Rothery mechanism Experimentally observed transformations in phosphorus on compression go along the sequence including highly symmetrical structures: simple cubic (sc) -simple hexagonal (sh) -body-centered cubic (bcc). This sequence satisfies the requirements to increase under pressure in packing density (0.52 -~0.60 -0.68) and in coordination number (6 -2+6 -8+6). Energetically this sequence corresponds to increase in Madelung constant 1.760 -1.775 -1.7918 The phase P-IV has an incommensurately modulated crystal structure with superspace group Cmmm (00) s00 Taking the experimentally found atomic volume 9.19 Å 3 and the number of valence electrons for group V element P equal z = 5 we estimate the value of 2kF equal to 5.05 Å -1 . Within a nearly free-electron model the Fermi sphere radius is defined as k F = (3 2 z/V) 1/3 , where z is the number of valence electrons per atom and V is the atomic volume. The 2kF position is indicated on Figure Thus, the plane (201-1) corresponding to the modulation peak (201-1) appears just to cut an empty section where the (200) plane crosses the Fermi sphere. This mechanism is similar to the "nesting" effect and allowed the lowering of electron energy on a Brillouin plane close to the Fermi sphere. Formation of the modulation wave accounts for appearance of other modulation peaks and consequently a group of Brillouin planes near the Fermi sphere as shown in Figures The complex modulated structure of P-IV is intermediate between two the simplest structures: the simple cubic and the simple hexagonal as shown first in At this pressure the relative volume is reached 0.444 and the volume decrease at IV-V transition is 5.5% In conclusion, the stability of the high pressure structures for phosphorus is attributed to the lowering of the electronic band structure energy due to Brillouin zone -Fermi surface interaction. Appearance of incommensuratly modulated P-IV structure demonstrates enhanced effects of FS-BZ interactions in comparison with the electrostatic energy preferred the high symmetry atomic arrangements . Similar approach can also be applied to the IM structure of the group VI elements.