Many emerging alternative models of computation require massive numbers of random bits, but their generation at low energy is currently a challenge. The superparamagnetic tunnel junction, a spintronic device based on the same technology as spin torque magnetoresistive random access memory has recently been proposed as a solution, as this device naturally switches between two easy to measure resistance states, due only to thermal noise. Reading the state of the junction naturally provides random bits, without the need of write operations. In this work, we evaluate a circuit solution for reading the state of superparamagnetic tunnel junction. We see that the circuit may induce a small read disturb effect for scaled superparamagnetic tunnel junctions, but this effect is naturally corrected in the whitening process needed to ensure the quality of the generated random bits. These results suggest that superparamagnetic tunnel junctions could generate truly random bits at 20 fJ/bit, including overheads, orders of magnitudes below CMOS-based solutions. With the end of Moore's law in sight, microelectronics research is currently exploring multiple alternative directions for replacing or complementing current architectures based on the von Neumann principles. Several of these ideas explore the power of random numbers for computing. In particular, stochastic computing approaches can achieve approximate computations with minimal circuit overhead However, the generation of massive amounts of random bits at low energy is currently a challenge that limits the applicability of such ideas. In recent years, emerging nanodevices have been introduced as a remarkable alternative for random bit generation However, due to their physics, these devices might be disturbed by the readout circuitry. In this paper, we investigate, through physical modeling and circuit simulation, the sensitivity of superparamagnetic tunnel junctions to read disturb effects, and conclude that it does not constitute a concern for the technology if the readout circuit is properly chosen. We first introduce the basic principles of superparamagnetic tunnel junctions. We then present the modeling of read disturb effects in these devices, and the results of our circuit-level investigation. II. RANDOM BIT GENERATION WITH SUPERPARAMAGNETIC TUNNEL JUNCTIONS Superparamagnetic tunnel junctions are nanodevices composed of several thin layers of magnetic and non-magnetic materials (Fig. Superparamagnetic tunnel junctions are based on the same technology as ST-MRAM. In a ST-MRAM cell, the AP and P states are highly stable, leading to a non-volatile memory behavior. By contrast, in a superparamagnetic tunnel junction, the two states are intentionally unstable: the junction naturally switches between its two states due to thermal energy only Such junctions can generate random bits of high quality. Long sequences of random bits were obtained by measuring junctions for days, providing gigabits of data, at different sampling frequencies. When a junction is measured, the output is said to be one if the junction was in the AP state, and zero if was in the P state. The obtained sequences of bits were tested using the National Institute of Standards and Technology Statistical Test Suite (NIST STS) for random bit quality The sequences whitened with the XOR8 process and sampled below F sampling /F MTJ = 3.6 pass all the tests, therefore demonstrating high random bit quality. By contrast, Raw sequences do not pass the tests, due to residual stray fields in the nanodevices that cause their mean values to deviate slightly from 0.5. Sequences that are sampled too fast also do not pass the tests, as they exhibit auto-correlation. In Fig. Electrical currents influence magnetic tunnel junctions through the spin transfer torque physical effect. High spin transfer torque is highly desirable for memory applications of magnetic tunnel junctions, as it allows their efficient programming. By contrast, in our random bit generation example, it acts as a perturbation, possibly affecting the relative stability of the two states of the junctions. At low currents, spin transfer torque effects can efficiently be modeled by an Arrhenius/Néel-Brown approach. The switching process is modeled by a Poisson process. If a junction is in the parallel state P , its probability to switch to the antiparallel state AP during an infinitesimal time interval [t; t + dt) is dt/τ P . Conversely, if the junction is in the AP state, its probability to switch to the P state during the same interval is dt/τ AP . τ P and τ AP can be expressed as: and where τ 0 is a constant whose value is often assumed to be around 1 ns, ∆E is the energy barrier separating the two states of the junction, and kT is the thermal energy. The critical current I CP and I CAP can be expressed as for an in-plane magnetization junction, and for a perpendicular magnetization junction. P is the spin polarization of the junction. It is connected to the tunnel magnetoresistance by T M R = 2P 2 1-P 2 . V is the volume of the free layer of the junction, μ 0 is the vacuum permittivity, M S is the magnetization of the free layer, H K the anisotropy, e the elementary charge and h the normalized Planck constant. In order to evaluate the impact of the read disturb effect on random bit generation by superparamagnetic junctions, we developed a compact model of the junctions implementing the equations of the previous section. At each time step, the model computes the switching probability of the junction, and draws a random number to decide if a switching event occurred. The model was coded in the VerilogA description language to ensure compatibility with major circuit simulators, and uses only standard VerilogA function. For the model to give reliable results, it is essential that the simulator chooses time steps that are much smaller than the τ AP of all the junctions in the circuit in the AP state, and the τ P of the junctions in the P state. This can easily be ensured by a bound step function call within the VerilogA code of the compact model. For junctions to be uncorrelated with each other, the seed of random number generation is a parameter of the device model, which can be declared as a variable parameter in Monte Carlo simulations. For measuring the state of the superparamagnetic tunnel junctions, we investigated the use of a precharge sense amplifier (PCSA), a circuit initially proposed for the readout of ST-MRAM We then performed extensive Monte Carlo simulations with the Spectre simulator in order to extract the mean state measured by the PCSA. Fig. Fig. For the most stable (slower) junctions, the impact of the read disturb effect appears minimal. It becomes more significant for less stable (faster) junctions and reaches approximately 0.01% for junctions operating at 10 MHz. Nevertheless, such deviations would not be a concern for applications as, for example, XOR8 whitening can compensate deviations as high as 10%, while ensuring that the results pass the NIST STS V. CONCLUSION Superparamagnetic tunnel junctions are an attractive candidate for generating low energy random bits for alternative models of computation, as they rely on the same technology as ST-MRAM and naturally turn thermal noise into an easy to measure resistance state. In this work, we investigated the impact of associating a readout circuit with superparamagnetic tunnel junctions. We described the device modeling and showed, through circuit simulation, that even for very scaled junctions, read disturb is not a concern for applications if an efficient sense amplifier circuit is used for reading the state of the junction. These results highlight that very low energy random bit generation is possible with superparamagnetic tunnel junctions, 20 f J/bit if XOR8 whitening is employed. The major limitation of the circuit is its relatively low speed, which might nevertheless be sufficient for many Internet-of-things applications envisioned by stochastic or cognitive computing.