We investigate the out-of-plane shape morphing capability of single-material elastic sheets with architected cut patterns that result in arrays of tiles connected by flexible hinges. We demonstrate that a non-periodic cut pattern can cause a sheet to buckle into three-dimensional shapes, such as domes or patterns of wrinkles, when pulled at specific boundary points. These global buckling modes are observed in experiments and rationalized by an in-plane kinematic analysis that highlights the role of the geometric frustration arising from non-periodicity. The study focuses on elastic sheets, and is later extended to elastic-plastic materials to achieve shape retention. Our work illustrates a scalable route towards the fabrication of three-dimensional objects with nonzero Gaussian curvature from initially-flat sheets. Imparting elastic sheets with a mesoscale architecture enables the creation of materials with unusual characteristics, such as extreme extensibility In contrast to shape-morphing origami or bilayer films, sheets with architected cut patterns can be easily fabricated via subtractive technologies. Their out-of-plane deformation can be triggered by manual forming In this work, we study the tensile response of elastic sheets featuring non-periodic cut patterns, and intentionally leverage geometric frustration to induce controllable, global shape changes via buckling. In most of our designs, we use point-like boundary loads that induce large deformations in selected sub-domains of the sheets. The inhomogeneous distribution of strains results in global buckling modes that make the sheets bend out of plane and morph into dome-like surfaces with nonzero Gaussian curvature and patterns of wrinkles confined to predetermined regions. Note that a similar mechanism is at work in the morphogenesis of living systems due to differential growth We start by analyzing a simple cut pattern featuring a large-amplitude, planar mode of deformation. A 108by-108 mm, 1.55 mm-thick natural rubber sheet is lasercut The salient features of the loading curves can be explained by a kinematic analysis, in which the sheet is modeled as an array of rigid tiles connected by pin joints. Such networks can feature modes of deformation known as mechanisms Next, we introduce a family of periodic cut patterns parameterized by design variables. Our generic pattern, sketched in Fig. where d h and d v are the lengths of the diagonals of a tile, and γ is the angle between these diagonals. The design variables have a strong influence on tension tests. The cut pattern in Fig. The effect of the design parameters δ and t on the inplane response is discussed in the SI. Having analyzed a family of periodic cut patterns, we now investigate non-uniform designs, obtained by specifying values of w x and w y in every cell of a rectangular grid; the cell size l x × l y is uniform throughout the sheet. Upon deformation, we expect that every unit cell of these non-periodic sheets will try to follow the mechanism corresponding to the local values of w x and w y , as described by Equation ( More complex buckling patterns can be obtained by letting both w x and w y vary along the sheet, either smoothly or abruptly. In these cases, a sufficient condition to obtain buckled surfaces is the presence of auxetic islands surrounded by unstretchable and non-auxetic re-FIG. Finally, permanent three-dimensional shapes can be obtained by using an elastic-plastic material In this work, we have demonstrated that geometric incompatibility can be leveraged to create threedimensional objects from sheets with non-periodic cutouts. By choosing the properties of the cuts locally, one can prescribe a map of maximum stretch, which is resolved when the sheet deforms out of plane in response to boundary loads or local stretching. While the shapes we have obtained are relatively simple, similar principles could be extended to different families of mechanisms, and could be coupled to optimization and inverse-design strategies to obtain more complex shapes. Towards this goal, it will be necessary to develop efficient numerical models of these systems and of their buckling behaviora goal most likely achievable via homogenization. In conclusion, our work expands the shape-morphing gamut of perforated mono-layer sheets, and it indicates an approach that could be used to produce morphing and deployable structures at vastly-different scales. From Fig. In Fig. In this work, finite element simulations are carried out using Abaqus/Standard. The investigated sheets present different lengthscales: the hinge in-plane width and length (∼ 1 mm), the length of a tile (∼ 10 mm), and the total size of the sheet (∼ 100 mm). Since the mechanical behavior of the sheets is, to a large extent, governed by the design of the hinges, a sufficiently fine mesh is required to accurately capture the correct response. Another challenge stems from the large nonlinearities involved and from the large distortions happening at large stretches. In order to efficiently identify regions that are prone to out-of-plane bending, we conduct two-dimensional finite element simulations. In all simulations, we resort to a plane strain assumption, accounting for the fact that the response is primarily determined by the hinge dimensions, and the hinges' in-plane width (∼ 0.5 mm) is smaller than their out-of-plane thickness (∼ 1.55 mm). Throughout this work, we consider geometric nonlinearities and model the nonlinear material behavior of natural rubber gum with a Neo-Hookean material model. This model is fit to the experimental response of a natural rubber dogbone specimen to tensile loading. Fig. The results reported in Fig. The stress maps in Fig. (i, j) indicates a generic tile, with i = 1, ..., N x + 1, j = 1, ..., N y + 1 and N x , N y being the number of tiles along the horizontal and vertical directions. Note that, if we consider a tile such that (i + j)/2 ∈ Z, the following formulae will only slightly vary. For the remainder of this section, we assume that we are dealing with periodic architectures; this implies that w y (i, j) = w y (i + 1, j + 1) = w y , and w x (i + 1, j) = w x (i, j + 1) = w x . The red and blue lines indicate the diagonals of each tile. Their lengths are Ideally, tiles can rotate until the diagonal lines corresponding to the selected stretch direction are straightened. With this in mind, we can determine the maximum horizontal and vertical stretches for any periodic architecture designed following our paradigm, as We can also use kinematics to derive formulae for the tangential stretches as functions of λ M x or λ M y . First, we determine the angle α between d h and the x-axis in the undeformed configuration, and β between d v and the y-axis, as Note that we define α to be positive counterclockwise and β to be positive clockwise. We also define γ = π/2 -α -β as the angle between d h and d v . During mechanism-like deformation, γ remains fixed since we assume the tiles are rotating rigidly. On the other hand, the inclinations of d h and d v with respect to x and y change during the deformation process. To determine the intermediate stages of the sheet's deformation, we define α * and β * as angles varying from 0 to α and 0 to β, respectively. Consider now the case of stretching along x. We can write From the first of the two equations, we obtain α * (λ x ) as Substitution leads to the following formula for λ y (λ x ): This formula is used to determine the analytical curves in Fig. In our work, we fix the design parameters l x , l y and δ most of the time, and vary w x and w y . Different combinations of w x and w y allow to span a wide design space in terms of achievable deformations. To get a better idea of the available design space, in Fig. x , and the related tangential stretch λ y (λ M x ), as a function of w x and w y . Note that the values in the colormaps are specific for l x = l y = 6 mm and δ = l x /8. We can see that choosing w x and w y allows to obtain a wide range of responses to stretching. Some significant examples (A, B, C and D) are extracted from the design space. A, corresponding to w x = w y = 0, is characterized by λ M x = λ y (λ M x ) = 1.33; B, corresponding to w x = (l x -δ)/2 and w y = 0, is characterized by λ M x = 1.33 and λ y (λ M x ) = 0.75; C, corresponding to w x = (l x -δ)/2 and w y = (l y -δ)/2, is kinematically undeformable albeit featuring bulky tiles connected by thin hinges; D, corresponding to w x = l x -δ and w y = 0, does not behave like a mechanism since the rigid tiles assumption does not hold for these specific parameters. From these examples, it is clear that not all the configurations available in the design space allow to obtain the in-plane mechanism-like deformation behavior we are interested in. Therefore, particular care is needed when choosing the design parameters; in light of this, in this work, we limit ourselves to the ranges 0 ≤ w x ≤ (l x -δ)/2 and 0 ≤ w y ≤ (l y -δ)/2. An example of non-periodic sheet is shown in Fig. INFLUENCE OF THE DESIGN PARAMETERS ON THE OUT-OF-PLANE DEFORMATION OF NON-PERIODIC SHEETS Fig. In Fig. 