Ru nanoparticles (NPs) can precipitate in Ru doped SiO2 amorphous thin films, triggered by electron irradiation in (scanning) transmission electron microscope ((S)TEM). A new mechanism was introduced to interpret the formation of metal NPs in (S)TEM. The induced electric field by electron irradiation, which originates from charging due to ionizations and excitations of atom electrons, can reduce the Gibbs free energy barrier for nucleation of metal particles. Furthermore, the directional ion drifting driven by the electric forces may accelerate the kinetic process of metal particle precipitation. Nanoparticle (NP) precipitation triggered by electron irradiation is a phenomenon often observed in (scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM) studies Although this is a type of unwanted specimen damages in pristine materials The former is due to kinetic energy and momentum transfer from a beam electron to an atom, resulting in displacement of the affected atom. The latter is originated from ionizing atom electrons by beam electrons, and decays of the excited electrons may result in displacement of an atom (specifically an anion) [for a review Thermodynamically, the precipitation (or phase transformation) is driven by lowering the Gibbs free energy of system. However, in (S)TEM, electron irradiation continuously injects energy into the specimen. To overcome this dilemma, a two-energy-levels model was suggested In recent studies, the induced electric field by electron irradiation has been identified as the main cause for beam damage in a variety of materials, in which the formation of NPs triggered by electron irradiation is categorized as phase separation Besides, there is another type of precipitation, in which the mass in the irradiated region does not have noticeable change or the mass loss is not directly associated with the NP precipitation Amorphous Ru-Si-O films were deposited by reactive rf magnetron co-sputtering from a Ru20Si90 25 cm diameter, fine-grained composite target. The sputtering gas was a mixture of 11% oxygen in argon at a total pressure of 10 mTorr. According to previous work this mixture guaranteed that an oxygen-saturated film would be produced The Ru NPs were precipitated and analyzed using JOEL 2010F (S)TEM, equipped with Gatan electron energy loss spectrometer, operating at both TEM and STEM illumination mode at 200kV. The precipitation of Ru NPs was observed by in situ imaging, electron diffraction and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) techniques. The energy resolution of EELS was about 1.0 eV. The as-deposited Ru-Si-O thin films used in our study are uniform and no pre-existing particles can be observed. The thin films are also stable; there is no morphology change in the samples after being stored in air at atmospheric pressure for more than a year. However, Ru NPs can be easily precipitated after the thin films are exposed to electron beam in (S)TEM. Figure After 24 min of exposure, the discontinuity in these rings can be seen clearly (Fig. The precipitation process can be more easily quantified by time dependent EELS technique. Figure The time-dependent changes of near-edge fine structures in the Ru M23-edge are not dramatic, but a closer comparison indicates that the widths of M23 peak become narrower with the increase of irradiation, and its position shifts about 1.0 eV lower after a long exposure (See S.I.). These changes indicate the transition of Ru from its ionic to metallic state. Such a transition is more profound in the change of the Ru -O peak in the O K-edge, as shown in Fig. Apparently, these stages can be also identified from the overall changes of Ru and O during the irradiation (Fig. Thermal annealing of oxygen-saturated Ru-Si-O thin films at 800’é░C in vacuum can precipitate RuO2 crystals The thermodynamic driving force for first-order phase transition is the gain in free energy upon nucleation, the quantity known as supersaturation. In homogeneous nucleation, the total Gibbs free energy, ’üäG, to precipitate a NP in a matrix material is the sum of the surface free energy and the bulk free energy. The energy barrier for nucleation, ’üäG*, is the maximum of ’üäG, with respect to the size of a nucleus. The driving force is needed to overcome this energy barrier for the formation of new phase. Although the thermal effect may not be the main cause for the Ru NPs precipitation, the mechanism should be able to fulfil this energy requirement. Apparently, neither knock-on nor radiolysis could suggest the system to overcome the nucleation barrier to precipitate Ru NPs rapidly and massively under electron irradiation. The knock-on interaction results in energy and momentum transfer from an energetic electron to an atom following collision. To displace an atom, the minimum kinetic energy of beam electrons is required. The threshold beam energy is proportionally dependent on the atomic mass and its threshold displacement energy. Considering that the threshold surface sputtering energy is only a fraction of bulk displacement energy and thin specimen for (S)TEM experiments, knock-on interaction is more likely to cause preferential surface sputtering of lighter O and Si than the precipitation of heavier Ru. However, the EELS analysis shows that there is no significant change in both Si and O during the precipitation. Although radiolysis has been widely referred to in terms of beam effects in (S)TEM for decades, the processes are unfortunately poorly described. Apparently, all the detailed processes involve the displacements of negative ions only, which cannot directly explain the rapid assembly of a vast amount of Ru cations into nanoparticles within a short period of time. As we knew, electric field carrier energy and can affect the free energy barrier of nucleation In the presence of external electric field, the Gibbs free energy is Here the first two terms are Gibbs free energy in the absence of electric field and GE is the change in electrostatic energy due to the formation of a NP. In eqn. (1), ’üäg is the term that includes both the difference in chemical potentials of matrix and NP at the corresponding minima and strain energy generated when a NP forms, and ’ü│ is the surface tension, and V and S are, respectively, volume and surface area of NP. The influence of an external electric field on the nucleation process has been well studied experimentally and theoretically Here the parameter c’üź is defined as in which ’üź0 is permittivity of free space, and ’üźm and ’üźc are, respectively, the dielectric constant of matrix and NP. Since c’üź is NP size independent, ’üäg + c’üźE 2 can be considered as an effective supersaturation, which is a function of the strength of electric field. If ’üźc > ’üźm (NP has higher dielectric constant than the matrix), the electric field can increase the effective supersaturation. If ’üźc < ’üźm, it opposites. For metal NPs, their dielectric constants can be considered as infinite, so c’üź ’é╗ 1.5’üź0’üźm. Therefore, from free energy point of view, the electric field is always in favor of metal NP precipitation. For a spherical NP in a uniform electric field, the energy barrier and the critical radius of nucleus are respectively ŌłåG * = (Ōłå ) and Ōłår * = Ōłå . Therefore, electronbeam effect on nucleation can be evaluated if ’üäg and ’ü│ are known. As an approximation, we can estimate ’üäg using Ōłåg(T) = H , in which Hf and Tm are heat of fusion and melting temperature of metal NP, respectively Although the electric field can lower the Gibbs free energies (if ’üźc > ’üźm), the precipitation under electron beam is not as the same as that by thermal annealing. Neither RuO2 nor ruthenium silicides is the product of electron irradiation, considering that they all have high conductivities (i.e. ’üźc > ’üźm). This is because the strong electric field can also affect the kinetics of the nucleation. One of such factors is atomic drifting under electric fields. Unlike the thermal effect, in which atomic drifting is random, electric forces exerting on ions are directional; forces on positively and negatively charged ions are opposite. According to Ren and Wang Due to the same reason, the electric field can also affect the nucleation rate, by affecting the diffusion coefficient in volume-diffusion control or by changing the mechanism of atom attachment As we knew Meanwhile, the fields are also strong near the edge region of the beam. Therefore, we can expect that the spatial distribution of precipitated NPs may not be uniform in the specimen but may preferentially occurs at the sub-surface regions and around edge of electron beam, as illustrated in Fig. Dielectric constants of gas phases are usually smaller than that of the matrix materials. From the free energy point of view, the induced electric field is therefore not in favor of nucleation of gas bubbles, which O2 bubbles or clusters were not observed during the Ru precipitation in our experiments. However, the formations of gas bubbles or clusters in some materials are also common phenomena of beam effect [5, and references therein]. In the previous studies, we found that the formation of gas bubbles or clusters is always accompanied by the rapid depletion of cations in the illuminated region A new mechanism of metal NPs precipitation induced by electron irradiation in (S)TEM has been introduced. The induced electric field by electron irradiation, due to ionizations and excitations of atom electrons, can reduce the Gibbs free energy barrier for nucleation of metal particles. Furthermore, the directional ion drifting driven by the electric forces may accelerate the kinetic process of metal particle precipitation. Electric Field (V/m) Figure This indicates that although Ru atoms or at least some of Ru, in the Ru-Si-O film are bounded to O, the well-organized octahedral coordination as in the RuO2 is unlikely to happen. The oxidation states of Ru in silicate glasses have not been as well documented as the first row of transition elements, partly because of the low solubility of Ru in the glass perhaps. Nevertheless, a series of optical absorption studies indicated that Ru 4+ is the most common state of Ru in silicate glasses; while Ru 3+ and Ru 6+ also exist i.e. longer Ru -O distances, while it is in tetrahedral coordination in higher states (e.g. As compared in figure O K-edge