Over many years, computational simulations based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) have been used extensively to study many different materials at the atomic scale. However, its application is restricted by system size, leaving a number of interesting systems without a high-accuracy quantum description. In this work, we calculate the electronic and structural properties of a graphenemetal system significantly larger than in previous plane-wave calculations with the same accuracy. For this task we use a localised basis set with the Conquest code, both in their primitive, pseudoatomic orbital form, and using a recent multi-site approach. This multi-site scheme allows us to maintain accuracy while saving computational time and memory requirements, even in our exemplar complex system of graphene grown on Rh(111) with and without intercalated atomic oxygen. This system offers a rich scenario that will serve as a benchmark, demonstrating that highly accurate simulations in cells with over 3000 atoms are feasible with modest computational resources. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations The mechanism of oxygen intercalation into monolayer graphene (G) on Rh(111) surface is another example. We previously reported that a highly corrugated graphene layer grown on Rh(111) can be flattened by the intercalation of oxygen atoms, with careful experimental control of the oxygen dosage and temperature This limitation of current DFT simulations cannot be simply overcome by increasing the computer power. DFT calculations based on a plane-wave basis, despite its mathematical robustness and accuracy, often have a serious problem in parallel efficiency. Fast Fourier Transforms and very smooth pseudopotentials clearly reduce the computational cost, but they require all-to-all communication between cores and this communication time grows rapidly when the number of processors is increased While the use of local basis functions has a great advantage in efficiency, it is very important to be able to reach accuracy comparable to plane wave calculations. Some local basis sets, like "blip" functions in Conquest or "psinc" functions in ONETEP can achieve plane-wave accuracy systematically, but the total number of basis functions is, in general, large. On the other hand, with the pseudo atomic orbital (PAO) basis sets, the number of basis functions is significantly smaller than plane-wave basis sets and the cost of the calculations is much lower, though it is difficult to achieve systematic convergence. Especially, systems that include different types of bonding interactions are particularly challenging for PAO basis sets. This is the case for graphene adsorbed on metals The recently developed multi-site support function (MSSF) method In this work, we demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of the MSSF method in calculations of subtle structural and electronic properties of the G/Rh(111) and G/O/Rh(111) systems (the MSSF method has not been applied to a system of this complexity yet). We first show that using multiple-ζ basis sets (DZP for Rh and O, and TZDP for C), we can achieve comparable accuracy to plane-wave calculations for the structural and electronic properties of these systems. We systematically compare our previous accurate plane-wave calculations The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first illustrate the model systems of G/Rh(111) and G/O/Rh(111) in Sec. II A. Then, we explain the MSSF method and the details of the calculations in Sec. II B and II C, respectively. In Sec. III A, we provide a detailed comparison of the structural properties of these systems calculated with the present PAO basis sets and our previous plane-wave calculations. Next, we investigate the accuracy of the MSSF method in Sec. III B. Then, in Sec. III C, we report the CPU time and parallel efficiency of the MSSF calculations for large G/Rh(111) systems. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Sec. IV. A. Simulation cells for the G/Rh moirés and O intercalation. The first system that we study in this work is the G/Rh(111) interface. Although this interface is regarded as a strongly interacting system, it displays a number of different rotational domains or moiré patterns as a consequence of the subtle balance between the corrugation and interaction contributions to the total energy However, the linear dispersion of pristine graphene can be recovered by intercalating oxygen atoms at the interface. We also work on this G/O/Rh(111) system, with various amount of oxygen atoms. The intercalation of oxygen atoms leads to a step-by-step decoupling of the G layer, where the G corrugation and the electronic properties vary depending on the amount of intercalated oxygen atoms, evolving from a purely chemisorbed state to a quasi-free-standing flat monolayer, physisorbed to the substrate by dispersion forces. Finally, when an ordered O-(2 × 1) network of atomic oxygen is formed at the interface, the corrugation almost disappears and the Dirac cones are restored except for a small energy shift due to the charge transfer For G/Rh(111) in this study, we consider three of these different moiré patterns that are experimentally FIG. There are two kinds of unit cells presented in Table It is important to note that the procedure used to build these cells in order to adjust the mismatch between the two lattices is the same used in ref. The intercalation of oxygen is modeled by introducing a variable number of oxygen atoms at the G/metal interface in the m14 moiré, that shares the main features of the m0 moiré but allows faster calculations. Based on our previous study In contrast to the plane-wave basis functions used in our previous calculations with b iα,iμ is the linear-combination coefficient. Conquest supports two kinds of localized basis functions ξ iμ (r), PAOs In order to achieve large-scale DFT calculations, reducing the number of support functions is important, because the computational cost scales with the cube of the number of support functions. The primitive PAO basis sets can be contracted into small number of support functions. Conventionally, as in Eq. ( where the summation on l runs over neighboring atoms which are within the cutoff region from the target atom i, including atom i itself. The coefficients b iα,iμ can be determined by numerical optimization It is worth pointing out that the MSSF method, espe-cially when the MSSFs are calculated by numerical optimization, may not have good accuracy for the unoccupied states since MSSFs are optimized only for the accurate description of occupied Kohn-Sham orbitals or density matrix. But, even in such cases, the calculated ground state charge density obtained by the MSSF method is accurate and we can evaluate the Hamiltonian matrix with primitive PAO basis set using the charge density. Then, we can calculate the eigenvalues of the unoccupied states accurately As in our previous plane-wave DFT simulations, we use a generalized gradient approximation for the exchange and correlation functional as described by Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) The geometry optimizations were performed using the conjugate gradient algorithm. During these optimizations, the two bottom layers of the slab were kept fixed in their bulk positions while the rest, including oxygen atoms, were allowed to relax. The geometry optimizations with Conquest were started from the geometries pre-converged by VASP. The geometry optimization using the conjugate gradient method was performed until the energy change becomes smaller than 10 -6 eV/atom or the maximum force is smaller than 0.05 eV/ Å. In adsorption energy calculations, the counterpoise method was used to correct the basis set superposition error (BSSE) In this section, we investigate the accuracy of the primitive PAO basis sets for the structural properties and energetics in the G/Rh(111) and G/O/Rh(111) systems, by comparing the present PAO calculations with Conquest and our previous plane-wave calculations with VASP. For G/Rh(111) system, we compare the optimized geometries of m16, m14 and m0 moiré patterns shown in Table More importantly, experiments show that these three moiré patterns display linear growth of the graphene corrugation as a function of the moiré unit cell size We now turn to the G/O/Rh(111) system, for the study of the structural changes in the corrugation and adsorption distance by the intercalation of oxygen atoms. We use only one of the rotational domains (m14) in this analysis. Table where E[G] and E[Rh(111)] are the energies of the isolated graphene layer and the metallic slab respectively. On the other hand, we define the interaction energy E int as: where Note that the distortion energies include two contributions: a small strain contribution, and the predominant term related to the corrugation of both subsystems While the adsorption energy is related to the stability of the different moiré structures, the interaction energy quantifies the gain associated with the G-metal interaction either by the creation of C-metal bonds or merely by weak dispersive interactions in physisorbed systems. From Table Among the graphene-metal systems, G/Rh(111) system belongs to the strongly interacting group For the structural properties, we calculated the forces and the energies of the G/Rh(111) systems with the primitive PAOs and MSSFs using the same geometries obtained by the primitive PAOs. It is found that the differences are very small, below 0.1 eV/ Å for the forces and 0.05 eV per atom for energy. For the energetics, shown in Table We next explore the electronic properties of the G/O/Rh(111) system. Note that the system is appropriate for this task because of the change in electronic coupling of the graphene layer with the amount of intercalated oxygen at the interface. We first examine the difference between the plane-wave results from VASP and those from the primitive PAO basis sets. Upper panels of Fig. primitive PAO basis sets for different oxygen coverage at the interface, θ O . We can see that the DOS near the large peaks located at E -E F ∼ -3 eV and E -E F ∼ +0.5 eV changes clearly when θ O increases. In all cases, the agreement between the VASP and Conquest results is remarkable. Then, we switch to the comparison between primitive PAO and MSSF calculations, using the same geometry obtained with the primitive PAOs of Conquest. The difference between the two methods are shown in the lower panels of Fig. In this section, we investigate the computational efficiency of the multi-site method to demonstrate the practicality of future large-scale simulations. We compare the computational time for one self-consistent-field (SCF) step with primitive PAOs and with MSSFs for two systems, m0 (1544 atoms) and the same system doubled in size, m0double (3088 atoms). The time for (a) the con- First, we compare the times for m0 moiré structure with the PAOs (#1 in the table) and the MSSFs (#2). The number of the local orbitals, that is the dimension of the Hamiltonian, with the MSSFs, 8112, is almost 3.4 times smaller than that of the primitive PAOs, 27192. Because of the cubic scaling, the computational time for the diagonalization should ideally be 37.7 times smaller and is found to be 33.8 times smaller. In this MSSF calculation, the computational time to construct the MSSFs is much longer than the time of the Hamiltonian diagonalization. Note that the time to construct MSSFs is large because we use large cutoff region (16 bohr) for the MSSFs in the present calculations. Nevertheless, due to the significant reduction of the computational time in the diagonalization, the total time with the MSSFs is about three times smaller than that with the PAOs. Next, we turn to the computational times for the larger m0double system. In the calculation with the PAOs (#3), we had to use fewer MPI processes (on more nodes) than in #1 for optimal memory access. The comparison between #3 and the calculation with the MSSFs (#4) shows that the MSSF method can reduce the diagonalization time dramatically. Although we need additional time to construct the MSSFs, the total computational time is reduced from 37803.5 seconds (more than 10 hours) to 2156.3 seconds (about 0.6 hour)-a speed-up of nearly 20. We also compare the computational times with the MSSFs for m0 (#2) and m0double (#5) systems, using the same number of computer nodes and MPI processes. Since the computational time to construct the MSSFs should be linear with system size, the time should be doubled when we double the system size. Table We can investigate the parallel efficiency by comparing the calculations #6 with 864 MPI processes and #5 with 432 MPI processes. The data shows that the construction of the matrix elements with MSSFs (a) scales quite well, i.e., the ratio #5/#6 should be 2 and actually 1.8 in the present calculation. Although the parallel efficiency for the diagonalization (b) is not as good as in (a), the computational time for one SCF step in #6 is less than 10 minutes and is 1.7 times smaller than that of #5. With this computation time, it would be perfectly possible to perform a full DFT study of such large systems, containing more than 3000 atoms. In this work, we have presented recent calculations on a graphene-rhodium interface using the the localized orbitals implemented in the Conquest code. We employed both standard basis sets based on PAOs and a multi-site projection which allow us to keep the accuracy level of the larger basis set, while using a small support basis, giving significant savings on computational time and memory requirements. The good agreement between these new results and previous plane-wave calculations shows that the Conquest code is a promising tool for large-scale systems containing thousands of atoms, even for complex systems. The multi-site approach shown here lies between full, primitive basis set calculations for small systems (up to a few hundred atoms) and the linear scal-ing approach for large systems (over 10,000 atoms). This approach, that can be implemented in other localized orbitals codes, significantly extends the size of system that can be addressed with DFT calculations on modest computational resources, without using linear scaling approaches. Although Conquest has already shown its potential for many, relatively simple, benchmark systems, our results reported in this work are the first example in which the interaction between delocalized charge states, graphene π-bands, and a metallic substrate has been successfully addressed with this methodology. We have demonstrated how it is possible to simulate very large systems, containing over 3000 atoms, using the contracted multi-site basis set. With this methodology the accuracy to resolve subtle details of the larger basis sets is preserved. In the case of graphene-metal interfaces, this includes the correct calculation of adsorption energies, corrugations, adsorption distances, and electronic structure. a These values are for ionic relaxations. In m14 and related structures, when calculating density of states finer grids are used: 11 × 11 × 1 for hexagonal cells and 11 × 7 × 1 for rectangular cells. FIG. a From Ref.