A new mechanism of low frequency (1/f-like) noise generation is described and analyzed. It is attributed to higher frequency asymmetric resonance modes, which are stimulated by a random factor, e.g. due to thermal excitation. One-dimensional models of bi-harmonic and non-linear asymmetric oscillators are presented to prove the concept, and a method of detecting the effect is developed. The method is then applied to experimental data, in order to show that the effect exists in magnetoresistive readers. Introduction -Many physical systems and devices are designed to work in a quasistatic regime. This means that the system's adaptation to varying input factors is so fast that the system practically follows its instantaneous equilibrium state. Hence, when these factors remain constant, the system output is expected to be constant, corresponding to the equilibrium state, i.e. a local minimum of the energy. However, at finite temperature, the system actually oscillates around this equilibrium with fluctuating amplitude, generating broadband noise. While these effects are present in any device, historically they did not bring much harm to system signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), as the resonance frequencies were typically much larger than the operational frequency range of the device, and the excitation was very small. As a result, a harmonic oscillator approximation could be applied, which produces thermal noise spectra replicating a damped oscillator resonance curve, with a nearly flat and very weak low-frequency (LF) section Noise in electronic devices has been investigated for decades, and its common types (e.g. Johnson, shot or random telegraph) are well understood In this Letter, a concept fluctuating asymmetric oscillator as a possible source of 1/f-type noise is developed. While fluctuating non-linear oscillators also have a long research history Bi-harmonic oscillator model -We will first consider a bi-harmonic oscillator, which has been previously analysed in For convenience we introduce an asymmetry parameter λ ∈ (-1, 1), such that: where and f 0 is the oscillator frequency. We can therefore set a constant free oscillation period for the bi-harmonic system, and use a single parameter λ to control asymmetry. The displacement dependent circular frequency can then be written as: We also have to define a displacement dependent damping coefficient β(x), to be consistent with the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. With α as the damping constant, we obtain: The Langevin equation for our model is: where dots are time derivatives, and η(t) represents the normalized white noise process. The intensity coefficient of η(t) was selected so as to normalize the average excitation energy. The equation can be numerically integrated with one of the standard methods for stochastic differential equations For this demonstration we used τ 0 = 0.2 and α = 0.01. FIG. An expected result is the growing share of resonance harmonics with growing asymmetry. However, even small asymmetry also yields significant LF noise increase. The LF noise profile initially resembles random telegraph signal (RTS) spectra (with a frequency "knee"), making it a challenge to distinguish the discussed effect from random telegraph noise in frequency domain measurements. On the other hand, at high asymmetry it becomes close to 1/f noise with a Hooge coefficient α H approaching 2. This effect of LF noise arising from oscillation asymmetry originates from the fact that the displacement averaged over a single period continues to vary significantly as the oscillation amplitude fluctuates (e.g. due to finite temperature). In order to illustrate this concept, the LF (0 < f < 2) and high frequency (HF, 3 < f < 7) signals were extracted form the simulated waveform using zero phase digital filters FIG. Skew normal distribution oscillator model -The bi-harmonic oscillator model has attractive features for understanding asymmetric oscillations, as resonance frequency and full width at half maximum (FWHM) are independent of excitation amplitude. However, its energy profile is not analytic at the equilibrium point, and it is unlikely to be fully realized in experiments or devices. Actual asymmetric oscillations may reveal very different LF noise spectra. To gain a stronger intuition about expected effects, other models have to be investigated. In particular, in a vertically flipped skew normal distribution (SND) function, The equilibrium signal (characterized by Eq value), corresponding to the lowest amplitudes, is shifted from 0 due to simulated AC coupling. asymmetry is controlled with a single real parameter λ s : This function has been shifted and scaled horizontally and vertically to produce a force profile F λs (x) = -∂E λs (x)/∂x with the slope equal -1 at x = 0 for any λ s , as illustrated in FIG. The Langevin equation can be now written as where β 0 = αω 0 (α is a damping constant). For simplicity, β 0 was assumed to remain independent of x. For x ≪ 1, we have F λs (x) ≈ -x , and the model becomes a damped harmonic oscillator with undamped resonant frequency ω 0 /2π. In the numerical integration of Eq. 7, a piece-wise, polynomial approximation of SND Experimental evidence -The asymmetric oscillation noise has been first proposed as a source of LF noise in magnetic readers Magnetic oscillations correspond to a magnetization vector precession around the effective magnetic field. However, the angles describing this process are not independent, and can be reduced to 1-D problem The actual reader noise waveforms have been collected using a 90000-series Keysight oscilloscope, connected to the external output of an ISI FMR tester A prominent RTS-like LF noise profile is clearly visible here. However, no trace of any RTS process could be detected in the high bandwidth waveform. At the same time, a strong correlation between LF signal and HF instantaneous amplitude (FIG. It turns out that the phenomenon is present in all magnetic readers, but with different intensity Conclusion -It appears that the low frequency noise excess is an immanent feature of all randomly stimulated asymmetric oscillators. The respective LF noise spectra may resemble either RTS or 1/f noise profiles, easily leading to confusion. Detecting the effect is impossible in frequency domain data (i.e. based on power spectra), due to missing information about phase. However, high bandwidth signal in the time domain allows for identification of the effect by checking for a correlation between the LF portion of the signal and the HF amplitude fluctuations. This phenomenon has been experimentally confirmed in thermal noise of magnetoresistive sensors. More thorough analysis -analytic, numerical and experimental -is needed to fully understand all factors (e.g. statistics of the random stimulus, shape of the energy well, etc.) that may influence this kind of LF noise. It may be also expected that many more physical systems, other than magnetic readers, will show such noise when excitation is large enough to reveal oscillation asymmetry.