Superconducting material parameters of the Nb film coating on the Quarter-Wave Resonator (QWR) for the HIE-ISOLDE project were studied by fitting experimental results with the Mattis-Bardeen theory. We pointed out a strong correlation among fitted estimators of material parameters in the BCS theory, and proposed a procedure to remove the correlation by simultaneously fitting the surface resistance and effective penetration depth. Unlike previous studies, no literature values were assumed in the fitting. As surface resistance and penetration depth had a similar dependence on coherence length and mean free path, the correlation between these two parameters could not be eliminated by this fitting. The upper critical field measured by SQUID magnetometry showed complementary constraint to the RF result, and this allowed all the material parameters to be determined. The HIE-ISOLDE Linac [1] is an upgrade project for post-acceleration of heavy ions produced in the ISOLDE facility at CERN The surface impedance of a superconductor at low Radio Frequency (RF) fields was initially obtained from linear response theory. Mattis and Bardeen (MB) were the first to apply the first order perturbation derived in the original paper by Bardeen Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS) Halbritter developed a general algorithm applicable to arbitrary mean free path but RF frequency below half of the superconducting gap The numerical code requires the following five input parameters: (i) BCS coherence length ξ 0 1 (ii) London penetration depth λ L (iii) mean free path of normal conducting electrons l and returns two physics quantities as output: as functions of two macroscopic variables: If the experimental data are to be explained by the BCS theory, ideally, this code should be able to fit the data and determine the input material parameters. The cavity was measured in a vertical cryostat, and had two ports, one for the fundamental power coupler and the other for the pick-up antenna. The coupler was mobile and the external coupling was controlled by a stepper motor. The accelerating field E acc and quality factor Q 0 were obtained from the time constant τ of the field decay, the forward power P f , the reflected power P r , and the transmitted power through the pick-up port P t . The RF measurement is summarized in Appendix A. The surface resistance R s , averaged over the cavity surface, was obtained by the measured where the geometrical factor G was evaluated by the commercial codes CST MICROWAVE where A depends on material parameters, ω is angular resonance frequency, 1.5 < n < 2.0, and R res is a temperature independent component called residual resistance. The first term in (2) looks similar to the formula derived by the BCS-MB theory approximated by constant Matrix elements where T 0 is the starting temperature of DAQ. Figure The fitting procedure was as follows. First, R res was removed by fitting the empirical formula shown in Second, the critical temperature T c was determined by a Meissner effect measurement using the flux-gate sensors around the cavity. Third, the starting temperature of the frequency measurement T 0 was fixed. Finally, the temperature dependent surface resistance R data and shift in effective penetration depth ∆λ were fitted by the numerical calculation of BCS theory to determine remaining four free material parameters (ξ 0 , λ L , l, ∆ 0 /k B T c ). The fitting could be done by minimizing χ 2 defined by Surface resistance as a function of temperature. The dots show data points and the solid is the line best fit. where n Rs and n λ are the number of data points of surface resistance and penetration depth measurement, respectively, and σ Rs (j) and σ λ (j) are their associated standard deviations at point j 4 . There are two sets of parameters, one which gives the minimum χ 2 (R s ) and one which gives the minimum χ 2 (λ). These two results should be consistent and should be averaged, or should converge into one solution after some iterations. However, the strategy described above did not work well. The strong correlations which exist between estimators for the fitting parameters (ξ 0 , λ L , l, ∆ 0 /k B T c ) prevented a non-linear minimizer from finding the solution. In order to see this effect, a grid search was done using Linux cluster. A job for a single CPU was coded as • l scan: 80 points between 25 nm and 185 nm • ∆ 0 /k B T c scan: 10 points between 1.5 and 2.5 • χ 2 calculation for n Rs ∼ 80 and n λ ∼ 50. This single job took several hours by Intel Core Processor i7 (Haswell, no TSX). The jobs were distributed to 700 CPUs by • ξ 0 scan: 35 points between 10 nm and 45 nm • λ L scan: 20 points between 20 nm and 40 nm A typical result of the χ 2 distribution for the surface resistance is shown in Fig. As another group reported In order to obtain the intersection, we considered the sum of the two independent χ 2 s 6 [nm] The result is shown in Fig. This simultaneous fit worked well for most of the sets of parameters: (ξ 0 , λ L ), (λ L , l), (ξ 0 , ∆ 0 /k B T c ), (λ L , ∆ 0 /k B T c ), and (l, ∆ 0 /k B T c ). However, the correlation of (ξ 0 , l) cannot be solved by this method as shown in Fig. In previous studies on bulk Nb, Nb 3 Sn and N-doped bulk Nb However, for the sputtered film cavity, the literature value may not be accurate because the material The other parameters are λ L = 26 nm and ∆ 0 /k B T c = 1.7. The solid line is explained in Sec. One of the promising complements to the RF measurement of the cavity is the measurement of the upper critical field B c2 . This can be done by a small sample representative of the cavity surface. Such a sample was prepared using a dummy cavity, whose geometry is identical to the real cavity, as a sample holder for the DC bias sputtering. The samples thus produced are therefore a good representation of the film on the cavity surface. A series of magnetization measurements of one sample was carried out using SQUID-VSM. Figure The temperature dependence of B c2 was measured as shown in Fig. where C 1 = 0.153, C 2 = 0.152 are fixed, and B c2 (0) is the only free parameter. The number 0.693 changes to 0.72 in the clean limit; thus, the uncertainty by ignoring the mean free path is less than 5%. The solid line shown in Fig. where Φ 0 is the flux quantum, and ξ GL is the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length Note that (11) and ( Since expansion of BCS-Gor'kov theory near T c reproduces the Ginzburg-Landau theory where 1 = R(0) < R(l) < R(∞) = 1.17. Once the material parameters (ξ 0 , l) are provided, ( where t = T /T c . The slope was given by the linear fitting by the dashed line in Fig. The fitted material parameters are summarized in Table The table also contains three different sample measurements. Point Contact Tunneling (PCT) measurement Muon spin rotation μSR when using (ξ 0 , λ L , l) obtained by the the BCS data fitting. The conventional DC 4-contact measurement for Residual-Resistivity Ratio (ρ(300K) /ρ(10K) by DC resistance ρ) was also done The possible different crystal structure of the films on Cu and quartz gives rise to a doubt on the reliability of this measurement. However, its result was consistent with BCS fitting (l ∼ 2.7 × ρ(300K)/ρ(10K) Reference In their study, the Ginzburg-Landau parameter of clean limit κ = 0.96λ L /ξ 0 was fixed at a literature value (0.78), and surface resistance and penetration depth were also independently fitted. The fitted parameters were consistent within two standard deviations. Reference The fitting results of cavity 1 are shown on Fig. The fitting result showed slightly shorter coherence length in sputtered Nb film than bulk Nb. The reason is not clear, but we excluded that this comes from the smaller grain size in the film than bulk. This is because picture analysis of the crystal structure showed that the averaged grain size near the surface is of the order of 100 nm, and still much longer than the fitted coherence length. Instead, the observed grain size is comparable to the fitted mean free path. The crystal grains in cavity 1 cavity 2 PCT μSR DC 4-contact There were weak superconducting junctions or even nonsuperconducting junctions over the surface. In cavity 2, after chemical processes, several cracks were found in the heat affected zone of the welding on the substrate. The cavity was coated without any particular treatment on these cracks. This might indicate that a contamination caused by the chemical polish was left in the cracks and eventually resurfaced during the sputtering process when the substrate was heated up to 620 • C. Also, the film deposited on the crack might grow inhomogeneously and could result in a lower superconducting gap. The cavities and analysis presented in Ref. The material parameters of the Nb sputtered cavity were determined only by the experiment and BCS theory without any literature values. Strong correlations among the parameter estimators were pointed out, and were eliminated by using surface resistance, penetration depth, and the upper critical fields. Some of the fitted parameters showed difference from the literature of bulk Nb in the clean limit. The method shown in this paper is general and can be a standard procedure for the performance analysis of superconducting cavities. theory. The residual resistance is only empirically temperature-independent in this context, but could weakly depend on temperature and might contaminate the BCS term. A unified theory including both BCS and weakly temperature-dependent R res was proposed Therefore, the χ 2 defined here does not necessarily obey the proper χ 2 distribution, and confidence intervals may not be well defined. However, the minimum of the χ 2 can still reliably determine the best fitting parameters. 5 As a sanity check, a dummy data set produced by the BCS code itself was fitted by the same code. The χ 2 converges to zero with the true parameters, but the region of minimum is very narrow and immediately smeared by finite experimental fluctuations. 6 The normalization by the minimum χ 2 enforces the same weight or significance to the two different data. In this analysis, the statistical and systematic errors in the data are overwhelmed by the uncertainty due to the structure of the parameter correlations. The χ 2 variation around the global minimum of this modified χ 2 may not give the statistically well defined confidence intervals. However, this χ 2 still provides a reasonable indicator of the uncertainty of the parameters associated with the correlations.