In this work we use density functional theory (DFT) to investigate the influence of semi-local exchange and correlation effects on the electronic and optical properties of zinc oxide. We find that the inclusion of such effects using the Tran-Blaha modified Becke-Johnson potential yields an excellent description of the electronic structure of this material giving energy band gap which is systematically larger than the one obtained with standard local functionals such as the generalized gradient approximation. The discrepancy between the experimental and theoretical band gaps is then significantly reduced at a computational low cost. We also calculated the dielectric functions of ZnO and find a violet shift to the absorption edge which is in good agreement with experimental results. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a wide band gap semiconductor with promising application in laser diodes, light emitting diodes, transparent electrodes and gas sensors It has been shown that partially or fully self-consistent schemes Recently proposed Tran-Blaha modified version of the Becke-Johnson potential (TB-mBJ) In this work, we use the Tran-Blaha modified Becke-Johnson (TB-mBJ) potential To investigate the optoelectronic properties of ZnO, we have used density-functional theory within the projected augmented wave (PAW) method where is the kinetic-energy and υ BR x,σ is the Becke and Roussel potential where V cell means the unit cell volume, α = -0.012 and β = 1.023 bohr 1 2 are parameters fitted according to experimental values for several materials ZnO has a wurtzite hexagonal crystal structure that belongs to the P 6 3 mc space group with the unit cell containing two Zn cations and two O anions. The lattice parameters are the second nearest neighbor distances and each Zn atom is coordinated by four O atoms which are located at the corners of a slightly distorted tetrahedron. The Zn-O distance along the c axis is about 1.90 Å which is a little shorter than 1.98 Å of its counterpart perpendicular to the c axis. To investigate the optoelectronic properties of ZnO, we firstly calculated the optimized crystal structure of ZnO using the GGA-PBE functional. Thereafter we computed the electronic structure and dielectric functions of ZnO with both GGA-PBE functional and TB-mBJ potential. We found that the GGA-PBE optimized lattice constants for ZnO crystal are a = 3.291 Å and c = 5.266 Å which are in agreement with the experimental values of a = 3.250 Å and c = 5.207 Å The electronic structure of the ZnO has been calculated with GGA-PBE functional and TB-mBJ potential and they are shown in Fig. It is known that DFT calculations using standard functionals give a very small band gap as compared with experimental values. This effect in ZnO is further enhanced due to the underestimation of the repulsion between the Zn 3d states and the conduction band In order to overcome the band gap problem and have a good description of the electronic structure of ZnO, we applied the TB-mBJ potential on top of the GGA-PBE calculations. We found that the calculated DOS with TB-mBJ method possesses approximately similar features to those of pure ZnO with functional GGA-PBE. However in the TB-mBJ DOS (Fig. of ZnO bulk crystal calculated using the GGA-PBE (black line) and TB-mBJ (red line) exchangecorrelation functionals and using G 0 W 0 method (blue line). Results of the dielectric functions for ZnO with a neutral oxygen vacancy obtained using TB-mBJ (green line) method are also presented. The band structure along high symmetry lines in the hexagonal Brillouin zone (BZ) using GGA-PBE functional is shown in Fig. The optical properties of ZnO have been investigated through the imaginary and real parts of the dielectric function. The imaginary part of the dielectric function is calculated directly from the electronic structure through the joint density of states and the matrix elements of the momentum, p, between occupied and unoccupied eigenstates according to: In this equation, e is the electron charge, m the electron mass, Ω is the volume of the crystal, f kn is the Fermi distribution function and kn is the crystal wave function corresponding to the n th eigenvalue E kn with crystal wave vector k. The real part of the dielectric function is calculated from ǫ 2 via the Kramers-Kronig transformation where the integral is evaluated setting the frequency cut-off to be several times larger than the frequency range in order to produce accurate results. In anisotropic materials, dielectric properties must be described by the dielectric tensor. In the case of ZnO, the tensor components can be reduced to only two independent components ǫ xx = ǫ yy = ǫ zz . For materials with weak anisotropy, it has been shown [? ] that the dielectric function can be replaced by an average ǫ = 2ǫxx+ǫzz In Fig. The ε 2 (ω) spectrum of ZnO shows a strong optical anisotropy and it can be roughly divided into three main regions, namely, the low-energy which is the region below 5 eV, the middle-energy one from 5 to 10 eV and the high-energy region above 10 eV. For GGA-PBE calculations, the first peak of ǫ 2 (ω) is located at about 2 eV but it appears as a shoulder at about 3 eV for TB-mBJ results. These features are formed mainly due to electronic transitions at the Γ point occurring between O 2p and Zn 4s orbitals. In the middle energy region, there is one peak located at 6.6 eV for the GGA-PBE and it appears less prominent at 8.2 eV for the TB-mBJ. These peaks in the middle-energy region are mainly derived from the transition at M and L points between the Zn 3d and O 2p orbitals. The high-energy region exhibits two principal peaks, around 10 eV and 12 eV for the GGA-PBE, and 12.3 eV and 14.5 eV for the TB-mBJ. The peaks correspond mainly to the transitions from Zn 3d and O 2s orbitals. The TB-mBJ calculations for ε 2 show a good overall agreement with the experimental results, but still fails compared to G 0 W 0 calculations. The strong absorption peak around xx eV is very broad with TB-mBJ, which is probably due to the wrong description of the charge density. The GW 0 shown in blue gives a different picture, with a strong absorption at 3.15 eV. The results for the real part, ǫ 1 (ω), of the dielectric function are consistent with the GGA-PBE and TB-mBJ calculations of ǫ 2 (ω). By looking at the upper panel of Fig. V. CONCLUSION In this paper we have investigated the electronic and optical properties of zinc oxide by using density function theory including semilocal exchange-correlation potentials and the GW 0 method. We found that the band gap and absorption edge of ZnO are in good agreement with experimental data. However, the intensity of the peaks does not agree well with GW 0 due to the lack of a better description of screening effects. The inclusion of screening effects are primordial to achieve a better agreement with experimental results. Still, the present results strongly support the conclusion that TB-mBJ potential greatly improves the band gaps and electronic structure of simple semiconductors and insulators.