Magnetization switching by spin-orbit torque (SOT) via spin Hall effect represents as a competitive alternative to that by spin-transfer torque (STT) used for magnetoresistive random access memory (MRAM), as it doesn't require high-density current to go through the tunnel junction. For perpendicular MRAM, however, SOT driven switching of the free layer requires an external in-plane field, which poses limitation for viability in practical applications. Here we demonstrate field-free magnetization switching of a perpendicular magnet by utilizing an Iridium (Ir) layer. The Ir layer not only provides SOTs via spin Hall effect, but also induce interlayer exchange coupling with an in-plane magnetic layer that eliminates the need for the external field. Such dual functions of the Ir layer allows future build-up of magnetoresistive stacks for memory and logic applications. Experimental observations show that the SOT driven field-free magnetization reversal is characterized as domain nucleation and expansion. Micromagnetic modeling is carried out to provide in-depth understanding of the perpendicular magnetization reversal process in the presence of an in-plane exchange coupling field. Research efforts in discovering and gaining better understanding of various spin-based physical phenomena over the past decades have propelled the innovation and developments of new generations of memory and logic devices However, the need for an external applied field significantly hinders the technological viability of commercial applications. By far, people have come up with several ways to solve this problem. One approach is by creating geometric asymmetry so that the SOTs acting on the perpendicular magnet could contain perpendicular components Here, we demonstrate the realization of field-free magnetization switching by utilizing an Ir interlayer layer. Ir has been shown capable of generating spin Hall effect The film stack for field-free magnetization switching is substrate/ Co(2)/ Ru(0.85)/ Co(2)/ Ir(1.35)/ Co(1.2)/ Ta(2), with unit in nanometers. Here, the top thin Co layer is naturally perpendicularly magnetized due to the interfacial perpendicular anisotropy arising from the interface with the Ir layer The above argument is further confirmed by the measurements on the devices that have the film stack without the bottom SAF structure (see Supplementary information Fig. It's noteworthy that the use of the SAF structure eliminates the possibility of stray field effect since the two antiparallel magnetized Co layers in the SAF is essentially flux-matched. To understand the nature of current-induced magnetization switching in the presence of the in-plane coupling field in our devices, Kerr microscopy is utilized to visualize magnetization reversal process, as shown in Fig. Recently, CB Seung-heon, et al. To provide further understanding of the experimental observations, the effect of pure spin current in the perpendicular Co layer is modeled by Slonczewski spin transfer torque included Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert damped gyromagnetic equation of motion. The full stack is modeled with the bottom SAF structure set as ⇄. The modeling is carried out by initially creating a reversed domain, or domains, in a perpendicularly saturated top Co layer. Fig. To summarize, we achieved robust field-free magnetization switching by utilizing the SHE and interlayer exchange coupling of Ir. The switching process is dominated by SHE-induced domain wall propagation to achieve the full expansion of reserved domains. Combined modeling study shows that in the presence of the in-plane coupling field, the nucleated domains can expand in all directions and the higher the coupling field, the higher the expansion speed of the reversed domains. The domain wall speed also increases when the magnetization at the center of the wall becomes more parallel to the wall during the motion. It's noteworthy that the film stack we used is easy to be built up with magnetoresistive layers on the top. Meanwhile, the device size should be able to scale down to the dimension of tens of nanometers, which shows its potential for practical applications in memory and logic. All films are deposited at room temperature by magnetron sputtering with base pressure < 2 × 10 -8 Torr. Film-level hysteresis loops are measured by Alternating Gradient Field Magnetometer (AGFM). The films are patterned into Hall-cross devices with 4-μm wide current channel and 1-μm wide voltage channel utilizing e-beam lithography, optical lithography and ion beam etching. To study the SOT-driven magnetization switching, current pulses are injected along the current channel with each pulse length of 100 μs. The amplitude of the current at milliamp (mA) level is swept from negative to positive values and back to negative again. The Hall voltage was measured after each write pulse with a read current of 100 μA. Prior to writing, the moments of bottom SAF is initially set as ⇄ (or ⇆) by applying 1 T magnetic field in +x (or -x) direction. The current density is calculated with taking into the account both the resistivity and cross-section area of each layer. For studying the domain wall propagation during magnetization switching process, 100 ns current pulses are injected and the dynamics of magnetization reversal was tracked by Kerr microscope. For DW modeling in our devices, the interlayer exchange coupling strength between the perpendicular Co layer and the in-plane Co layer sandwiching the Ir layer is varied throughout the study. The top perpendicular Co layer is assumed to have 2 nm thickness with interfacial perpendicular uniaxial anisotropy of Ks = 4 x 10 -3 J/m 2 and saturation magnetization Ms = 1.2 T. The two Co layers in the Co/Ru/Co SAF are assumed to be flux-matched without perpendicular anisotropy and to have antiparallel exchange coupling of ex,SAF = -1.0x10 -3 J/m 2 . The film stack is meshed laterally with each mesh cell of 2 x 2 nm 2 size. The exchange stiffness constant A = 1.6 x 10 -11 J/m is assumed for all three Co layers. A spatially uniform pure spin current with spin polarization along the positive y-direction is assumed corresponding to a charge current density of Jc = 10 12 A/m 2 and a spin Hall angle of 10%. The top Co layer of the SAF is always magnetized along the positive x-direction with essentially uniform magnetization. Zero DMI is assumed for simplification.