Modern wireless communication is one of the most important information technologies, but its system architecture has been unchanged for many years. Here, we propose a much simpler architecture for wireless communication systems based on metasurface. We firstly propose a time-domain digital coding metasurface to reach a simple but efficient method to manipulate spectral distributions of harmonics. Under dynamic modulations of phases on surface reflectivity, we could achieve accurate controls to different harmonics in a programmable way to reach many unusual functions like frequency cloaking and velocity illusion, owing to the temporal gradient introduced by digital signals encoded by '0' and '1' sequences. A theoretical model is presented and experimentally validated to reveal the nonlinear process. Based on the time-domain digital coding metasurface, we propose and realize a new wireless communication system in binary frequency-shift keying (BFSK) frame, which has much more simplified architecture than the traditional BFSK with excellent performance for real-time message transmission. The presented work, from new concept to new system, will find important applications in modern information technologies. Nonlinear effects are typically observed during the interaction of electromagnetic (EM) waves and natural materials in a wide spectrum ranging from microwave to optical frequencies Such phenomena are usually associated with the dielectric polarization responding in a nonlinear way to the intensity of incident field, resulting in radiation fields oscillating at new frequencies or propagating to new directions Recent advances of metamaterials and metasurfaces have provided an unprecedented degree of freedom to manipulate the electromagnetic waves in subwavelength scale, giving rise to the enhanced nonlinearity with giant local fields, and thus offering new possibilities in controlling the intensity, phase, and polarization states of induced harmonics As an alternative approach, by using time-varying metasurface, it has been proved that the normal momentum component of the incident photon makes a difference on the two sides of the metasurface (26,27), enabling spatiotemporal modulation of electromagnetic waves and frequency shifting due to temporal phase gradient28. Nevertheless, this theoretical approach on one hand is lack of simple and elegant way to realize in application (26-28), on the other hand, it still remains a significant challenge to generate arbitrary wave manipulations for both linear and nonlinear frequency components with high precision and high efficiency. Another route to achieve the nonlinear control lies in time-modulated antenna array (29,30). Through simple binary switching of diodes integrated into the array elements, one is able to tailor the radiation patterns at both central and harmonic frequencies, and thus benefit a plenty of applications in microwave engineering. However, this scheme lacks essential response to the external excitations as the natural materials since the harmonics are resulted from the Fourier components of the rapid switching over a built-in source, hereby fails to perceive and respond to external electromagnetic waves in a predefined way, limiting the application area of the method. Moreover, most of research efforts in this field are focused on amplitude modulation of the antenna element, since complicated circuit designs are usually required to implement the desired phase modulations over the high-order harmonics, which will inevitably increase the system complexity and the risk of performance degradation (31). To solve the above difficulties, here we propose a new route to produce and control the nonlinearity of waves in free space with much stronger capabilities by exploiting a time-domain digital coding metasurface with dynamic reflection features. Inspired by spatial-domain digital coding metasurfaces (32,33), complex modulation strategies are employed to tailor the wave-matter interactions and frequency spectrum simultaneously, where discrete reflection phase states of metasurface are altered in digital coding sequences with a controlled manner. We demonstrate that nonlinear process will take place from the temporal modulation of incident waves on the metasurface with accurate controls of both amplitude and phase distributions for all harmonics. A rigorous theory is presented to describe the nonlinear process. To experimentally validate the theory, we fabricate a sample composed of periodic coding element loaded with varactor diode. Driven by different combinations of output voltages from an interface of field programmable gate array (FPGA), the single metasurface can operate many functions by controlling the time-domain digital coding states. This produces a time-domain programmable coding metasurface, which have powerful capabilities to generate and manipulate the nonlinearity, and could trigger some interesting phenomena such as frequency cloaking and velocity illusion. As an application of the time-domain digital coding metasurface, a binary frequency-shift keying (BFSK) communication system is explored within a novel framework in contrast to the classical heterodyne architectures. In the new BFSK system, the two basic carrier frequencies are synthesized directly via the metasurface without using complicated mixing processes, showing great advantages of the time-domain digital coding metasurface. The proposed theory and method will pave a way for simplified and compact communication and radar systems across the frequency range from acoustic, microwave to optics. A coding metasurface is composed of digital units. For 1-bit coding, the two digital units '0' and '1' have either opposite phases or 0 and 1 transmission coefficients. However, the existing references (32-35) have only studied space-domain digital coding metasurfaces to control electromagnetic waves by using different spatial coding sequences. Here, we propose the concept of time-domain digital coding metasurface, in which the digital units are controlled by different periodic time sequences from FPGA, as shown in Fig. Under the excitation of a monochromatic signal E i (f) with frequency f c , the reflected signal from the time-domain digital coding metasurface can be derived as (see Supporting Online Material, SOM): in which f 0 = 1/T (T is the period of the reflectivity function), and a k is the complex Fourier series coefficient at kf 0 : in which, M is the length of coding sequence in one period, Γ m is the reflectivity at the interval (m-1)τ < t < mτ, τ = T/M is the pulse width, and It is clear that a k can be regarded as the product of two terms: the time factor (TF) and unit factor (UF). The former is related to the modulation signal (Γ m ) within different time slots, while the latter is the Fourier series coefficient of the basic pulse with the pulse width τ and repeated with the period T. UF defines the basic spectrum property within one pulse, while TF represents the coding strategy. It is obvious that the time-domain digital coding metasurface is able to generate a number of harmonics f c ± kf 0 by simply controlling the time-domain coding states around the central frequency. Meanwhile, it offers the possibility of nonlinear amplitude and phase manipulations for all harmonics by tuning the coefficients a k using an optimized modulation TF. We remark that the proposed method is essentially different from the traditional mixing techniques, and relies on the dynamic reflections on the coding metasurface to produce the spectral features of incident waves. Modulation methods. To illustrate the nonlinear control capability to the spectral features of reflected waves by the time-domain digital coding metasurface quantitatively, we calculate the spectral distributions of all harmonics under the illumination of monochromatic plane wave. In fact, both amplitude and phase modulations of the reflectivity on metasurface could achieve efficient controls to the nonlinearity. SOM Figure More importantly, the zero th -order harmonic (the central frequency) cannot be eliminated totally since the reflectivity is always positive in the whole period, which makes it impossible to realize frequency cloaking. To circumvent the disadvantages, phase modulation (PM) of the time-domain reflectivity is explored to provide asymmetric spectral responses and promote the modulation efficiency. Figure The frequency cloaking effect can be clearly observed from the far-field scattering pattern. Concerning the on-off dependency of the modulation signal with the binary coding sequence 01010101..., the measured scattering patterns of the metasurface in H-plane are presented in Fig. For 2-bit coding sequences containing four digital states '00', '01', '10', and '11' with the corresponding biasing voltages 0, -6, -9, and -21V, we can achieve reflection responses with the same amplitude but discrete phase states 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°, respectively. The symmetry of the reflection spectra will be broken in the presence of time gradient. This is confirmed by the measured results shown in Fig. The large power conversion rate from carrier to the first harmonics renders the metasurface distinctive capability to realize arbitrary Doppler shift, which is especially useful for simulating echoed signals of real targets with fake Doppler frequency shift to deceive the active radar system, yielding velocity illusions. For instance, a motionless time-domain digital coding metasurface with the frequency shift of ±156.25 KHz (see Fig. New-architecture wireless communication system. The time-domain coding metasurface has demonstrated excellent capability to embed the digital signals into the carrier waves at the radio frequency (RF) in free space, getting rid of the conventional mixing process, which may serve as a brand new architecture for the information transmission (36). As illustrated in Figs. 2E-H and 3G-H, the opposite coding sequences (00-01-10-11 and 11-10-01-00) would enable efficient energy conversion from the central frequency to the +1 th and -1 th order harmonics, hinting that the two spectral lines can be employed as two discrete frequencies required by the traditional BFSK communication system, standing for binary information of '1' and '0' respectively inside the message. The schematic of the new BFSK system is illustrated in Fig. We build up the new BFSK wireless communication system, as shown in SOM Figure SOM Table In summary, we have demonstrated a new theory to control nonlinearity using time-domain digital coding metasurface, whose reflection phase or amplitude can be modulated periodically with pre-defined coding sequences. This time-varying feature allows productions of high-order harmonics through the Fourier transform of the modulation signal, and hence can transfer the energy of the central frequency to harmonics of higher orders. Different from the conventional nonlinear technologies, the proposed time-domain digital coding metasurface offers substantial flexibility and accuracy in the manipulations of the harmonics by simply customizing the coding sequences in a programmable way, resulting in many unusual functions like frequency cloaking and velocity illusion. Based on the time-domain digital coding metasurface, we have proposed a novel wireless communication system with much more simplified architecture. Compared with conventional systems, the hardware complexity of the metasurface-based system is greatly simplified without degrading the system performance. The metasurface-based system also promises a significant potential to reduce the power consumption and improves the energy efficiency, and hence provides new solutions for the future wireless communication systems. 