X-ray and neutron diffraction are well-established techniques for structural determination, whose success allowed the development of materials science. At the same time, simulation techniques are providing with each passing day a deeper insight into the structure and properties of materials. Two main obstacles appear for the cooperation of simulation and experiment. On the one hand, the frequent lack of a degree of uncertainty associated with calculated data. On the other, the concomitant underlying feeling that calculation parameters can be tuned with the explicit aim of matching the experimental results, even at the expense of the quality of the simulation. Without the definition of an error bar for estimating the precision of the calculation, direct comparison of calculated and experimental data can lack physical significance. In this contribution, we employ the well known delocalization error of DFT and HF to develop a simple and robust procedure to quickly estimate an error bar for calculated quantities in the field of solid state chemistry. First, we validate our model on one of the simplest properties of a solid, the geometry of its unit cell, which can be determined experimentally with high accuracy. In this case, our computational window is too large to provide a useful error bar. However, it provides computational material scientists with a pointer on how much a given system is affected by the method of choice, i.e. how much it is sensible to parameter tuning and how much care should be taken in doing it. Then, we move to another quantity which has a greater experimental uncertainty, namely transition pressure, and show that our approach can lead to error bars comparable to experiment. Hence, both experiment and theory can be compared on an even basis taking into account the uncertainty introduced by the scientist, both in the measuring conditions and the tuning of computational parameters. More than a century has passed since the first determination of the structure of a crystal (W.H. and W.L. Bragg, 1913). To introduce the problem, we will start with one of simplest features of a crystal: its cell parameters. Nowadays, a routine X-ray diffractometer measurement provides the cell parameters with an excellent precision, the uncertaintanty being as low as some parts in 10 -4 , even for organic crystals, which can be lessened by a further order of magnitude by employing special techinques. where l db,i and l sb,i are the lengths of adjacent double and single bonds. Large BLAs reveal that double and single bonds are very different in length and vice-versa. The effect of delocalization error can be easily grasped in Figure HF LDA expt. With the aim of testing the hypothesis that HF and LDA can be used to asses the uncertainty of a calculation, we will start by discussing the properties of a set of ionic solids. The HF and LDA values of cell parameter a are reported in Figure The discussion of molecular solids is more complex due to several factors, among which thermal expansion and the contribution of non-covalent interactions are particularly relevant. For small molecules, whose intermolecular distances contribute to the cell size (and thus the cell parameters) to a large extent, thermal expansion is significant and can involve volume expansion up to 8% moving from 0 K to room temperature. As shown in Figure We have shown that the uncertainty associated to DFT calculated cell parameters can be expressed in terms of the HF and LDA values, and that this error is some orders of magnitude higher than the corresponding experimental uncertainty. In this sense, the case of cell parameters is: (i) a proof-of-concept of the validity of our model, (ii) an inductive proof of how this difference can be used to estimate how much a given computation depends on the model (functional) chosen. However, it is not useful in the experiment-theory validation due to the extremely low experimental uncertainty. The mutual validation of measured and simulated quantities along with their error bars can be recovered when tackling experimentally less accessible quantities, such as transition pressures. Transition pressures are commonly used to assess the quality of DFT functionals, Summarizing, we showed that the choice of DFT functional for the simulation of solid systems greatly affects both cell parameters and transition pressures. This is attributed to the well-known delocalization error of DFT, and it has been shown that HF and LDA provide a robust error bar for the calculated values. The amplitude of this error bar can be used not only to identify (and even a priori estimate) which systems are more affected by the density functional used, but in some cases it can also be directly compared with experimental results and their uncertainty. First, we focused on the cell parameters of ionic solids as a proof-of-concept, confirming the validity of our method and showing that the DFT-derived uncertainty is several orders of magnitude superior to the experimental one. Moving to molecular solids, we showed that also the extent of thermal and dispersion effects affect cell parameters to an extent that is by some orders of magnitude inferior to the delocalization error, which is confirmed as the main source of uncertainty. After validating our model on cell parameters, we focused on transition pressures, and showed that for experimentally less precise data, HF and LDA yield an error bar of the same order of magnitude as the experimental one. In this case, the experimental and calculated transition pressure values can be compared directly along with their asso-ciated error bars. The general picture that emerges from this study is that a paradigm shift in the interaction between experimental and computational chemistry is needed. Too often, simulation parameters are tuned case by case to match as closely as possible a given experimental value, when a reasoned approach based on the properties of the solid at hand and its method dependence should be rather preferred. This is because the intrinsic variability associated with the computational method chosen is no lower than the experimental uncertainty, and thus accurately matching the calculated value to the experimental one does not necessarily improve the quality of the simulation. Finally, we have also constructed a solid state dataset of experimental cell parameters and transition pressures that can be used for future benchmarking (see ESI). Out of all these data, we have that the computational error bar encloses in most cases the experimental value data we have collected. Overall, we have devised a simple and robust indicator that provides for any quantity of interest of a material a guide in the choice of the simulation setup.