While the microscopic structure of defected solid crystalline materials has significant impact on their physical properties, efficient and accurate determination of a given polycrystalline microstructure remains a challenge. In this paper we present a highly generalizable and reliable variational method to achieve this goal for two-dimensional crystalline and quasicrystalline materials. The method is benchmarked and optimized successfully using a variety of large-scale systems of defected solids, including periodic structures and quasicrystalline symmetries to quantify their microstructural characteristics, e.g., grain size and lattice misorientation distributions. We find that many microstructural properties show universal features independent of the underlying symmetries. The properties of matter in its solid, crystalline state are typically dictated not only by the elemental composition and lattice structure but also the microstructure, i.e. the distribution of grains and lattice defects. The microstructure can have a great influence on mechanical Characterizing and analyzing microstructures remains a very difficult task, however. While there exist several methods including variational Another open issue concerns aperiodic crystalline structures. In particular, the microstructures of quasicrystals and their impact on physical properties are not well known. Quasicrystals are a group of materials that show no long-range translational order but display longrange orientational order, which makes structural analysis a major challenge with traditional means. In particular, they can have, for example, 5-, 8-, 10-or 12-fold rotational symmetries which are not possible in regular periodic crystals. First discovered in 1984, quasicrystals are today known to form a family of hundreds of metallic alloys and soft-matter systems. Quasicrystals have many potential applications due to their low coefficient of friction, resistance to oxidation In this work, we present and benchmark a powerful variational method for extracting individual grains and analyzing the microstructure in two-dimensional (2D) poly(quasi)crystalline systems from large-scale PFC grain coarsening simulations. We consider both regular square and hexagonal lattice types, as well as quasicrystals with 10-and 12-fold rotational symmetries. We study the sizes, aspect ratios, circularities and neighbor counts of individual grains, as well as the size ratios, misorientations and misalignments between neighboring grains. We demonstrate that the method can be reliably used to quantify the microstructure of 2D crystals and quasicrystals. The remainder of this work is organized as follows: Section II A introduces the grain extraction method and Sec. II B describes the present model systems and the PFC model used to characterize them. In Sec. III A, the performance of the grain extraction method is evaluated and in Sec. III B results of microstructural analysis of different (quasi-)lattice types are given. Section IV concludes and summarizes our results. Appendix A gives more details of our methods and additional results. The grain extraction method proposed here consists of four steps. In the first step, a density field describing a crystalline or quasicrystalline 2D system is transformed into an "orientation field" indicating the crystallographic orientation and crystalline order at each point. In this work, for the sake of concreteness and ease of implementation we consider mainly PFC generated density fields, but virtually any data containing the spatially distributed atomic density is acceptable; see Sec. A 1 in Appendix for examples. Next, a "deformation field" is constructed from the orientation field, highlighting the grain boundaries and isolated dislocations. Then, the system is segmented into "subdomains" via level-fill growth in the deformation field. As the final step, some subdomains need to be merged to recover a structure closer to the true network of grains. This subsection describes these steps in detail. We start with a 2D density field ψ ≡ ψ(x, y), describing a crystalline system, which can be transformed into a smooth, complex-valued orientation field φ whose argument arg (φ) represents the local orientation and whose norm |φ| indicates the local crystalline order, or lack thereof, namely defects. The orientation field φ is given by where * indicates a convolution and G is a Gaussian kernel just wide enough to filter out the atomic-level structure. The kernel K is given in Fourier space by where k = (k x , k y ) and q is a wave number corresponding to a characteristic length scale, say the lattice constant (q = 1 in our PFC model), σ controls the spread of the kernel (σ = 1/5 appears to work in all the cases here), i is the imaginary unit and m indicates the rotational symmetry of the (quasi-)lattice (respectively, m = 2, 4, 6 for stripe, square and hexagonal, or honeycomb, lattices). It appears possible to form φ for various even-fold symmetric (quasi-)lattices. Odd-fold quasi-lattices display double-fold symmetry centers whose degeneracy leads to φ = 0 in the bulk. Figure The defects and changes in the crystallographic orientation can be mapped by the magnitude of the gradient of the orientation field where and give the real and imaginary parts, respectively, while φ x and φ y denote the partial derivatives of φ with respect to the x and y directions. From the gradient, one can construct a filtered, smooth deformation field χ as where a is the lattice constant, W and H are the dimensions of the system, and p is a tunable exponent (to be discussed in detail in Sec. III A). The right-hand side of Eq. ( Quite often some grains contain multiple local minima of χ and are consequently subdivided into multiple subdomains. As a final step of the grain extraction algorithm, neighboring subdomains are merged if they satisfy certain conditions. Various criteria were considered but a simple misorientation-based criterion was found to be sufficient: merge neighboring subdomains if the relative difference between the two lattice orientations θ < θ * . The optimal choice of θ * for each lattice type is discussed in Sec. III A. Figure Regarding the computational cost of the method, its two bottlenecks are computing the deformation field χ and the subdomain growth step. We implemented the several convolutions in the former using parallelized fast Fourier transforms. The latter was realized as a serial iterative algorithm due to its complexity. We expect that the latter step can be sped up significantly by using a better, parallelized algorithm. It takes on the order of a few minutes for a quad-core desktop PC to fully process a system of 8192 × 8192 grid points. The computational performance of the method is discussed in more detail in Sec. A 2 in the Appendix. We applied the grain extraction method to study the microstructure and its evolution in polycrystalline systems of different lattice types. We considered regular square and hexagonal lattices, as well as 10-and 12-fold quasicrystalline ones. Random polycrystalline 2D systems were obtained from large-scale grain coarsening simulations carried out using a two-mode PFC model. PFC models are a family of continuum methods for structural and elastoplastic modeling of crystalline matter at the atomistic scale. The main advantage with PFC models is the access to long, diffusive time scales over which microstructure evolution takes place. Mesoscopic systems can be handled readily with atomic-level resolution. Systems modeled using PFC are described in terms of smooth, classical density fields ψ whose evolution is governed by a free energy functional where R is related to temperature, N = 1 or 2 indicates the number of modes, and the wave numbers q n control the periodic length scales in ψ. We evolved ψ forward in time assuming diffusive dynamics as where δ/δψ indicates a functional derivative with respect to ψ. Diffusive dynamics strictly conserve the average density ψ that, together with R and q n , controls the lattice type. The average densities and model parameters used for the four different lattice types considered in this work are given in Table For the original PFC model with N = 1, for parameters where the hexagonal phase has the lowest energy, the liquid phase is always linearly unstable with respect to small deformations The method was also tested on molecular dynamics (MD) generated data of free-standing polycrystalline monolayer graphene to investigate the impact of thermal fluctuations -giving rise to displacements of atoms and to out-of-plane buckling of the sheet -on the performance of the method. First, relaxed PFC density fields for polycrystalline graphene were converted into sets of atomic coordinates. The approx. 48 × 48 nm 2 systems were thermalized at both 1 K and 300 K using a GPUMD code This subsection is dedicated to the assessment of the performance of the grain extraction method and to its optimization to reproduce the hand segmentations of the authors of the patched network of grains in a polycrystalline system. The preliminary networks of subdomains are first investigated, before optimizing subdomain merging step to match human judgment. Lastly, the method's applicability to molecular dynamics data is demonstrated. A prerequisite for capturing the correct grain structure is a patchwork of subdomains that captures the outlines of the grains. Figure We compared the method to a previous atom-based method from Ref. The final grain structures obtained from the subdomain merging step were benchmarked and optimized against hand segmentations of grain network images. The hand segmentations were generated by first plotting the subdomains given by the method. Authors PH, KRE and GMLaB then used image manipulation software to recolor the subdomains, using (non-)identical colors for two neighboring subdomains to indicate that they should (not) be merged. The manipulated images were loaded into the grain extraction program and the code merged the subdomains accordingly for further analysis. For each lattice type, multiple systems at different time steps and with different average grain sizes were considered. A more comprehensive assessment was carried out for hexagonal systems for which PH, KRE and GMLaB all prepared their own hand segmentations. The agreement between the segmentations of the code and those of the authors was measured by calculating the fraction of neighboring subdomain pairs that were treated, i.e., merged or not merged, similarly. The misorientation limit θ * for the merging criterion was varied to find the optimal value for each lattice type. For the norm of the gradient |∇φ| p in Eq. ( Figure where S is the total area of a system and N is the number of grains in it. Comparison to the previous method was carried out similarly to the hand segmentations by comparing the colors in the image files representing the numerical segmentation. The segmentations of the previous method were prepared using the fixed set of parameters found optimal in Ref. Based on Fig. Figure Last, Fig. At 300 K, the method ends up merging -erroneously to our opinion -the two grains at the top of the figure. At 1 K, the dumbbell-shaped composite of two subdomains at the periodic corner of the figure is treated as two separate grains as their misorientation θ > θ * = 2 • . At 300 K, the method considers the corresponding set of subdomains a single grain. Another noticeable difference between the high and the low temperature configurations is the delineation between the grains in lower right, but this case is a somewhat ambiguous one. The present grain extraction method was used to analyze the microstructure and evolution of four different lattice types. Regular periodic square and hexagonal lattices as well as 10-and 12-fold quasi-lattices were studied to compare and to shed light on the microstructure especially in quasicrystals. Various microstructural properties were investigated, but to focus on the most relevant results and to keep this section concise, part of the results are given in detail in Sec. A 3 in the Appendix. A brief summary of these results is given here. All values and error bars plotted here are the mean and the standard error, respectively, of parallel realizations of model systems. Unless stated otherwise, results for the lattice types will be listed in the order of increasing m: square, hexagonal, 10-fold and 12-fold. For the four lattice types, 16, 16, 32 and 32 parallel realizations of PFC grain coarsening simulations were conducted. All realizations had a size of 8192 × 8192 grid points and the spatial discretizations were ∆x = ∆y = 0.55, 0.8, 0.5 and 0.4. The systems were evolved for 5 × 10 6 time steps each and the time step sizes were ∆t = 0.5, 0.4, 0.02, 0.01. We also compared our systems to random Voronoi tessellations in some instances. A total of 100 random seed points was sampled into each periodic Voronoi system of 4096 × 4096 grid points. A total of 1000 parallel realizations were generated. As an archetypal benchmark of microstructural analysis, we first consider grain growth. Based on theoretical models where α, t 0 and β are fitting parameters, β known as the growth exponent. While curvature Figure Figure Figure Regarding hexagonal systems, a slight preference toward smaller misorientations has previously been reported For the square lattice, we carried out grain boundary energy calculations using symmetrically tilted bicrystals to investigate the possibility of a connection between the features of the grain boundary energy and the misorientation distributions. However, the grain boundary energy measured appears very smooth and virtually featureless as a function of the tilt angle, and shows no kinks that could explain the excess observed at θ ≈ 15 • . We also investigated the grain boundary energies of symmetrically tilted grain boundaries for 12-fold quasicrystals, but again the energies obtained show no hints of particularly low-energy boundaries around θ ≈ 7 • . We must point out, however, that our analysis was not exhaustive and may have failed to detect hypothetical narrow kinks in grain boundary energy. In fact, unpublished results of author CVA show evidence of a possibly related kink at θ ≈ 5.5 • which is in agreement with the interface dynamics when growing quasi-crystals from two seeds of different size The rest of the microstructural results are given in full detail in Sec. A 3 of the Appendix. Table IV lists all main results from this section. The grain aspect ratios, i.e., the ratio of the shorter principal axis to the longer, were found to be modest with averages 0.70, 0.66, 0.72 and 0.71 (at t/∆t = 5 × 10 6 ), meaning that the most grains are slightly elongated. This is in reasonable agreement with random Voronoi tessellations with an average of 0.63. The aspect ratios are normally distributed. The grain misalignment, or the angle between the longer principal axes of two neighboring grains, shows tendency toward mutual alignment. In contrast, random Voronoi tessellations disfavor intermediate misalignments. We ascribe this difference to PFC's ability to capture the interactions and anisotropy of grain boundaries where A is grain area and P its perimeter, for all lattice types. The average circularities are 0.76, 0.75, 0.78 and 0.77 (at t/∆t = 5 × 10 6 ), all slightly less circular than a square In this paper we have introduced and comprehensively benchmarked an efficient and accurate method for extracting grains and analyzing the microstructure in 2D poly and quasicrystalline solids. The present method was optimized for different periodic and quasi-lattices based on manual segmentations. A high level of agreement was achieved in all cases. We expect that the accuracy of the method could be further improved by utilizing machine learning techniques for the final subdomain merging step of the method. We also showed that the present method is applicable to molecular dynamics generated data of free-standing graphene. It should also be possible to modify the method to segment diffuse microstructures from phase field simulations. Generalizing this method to 3D lattices and quasi-lattices would be more complicated, but also extremely valuable. We used the method to analyze the microstructures of various lattice types. We considered both regular periodic square and hexagonal lattices, as well as 10-and 12-fold symmetric quasicrystals. We studied the sizes, aspect ratios, circularities and neighbor counts of individual grains; also the size ratios, misorientations and misalignments between all pairs of neighboring grains. For the most part, we observed good agreement with previous works for the hexagonal lattice, and also very similar behavior between all four lattice types, suggesting that many microstructural properties are universal beyond lattice symmetry. However, a particularly interesting case is that of lattice misorientation between neighboring grains. A previous work reported a slight preference toward smaller misorientations for hexagonal lattices, but we observed a preference toward larger misorientations. This issue was resolved by analyzing model systems used in the previous work -we found the same preference toward smaller misorientations. This suggests that the distribution of misorientations is sensitive not only to the lattice type, but also to the exact model and its parameters being used. For square lattice and 12-fold quasicrystal, an excess of boundaries is observed with a misorientation of θ ≈ 15 • and θ ≈ 7 • , respectively. We sought an explanation from grain boundary energy calculations and ruled out wide kinks in grain boundary energy as culprits of the excesses observed. We expect the present work to be valuable in the study of both regular periodic crystals and quasicrystals. While phase field crystal has been used succesfully in the past to study quasicrystals, we have here demonstrated largescale coarsening simulations of polyquasicrystalline microstructures. We have also presented a powerful new method for analyzing those microstructures. A very limited number of related approaches have been demonstrated for regular periodic crystals, but the present one is a first for quasicrystals, opening a new door for understanding quasicrystalline microstructures. Appendix A: Appendix Virtually any 2D scalar field, or a norm of a complexvalued or a vector field, ψ can be transformed into a corresponding orientation field φ assuming that ψ displays periodic patterns with a fixed length scale and an even-fold rotational symmetry. As an example, Fig. The grain extraction method was implemented as two pieces of code, one being parallel C code and the other serial Java code. Computation of the orientation field φ and the deformation field χ are incorporated into the C code which utilizes MPI and FFTW for efficient parallel computation. The subdomain growth and merging steps, as well as analysis and visualization tools comprise the serial Java code. We report here rough estimates of the execution times and memory usage for the largest system size considered in this work, namely 8192 × 8192 grid points. The square lattice system used for performance assessment had a total of 1084 grains. For benchmarking, the codes were run on a workstation with Intel Xeon E3-1230 v5 processor. Computation of φ and χ takes approx. 90 s (wall clock time) using the C code with 8 parallel MPI processes. Maximal memory usage was approx. 4.0 GB. With the serial Java code, the subdomain growth step takes approx. 90 s, whereas merging the grains only approx. 10 ms. Initialization and reading data take approx. 40 s. Tracing the grain boundaries and carrying out principal component analysis for the principal axes of the grains take approx. 3 s and 60 s, respectively. The maximal memory usage was approx. 10 GB. We dedicate this paragraph to discussion on potential performance improvements. Due to the greater complexity of the subdomain growth and merging steps, they were implemented using the more user-friendly Java programming language. The serial subdomain growth step is the performance bottleneck -the parallel computation of φ and χ can be sped up, up to some extent, by utilizing more CPU cores. Currently, the grid points are first sorted in the ascending order of χ using the sort method of the Collections Java class, and the grid points are then traversed in this order and assigned to the growing subdomains. A more efficient implementation would replace global sorting with local comparisons and would grow the subdomains on multiple fronts in parallel, starting from each local minimum in χ. Another fairly obvious performance improvement would be to implement the method in a single piece of code. This would eliminate the current need to write and read φ and χ to and from disk. Lastly, coarse graining could be exploited to reduce both the execution times and memory usage. Significant downsampling of φ for computing χ, and downsampling of both φ and χ for subdomain growth, could be feasible. The grain extraction method was applied to study the microstructures of four different lattice types: square and hexagonal periodic lattices as well as 10-and 12fold quasilattices. Major results are given in the main text, but we report here further related results. While the full details of these results are given here, they are also summarized in the main text. All values and error bars plotted here are the mean and the standard error, respectively, of parallel realizations of model systems. Figure Figure Figure where A is the grain area and P its perimeter Figure We calculated the grain boundary energy of symmetrically tilted boundaries for the square lattice to investigate if the excess of grain boundaries with misorientation θ ≈ 15 • is caused by energetically favored boundaries at such misorientation. Similarly to our earlier work where L ⊥ is the length of the rectangle-shaped model system in the direction perpendicular to the grain boundaries, the factor 1/2 comes from the fact that there are two grain boundaries in a periodic bicrystalline system, f is the free energy density of the relaxed, defected bicrystal and f eq is the free energy density of the ground state. We considered a representative set of high-symmetry, or short period boundaries. The bicrystal halves were fitted with the computational unit cell in the direction of the grain boundaries. The bicrystal halves were initialized with a sharp interface. Possible finite size effects were assessed by doubling system dimensions; virtually identical results were obtained. The grain boundary energy appears very smooth and essentially featureless; no obvious downward kinks in energy, corresponding to low-energy boundaries that could explain the excess detected, are observed. Simulated annealing or perturbing the potentially metastable grain boundary configurations in other ways could possibly help reduce the energies, but we do not expect any pronounced kinks to appear in the energy. A similar grain boundary energy analysis was carried out for the 12-fold quasicrystals to shed some light on the excess observed at θ ≈ 7 • . Calculating the grain boundary energies of quasicrystals in a similar manner is more complicated, because they cannot be fitted to a periodic calculation unit cell due to their aperiodic nature. As a consequence, phasonic flips will occur in the vicinity of the interfaces between a grain and its periodic images. A simplified schematic of the biquasicrystal layout is given in Fig. where S is the area of the system, γ is the energy of the grain boundaries (highlighted in red in Fig. Computational performance of the grain extraction method