The prospect of additional energy yield and improved reliability have increased commercial interest in bifacial solar modules. A number of recent publications have quantified the bifacial gain for several configurations. For example, a standalone, optimally-tilted bifacial panel placed over a flat ground (with 50% albedo) is expected to produce a bifacial energy gain of 30% (per module area). In contrast, for a panel array in a solar farm, self and mutual shading reduce the bifacial gain at the same tilt to 10-15% (per farm area). Bifacial gain is negligible for vertical arraysalthough the configuration is of significant interest, since it can prevent soiling. Here, we calculate the bifacial gain of a solar farm where vertical arrays have been placed over sculpted/patterned ground. We conclude that vertical panels straddling (upward) triangle-shaped ground maximizes the energy output. For this optimum configuration, the bifacial gain can approach 50%, especially for regions with moderate to high cloudy conditions. The enhanced output, along with reduced soiling loss and lower cleaning cost of the ground sculpted vertical bifacial (GvBF) solar farm could be of significant technological interest, especially in regions such as the Middle East and North Africa (MENA), particularly susceptible to significant soiling losses. Monofacial panels are the most commonly used panel configuration in today's photovoltaic (PV) industry. Recent trends, however, show a steady increase in the share of bifacial panels in the PV market, and ITRPV also predicts further increase in market share of bifacial PV over the next decade Allowing light to be captured from both faces thereby creating a 'bifacial' panel dates back to the early 1980s The analysis of large solar farms Given the relatively small bifacial gain for vertical farms, one might consider resurrecting the ideas of Cuevas et al. (in the context of the solar farms) to improve the energy output of the bifacial solar farms. Recall that Cuevas et al. In this paper, we infuse the idea of low concentration PV with vertical bifacial PV by artificially sculpting the ground to enhance albedo collection on the two faces of the panel. We have developed a model to analyze arbitrarily shaped ground between periodic arrays of vertical panels. The diurnal and seasonal variations of sun path and solar illumination are taken into account using our previously developed model In our numerical model (see Fig. The daily average meteorological NASA data In this paper, we consider an array of vertically placed bifacial panels facing East-West (E-W). Conventionally, the ground is kept horizontal and flat. However, intuitively, we expect additional albedo reflection if the ground is sculpted. In general, the panels may be elevated over arbitrarily patterned ground (as shown in Fig. In early mornings and late afternoons, shadows cast by the sun are longer, which can create mutual shading between neighboring rows. Such non-uniform illumination may cause reverse breakdown in series-connected cells. We assume three bypass diodes sub-dividing the panel to minimize the adverse effect of non-uniform illumination As the panels are E-W facing, it is straightforward to calculate the angle of incidence (AOI: θ (F) or θ (B) ) between the direct solar beam and the front (or back) face of the panel Here, F dz-sky is the view factor from a point z on the panel to the unobstructed part of the sky. The power output contribution from direct and diffused sunlight does not depend on the panel to ground distance, nor the shape or reflectivity of the ground (assuming that the ground is shaped such that it does not cast shadows on the panels). In general, a view factor F A-B represents the fraction of radiation collected by surface B emitted from surface A. The expressions for the view factors used in this paper are straightforward and can be found in prior literature or textbooks To calculate the albedo collection from the diffused sunlight, we first find the amount of diffused sunlight collected on the sculpted ground under the PV array configuration. Then we can assume the light reflected by the ground as a source of light to be collected by the panels. The amount of diffuse illumination hitting segment Δs on the sculpted ground can be written as: Here, F Δs-sky (s) is the view factor from the segment Δs at position s on the ground to the unobstructed part of the sky. We can now write the corresponding albedo collection on the panels (front face) as follows: Here, F dz-Δs (F) is the view factor from position z on the panel to the ground segment. The contribution from adjacent periods in the array is small; we therefore only consider the collection of light from ground to panels within the relevant period. The configuration shown in Fig. where ρ j is the diffuse reflection of each element. In (5), the initial reflection from an element of index i is e i = ρ i H i , where H i is the initial solar irradiation received on the ground element. The view factor between surface elements F ji accounts for multiple reflections between surfaces enclosed. In an enclosure with N surface elements, ( where . The view factor matrix F contains the mutual view factors between elements involved in the enclosure, with self-view factors F ii = 0, since all the elements are assumed to be flat. It is worth mentioning that the radiosity computation in its form in ( For the problem of an array of periodic vertical solar panels mounted on or elevated above the ground, we assume that the ground and the panels are infinitely extended in one direction. Thus, the corresponding view factors can be simply computed using the crossed-strings method In principle, elevated panels above the ground surface can receive albedo light reflection from all exposed points on the ground. However, the view factors between a given panel and a ground segment will decrease considerably with the separation distance between them The shadow of the panel on the ground changes with the solar elevation angle. Over the of the day, only the portions of the ground that are exposed to sunlight are contributing to direct albedo reflection. In some situations, an adjacent panel or a sculpted ground segment can block a portion of the light reflected by the ground, thus reducing the view factor between ground segments and the panel. These situations are computed carefully in the model. Similar calculations will result in the illumination collection components for the back face as well. All the light collection components by the panel faces are now used to estimate hourly panel output (assuming 3-bypass diode per panel) based on the analytical approach in Ref. The model described above can calculate the albedo light collection from arbitrarily curved surface. The curved surface is of course symmetric around the center of the period due to the vertical panel array configuration. Therefore, as a first order estimate, using Hottel's crossed string rule There are three questions that we want to answer: (i) Is there an optimum ground pattern? (ii) Given the pattern, what is the optimum period for the panel array? (iii) What improvement, if any, can we expect from the optimized panel array? Consider the three ground patterns shown in Fig. Next, as we increase the height r of the triangular ground, essentially tilting the ground towards the panel, thereby steering the albedo light mostly towards the panel faces. As a result, we observe that the output increases as we increase r. However, if r is increased beyond (h/2), the ground would cast a shadow on the panels and the output will reduce dramatically. Therefore, for ground mounted panels (i.e., y 0 = 0), the triangular ground height can at most be half the panel size, i.e., r = -and, as discussed above, this will also result in the highest possible output with optimized period p. In general, we would choose r = y 0 + for panels fixed at elevation y 0 . Finally, we need to optimize y 0 . As we increase y 0 , the 'viewing angle', i.e., view factor between a panel face and the illuminated part of the ground reduces, thereby reducing the albedo collection. Moreover, with increasing y 0 , larger portion of the ground is exposed to each other. This increases light scattering in between the ground faces (similar to the ground shape G3) and increases scattering loss on the ground. We can therefore conclude that, ground mounting (y 0 = 0) the panels are the best choice for this configuration. On the other hand, as seen in literature To summarize, we can set y 0 = 0, r = and then optimize period p to maximize yearly yield. The optimum value of p will depend on the location on earth and the weather (i.e., clearness index). Let us now focus specifically on various locations on earth at latitude 0 ∘ N. At a given latitude, sunlight travels through the same thickness of atmosphere (air mass). This results in the same terrestrial insolation under a clear sky assumption. However, as the sky clearness is different at various longitudes, we observe variation in GHI, DNI, and DHI, even at same latitude. We compare the yearly yield of ground sculpted vertical bifacial PV farm (GvBF), conventional vertical bifacial PV farm (vBF), and optimally tilted monofacial PV farm in Fig. The integrated annual yield of the various PV farms (optimized) are shown in Fig. The GvBF (with R A = 0.5) shows exceptional advantage over vBF as well as monofacial farm. As shown in Fig. In this work, we presented a numerical model for vertical bifacial panel arrays elevated to a specified height upon a strategically patterned ground. The model was applied to study the optimum elevation and ground shape for maximum annual yield. We predict that the optimum condition is achieved when the vertical panels of size are placed on the ground (no elevation) with the ground sculpted to an upward triangle pattern with height . Using a ground material designed to have an effective albedo reflection R A = 0.5, the optimal ground sculpted vertical bifacial PV farm (GvBF) yields more energy than the monofacial farm. In fact, compared to the optimum monofacial farm, the GvBF has 50% more annual energy output in regions with somewhat cloudy sky (k TA < 0. 5). Here, we have focused on vertical bifacial panel arrays, which can have much less soiling than tilted monofacial panels. In our analysis, we have assumed an extra 10% soiling loss for the tilted monofacial panels. This value is not absolute for all practical situations-it will vary with the local soiling rate as well as the cleaning cycle-and can be much worse. In the end, the integrated energy output along with bifacial versus monofacial panel costs, and the cleaning costs (integrated over the farm lifetime) will define the difference in the levelized cost of energy (LCOE). In our studies of energy yields, we found that the proposed GvBF configuration will have significant advantages over the conventional monofacial farms, especially, but not only, in moderately to highly-cloudy locations.