Some materials can have the dispersionless parts in their electronic spectra. These parts are usually called flat bands and generate the corps of unusual physical properties of such materials. These flat bands are induced by the condensation of fermionic quasiparticles [1-3], being very similar to the Bose condensation. The difference is that fermions to condense, the Fermi surface should change its topology [1-4], leading to violation of time-reversal (T) and particle-hole (C) symmetries. Thus, the famous Landau theory of Fermi liquids does not work for the systems with fermion condensate (FC) so that several experimentally observable anomalies have not been explained so far. Here we use FC approach to explain recent observations of the asymmetric tunneling conductivity in heavy-fermion compounds and graphene [5-7] and its restoration in magnetic fields, as well as the violation of Leggett theorem Many strongly correlated Fermi systems like heavyfermion (HF) metals and high-T c superconductors (HTSC) can be viewed as those where the familiar description in terms of the Landau Fermi liquid (LFL) theory fails. Instead, these systems demonstrate the socalled non-Fermi liquid (NFL) properties, which exhibit the violation of the time-reversal (T-invariance) and the particle-hole (antiparticle) (C) invariance. A powerful experimental tool to detect these violations is a tunneling conductance. It is common knowledge that LFL theory preserves both T and C symmetries so that the differential conductivity dI/dV , I being the current and V the bias voltage, is a symmetric function of V . It has been predicted that the conductivity becomes asymmetric for HF metals like CeCoIn 5 and YbRh 2 Si 2 whose electronic system undergoes special transformation in a way that some part of their spectrum becomes dispersionless, forming the so-called flat bands In many common superconductors the density n s of superconductive electrons is equal to the total electron density n t , a manifestation of the well-known Leggett's the-orem There are challenging experimental observations, indicating the universal scaling: (ρ is the resistivity and λ 0 is the zero temperature London penetration depth) for large number of strongly correlated HTSC's Direct experimental studies of quantum phase transitions in HTSC and HF metals are of great importance for understanding the underlying physical mechanisms, arXiv:1806.00438v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 1 Jun 2018 responsible for their anomalous properties. However the experimental studies of HF metals and HTSC are difficult since the corresponding critical points are usually concealed in the presence of the other phase transitions like the antiferromagnetic (AF) and/or superconducting. Recently the challenging properties of tunneling conductivity manifesting themselves in the presence magnetic field were observed in a graphene with a flat band To determine the tunneling conductivity, we should first calculate the tunneling current I through the point contact between two metals as a function of the voltage V . The best way to calculate I(V ) is to use the method of Harrison Here t 12 is the transition matrix element, N 2 (0) is the density of states (at ε = 0, see above) in the state 2 and n 1,2 are electron occupation numbers in the states 1 and 2 respectively. Then, the total tunneling current I is proportional to the difference between those from 1 to 2 and from 2 to 1 so that ( The matrix element t 12 was calculated using the WKB At T = 0.0001EF (blue curve), the single particle spectrum ε(k, T ) is almost flat (marked "Flat band") in the range k f -ki (ki and k f stand for initial and final momenta for FC realization respectively, with k = p/pF ) so that the distribution function n(k, T ) becomes more asymmetric with respect to the Fermi level EF , generating the NFL behavior and both C-and T-invariance break. To illuminate the asymmetry, the area occupied by holes in panel (b) is marked by letter "h", while that for quasiparticles is marked by letter "p". (Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin) approximation , where t is the transition amplitude. Multiplying the above expression by 2 to account for the electronic spin and integrating over energy ε leads to the following result Here n F (ε) is the electron occupation number for a metal without FC. In the expression (3), we use the atomic units e = m = = 1, where e and m are electron charge and mass, respectively. Since temperature is low, n F (ε) can be approximated by the step function θ(ε-μ), where μ is the chemical potential. It follows from Eq. (3) that quasiparticles with the single particle energy ε, μ-V ≤ ε ≤ μ, contribute to the current, and I(V ) = c 1 V and σ d (V ) = dI/dV = c 1 , with c 1 = const. Thus, in the framework of LFL theory the differential tunneling conductivity σ d (V ), being a constant, is a symmetric function of the voltage V , i.e. σ d (V ) = σ d (-V ). In fact, the symmetry of σ d (V ) holds if the C and T symmetries are observed, as it is customary for LFL theory. Therefore, the existence of the symmetric σ d (V ) is quite obvious and common in case of contact of two ordinary (i.e. those without FC) metals, regardless are they in normal or superconducting states. The situation becomes quite different if we are dealing with a strongly correlated Fermi system locating near FCQPT, forming flat bands Here one of the distribution functions of ordinary metal n F in the right side of Eq. ( becomes finite and we obtain In (5) p F is the Fermi momentum, c is a constant of the order of unity. Note that the conductivity ∆σ d (V ) remains asymmetric also in the superconducting phase of either HTSC or HF metals. In that case it is again the occupation number n(p) that is responsible for the asymmetric part of ∆σ d (V ), since this function is not appreciably disturbed by the superconductive pairing. This is because the superconductive pairing is usually weaker then Landau one, forming the function n(p) the hard magnetization direction, B c, with B c 0.7 T FIG. ential conductivity, ∆σ d (V ), is displayed in Fig. FIG. One can measure the differential resistance dV /dI as a function of current I. In fact, the symmetry properties of this function is the same as those of σ d (V ): under the application of a magnetic field the asymmetry of the differential resistance vanishes as the system transits to a normal Fermi liquid state. The differential resistance dV /dI of graphene as a function of a direct current I for different magnetic fields B is reported in Fig. Disappearance of the asymmetric part of the differential conductivity in Fig. Recent striking experimental results of Boẑović et al n el , where n F C is the density of particles in FC state Another experimental result It has been shown in Ref. spans over several orders of magnitude in λ 0 signifying the robustness of the above law. At the phase transition point T = T c , relation (6) yields the well-known Holmes law (Ref. where σ = ρ -1 is the normal state dc conductivity. It has been shown by i.e. dρ/dT is indeed given by the expression (6). Equation (8) demonstrates the concept that fermion condensation can explain all the above experimentally observed universal scaling relations. Note that the presented FC approach is not affected by the microscopic non universal features of the substances under study. This is due to the fact that the FC state is protected by its topological structure, representing a new class of Fermi liquids The main message of the present paper is that if the electronic spectrum of a substance by some reasons has the dispersionless part, called flat bands, this is exactly what is responsible for a many puzzling and nontrivial experimentally observable features of this substance. This is notwithstanding the different microscopic properties (like crystalline symmetry, defect structure etc) of these substances. Explanation for that stems from the fact that the fermion condensation most readily occurs in the substance with the flat bands. The experimental manifestations of FC phenomenon are varied, which means that different experimental techniques are suitable to detect them. We have shown that one of such techniques is the scanning tunneling microscopy. The reason is that it is sensitive to both the density of states and quasiparticle occupation numbers, which makes it suitable for studying the effects related to the violation of the particle-hole symmetry and to the time-reversal invariance. The violation of the particle-hole symmetry and of the time-reversal invariance leads to the asymmetry of the differential tunneling conductivity and resistance to the applied voltage V or current I. Based on the recent experimental results, we have demonstrated that the asymmetric part of both the conductivity and the resistivity vanishes under the application of magnetic field, as predicted in Refs. 