Upon excitation with an intense ultrafast laser pulse, a symmetry-broken ground state can undergo a non-equilibrium phase transition through pathways dissimilar from those in thermal equilibrium. Determining the mechanism underlying these photo-induced phase transitions (PIPTs) has been a long-standing issue in the study of condensed matter systems The understanding of equilibrium phase transitions caused by spontaneous symmetry breaking is a hallmark achievement of 20th-century physics. When these transitions are induced by adiabatic cooling from a disordered to an ordered phase, they are marked by a diverging correlation length and correlation time of equilibrium fluctuations at the transition temperature, T c PIPTs present a unique platform whereby nonadiabatic transitions can be studied. They have emerged as an intense research field in recent decades Materials that exhibit a unidirectional incommensurate CDW are well-suited for investigating PIPTs. Topological defects in these systems, such as dislocations, have been classified theoretically In this work, we use three different time-resolved probes to gain insight into the light-driven phase transition kinetics (see Methods). In each probe, an incident pump pulse perturbs or melts the CDW, and a delayed probe pulse is utilized to measure the ensuing dynamics of the relevant observable. We employ ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) to probe the long-range density correlations The material we choose to study is the unidirectional CDW compound LaTe 3 . It has a simple phase diagram We first describe the UED experiments, which monitor the structural modulation through the intensity and width of diffraction peaks. These experiments, carried out in a transmission geometry, are sensitive to both the amplitude and phase coherence of the CDW Following photoexcitation at t = 0, the integrated intensity of the superlattice peak initially decreases within ∼ 1 ps (Fig. We next study how the time evolution of the superlattice peak changes with excitation density, F , shown in Fig. The CDW amplitude -the first factor in the above list -recovers on a quicker timescale than the phase coherence, as we demonstrate in the following. For this purpose, we examine the structural Bragg peaks. In theory, their dynamics reflect the response of only the CDW amplitude, whereas superlattice peaks additionally retain information about the phase coherence To confirm this picture, we turn to transient reflectivity and tr-ARPES measurements, which can probe the fast evolution of CDW amplitude To further investigate the amplitude restoration in a momentum-and energy-resolved fashion, we use tr-ARPES to probe the gap dynamics. Figure Taken together, our investigations of LaTe 3 are consistent with the interpretation sketched in Fig. An important implication of Fig. Single crystals of LaTe 3 were grown by slow cooling of a binary melt Ultrafast electron diffraction. The 1038 nm (1.19 eV) output of a commercial Yb:KGW regenerative amplifier laser system (PHAROS SP-10-600-PP, Light Conversion) operating at 250 kHz was split into pump and probe branches. The pump branch was focused onto the sample at room temperature, while the probe branch was frequency quadrupled to 260 nm (4.78 eV) and focused onto a gold-coated sapphire in high vacuum (< 4 × 10 -9 torr) to generate photoelectrons. These electrons were accelerated to 26 kV in a dc field and focused with a solenoid before diffracting from LaTe 3 in a transmission geometry, making visible the K = 0 diffraction plane. Diffracted electrons were incident on an aluminum-coated phosphor screen (P-46), whose luminescence was recorded by a commercial intensified charge-coupled device (iCCD PI-MAX II) operating in shutter mode. A pulse picker was used to tune the laser repetition rate from 0.5 to 250 kHz used in the measurement. The operating temporal resolution was 1 ps with 1000 to 4000 electrons per pulse. Transient reflectivity. The 780 nm (1.59 eV) output of a commercial Ti:sapphire regenerative amplifier laser (Wyvern 500/1000, KMLabs) operating at 30 kHz was split into pump and probe branches. The probe branch was focused onto a sapphire crystal to generate a white light continuum (500 to 700 nm). Both pump and probe pulses were focused onto the sample surface, which was held at room temperature, at near-normal incidence with parallel polarization. The pump wavelength was 780 nm (1.59 eV), while the probe wavelength was 690 nm (1.80 eV). The reflected probe beam was directed to a monochromator and photodiode for lock-in detection. The overall temporal resolution, as determined from the pump-probe cross-correlation, was 70 fs. Time-resolved ARPES. The same laser system employed in UED measurements was used for tr-ARPES. The pump branch was passed to a commercial optical parametric amplifier (ORPHEUS, Light Conversion) to generate a 720 nm (1.72 eV) output used to photoexcite the sample. The probe branch was first frequencytripled to 346 nm (3.58 eV) and then focused into a hollow fiber filled with xenon gas (XUUS, KMLabs) to generate the 9th harmonic at 115 nm (10.75 eV). The resulting XUV pulse was passed through a custom-built grating monochromator (McPherson OP-XCT) to minimize pulse width broadening and to enhance throughput efficiency 