We have investigated the equilibrium states of ferromagnetic single wall nanotubes by means of atomistic Monte Carlo simulations of a zig-zag lattice of Heisenberg spins on the surface of a cylinder. The main focus of our study is to determine how the competition between short-range exchange (J) and long-range dipolar (D) interactions influences the low temperature magnetic order of the nanotubes as well as the thermal-driven transitions involved. Apart from the uniform and vortex states occurring for dominant J or D, we find that helical states become stable for a range of intermediate values of γ = D/J that depends on the radius and length of the nanotube. Introducing a vorticity order parameter to better characterize helical and vortex states, we find the pseudo-critical temperatures for the transitions between these states and we establish the magnetic phase diagrams of their stability regions as a function of the nanotube aspect ratio. Comparison of the energy of the states obtained by simulation with those of simpler theoretical structures that interpolate continuously between them, reveals a high degree of metastability of the helical structures that might be relevant for their reversal modes. When planar structures are extended to 3D by changing their curvature, the magnetic behavior of the corresponding surface can change significantly, leading for example to the appearance of new magnetic configurations that are not energetically favorable in the planar case The rapid advance in fabrication techniques available nowadays allows to synthesize tubular nanostrutures by following different routes like chemical or electro-deposition Vortex states having the magnetic moments circulating around the symmetry axis are expected to be formed in structures having cylindrical symmetry Different theoretical and simulation approaches have been used in order to study the thermodynamic properties of magnetic hollow nanocylinders, including micromagnetic studies Most of these works, have focused on the study of magnetic configurations as a function of the geometric parameters of the nanotubes for given values of material parameters. However, the occurrence of such phases and their thermal stability becomes also determined by the competition between the short-range exchange and long-range magnetic dipolar interactions Therefore, the present work will focus on studying the changes in the equilibrium configurations with γ considering first a fixed tube geometry and then extending the calculations to a range of tube radii and lengths. To address the problem, we use standard Metropolis MC to study the finite-temperature properties, and we revert to analytical or numerical calculations when comparing the properties of ground-state configurations obtained from simulations to theoretical ones. It turns out that the different equilibrium states with well-defined chiral order have magnetization close to zero and, therefore, this magnitude is no longer a valid order parameter to characterize the transitions between the mentioned states. We will show that these states and the transitions in between can be correctly identified and characterized by introducing the rotational of the magnetization as a measure of vorticity or circularity of the moments around the tube. This, combined with a detailed inspection of the equilibrium spin patterns, will allow us to determine the magnetic phase diagrams of their stability regions as a function of the nanotube aspect ratio. The outline of the manuscript is a follows. We start by presenting the model for the nanotubes and computational details of the simulations. Then, the results of the equilibrium properties are presented for a (8, 15) tube, followed by a detailed analysis of the ground state configurations. In the next subsection, we extend the calculations to tubes with different radii and lengths and present the corresponding phase diagrams as a function of the parameter γ. Finally, we analyze the metastability of the helical states by comparing the simulation results to analytical calculations based on two kind of states that can be theoretically parametrized. We finish with a discussion and final conclusions. Our model system to simulate single-wall nanotubes consists of Heisenberg classical unitary spins S = (S x , S y , S z ) placed on the surface of a cylinder of radius R and finite length L 56 . The structure is formed by rolling a planar squared spin lattice with lattice parameter a along the (1,1) direction onto a cylindrical geometry in order to get a zig-zag ended tube that can be characterized by N z layers of rings stacked along the z axis with N spins per layer. For a given N, the tube is characterized by the angle between consecutive spins in the ring φ N = 2π/N , interlayer separation l = √ 2a/2 and radius R = N √ 2 2π a. Therefore, the distance between two consecutive spins in the ring is given by Of course, there are other ways to arrange spins on a regular lattice on the surface of a cylinder (for example, varying the interlayer separation and the kind of stacking in between layers), but not all of them will be stable from the point of view of dipolar energy alone The spin interaction Hamiltonian can be written as where E ex stands for an isotropic short-range exchange coupling between nearest neighbors (nn) spins: being J i j = J the positive exchange constant accounting for ferromagnetic interactions. E dip stands for the long-range magnetic dipolar interaction given by where summation expands over all the set of spin pairs, D = μ 0 4π μ 2 /a 3 is the dipolar coupling constant, with μ 0 and μ the magnetic permeability of vacuum and the magnetic moment per spin respectively, and r i j is the relative position vector between i and j spins. We define the parameter γ = D/J in order to quantify the degree of competition between the short-range and long-range interactions. Temperature (T ) is expressed in reduced J/k B units where k B is the Boltzmann constant. The Hamiltonian does not contain a magnetocrystalline anisotropic energy term as so far we are interested in soft magnetic materials where the associated energy can be neglected compared to the exchange and magnetostatic counterparts We have conducted standard Metropolis MC simulations to analyze the temperature dependence of thermodynamic observables and low temperature spin configurations arising from the competition between dipolar and exchange interactions. In order to be able to reach low temperature configurations close to the vicinity of the thermodynamic equilibrium for a given γ, we have employed the following protocols for the thermal dependence and spin updates: (1) linear decrease of temperature with random homogeneous spin trials; (2) linear decrease of temperature with spin trials restricted to lie inside a cone with aperture varying with temperature; and (3) simulated annealing with a temperature power law decay of the form T = T 0 α k where spin updates are also restricted to lie inside a cone. For the first two, initial and final temperatures are 50 J/k B , 0.2 J/k B respectively, with a temperature step of 0.2 J/k B . For protocol (3) simulations are started at T 0 = 50 J/k B and ended at 0.113 J/k B after 200 temperatures with α = 0.97. The number of MC steps used at each temperature is 5 × 10 3 , with 2 × 10 3 used for averaging. Error bars in subsequent results have been obtained after averaging over 5 independent simulations starting with different seeds. In order to generate spin trials inside a cone, we generated a random vector v i inside a sphere of radius S max which is added to the current spin vector S i and then the resulting vector S i is normalized, thus S i = v i + S i . In order to keep the acceptance rates high, we use an adaptive scheme for the spin updates by reducing the aperture of the cone progressively as T decreases. We initially set S max = 2 at high T so that initially the trial spin can reach any state within the Bloch sphere and then, at every temperature, we replace it by the maximum value accepted at trials during the previous temperature. Simulation results for the thermal dependence of energy, specific heat, magnetic susceptibility and magnetization per site of a (8,15) nanotube are shown in Fig. In particular, for γ ≤ 0.03, the magnetization curves in Fig. However, for γ ≥ 0.04, the magnetization tends to zero when decreasing T and it is no longer a valid order parameter since, as we will show latter, the dominant dipolar interactions favor the appearance of closed flux states in the form of a vortex circulating around the tube axis. In order to better characterize the onset of these vortex states, we have found convenient to define a new order parameter that we will call vorticity that characterizes the degree of circularity of a given magnetic structure, which is defined locally as the vector: Correspondingly, the average z component of the vorticity of the whole tube can be written as a discrete sum over lattice points: where ∆x k and ∆y l are components of interparticle vector connecting nn spins and the sum is over indexes that characterize lattice coordinates. It can be demonstrated that ρ is maximum for a perfect vortex configuration with a value that depends on the tube radius and length. In analogy to the susceptibility associated to magnetization, we also define an effective susceptibility to characterize transitions associated with the appearance of states with finite vorticity: As shown in Fig. For intermediate values 0.03 < γ < 0.04, the magnetization begins to exhibit a noisy behavior with big error bars [see Fig. For this intermediate range of γ, it was not possible to infer precisely a H-PM transition temperature due to the high degree of metastability. The reason for this can be clearly noticed in Fig. By using the vorticity as an order parameter, we were able to obtain the phase diagram shown in Fig. In order to better characterize magnetic ground state configurations, we have expressed the total magnetization of the tubes in cylindrical coordinates (azimuthal m φ tangential to the tube surface, radial m ρ and longitudinal m z ). By projecting the spin vectors along a local reference frame centered on the spin positions r i = (R cos φ i , R sin φ i , z i ) (see inset in Fig. so the vortex and helical states formed at intermediate γ values can be better described. The magnetization components of the configurations obtained at the lowest temperature after simulated annealing are plotted in Fig. However, for intermediate values in the region 0.03 < γ < 0.04 where H states arise, profiles are not longer flat evidencing different spin configurations at the edges and the inner part of the tube. More concretely, θ is lower in the middle part of the tube and greater at the edges. This means that the degree of vorticity is higher at the ends than at the central part of the tube. This behavior can be more clearly observed for longer tubes, as we will show in the next section. Due to the competition between exchange and dipolar energies, helical states transform onto vortex states as γ increases, and this change occurs first on the rings near the tube edges. In the previous subsections, we focused on determining the low energy configurations as a function of γ for a fixed tube radius and length, exemplified by a (8,15) tube. Now, we carry out a systematic study of the low temperature configurations for different values of N z , N at different fixed interaction strengths γ. For this purpose, we start first by varying the tube length while keeping the number of spins per layer at N = 8. Using simulated annealing, we have obtained the low temperature magnetization and vorticity of the low temperature configurations, as shown in Fig. Length driven transitions from FM to V states are identified by the N z for which m ≈ 1 and ρ z ≈ 0 and transitions from FM or H to V states by m ≈ 0 and ρ z ≈ 1 , while intermediate values of these parameters characterize regions where H states are favored. As observed in Fig. As an example of what happens for longer and wider nanotubes, we show representative magnetization height profiles for γ = 0.05 in Fig. We have extended the calculations to additional tube radii N=10, . . . , 16, using the procedure described previously in order to identify the N, N z at which FM-H and H-V transitions are observed. We have obtained the phase diagrams in the (N, N z ) plane shown in Fig. Given the narrow region of γ values for which H configurations with complex magnetic order are stabilized, next we will study their metastability by comparing their total energy to that of simpler configurations that interpolate continuously between FM and V states. As a first case, we have considered configurations with the spins pointing along the local plane tangent to the tube surface and all oriented along a direction characterized by a polar angle θ with respect to the tube axis. We start computing the exchange energy per spin in J units (i.e. total exchange energy divided by N tot = NN z ) , which can be shown to be given by (see Supplementary Information for details): where z is the coordination number (z = 4 in our case), φ N = 2π/N is the angle subtending two consecutive spins on the same layer containing N atoms, whereas φ N /2 is the basal projection angle between two n.n. interacting spins belonging to consecutive layers according to the zig-zag geometry. Thus, exact values can be obtained for the FM or V configurations by setting θ = 0, π/2 in Eq. 9, while intermediate values of θ would correspond to H states. Notice that the energy depends on the tube radius (or number of spins per ring N) through φ N and also on N z due to the finite tube length. In the long tube limit N z → ∞, it becomes ε ex = -(z/2) for the FM state and ε ex = -(z/2) cos(φ N /2) for the vortex state, as expected. Due to the sin 2 θ dependence, ε ex increases progressively as the system evolves from FM to V states passing through intermediate H states. The variation of this energy with θ is shown in Fig. The dipolar energy can also be computed using analytical expressions, although their derivation is more complex due to the long-range character of the interactions and the fact that contributions from spins in the same ring and from different (odd or even) rings have to be considered separately (see Supplementary Information for the details). As shown in Fig. By looking at the evolution of the total energy when going from low to high γ, it is clear that there must be an intermediate γ for which ε tot does not depend on the polar angle θ . This value can be found by equating the total energies per spin for θ = 0, π/2, which results in Inserting the values for the (8,15) tube (see Supplementary Information), this gives γ = 0.034 with a value for the energy ε tot /J = -2.31 which lies precisely at the center of the region of γ where H states are obtained in the simulations. We notice that, as can be seen in Fig. In fact, comparing the energies of the states obtained from the simulated annealing process with those of the states with uniform θ (see Fig. Finally, we have computed the dependence of γ on N z as shown in Supplementary Fig. The low temperature H configurations that we have obtained by simulations present some non-uniformities at the tube ends that depart from the states with uniform θ considered in the previous subsection. Therefore, in an effort to find a better approximate analytical description for the equilibrium magnetization patterns, we will consider now the energy of configurations for which a central region (of length l -2λ ) of the nanotube with a uniform FM state is connected by a pair of incomplete vortex walls that extend towards the two ends of the tube, where the spins form an angle θ 0 with respect to the tube axis For this kind of configurations, no analytic expressions can be obtained for the energies. Therefore, for a given tube with length L and radius R, we have calculated numerically energies for a selection of values of θ 0 ∈ [0, π/2] and λ ∈ [0, L/2] and located the minima of the E(θ 0 , λ ) surface for a range of γ values. The results of this minimization procedure are shown in Fig. First, let us stress the perfect linear dependence of E min on γ that indicates a linear scaling of the energy on this parameter when considering the values of θ 0 , λ that minimize the energy. Second, regarding the angle at the ends of the tubes and the central region with uniform magnetization, we observe that, for γ < γ , θ 0 ≈ 0, λ ≈ L and, therefore, FM configurations are obtained independently of the tube length. For γ > γ , θ 0 (γ) follows the same trend independently of the tube length, increasing progressively towards 90 • since for higher γ the dipolar interaction favors flux closure at the ends. For the shortest considered tubes (N z ≤ 15), the vortex region extends to the central part of the tubes, whereas for long tubes [see for example the case N z = 45 in Fig. Finally, we have compared the energies of these optimized mixed states to those of the configurations from our MC simulations. As indicated by the yellow triangles in Fig. Using atomistic MC simulations, we have studied the ground state configurations that arise as a result of the competence between exchange and dipolar interactions in magnetic nananotubes of finite size, establishing radius-length phase diagrams for their stability for different γ's. We have shown that, for a given radius and length, ferromagnetic (FM), vortex (V) or helical (H) states can be stabilized, depending on the value of γ. Our results are in agreement with experiments that have recently reported the observation of these states in real samples. We would like to emphasize that, although experimental studies have been conducted on nanotubes which have considerably bigger dimensions than those considered here, the application of scaling techniques As mentioned previously, in our model Hamiltonian we did not include magnetocrystalline anisotropy as we were aiming to simulated magnetically soft materials. However, the results of previous studies Furthermore, we would like to stress that our results are applicable to a wide variety of magnetic systems independently of the physical realization of the spins that reside on the nanotube surface. They could represent magnetic moments of atomic spins or of a magnetic cluster or nanoparticle as this would only change the values of D and J. As shown in Supplementary Information, typical values of D are in the range from 10 -2 meV for atomic spins to 40 meV for nanoparticles while J vary in between 1 and 10ths of meV for most FM materials. Therefore, materials may be easily found with γ's falling within the interval 10 -2 -10 -1 where we have found H configurations as ground states. We have shown that a modified simulated annealing protocol has to be employed in order to be certain that the obtained configurations are indeed the true ground states, specially the ones showing helicoidal order. In order to determine the interval of γ values for which H states are the quasi-equilibrium configurations for a given radius and length of the nanotube, we have found crucial to introduce the so-called vorticity order parameter which clearly identifies the formation of states with zero magnetization but a well defined circularity or chirality. This has allowed us to establish the stability regions for their formation in radius-length phase diagrams, showing that, with increasing γ, the region of stability of H states becomes wider for higher aspect ratio tubes. In an effort to check the robustness of the helicoidal states, we have compared the energies obtained by simulation to those of similar configurations that can be expressed analytically, such as quasi-uniform states with spins having a common angle with respect to the tube axis or mixed states formed by a FM ordered regions connected to vortex states at the tube ends. We have found that the states resulting from MC simulated annealing have indeed lower energies than any of the considered analytical ones for the range of γ's where the H states appear. However, the energy differences in this range are really small, indicating the high degree of metastability of the H states. This fact can be relevant for the nanotube reversal modes in hysteresis loops, which we will study in a future publication. of the fits of the curves separating the V-H and FM-H configurations shown in Fig.