In this paper, the effect of air exposure and acetone cleaning on the secondary electron yield (SEY) of laser treated copper were investigated and discussed. The SEY of laser treated copper samples after acetone cleaning and air exposure were measured. After 10 to 21 months air exposure, the maximum SEY increased by about 11%~20%. Furthermore, changes of carbon, copper, and oxygen chemistry states from sample surface after acetone and air exposure were studied by means of XPS. The XPS results show that the concentration of Cu decreased by about 61%~70% after acetone cleaning and decreased by a further 36%~70% after 10 to 21 months air exposure. Moreover, the XPS measurement reflects the significant increase of the total percentages of C and O after acetone cleaning, and further increase after 10 to 21 months air exposure. The increase of SEY is explained in terms of the introduction of impurities, such as oxide, carbide etc. The electron cloud is a key problem in particle accelerators, which can cause the degradation of beam quality and limit the performance of particle accelerators with high energy, high intensity, high luminosity and long beam lifetime In the following, the SEY measurement parameters and XPS test results of laser treated copper samples are presented. The effects of the air exposure on the SEY and surface composition of laser-engineered copper samples are also discussed. The SEY values obtained based on the principle shown in Eq. ( The SEY test equipment consists of an EGPS-2B electron gun, Faraday cup, sample holder, two Keithley 6485 picoammeter, a source of X-ray, electron energy analyzer, electron detector, sample transfer frame, and power supply. The electron dose per unit was 7.6×10 -8 C mm -2 . The electron gun (Kimball, ELG-2/EGPS-2)scans over an energy range of 50 eV to 1000 eV. In addition, the background pressure of the chamber before the SEY test was (4-8) ×10 -10 Torr and (2-8) ×10 -9 Torr during the SEY test. The test temperature was 300 K. The rolled and electro-polished oxygen-free copper (Cu) samples were commercially available with high purity of 99.999%. The samples with the size of 20 mm ×20 mm were degreased prior to laser engineering. The samples were cleaned with acetone and then were treated in air and at room temperature by pulses of a Nd:YAG laser. This laser was operated at various repetition rates (see Table The SEY of Samples is shown in Figure The maximum SEY of as-received, after acetone and 10 months air exposure laser treated oxygen-free copper sample #1 were 0.92, 1.03 and 1.15, respectively, as shown in Figure For sample #2, the maximum SEY of as-received and 20 months air exposure were 1.04 and 1.20, respectively, as shown in Figure For sample #3, the maximum SEYs of as-received and 21 months air exposure were 0.99 and 1.19, respectively, as shown in Figure In order to analyze the reason for SEY increase, XPS was used to characterize the surface composition of laser treated copper under different conditions, such as acetone cleaning and air exposure. The surface composition and chemical state on as-received, acetone cleaning and air exposure laser treated Cu samples was studied using XPS. peak, the broader peak shape of the cupric species is due to coupling between unpaired electrons eV respectively and their atomic percentages for each sample at different condition are presented in Table The results show that the concentration of Cu decreased about 63% after acetone cleaning and 81% after 10 months air exposure. While, the concentration of Cu from as received laser treated copper foil samples were 23.2% and 18.8%, respectively. It indicates that the percentage of carbon-containing compounds and oxygenated chemicals from the surface of as received laser treated copper foils are much higher than that of as received laser treated copper plate sample, as shown in Table After cleaning in acetone, the ratio of C, O and Cu elements on the sample #1 surface were 17.7%, 53.6%, and 29.1%, respectively. After air exposure, these ratios were 38.7 %, 46.8%, and 14.6% respectively, as shown in Table According to the XPS spectrums of as-received, cleaned in acetone and 10 months air exposure sample #1, it shows that the concentration of Cu under three different conditions are 78.7%, 29.1%, and 14.6%, respectively. This means that the content of Cu from laser treated copper sample #1 decreased by 63% after acetone cleaning. Then it reduced further to 14.6% after 10 months air exposure. As shown in Figure Consequently, the percentage of Cu (II) after 10 months air exposure was very close to the one of as received laser treated copper sample #1, which indicate that there is no obvious further oxidation of Cu mental. According to the XPS curve fitting of Cu 2p spectrum from sample #2, it indicates that the percentage of Cu (II) after 20 months air exposure decreased slightly by 4% comparing with that from as received laser treated copper sample #2, shown in Figure Therefore, it indicates that there is slightly further oxidation of Cu mental after 20 months air exposure. Figure The percentage of Cu (II) from sample #3 is nearly 100%, which is the reason for no obvious peak shift. This means the chemical state of Cu from as received copper sample #3 is cupric. Finally, it can be concluded that the chemical state of Cu is mainly cupric after laser treatment. The percentage of Cu (II) varied between 82%~99%. These results show that the percentage of Cu (I) and Cu (II) are similar, possibly slightly further oxidation under different conditions, which means that the oxidation states of the copper element after laser treatment are essentially stable. Therefore, the increase of SEY is mainly caused by the introduction of impurities, such as oxide, carbide etc. Next, the XPS spectra of C and O from laser treated Cu sample will be analyzed. In Figure The effects of acetone cleaning and air exposure on the SEY of laser treated copper samples were investigated and discussed in this paper. The following conclusions were obtained. (E) The increase of the SEY is explained in terms of the introduction of impurities, such as oxide, carbide etc. It manifests that carbon and oxygen free environment is important for reducing the percentage of adventitious hydroxides, C-C, and C-H. . δmax and Emax for as-received, after acetone and after air exposure laser treated Cu samples #1, #2 and #3.