The application of PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy (PEEM) and Low Energy Electron Microscopy (LEEM) techniques to the study of the electronic and chemical structure of ferroelectric materials is reviewed. Electron optics in both techniques gives spatial resolution of a few tens of nanometres. PEEM images photoelectrons whereas LEEM images reflected and elastically backscattered electrons. Both PEEM and LEEM can be used in direct and reciprocal space imaging. Together, they provide access to surface charge, work function, topography, chemical mapping, surface crystallinity and band structure. Examples of applications for the study of ferroelectric thin films and single crystals are presented. The aim of this overview is to introduce and illustrate the use of full field spectromicroscopy techniques such as PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy (PEEM) and Low Energy Electron Microscopy (LEEM) to study the electronic and chemical structure of ferroelectric (FE) materials. Particular emphasis will be given to the study of thin films and their electrical boundary conditions. The term spectromicroscopy is used to stress that these techniques yield spectroscopic and microscopic information simultaneously. This is to be distinguished from microspectroscopy which, in order to obtain spatial information over similar fields of view, relies on scanning a microfocussed beam, whose size defines the spatial resolution, over the surface. This article is not intended to be an exhaustive review, nor is it aimed at PEEM or LEEM specialists. Rather, we hope to give scientists working on ferroic systems a better idea of the variety of information which may be obtained using spectromicroscopy on a) Electronic mail: nick.barrett@cea.fr domain structured materials. In the last two decades, three main breakthroughs have led to intense research into ferroelectrics and more generally ferroic materials. On a theoretical level, Cohen showed that the ferroelectric stability depends on a balance between long and short range forces. The new physics emerging from two-dimensional films in the limit of a few unit cells has a host of exciting applications. Understanding the ferroelectric properties of such engineered thin film systems requires taking into account not only the material but also its interfaces with electrodes, substrates or atmosphere; in other words, the electrical boundary conditions. Near-field techniques such as PFM or scanning surface potential microscopy (SSPM) occupy a prime position in the investigation of ferroelectric domain structure. Like all techniques they require careful use, and attention must be paid to the role of adsorbates and to interactions between the tip and the surface in contact mode. However, they cannot probe the full electron structure and chemistry of ferroelectric surfaces. In view of this, and given the increasing number of fields of applications of engineered ferroelectric systems (for example in promoting chemisorption In section II the principles behind PEEM and LEEM will be presented with an emphasis on the photoemission process underlying PEEM based methods. The main part of this review consists of the different case studies in section III. The five examples of studies of ferroelectric surfaces which can be carried out using PEEM and LEEM are not meant to be exhaustive, but rather give an idea of the rich information obtainable using spectromicroscopy. The first example illustrates the relationship between the work function as measured in PEEM and the surface polarization charge. The following two studies look at screening by surface carbon and photogenerated electron-hole pairs. The fourth example illustrates how PEEM and MEM-LEEM can be used to estimate the polarization of ultra-thin, tunneling regime films. The last example demonstrates the measurement of the full 2D band structure parallel to the surface of a single, micron sized in-plane ferroelectric domain. Indeed, there is much more to be done, both in terms of quantification but also in fully exploiting the spectral information available. Section IV discusses both the advantages and present limitations/drawbacks of LEEM and PEEM for studies of FE systems. A short outlook completes the overview in section V. PEEM and LEEM are two distinct, surface imaging techniques; however, they are also extremely complementary. Not only are the electron optics of the imaging column often very similar, if not identical, the spatial resolution is often comparable. However, in the case of PEEM the fundamental process is the photoelectric effect, i.e. photon in and electron out, whereas in the case of LEEM the probe is a collimated electron beam and the elastically reflected or backscattered electrons are detected. LEEM is therefore an electron in and electron out process. The information contained in PEEM and LEEM can be very different and the combined use of both techniques provides extremely rich information. Both systems have been used in the examples given in this review. Recent reviews provide more extensive technical details. Two basic design concepts exist in low energy electron microscopes. In both cases there is a high extractor field, typically 12 to 24 kV, between the sample and the objective lens. Thanks to this field, high electron take-off angles from the sample surface can be collected and imaged through the electron optics. In the first design (Fig. The magnetic lens design provides an instrument suitable for both LEEM and PEEM. To do LEEM a sector field produced by magnetic lenses uses the Lorentz force to separate an incident electron beam formed in an illumination column from the reflected or backscattered beam. Thus, the optical axes of both the incident beam and the backscattered electrons are perpendicular to the sample surface. The sector angles are either 120 • or 180 • . TL, FL and IL are the transfer, field and intermediate lens of the imaging column. finally projective lens magnify the image onto the detector. To do PEEM, the illumination column is not used and a photon beam is incident directly on the sample surface. The imaging column is identical for both LEEM and PEEM. A schematic is shown in Fig. The electrostatic lens design (Fig. When a photon of energy hν is incident on a sample, all of the electrons whose binding energy is smaller than hν can undergo a transition from their initial state. For an electron to be photoemitted from the material and detected, it must overcome the work function, Φ, the potential barrier to be overcome to extract the photoelectron. The photoemission process is represented schematically in Fig. PEEM can be performed just with electron optics and a 2D detector, recording the secondary electron current. Early PEEM work has been carried out using such a system. Today, still many PEEM experiments focussing on absorption spectroscopy measure the electron yield and do not require an energy analyser. By adding an energy filter to the electron optics, the image of the sample surface in the FoV is obtained at a well-defined electron kinetic energy. The same 2D detection system is used to provide an image of the microscopic field of view. Such a spectromicroscopy set-up is shown schematically in Fig. There is a slight variation in energy, called non-isochromaticity, along the vertical axis, corresponding to the dispersive plane of the analyzer, but this is usually small, typically a fraction of an electron-volt, and is accounted for in data analysis. In energy-filtered operation, image stacks are recorded by scanning the sample voltage with fixed analyzer pass energy and automatic refocusing of the objective lens. The three-dimensional data stack, I(x, y, E), therefore contains in each image-pixel microscopic and spectroscopic information, and can be analyzed off-line by standard data reduction techniques, e.g. removal of photoemission background or principal component analysis to reduce the noise in core level images. Using the electrostatic lens design, the sample is referenced to ground, thus with knowledge of the analyser work function, the onset of the photoemission spectrum at low energy is precisely the work function of the sample surface. The standard method for measuring the dispersion relations of the band structure is Angular Resolved Photo-Electron Spectroscopy (ARPES). In ARPES, the energyresolved photoelectron intensity distribution is usually measured as a function of angle along a high symmetry direction of the crystal. Conservation of the component of the electron wave vector parallel to the sample surface allows one to map out the dispersion relations as a function of the initial state wave-vector. In practical units the wave vector is given by k parallel = 0.512 √ E K sinθ, where E K is the photoelectron kinetic energy and θ the photoelectron emission angle with respect to the surface normal. In order to map the dispersion relations over the full Brillouin zone the sample must be rotated through 180 • resulting in long acquisition times. In PEEM, the high extractor field collects the photoelectron emission over a wide angular range. By using a suitable transfer lens the diffraction plane (close to the back-focal plane) of the PEEM can be imaged. Imaging the diffraction plane in PEEM produces an angular intensity map for all azimuths simultaneously. Energy-filtering transforms the angular distribution into a map of photoelectron intensity as a function of wave-vector parallel to the surface, i.e. a horizontal, constant energy cut in reciprocal space. This technique is known as k-resolved PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy (k-PEEM). For example, the Fermi surface can be acquired in a single-shot experiment. In MEM the incident electrons are retarded to a few volts, called the start voltage (SV) by the high sample bias. At very low SV, electrons are reflected by the potential above the surface (MEM), whereas at higher values they penetrate the sample and are backscattered (LEEM). Mirror electron microscopy (MEM) using a low energy electron microscope, allows non-contact, full-field imaging of the surface topography and potential with 12-15 nm spatial resolution. The transition from the reflection of the electrons to the back scattering regime, the MEM-LEEM transition, images the electrostatic potential above the surface. MEM contrast is therefore re- lated to work function differences and it is an ideal tool to probe, for example, surface charge differences in domains with a polarization component perpendicular to the surface, pointing either inwards (P -) or outwards (P + ). At the surface, an in-plane electric field will be created at the boundary between oppositely polarized domains due to the fixed charge. Depending on the width of the space charge region around the domain wall, this field can attain values significant with respect to the extractor field, deviating the reflected electrons in a direction parallel to the surface. The deviation due to the built-in field at a pn junction has already been used in emission microscopy. The first demonstration of MEM to probe the surface potential of differently polarized ferroelectric domains was reported by Spivak et al. using an extremely simple electron lens and single crystal BaTiO 3 . LEEM images surfaces using elastically backscattered low energy electrons. For single crystal systems both real and reciprocal space information is available. The low kinetic energy makes LEEM, like photoemission, intrinsically sensitive to the surface and near surface region. LEEM gives information not only on the surface morphology, but it is also sensitive to the electronic and crystal structure. In-situ crystal growth or even surface diffusion processes can be monitored. Furthermore, by scanning the start voltage, the empty states in the conduction band are probed. This has been used to explore quantum oscillations in the back-scattered electron signal for 2D systems. The results can be directly interpreted in terms of the conduction band structure, for example on few-layer graphene. In this section we present five studies of FE systems using full field electron spectromicroscopy. The first study was done using a NanoESCA installed at the TEMPO beamline at the SOLEIL synchrotron (Saint Aubin, France). The screening study of PZT and the band structure of BTO were performed at the Nanospectroscopy beamline at the Elettra synchrotron (Trieste, Italy) using a spectroscopic LEEM. The photogenerated charge screening study was carried out using a laboratory instrument at the CEA Saclay (France). The study of the thickness dependence of the polarization in BiFeO 3 used a NanoESCA instrument at the Omicron Nanotechnology premises in Taunusstein(Germany) and the CEA Saclay laboratory instrument. The first example shows an unpublished example of how energy-filtered PEEM can be used to identify differently polarized domains at the surface of a ferroelectric. The sample was a BaTiO 3 (001) single crystal. Before introduction into the vacuum system the sample underwent a short exposure (∼10 minutes) in air at room temperature to a UV lamp. The UV radiation creates ozone which reacts with the sample surface cleaning it of most organic contamination. An insulator charges during photoemission therefore the sample was then annealed under vacuum at 700 • C producing oxygen vacancies to provide sufficient conductivity whilst maintaining the ferroelectric phase. This is also sufficient to remove any residual surface carbon. to demonstrate the existence of polar domains in a BTO single crystal well above the the bulk Curie temperature and has been linked to a stabilization of the tetragonal distortion by an ionic surface relaxation. Surface polarization charge in FE materials can be screened by a variety of mechanisms: intrinsic (charge carriers or defects in the bulk), extrinsic (chemical en-vironment or adsorbates), -and protons can lead to important changes in the electrical boundary conditions In this example, the screening by mobile charge carriers was studied. The right hand inset of Fig. The reflectivity curves after UV exposure are plotted as open symbols in Fig. To study the surface charge dynamics, we recorded fixed start voltage (-1.8 V) MEM images at 1 frame per second under UV illumination. The time dependence of the domain intensity contrast, defined by ∆I = I(P + ) -I(P -), when the UV light is switched on and off is plotted in Fig. A major issue for prospective nanoscale, strainengineered ferroelectric applications is the decrease of the remanent polarization of ultra-thin films. Ferroelectric capacitors for example may exhibit a critical thickness. The P + /P -domain contrasts fall to zero, as shown in Fig. Measuring the dispersion relations of the electronic bands in oxides is notoriously difficult even with highly ordered samples because of charging under photoemission. The few examples of angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy studies of oxides in the literature concern either metallic oxides, such as niobium doped SrTiO 3 60 or insulating oxides such as SrTiO 3 with a metallic 2D electron gas at the surface. The integrated intensity (Fig. Spectromicroscopy is a full field technique, thus no scanning of the sample is necessary. The relatively large fields of view with respect to a typical PFM image will often allow simultaneous visualization of many domains. Dynamical experiments of domain ordering are therefore possible. Both PEEM and MEM/LEEM are non-contact techniques, avoiding possible unwanted tip-surface interactions of near field methods such as PFM and Conductive Atomic Force Microscopy (CAFM). The spectroscopic capability obtained by energy-filtering in PEEM gives direct access to the initial states of the electrons. Thus a full description of the electronic and chemical structure is possible. PEEM may be performed with a variety of lights sources: in the laboratory, with lasers or with synchrotron radiation. The use of synchrotron radiation allows tuning of the photon energy: optimization of the photoelectron yield, adjustment of the electron kinetic energy, thus the depth sensitivity. Most undulator beamlines allow variable polarization, thus circularly polarized light can be used to perform X-ray magnetic circular dichroism based PEEM to study ferromagnetic states, whereas linear dichroism allows study of the ferroelectric distortion, for example at the Ti L 2,3 edge. PEEM and LEEM experiments must be carried out in ultra high vacuum (UHV), mainly to avoid arcing between the sample and the objective lens, which would create high instantaneous currents, potentially damaging to the sample. However, an UHV environment has the advantage that it is possible to study relatively clean surfaces, free of extrinsic adsorbates like water which are inevitably present in air based experiments and which can dramatically change the electrical boundary conditions. Controlled surface preparation is therefore cru-cial. surface science techniques such as ion beam sputtering to clean the surface are excluded because of the damage they cause to the surface structure. Careful annealing in 10 -5 -10 -6 mbar oxygen environment may be sufficient to clean the sample surface insitu. There are several contributions to the limits in spatial resolution of PEEM and LEEM. In PEEM, the most frequently encountered problem is simply the signal level. In many cases it is the transmission of the detector (PEEM optics, energy filter) which reduces the statistics and is often responsible for the practical spatial resolution. The second limitation to the spatial resolution comes from imperfections in the electron lenses, giving rise to chromatic and spherical aberrations. One might think that the high extractor field, typically 100 kV/cm, could switch the polarization in thin films. We have never observed this for a wide variety of ferroelectric materials in both single crystal and thin film forms. The geometry of the sample holder means that all of the sample is at the same potential (close to ground in the case of an electrostatic PEEM), thus the potential difference across a film due to the extractor field is zero. As in XPS, the moderate photoelectron kinetic energies used in PEEM limit the depth sensitivity to a few nm. PEEM is particularly sensitive to surface chemistry and electronic structure. If one wishes to extend the method to the study of buried, heterogeneous interfaces, for example between an electrode and a ferroelectric, higher energy photons will be necessary. This is extremely demanding for PEEM because of the rapid decrease of the instrumental transmission function with electron energy. Nevertheless, some hard X-ray PEEM has been performed; High intensity undulator radiation can also have a number of unwanted effects. The incident photon beam results in high rates of electron-hole pair creation. Despite the desirability of high intensity photon beams, one cannot indefinitely increase the photon brilliance in the microscope field of view. Locatelli et al. have shown that beyond 10 13 photons/s, space charge effects occur either at the sample surface or near the first cross-over point of the electron optics, distorting the image. Sample charging due to the emission of photoelectrons in PEEM, or due to the injection of electrons from the LEEM can also distort images or cause spectacular spectral shifts, particularly for highly stoichiometric, insulating samples, i.e. with few defects, oxygen vacancies or for single crystals. Again the seriousness of the problem must be assessed in each case. One possibility is to carefully anneal in vacuum single crystal samples as we have done for BTO(001) to create sufficient oxygen vacancies whilst maintaining the ferroelectric phase. Another way to overcome charging is to heat the sample during measurement, providing that this does not modify, for example, the ferroelectric phase being studied. Finally, direct beam damage must also be considered. The highest intensity and hard X-ray beamlines can deliver incident beam currents of the order of 1 nA. In high vacuum the energy transferred to the sample can easily give rise to reduction of cation species. Elements such as Pb in PZT or Bi in BFO are particularly susceptible to metallization. Most synchrotrons now offer PEEM instrumentation; however, access is not always straightforward because of the high demand for beam time. Furthermore, proposals to study ferroelectrics are intrinsically more complex because of the insulating nature of the materials involved and their high sensitivity to intense undulator radiation. The use of laboratory based PEEM, for example with UV lamps or focused He I/II discharge sources may therefore be an interesting alternative. Laboratory based lasers, particularly if frequency doubled and used in the 2 or 3 photon mode may also be an extremely good alternative light source. However, laser based PEEM requires careful attention to average and peak power outputs. In general, high repetition rates (MHz) are mandatory in order to avoid space charge effects in the PEEM optics. It has been accepted to a large extent that the polarization state gives rise to a rigid shift in the electron bands, similar to the effect of doping in semiconductors. However, there is no reason why this must always be the case. In BTO, the distortion around the TiO 6 octahedra is principally responsible for the soft phonon mode associated with the ferroelectric state. In PZT it is the movement of the Pb atoms which makes the biggest contribution, i.e. the type A cation rather than the B-cation. The work on dynamical charge, notably by Ghosez, Reciprocal space PEEM, k-PEEM, could become an extremely powerful tool since much of the research of magnetoelectric coupling is starting to focus on orbital overlaps 