Despite its potential in the fields of optoelectronics and topological insulators, experimental electronic band structure studies of Bi-doped GaAs are scarce. The reason is the complexity of growth which tends to leave bulk and in particular surface properties in an undefined state. Here we present an in depth investigation of structural and electronic properties of GaAsBi epilayers grown by molecular beam epitaxy with high (001) crystalline order and well-defined surface structures evident from low-energy electron diffraction. X-ray and ultraviolet photoemission spectrocopy as well as angleresolved photoemission data at variable photon energies allows to disentangle a Bi-rich surface layer with (1 × 3) symmetry from the effects of Bi atoms incorporated in the GaAs bulk matrix. The influence of Bi concentrations up to ≈ 1% integrated in the GaAs bulk are visible in angle-resolved photoemission spectra after mild ion bombardment and subsequent annealing steps. Interpretation of our results is obtained via density functional theory simulations of bulk and β2(2 × 4) reconstructed slab geometries with and without Bi. Bi-induced energy shifts in the dispersion of GaAs heavy and light hole bulk bands are evident both in experiment and theory, which are relevant for modulations in the optical band gap and thus optoelectronic applications. GaAs 1-x Bi x with varying Bi concentrations has enormous potential for a number of advanced applications in the fields of electronics, optoelectronics, nanophotonics, thermoelectricity, photovoltaics 1-3 . The incorporation of Bi into GaAs induces a large band gap bowing even at Bi concentrations less than few percent 4 , due to a large upward shift of the valence band edge. This property offers a large freedom to engineer the band structure of the alloy for potential high-speed electronic and infrared optoelectronic applications, even since Bi alloying in GaAs 1-x Bi x seems to improve the hole mobility, while preserving the high electron mobility of GaAs Despite the strategic interest of the GaAs 1-x Bi x alloy, a reliable phase of this material with well controlled properties is still far from having being grown for several reasons. In fact, the existence of a large miscibility gap requires low growth temperatures leading to the formation of defects that degrade optical properties, while the surfactant action of Bi counteracts its incorporation and can leads to phase-separation phenomena (such as surface Ga-Bi droplets). Finally, the large-radius Bi atom leads to a compressive lattice distortion of the GaAs lattice. To couple the optical/electronic properties of the GaAs 1-x Bi x alloy and the aggregation properties of Bi in the alloy it is very interesting to study the alloy with traditional and innovative surface techniques. To this aim, in this paper we challenge the matter of Bi inclusion in GaAs lattice by means of X-ray Photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and we study the electronic band structure by means of Ultraviolet Photoemission Spectroscopy (UPS) and k-resolved Photoemission Elec-tron Microscopy (k-PEEM). By varying the Bi flux during MBE growth we are able to change the Bi concentration in the bulk. Generally, our results show Bi in two different states. One corresponds to a Bi-rich surface layer. The (1 × 3) Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED) symmetry of the surface suggests the formation of a phase similar to the one found after deposition of Bi onto to β2(2 × 4) GaAs(001) surface, as reported in literature Pure GaAs and GaAsBi samples were grown by MBE on n(Si)-doped (10 18 cm -3 ) GaAs(001) substrates with a miscut angle of about 0.01 • . GaAs buffer layers of approximate thickness 500 nm were grown at 590 • C. For the growth of GaAsBi layers, the substrate temperature was decreased to 325 • C. Prior to GaAsBi deposition. A layer of 150 nm of GaAsBi was deposited at a flux rate of 0.5 ML/s. At the end of both GaAs and GaAsBi epilayer deposition, samples were cooled down to about -10 • C, and an amorphous As capping layer was deposited to prevent the sample from contamination during air exposure when ex situ shipped to XPS and k -PEEM facilities. Prior to surface sensitive photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM), LEED, XPS, and k-PEEM measurements, the samples were decapped in situ under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions at temperatures of 300 • C and subsequently annealed at 400-440 • C. Temperatures were monitored directly on the sample using an optical pyrometer. Resulting surface order was investigated by LEED where a clear β2(2 × 4) pattern is found for pure GaAs(001) as shown in Fig. As we discuss below, after decapping we observe a Birich phase at the surface of GaAs 1-x Bi x , with x > 0. Since we are particularly interested in the bulk properties we treated GaAsBi samples by a short ion bombardment (up to 12 min) and subsequent annealing to again 400-440 • C. In the following we refer to respective samples as sputter-annealed. Typical LEED images of GaAsBi sputter-annealed samples are shown in Fig. XPS and k -PEEM measurements were carried out by using an Omicron NanoESCA instrument with laboratory light sources. Highly resolved XPS-UPS was measured independently at the ELETTRA synchrotron radiation facility (MSB beamline). The NanoESCA photoemission spectrometer is based on a PEEM column and an imaging double hemispherical energy filter Geometry and electronic structure calculations were carried out using density functional theory (DFT) within the local density approximation (LDA) as implemented in the quantum ESPRESSO code 8 . Spin-orbit coupling was accounted for by means of fully relativistic ultrasoft pseudopotentials, The computed electronic properties were analysed through different techniques. First, the band structures of the bulk 4 × 4 × 4 and slab 2 × 4 supercells were unfolded along high symmetry directions in the primitive bulk GaAs BZ and 1 × 1 surface BZ (SBZ), respectively, using the BandUP code . Before we discuss GaAs 1-x Bi x XPS data we remind the reader that in semiconductors the Fermi level (E F ) with respect to valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) is sensitive to defect states and possible surface band bending effects. We expect Bi dopants in GaAs to cause shifts of E F , which in turn will affect binding energy (BE) values detected in photoemission experiments. Kraut et al. In the case of GaAs(001)(2 × 4) we derive a value E GaAs VBM = (0.83 ± 0.02) eV. We want to stress at this point that from UPS data discussed below, we have good evidence that the absolute value E GaAs VBM does not seem to be affected by band bending effects. The relative BE of the Ga 3d level with respect to VBM then amounts to (E GaAs Ga 3d -E GaAs VBM ) = (18.82 ± 0.02) eV, which is in good agreement with the bulk value 18.80 eV reported on GaAs(110). values shift in the same direction. Taking into account the limited energy resolution of the laboratory NanoESCA instrument we estimate bulk-related, Bi-induced changes in the relative Ga 3d CL positions (E Ga 3d -E VBM ) to be smaller than 0.1 eV. Short ion bombardment as described in the above section introduces surface-near defects. Under subsequent annealing cycles at temperatures of 400-440 • C, surfaces partly reorder in 2×3 surface symmetries. Again we want to reference CLs to E VBM , which is shown in Fig. In the initial decapped surface shown in Fig. A prerequisite for momentum resolved k -PEEM measurements is a sufficient crystalline surface order of samples under study, which we monitor by LEED. We first discuss the case of GaAs without Bi. After decapping of pure GaAs(001) (0% Bi) surfaces we observe the wellknown (2 × 4) reconstruction as shown in Fig. Experimental k -PEEM data for photon energies of hν = 21.2 eV are shown in Fig. Both cuts show similar band structures with several common features that are marked A-E (partly following the notation of Souma et al. At these incident energies we expect a dominant contribution from bulk states, and thus associate the maximum at Γ with the peak in the light-hole or split-off band of bulk GaAs. To understand the data further, one must consider the relation between the (1 × 1) SBZ and the bulk GaAs BZ as depicted in Fig. As a first approximation of the k -PEEM data, we computed within DFT (including spin-orbit coupling) the density of states of bulk GaAs resolved on a (100 × 40) grid of k || , k z points along the [010] and [110] directions, before taking a simple average over k z for each value of k || . The results are plotted as colormaps in Fig. In order to facilitate a better comparison with experiment, these selected bands are also overlaid on the k -PEEM data in Fig. Good agreement with experiment is also obtained for the DFT band structure of the full GaAs(001)-β2(2 × 4) slab, plotted in Fig. In the 2 × 4 reconstruction the bulk symmetry between [110] and [ 110] directions is broken and respective surface electronic properties should differ. Figure Further confirmation of the origin of these bands is obtained by performing constant energy cuts of the k-PEEM data. Exemplary energy cuts at BE = 0.75 eV, 2.0 eV, 3.4 eV and 4.5 eV are shown in Fig. In addition to the above bulk-derived features, we also identify an additional feature E in Fig. We now turn to the effect of Bi doping on the GaAs band structure. Fig. Rigid shifts of the k-PEEM band structures of GaAsBi to lower BEs with respect to pure GaAs confirms our XPS observations. Fig. The shift in the VBM is accompanied by a general broadening of k-PEEM features compared to pure GaAs despite the well-defined LEED pattern in Fig. Slab calculations incorporating Bi in a bulk site succeed in reproducing the main observed experimental features. Figure . 8 compares the pristine β2(2 × 4) slab band structure unfolded along [110] with that of a slab containing a low concentration of Bi. The main effect of Bi is to perturb the bands coming from bulk GaAs, in particular the hh band (yellow arrows). Other points in the SBZ also lose their clear Bloch character (box). A small shift or change in the bandwidth is also observed (red arrow). However, due to the dense manifold of bulk and surface bands in these supercells it is difficult to make any quantitative analyses: this is discussed instead in the following section. The k-PEEM measurements reported in the previous section succeeds in identifying mainly bulk-derived electronic states in GaAs and GaAsBi. However, the limited resolution makes it difficult to identify surface related features previously identified, for instance, with ARPES Fig. Spectra taken from decapped GaAs(001) are in good agreement with the literature e.g. for GaAs(001)-2 × 4 at hν = 29 eV Both findings coincide very well with Cai et al Although incorporation of Bi in the GaAs(001) slab calculations does yield tangible changes (see Fig. Finally, we consider the surface contribution to the electronic properties. Fig. We have studied structural and electronic properties of molecular beam epitaxy grown GaAs 1-x Bi x with varying Bi concentrations epilayers with (001) crystalline order and varying Bi content. Band structure properties of the well-known β 2 (2 × 4) reconstruction of pure GaAs(001) were measured by angle-resolved photoemission as well as photon energy dependent ultra-violet photoemission. By comparing the experimental data to density functional theory calculations of bulk GaAs and the β 2 (2×4)reconstructed GaAs surface, we show that angle-resolved photoemission intensities at 21.2 eV are governed by projections of bulk heavy and light hole bands in an extended Brillouin zone scheme along the high-symmetry directions X-W-X', X-U-Γ', Γ-K-X', and Γ-L-Γ, i.e. taking into account the k z dependence. From the ab initio slab calculation we attribute an experimentally observed (and previously unreported) dispersing band at binding energies of about 1 eV with a surface state. Bi atoms are found to be integrated as a Bi-rich sur- face layer and bulk Bi species which lead to a change of the surface order towards a (1 × 3) symmetry. We achieved Bi bulk concentrations of ≈ 1 % while preserving surface order and crystallinity high. In photoemission Bi-induced energy shifts and broadening effects of GaAs heavy and light hole bulk bands become evident, which are reproduced in respective calculations. Bi-induced electronic band structure effects underlines the potential of GaAs 1-x Bi x compounds for modulations in the optical band gap and thus optoelectronic applications. 