We present a quantum-limited Josephson-junction-based 3-wave-mixing parametric amplifier, the SNAIL Parametric Amplifier (SPA), which uses an array of SNAILs (Superconducting Nonlinear Asymmetric Inductive eLements) as the source of tunable nonlinearity. We show how to engineer the nonlinearity over multiple orders of magnitude by varying the physical design of the device. As a function of design parameters, we systematically explore two important amplifier nonidealities that limit dynamic range: the phenomena of gain compression and intermodulation distortion, whose minimization are crucial for high-fidelity multi-qubit readout. Through a comparison with firstprinciples theory across multiple devices, we demonstrate how to optimize both the nonlinearity and the input-output port coupling of these SNAIL-based parametric amplifiers to achieve higher saturation power, without sacrificing any other desirable characteristics. The method elaborated in our work can be extended to improve all forms of parametrically induced mixing that can be employed for quantum information applications. Quantum-limited Josephson parametric amplifiers Among these characteristics, dynamic range is a particularly important requirement for scaling up superconducting qubit setups to larger size systems Is it possible to improve the amplifier dynamic range without sacrificing other desirable characteristics? Here, we answer affirmatively by demonstrating systematic improvement of the dynamic range of a 3-wave-mixing degenerate parametric amplifier, named the SNAIL Parametric Amplifier (SPA). The SPA is based on an array of Superconducting Nonlinear Asymmetric Inductive eLements (SNAILs) Our demonstration of dynamic range improvement is crucially accompanied by first-principles theory that elucidates the link between the physical realization of the amplifier and the nonidealities of its response to large input signals. This link is accomplished in two steps. First, we show how to map the physical layout of the SPA to the phenomenological parameters that enter the input-output description of the device. These parameters consist of the 3-and 4-wave-mixing nonlinear components of the SPA Hamiltonian, as well as the damping induced through coupling to a transmission line via an input-output port. Second, we describe and validate experimentally how these phenomenological parameters directly determine the nonidealities in the amplifier's response to large input signals. Such first-principles theoretical description opens the door to further improvements in the amplifier dynamic range as well as the optimization of any other form of parametrically induced mixing for quantum information processing. The article is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the physical realization of the SPA. Sec. III briefly describes the relevant parameters of the SPA model and their influence on the small-signal gain of the amplifier. Sec. IV validates our mapping between the physical layout and the SPA parameters, with the theoretical details given in Appendix A. In Sec. V, we explore the mechanisms responsible for amplifier saturation, and characterize the intermodulation distortion of the SPA in Sec. VI, with theoretical details given in Appendix B. Akin to the Josephson Parametric Amplifier (JPA) The microstrip transmission line sections are formed by a 2 μm thick silver (Ag) layer deposited on the back of the 300 μm thick Si wafer to act as a ground plane, and by center traces of Al whose length l MS and width w MS adjust the frequency ω 0 and the characteristic impedance Z c . For all devices in this work, we held the microstrip width constant at w MS = 300 μm to set Z c = 45 Ω, and adjusted l MS (in conjunction with M , α and L J ) to set the operating frequencies of the devices (see Section IV A). The coupling to the 50 Ω transmission line κ is set by a gap capacitor (capacitance C c ) at one end of the SPA resonator (Fig. The experimental characterization was performed in a helium dilution refrigerator (temperature ≈ 20 mK) with a standard microwave reflection measurement setup. While cold, a magnet coil mounted beneath the sample applies a magnetic flux Φ to each SNAIL, which we assume to be uniform across the array. All measurements were performed with a PNA-X network analyzer The device is modeled with the circuit schematic of Fig 1d. Following Ref. 12, we treat the SNAIL as a nonlinear inductor that provides an asymmetric potential energy U SNAIL (φ s ) and corresponding current-phase relation (where Φ 0 = h/2e is the superconducting magnetic flux quantum and φ s is the phase drop across the small junction of the SNAIL). These functions are engineered via the junction inductance ratio α and the externally applied magnetic flux Φ. To include the linear embedding circuit, we enforce the constraint of current conservation at the left and right boundary nodes of the SNAIL array (phases denoted φ l and φ r in Fig. We next quantize the system and express the Hamiltonian of the lowest frequency mode of the SPA up to fourth order as where a † (a) is the harmonic oscillator creation (annihilation) operator, ω a is the resonant frequency, and the third-order and fourth-order nonlinearities are denoted g 3 and g 4 respectively. These three Hamiltonian terms are all tuned in situ via the applied magnetic flux Φ through each SNAIL loop. Along with the coupling rate to the transmission line κ, the parameters of H SPA determine the behavior of the SPA as a degenerate parametric amplifier as we show next. To operate the SPA as a 3-wave-mixing amplifier, we apply a strong microwave pump tone at ω p ≈ 2ω a , with mean intracavity amplitude α p . As shown in Appendix B, input-output theory where ω = ω s -ω p /2 is the detuning of the input signal from ω p /2, g = 2g 3 α p , and For this work, we always set the pump frequency so that ∆ = 0. Note that the maximum of gain G always occurs at ω s = ω p /2, similar to the flux-pumped JPA Resonant frequency ωa as a function of applied magnetic flux Φ for three devices. Thin solid lines are fits to a model based on the schematic in Fig. these Hamiltonian parameters and provide intuition on this mapping, we compare the set of devices listed in Table We first compare the linear-response characteristics of these devices, specifically the resonant frequency ω a as a function of applied magnetic flux Φ (Fig. The first factor, the flux dependence of L SNAIL (Φ), is strongly analogous to that of a dc superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) or an rf SQUID The second factor influencing the tunable range of ω a is the fraction of the mode inductance coming from the SNAILs. For a given SNAIL design with an L SNAIL (Φ), this is controlled by the number of SNAILs M in series as well as the length l MS and width w MS of the surrounding microstrip embedding structure. In practice, M provides (a) Reflection gain versus input signal frequency when the SPA is biased with a strong tone at ωp ≈ 2ωa, frequency landscape inset of (c). (b) Gain as a function of input signal power shows amplifier saturation. Input power at which the gain reduces by 1 dB is denoted P -1dB . (c) Third-order nonlinearity g3 versus applied magnetic flux Φ. Solid curves are first-principles theory for g3. more control over ω a due to the practical difficulty in realizing microstrip embedding structures with impedances significantly different from 50 Ω. Thus, M and α are chosen first and then we adjusted l MS (while keeping w MS fixed) to hit our desired operating frequency range. Focusing on the Φ dependence of ω a in devices B and C (Fig. Having described the linear response of the SPA resonator, we next demonstrate its operation as a 3-wavemixing degenerate parametric amplifier. We applied a strong microwave pump tone at ω p = 2ω a and adjusted the pump power to achieve 20 dB of small-signal reflection gain (example shown Fig. The dependence of third-order nonlinearity g 3 on Φ is shown in Fig. The fourth-order nonlinearity g 4 is extracted from a Stark shift measurement. In this experiment, we applied a strong ≈ 500 MHz detuned drive that populates the resonator with n average steady-state photons and shifts its resonant frequency. Here, n is calibrated using fits of ω a , κ and room-temperature line attenuation. In Fig. The dependence of K and thus g 4 on Φ is shown in Fig. While our previous comparison of devices A-C focused on the flux profile of g 3 and g 4 , their overall magnitudes must also be engineered for optimizing amplifier nonidealities, such as saturation power. Besides α and L J , these magnitudes are also influenced by the number of SNAILs M (see Appendix A). At small values, changing M strongly affects |g 3 | and |g 4 |, but we note its influence substantially weakens for M 20. Subsequent devices (D and E) have similar magnitudes of the nonlinearities and flux profiles to device C, but instead vary the coupling to the transmission line κ. A summary of these phenomenological parameters for all devices is given in Table Having established the connection between the physical parameters of our device and the properties of H SPA (Eq. 1), we now optimize the nonlinearities (g 3 and g 4 ) and the coupling to the transmission line (κ) to achieve higher dynamic range. But first, let us review the causes of amplifier saturation. The previous formula for gain (Eq. 2) shows no dependence on input signal power, and therefore does not capture the phenomenon of amplifier saturation. To include this dependence, we need to account for the population of the resonator by signal photons at frequency ω s . We therefore introduce the mean intracavity amplitude α s . Furthermore, 3-wave mixing creates an image tone (often called the idler) at frequency ω i = ω p -ω s , with intracavity amplitude α i , which is comparable to α s . As shown by a semiclassical harmonic-balance analysis (see Appendix B) that includes both of these amplitudes in the input-output theory on equal footing with α p , the gain G can be recast into a formula similar to Eq. 2. We find where ω = ω s -ω p /2, g eff = 2g 3 α p , and Considering the on resonance response (ω → 0), we see that we can tune the pump strength and thus g eff such that the denominator of Eq. 3 goes to 0 and the gain G diverges. Resonant parametric amplifiers operate very close to this parametric instability point, with g eff chosen such that G = 20 dB. As a result, slight changes in this denominator are enough to significantly affect the gain G. Two causes of gain compression can be associated with changes in the denominator of Eq. 3. The first, Kerrinduced Stark shifts, comes from shifts in ∆ eff with increasing signal power. More signal power increases α s and shifts the resonant frequency due to g 4 . Under the approximation that α p is independent of α s (often termed the stiff-pump approximation where G 0 is the small-signal gain (see derivation in Appendix B). The second cause of gain compression visible from Eq. 3 is that of pump depletion, which arises from the breakdown of the stiff-pump approximation where G 0 is the small-signal gain. We note that this compression mechanism arises directly from the thirdorder nonlinearity that we need for amplification, and is thus unavoidable. Given these limits on dynamic range, we examine Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 to formulate a recipe for higher compression powers: decrease nonlinearities g 3 and g 4 , and increase the dissipation κ. Intuitively, this recipe pushes the optimization closer to a system that obeys the assumptions underlying Eq. 2, namely a more linear oscillator. Following this recipe requires more applied pump power to reach a desired gain. However, we must be mindful that the current through the SNAIL does not approach the critical current of its Josephson junctions. In practice, applying pump currents that approach the critical current does not directly cause gain compression, but instead determines whether the amplifier achieves the desired small-signal gain in the first place. This limitation translates to pQ 1, where p is the inductive participation ratio of all nonlinear elements and Q is the total quality factor of the SPA mode We followed the recipe of reducing nonlinearities and increasing dissipation in designing our devices (see Table To confirm the dependence of P -1dB on g 4 , we first focus on device B, which has the largest |g 4 |/2π ∈ For device C, we engineered κ/2π ∈ [90, 120] MHz and |g 4 |/2π ≈ 4 kHz except near its Kerr-free region (see Fig. Despite this increase in dynamic range, Fig. To investigate this discrepancy, we measured the Kerr nonlinearity in the presence of the strong pump tone using a third-order intermodulation distortion (IMD) measurement A third-order IMD experiment is performed according to the frequency landscape in Fig. Sweeping the applied power on the two main signal tones, we extracted the input-referred third-order intercept point (IIP 3 ) at which the measured sideband power would equal the main input signal power (details in Appendix B 2 and Fig. Quantitatively, lowest-order harmonic balance theory predicts (see Appendix B) that the measured IIP 3 is related to the Kerr nonlinearity g 4 by the equation where G 0 is the small-signal gain. However, upon a closer examination of Fig. Not only do IMD measurements help us understand the causes of amplifier saturation, they are also interesting in their own right since reduction of these spurious mixing processes is important for many applications. For instance, any scheme for multiplexed readout of superconducting qubits requires the independence of the readout channels. These spurious intermodulation products will directly limit the isolation between channels either by directly mixing them or by distorting pulses. Furthermore, such intermodulation products put an upper bound on the quantum efficiency of any practical amplifier since, without careful calibration, distortion of the incident quantum signal is unlikely to be accounted for in the experimentalist's demodulation scheme. In conclusion, we have introduced the SPA, a 3-wavemixing degenerate parametric amplifier, which is simple to design, fabricate, and operate. Through a systematic study across multiple devices, we have confirmed that the fourth-order Kerr term in the amplifier Hamiltonian is the primary cause of gain compression and intermodulation distortion. With this insight, we have optimized the SPA to achieve 1-dB compression powers on par with the best reported values for resonant quantum-limited parametric amplifiers, but over the entire tunable bandwidth of 1 GHz of the device, and without sacrificing any other desirable characteristics. Importantly, the most precious of these characteristics, quantum-limited noise performance, was confirmed through comparing noise-visibility-ratio (NVR) measurements. A proxy for noise temperature, NVR is the ratio between the noise power spectral density with the pump on and the pump off. All amplifiers in this work were measured to have comparable NVRs and thus comparable noise performances to other quantum-limited amplifiers measured in the same system Our work on the improvement of amplifier performance can be carried out further. One puzzling observation was the absence of a peak in the saturation power at the Kerr-free point, despite the confirmation that Kerrinduced Stark shifts are the primary cause of gain compression. The IMD measurements suggested that Stark shifts caused by higher harmonics limit the saturation power at the Kerr-free point. A natural next step would be to understand how to reduce these spurious harmonics in the presence of a strong pump drive. An alternative strategy would be to further reduce amplifier nonlinearity, which should increase the saturation power at the cost of requiring more pump power to achieve the same gain. As such, effectively engineering the pumppower delivery network to achieve the desired pump strength, without introducing excess noise or heating up the base plate of the dilution refrigerator, will become increasingly more crucial for higher dynamic range amplifiers. More broadly, the optimizations performed in this work for higher dynamic range do not conflict with recent approaches for enhanced dynamic bandwidth via impedance engineering Furthermore, our results indicate that 3-wave mixing with an array of SNAILs is a particularly robust building block for information processing with superconducting quantum circuits. With this versatile tool, both the third-order and the Kerr nonlinear parameters can be controlled over many orders of magnitude. Moreover, the sign of Kerr can be changed and its magnitude suppressed in situ by tuning an applied magnetic flux. Such control can be convenient in parameter regimes which are rather different from quantum-limited amplifiers, such as for instance, in superconducting qubits The SNAIL where E J is the Josephson energy, and φ ext = 2πΦ/Φ 0 . We operate in a regime where phase fluctuations are suppressed, and the potential can be Taylor expanded near one of its equivalent minima. We denote the expansion coefficients by c n = 1 These flux-dependent coefficients c n = c n (φ ext ), together with L J , completely characterize the behavior of the SNAIL when embedded in a larger electrical circuit. For instance, the linear inductance of the SNAIL is L s (φ ext ) = L J /c 2 (φ ext ). To realize an SPA with a resonance in the 4-10 GHz range, an array of M identical SNAILs is embedded into a transmission line resonator. The simplified circuit model, shown in Fig. In this case the total inductance of the emergent electromagnetic mode becomes flux tunable, as it consists of flux-independent inductance L and flux-dependent inductance L array s (φ ext ) = M L s (φ ext ) coming from the SNAIL array. The resonance frequency of this SPA mode is where we have defined the dimensionless coefficient ξ J = L J /L and the resonance frequency in the absence of the array ω 0 = 1/ √ LC. The Lagrangian of this system is where φ is the mode canonical phase coordinate, φ 0 is the reduced flux quantum, and E L = φ 2 0 /L. The coordinate φ s is not an independent variable, as it does not have its own kinetic energy. Therefore, prior to quantization, we need to eliminate it by minimizing the nonlinear potential energy U (φ s , φ) as a function of φ s . The resulting trivial Lagrange equation of motion is equivalent to imposing a full nonlinear current conservation condition at the node between the SNAIL array and the linear inductor. Using Eq. (A1), we can write it as This equation determines the SNAIL phase φ s [φ] as a function of mode canonical coordinate φ, which has to be further quantized. The potential energy can now be written in terms of a single degree of freedom φ Given that we operate in the regime of small phase fluctuations, we can again Taylor expand the renormalized potential U (φ), resulting in the coefficients cn = dφ n (φ min ), where φ min is determined from the condition c1 = 0. Using the current conservation equation (A5), we can write the first four Taylor coefficients as The derivatives of the implicit function φ s [φ] can be found by differentiating Eq. (A5). For example, by differentiating it once we obtain In addition, we can show from Eq. (A5) that the presence of the series linear inductor does not change the location of the SNAIL potential minimum φ s [φ min ] = φ min . Therefore, we can express the Taylor coefficients cn for the renormalized potential U (φ) in terms of the bare ones where we have defined the array linear participation ratio: After performing the Legendre transformation and canonical quantization, the Hamiltonian of the mode can be written as where E C = e 2 /2C and [φ, N ] = i. For more convenience, we can introduce the bosonic raising and lowering operators a † and a that diagonalize the quadratic part of the Hamiltonian in the excitation number basis. The SPA Hamiltonian after this second quantization can be written, truncated to fourth order, as where In general, this Hamiltonian has both odd and even nonlinearities for Φ/Φ 0 = n/2 (where n is any integer), unlike the symmetric transmon Hamiltonian We can now relate these nonlinearities to the Stark shift per photon K that is measured in the experiment. In a nearly harmonic oscillator, K can be calculated as the dispersion of transition frequencies between the neighboring energy levels, where E(n) is the nth energy level of the Hamiltonian (A17). In the case g 3 = 0, which is the well-known Duffing oscillator model, K is simply related to the Hamiltonian parameter g 4 via K = 12g 4 . However, in the asymmetric SPA potential this relation is modified to K = 12 g 4 -5g 2 3 /ω a , where the last term comes from the second-order perturbation theory correction to the energy levels. Using expressions (A18-A19) we thus obtain We would like to stress that the calculation of the Kerr effect that we have outlined is significantly different from previous calculations in 3-wave-mixing amplifiers, such as for the JPC, in Ref. This discrepancy arises because the linear participation ratio-based approach does not properly account for the nonlinear current conservation, Eq. (A5), in the SPA between the SNAIL array and the inductor. This effect leads to a renormalization of g 4 due to c 3 evident in (A19). One can see that in the limit of small participation ratio p → 0 the additional contribution is equal to -3c 2 3 /c 2 , which does not contain any small parameters relative to c 4 . This significantly shifts the Kerr-free point in flux and modifies the whole Kerr nonlinearity profile. The comparison of data taken on device A with predictions of both approaches is shown in Fig. Moreover, apart from this renormalization effect, there is a trivial second-order perturbation-theory correction to energy levels due to the g 3 term in the Hamiltonian, which affects the Stark shift per photon K (last term in Eq. A21). Note that both g 4 and this correction scale identically with E C . This perturbative correction is insignificant in the limit of small participation ratio p. On the other hand, in the limit p → 1, the renormalization effect due to the linear inductance becomes irrelevant and the perturbative contribution becomes important instead. We can also explain the physics of the nontrivial contribution to g 4 in Eq. (A19) from a different perspective. This correction is nothing but a renormalization of the potential due to high-frequency modes that are inevitably present in the system (for example, the plasma modes of the SNAIL junctions). Such modes cannot be directly probed by low-energy experiments, but their effect is evident in measurable quantities such as the Stark shift per photon K. To demonstrate this point, consider the circuit in Fig. In this system, in contrast with Eq. (A4a) (see also Fig. In the Feynman diagram language, the Kerr nonlinearity of the SPA mode can be represented as a fourth-order self-interaction vertex. The example diagrams that contribute to the renormalization of this vertex are depicted in Figs. The first diagram in Fig. The interesting and nontrivial correction to K comes from the high-energy SNAIL mode, and is represented by the second diagram in Fig. The last diagram in Fig. In principle, there are other contributions to the renormalization of the fourth-order self-interaction vertex. Some example one-loop processes are shown in Fig. Comparing the two electrical circuits in Figs. Understanding these effects is important because the general approach for designing circuit QED systems relies on pushing the spurious modes up in frequency and then neglecting their influence by arguing that the detuning to these modes is large. We have shown that the presence of these modes can influence low-energy observables, and they have to be accounted for either by means of full nonlinear current conservation, or equivalently by integrating out the high-energy modes. While the lumped-element model above elucidates the important details in the theoretical treatment of the SPA and provides physical intuition, it cannot strictly be applied to our devices. In the SPA, the SNAIL array is embedded in a transmission line resonator, which is a distributed circuit element, see Fig. The Lagrangian of such a system can be written as where c is the capacitance per unit length and is the inductance per unit length. The generalized flux φ(x, t) on the transmission line is a one-dimensional massless Klein-Gordon field which has a discontinuity at x = 0, where the transmission line is interrupted by the lumpedelement SNAIL array. For convenience, we have introduced φ l = φ(-0, t)/φ 0 and φ r = φ(0+, t)/φ 0 to denote the superconducting phase on both sides of the array. Using zero current boundary conditions at x = ±l MS /2 and linearizing the Lagrange equation of motion for this system, we can perform an eigenmode decomposition and find the resonant frequency ω a of the structure as the smallest nontrivial solution of the equation where Z c = /c is the characteristic impedance of the transmission line, and ω 0 = π/l MS √ c is the resonant frequency when the array of SNAILs is replaced with a short. We use (A23) for the fits of ω a in Fig. Following Refs. 61 and 62, we calculate the nonlinearities of the SPA as where R Q = /(2e) 2 is the resistance quantum. The limits of small and unity participation ratio correspond in this model to M L s Z c /ω a and M L s Z c /ω a , respectively. In these limits, the corrections to Kerr due to c 3 coincide in both the distributed-(A25) and lumpedelement (A21) models. We use the expressions (A24) and (A25) for g 3 and K to plot the first-principles theory curves in Figs. The above expressions for g 3 and K give these nonlinearities as functions of designable parameters, such as the number of SNAILs M . However, the scaling with M can be rather unintuitive when applied to practical device design changes. For example, we consider the goal of decreasing K by increasing M . Using the lumped-element expression (A21) for simplicity, the dependence on M is K ∝ 1/M 2 when p, α, and E C are held constant. To then hold the operating frequency ω a constant, increasing M requires a corresponding increase in E J (smaller L J ), as is suggested in Ref. 14 for higher dynamic range in JPAs. Unfortunately, parasitic geometric inductance in the leads used to make the junctions prevents the reduction of L J much below its current ≈ 40 pH value without significantly affecting p. In practice, when increasing M , we hold L J constant and increase E C to realize the desired frequency ω a . The predicted scaling in this instance is weaker (K ∝ p 2 /M ). Moreover, this tactic also tends to increase p, which further weakens this scaling. As such, we find that increasing M much past 20 for our design does not strongly reduce K until M 200, at which point the SNAIL array can no longer be considered a lumped element. Future work must model these larger arrays as SNAIL transmission lines, where increasing M reduces K if the characteristic impedance is independent of M . Restricting ourselves to signal ω s , idler ω i , and pump ω p frequencies, we can solve the QLE (B1-B3) using the semiclassical harmonic-balance method where α s , α i and α p denote the mean intracavity amplitudes at the corresponding frequencies. To cast these equations into a more familiar form, we introduce the signal detuning ω = ω s -ωp 2 , the pump detuning ∆ = ω a -ωp 2 , and the effective pump detuning that includes Stark shift effects With the help of these notations, Eqs. (B5)-(B6) can be written via a susceptibility matrix as where g eff = 2g 3 α p . Using Eq. (B8) and the input-output relation (B3), we calculate the phase-preserving power gain G = |u ωs out | 2 /|u s | 2 . After some algebraic transformations, it can be cast into the form We note the close similarity between this expression for gain and Eq. ( To achieve large gain, the denominator in Eq. (B9) should be tuned close to zero, often called the parametric instability point. Altering this denominator by even a small amount in response to increased input signal power will reduce the gain and cause amplifier saturation. The small change in gain can therefore be written as where G 0 denotes the small-signal gain and n p = |α p | 2 . We have also restricted to the case ω = 0 and neglected the weak influence of numerator in Eq. (B9). The first term in Eq. (B10) shows the effect of changes in pump population n p . Pump population can be depleted in response to increasing signal power due to the intrinsic g 3 -induced coupling of α p and α s in Eq. (B4). This back-action on the pump due to the signal The second term in Eq. (B10) shows the effect of changes in ∆ eff . This change originates from the Stark shift contributions of the input signal in the detuning (B7). In the first-order harmonic-balance theory discussed so far, this effect vanishes when g 4 = 0. From Eq. (B10), it is straightforward to estimate how the saturation power scales with the parameters of the SPA for these two mechanisms where for brevity we have assumed ∆ = 0. Before comparing this semiclassical harmonic-balance theory to the experimental data, let us cover one more topic which is relevant for amplifiers: spurious intermodulation distortion. Let us now extend the analysis to consider the response of an amplifier to two monochromatic input tones. Standard parametric-amplifier theory predicts that the output will consist of two amplified tones at the same frequencies and two idler tones. However, because of the resonator nonlinearity, higher-order-mixing products will inevitably be created. The third-order IMD products are most relevant to the amplifier quality, as they are created within the amplifier bandwidth Third-order IMDs measure the nonlinear 4-wavemixing scattering processes of a device, which can be understood from the following frequency conditions, see Fig. We can quantitatively relate this sideband power to the g 4 of the device. Including ω imd in the harmonicbalance analysis of the QLE (B1), we find that the Kerr term in the Hamiltonian acts as an effective drive at the respective IMD frequencies. For example, for the IMD product at ω imd = 2ω s1 -ω s2 , the effective drive strength is equal to Therefore, we can pretend that there is an input at the IMD frequencies, and the amplifier treats it as any other input signal, namely creates an amplified output P imd out = GP imd in(eff) and the corresponding idler. For near-resonant tones, where n s1(2) = |α s1(2) | 2 is the average intraresonator population, which can be related to the input and output powers by n s1(2) ω a κ = GP s1(2),in = P s1(2),out (for G 1). Thus, we can relate the output power at ω imd to the output powers at ω s1 and ω s2 by ( ω a ) 2 P 2 s1,out P s2,out . (B15) Assuming P s2,in = P s1,in = P s,in , we note that P imd out scales cubically with applied input power, whereas P s,out = GP s,in scales linearly (see Fig. While the above derivation for brevity assumes G 1, it can be shown that for arbitrary gain G the IIP 3 is given by This result can be used to extract the fourth-order nonlinearity g 4 in the presence of the amplification pump and compare it to the Stark shift experiment described in the main text (Fig. As shown in Fig. In this Section, we compare the predictions of the saturation power by the harmonic-balance theory with the experimental data for device D, see Fig. Let us focus first on the blue first-order harmonic balance theory curve. To obtain it, we map the signal and pump powers onto the corresponding drive strengths u s and u p , solve the system of Eqs. (B4)-(B6) numerically, FIG. Measured P -1dB (black) as a function of Φ for device D biased at 20 dB gain. Solid lines are predictions of first-order harmonic-balance theory (B4)-(B6) using g4 calculated from first-principles (blue) or empirically extracted from IIP3 (red). Green depicts the second-order harmonic-balance theory (B18)-(B20) using the same parameters as blue. and use the resulting amplitudes to calculate the gain (B9). In this numerical procedure, we use ω a and κ extracted from the resonance fits at each flux point, and g 3 and g 4 calculated from first principles. As one can see from Fig. Similarly, from Eq. (B16) a peak near the Kerr-free point is expected in IIP 3 , which is not observed in the data (Fig. We attempt to explain the failure of the first-order harmonic balance theory near the Kerr-free point by going to higher order. We had previously included only the main frequency components ω p , ω s and ω i = ω p -ω s in harmonic balance. The relevant frequencies to next order are 2ω p , 2ω s , 2ω i , ω p + ω s , ω p + ω i , ω s -ω i and 0. The corresponding intra-resonator amplitudes of these harmonics are suppressed by a factor of ∼ κ/ω a since they fall outside the linewidth of the SPA resonator. However, increasing the population at these frequencies can cause additional Stark shifts and contribute to the reduction of the saturation power. Using the smallness of the amplitudes of these harmonics, the new extended system of harmonic balance equations can be partially solved and reduced to three equations similar to Eqs. (B4)-(B6) as shown below: Using this system of equations with the g 3 and g 4 calculated from first principles, we are able to reconstruct the green line on Fig. Finally, we find that using the stiff-pump approximation for Stark-shift-limited saturation yields results similar to the full numerical solution. This further confirms that the effect of pump depletion is negligible and Kerrinduced Stark shifts are the primary mechanism responsible for amplifier saturation. . Constitutive parameters of 5 devices measured in the experiment: Josephson inductance of largest junction (LJ ), number of SNAILs (M ), junction inductance ratio (α), coupling capacitance to the 50 Ω transmission line (Cc), and frequency of the λ/2 microstrip embedding structure when the array of SNAILs is replaced by a short (ω0).