We investigate the interplay between the structural reconstruction and the magnetic properties of Fe doublelayers on Ir (111)-substrate using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory and mapping of the total energies on an atomistic spin model. We show that, if a second Fe monolayer is deposited on Fe/Ir (111), the stacking may change from hexagonal close-packed to bcc (110)-like accompanied by a reduction of symmetry from trigonal to centered rectangular. Although the bcc-like surface has a lower coordination, we find that this is the structural ground state. This reconstruction has a major impact on the magnetic structure. We investigate in detail the changes in the magnetic exchange interaction, the magnetocrystalline anisotropy, and the Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interaction depending on the stacking sequence of the Fe double-layer. Based on our findings, we suggest a new technique to engineer Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interactions in multilayer systems employing symmetry considerations. The resulting anisotropic Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions may stabilize higher-order skyrmions or antiskyrmions. The next generation of high-density and low-energy data storage devices or neuromorphic computing based units will require novel materials and phenomena. Skyrmions in magnetic materials have high potential to meet the demands for these new technologies. The DMI originates from spin-orbit coupling (SOC). At metal surfaces and interfaces, the DMI can be understood via the model of Fert and Levy, Here, we study the double-layer of Fe on Ir (111) (2Fe/Ir (111)) via density functional theory (DFT) with a particular focus on the different stackings of the two Fe layers of 2Fe/Ir (111). We base our DFT calculations on the experimental observations of certain structural phases. We show that, counterintuitively, the second monolayer does not grow in the fcc or hcp absorption site but in the bcc absorption site. This induces a reduction of the crystal symmetry of 2Fe/Ir (111) which loses the 3-fold rotation axis. We calculate the magnetic exchange interaction for each of the stackings of the Fe second layer and show that the frustration of exchange interaction varies considerably from one stacking to the other. Our DFT-parameterized atomistic spin model includes both intra-and inter-layer exchange interactions. Then, we compute the DMI for each of the stackings and show that the interfacial symmetry does not impose the symmetry of the DMI alone. Finally, we deconvolute the DMI contribution of each of the layers and infer a new method based on symmetry considerations to obtain an anisotropic DMI which may stabilize antiskyrmions or higher order skyrmions. The paper is organized in two parts. The first part is dedicated to the methodology used to compute the magnetic exchange interaction and the DMI. The second part presents the results regarding the different magnetic ground states of 2Fe/Ir (111) depending on the double-layer stacking. We want to study the effect of simple variations of stacking sequences in the Fe double-layer deposited on an Ir (111) surface and how their structural differences influence the stability and magnetic interactions between the Fe-atoms in the double-layer. We chose double-layer structures which are derived from the metallic bulk structures fcc, hcp and bcc. The fcc structure consists of hexagonal close-packed layers in the (111)-plane, where every atom has six equidistant nearest neighbours within the plane as shown in Fig. Also the hcp structure in Fig. The third stacking-type we include in our study, is the pseudomorphically strained bcc (110) structure. In contrast to the fcc and hcp structures, the bcc bulk structure usually does not possess any close-packed crystallographic planes. However, the (110)-plane of the bcc unit cell can be (considerably) strained ( xx = -10.7%, yy = +9.6%) in order to fit the same hexagonal unit cell as the fcc and hcp structures, as indicated in white. The main difference is that the Fe-atoms do not occupy the hollow site positions B or C, but the bridge positions marked D, giving rise to the stacking sequence ADA. Fe atoms in this position have a reduced coordination number as they possess only two nearest neighbours in the plane below instead of three. To characterize the stacking sequences in the Fe doublelayer with respect to the fcc-stacked Ir (111) substrate, throughout this paper, we use a modified h-f stacking sequence notation, borrowed from the description of closepacked (bulk) crystal structures. In contrast to the original h-f stacking sequence notation, where the symbol always refers to the middle layer of the sequence-triple, i.e. "f" for the Blayer in the ABC-sequence of the fcc structure or "h" for the B-layer in the ABA-sequence of the hcp-structure, our symbols refer to the top layer of the sequence-triple, as we want to characterize surface structures. In addition to f and h, we introduce the stacking sequence b * to indicate a pseudomorpically strained bcc-like top-layer. In Tab. I we give an overview of the stacking sequences that we have studied. The first symbol indicates the stacking sequence of the Fe atom at the interface Fe@Ir and the second symbol the stacking sequence of the Fe atom at the surface Fe@vac. For Fe@Ir only stackings f and h were considered, while for Fe@vac also b * was taken into account. Besides the stacking sequence in ABC-notation also the coordination numbers (CN) of the two Fe-atoms are given, demonstrating that coordination numbers are reduced by one, if the top layer adopts the bcc-like structure. Two different symmetries result in the close-packed structures ff, fh, hf and hh, we find the trigonal plane group (PG) p3m1 and in the bcc-like structures fb * and hb * the centered rectangular/rhombic plane group cm. Figure Structural relaxations were performed using a symmetric film consisting of 11 layers of Ir and two layers of ferromagnetic (FM) Fe on the top and bottom of the Ir slab, slightly different from the slab shown in Fig. A powerful way of describing and understanding the underlying mechanisms and magnetic interactions leading to non-collinear magnetic structures in ultrathin films is to study the energy dispersion of spin spirals. This spin spiral propagation vector q can be chosen arbitrarily in the irreducible Brillouin zone. In Fig. As we learned before (see Tab. I), the Fe double-layer does not possess the six-fold rotation axis of the hexagonal symmetry. Instead, depending on the stacking sequence, the symmetry is reduced to trigonal (plane group p3m1) in the hexagonal close-packed stackings ff, fh, hf, and hh or to centered rectangular (plane group c2mm) in the bcc-like stackings fb * and hb * . Therefore, some of the high-symmetry points are lost in the close-packed stackings or become fully obsolete in the bcc-like stackings, as indicated in Fig. In the case of trigonal symmetry, the K-points are not equivalent anymore as shown by the additional K along b. The M-points remain unchanged. Therefore, the irreducible BZ has doubled in size as compared to the case shown in Fig. As Γ-M and Γ-X along x as well as Γ-K and Γ-Ȳ along y are high-symmetry lines in both the trigonal and centered rectangular symmetries, we utilize these throughout this study to compare the magnetic interactions in the different stackings. The spin spiral propagation vector q determines the propagation direction of the spin spiral and the periodicity length or, in other words, the angle between the neighbouring magnetic moments. A spin spiral with q = Γ describes the ferromagnetic state. At q = M the row-wise antiferromagnetic state is characterized by an angle of 180 • between neighbouring magnetic moments and a periodicity length of 2a. q = K on the other hand characterizes the Néel state with an angle of 120 • and a periodicity length of 3a. In (a) the relationships between real space (grey) and reciprocal (blue) unit cells including the first Brillouion zone (yellow) for the hexagonal reference structure is given. For simplicity, the vectors of the real space and reciprocal space were chosen to have the same length. The dashed black triangle indicates the irreducible part of the first Brillouin zone. Also shown is the cartesian coordinate system within the first Brillouin zone (yellow), which is used for the calculation of magnetic interaction energies. The high symmetry q-points Γ, K and M are indicated as well as the irreducible part of the Brillouin zone (dotted line). In the double-layers, the hexagonal symmetry is reduced to trigonal and centered rectangular. In (b) the trigonal setting is shown where half of the points K are lost, indicated by the additional K and a doubling of the size of the irreducible Brillouin zone. In the centered rectangular systems, given in (c), the Brillouin zone changes its shape and size (the hexagonal one is shown for comparison) and new special k-points X, Ȳ and M result. In Fig. To study the magnetic properties of these films, we calculate the total energy of flat spin spirals as a function of the angle between neighboring magnetic moments via the generalized Bloch theorem. SOC contributes to the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) and to the DMI. The MAE contribution is obtained from calculations of collinear spin structures. Whereas the DMI energy contribution is accessed via calculations of spin spirals. The MAE can be obtained by evaluating the energy contribution of the SOC in the collinear Fe double-layers with all magnetic moments oriented parallel along the three cartesian axes x, y and z. This SOC contribution is calculated by performing self-consistent scalar-relativistic calculations, which require an increased accuracy, therefore we use a k max = 4.3 bohr -1 and 1936 k-points. To study the stability of the MAE with respect to the number of Ir layer, we have successively turned off the SOC contribution in the muffin tin of the Ir atoms. In that case, we have converged self-consistently the charge density when the quantization axis was applied in the z-direction and applied the magnetic force theorem to evaluate the energy when quantization axis was applied in the xand y-direction. For the non-collinear case of a flat spin spiral, the SOC can be included via first-order perturbation theory. where ξ i is the SOC strength at site i, σ is the Pauli matrix and L i is the orbital momentum operator at site i. H SOC describes the odd part of the magnetic exchange tensor which can be interpreted as the DMI, which stabilizes a left or a right rotating spin-spiral. Within FLEUR, the FLAPW basis set provides a natural framework for the atomic decomposition of the SOC. The atomically resolved SOC contribution allows the determination of the layer-dependent contributions to the DMI. If the magnetic moments in the MT of the layer i are kept in a FM state perpendicular to the rotation plane of the spin spiral in the other layers then the SOC contribution of this layer will be reduced to zero. The DMI can be attributed to the SOC contributions of the remaining layers. For these calculations, we have used k max = 4.3 bohr -1 and 1936 k-points. We use an extended Heisenberg model to analyze the energy dispersion curves E(q) of the different stacking models. This model involves the magnetic exchange interactions up to the fifth nearest neighbors and the Dzyaloshinksii-Moriya interactions. The exchange interactions in the magnetic Fe double-layer can be separated into two contributions: ( Both the intra-and the inter-layer interaction Hamiltonian are expressed as where the sum runs over sites within both Fe-layers. This Hamiltonian may be expressed as a series of Cosines by inserting the magnetization of a homogeneous spin spiral as where R δi is the position of the atom i in the shell δ and q is the propagation vector of the spin spiral in units of 2π a . In all structures presented in this study, both Fe layers adopt a hexagonal close-packed structure. Therefore H remains unchanged as compared to previous works. 3 ) and (0, -a √ 3 ). The resulting equations for the inter-layer interactions can be found in the Supplemental Material of Ref [21]. For the bcc-like stackings fb * and hb * , there are two next nearest neighbor atoms at positions ( a 2 , a 2 ) and (-a 2 , a 2 ). This gives for the first four neighbor shells in the adjacent plane the following expressions in cartesian coordinates H ⊥ nn (q x , q y ): Thus, the energy dispersions obtained for three different spin spirals in the Fe-layers can be fitted to the spin Hamiltonian (4) in order to obtain the exchange interaction coefficients J ,Fe@vac ij , J ,Fe@Ir ij and J ⊥ ij up to the fifth and fourth neighbor shell, respectively. J ,Fe@vac ij and J ,Fe@Ir ij are obtained when the spin spiral only propagates in the Fe@vac or Fe@Ir layer, respectively. J ⊥ ij is obtained when the spin spiral propagates in both Fe layers simultaneously. In addition, we provide effective exchange coefficients J eff resulting from the first nearest neighbor exchange interaction obtained in the range |q| < 0.1 × ( 2π a ), i.e. in the vicinity of the Γ-point. The DMI arises when SOC occurs in a system with broken inversion symmetry such as a surface or an interface. This in-teraction favours a perpendicular orientation between neighboring spins instead of the parallel or anti-parallel orientation favoured by Heisenberg exchange. Its effect is to favour cycloidal spin spirals and a certain rotational sense, thus, it determines whether a spin spiral rotates clockwise or counterclockwise. The Hamiltonian can be written as where the sum runs over sites within both Fe-layers. We consider contributions to the DMI up to the third neighbor shell and also provide effective DMI coefficients D eff resulting from the next nearest neighbor interaction as obtained close to the Γ-point (q ∈ [-0.1, 0.1]). This section is organized as follows. We first investigate and discuss the stability of the different stackings of the Fe double-layer. We consider the low temperature case (A) as well as a high temperature case (B), where the effect of thermal expansion of the substrate is taken into account. For completeness, we also study the kinetic stability of the stackings with respect to the ground state structure (C). Afterwards we provide an in-depth investigation of the magnetic interactions playing a decisive role in this material system (D), i.e. Heisenberg exchange (D 1), magnetocrystalline anisotropy (D 2) and the Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interaction (D 3). In order to understand the obtained relative stabilities and magnitudes of magnetic interactions we present densities of states (E). Finally, after having determined all energy contributions to the magnetic texture resulting from the different stackings in the Fe double-layer, we can discuss the occurrence of spin spirals in the studied system and compare our findings with experiments. We start by presenting the stability of the different doublelayer stackings given in Tab. I. In Fig. This result can be considered surprising in two ways. Firstly, the Fe@vac-layer uniquely determines the stability of the double layer. Secondly, the low-symmetry structures xb* are more stable than the close-packed stackings xh or xf. It seems that two monolayers of Fe are sufficient to give rise to bulk-like properties (i.e. the FM bcc-ground state structure) in the ultra thin-film, although it is extremely strained: xx = -4.6% and yy = +17.0% with respect to the calculated lattice constant of bcc iron (compare a = 2.83 Å of Fe in cubic unit cell vs. a = 2.70 Å of Ir in hexagonal unit cell). There is no explanation so far for the experimental finding that both fcc and bcc-top layers can be found to coexist, As the Fe double-layers are grown at elevated temperatures of about 700 Kelvin, thermal expansion of the Ir substrate might affect the relative stabilities of the stackings. In order to investigate the effect of an increased epitaxial strain due to thermal expansion of the substrate we studied the fxstackings at different in-plane lattice-constants expanded by 0.5 and 1.0% as compared to the DFT equilibrium value of a 0 = 2.70 Å. Iridium has an expanded lattice constant by about 0.34% at 600 K as compared to the value at temperatures close to 0 K, The energy difference between ff-and fb * -stackings slightly decreases by 10 meV from the equilibrium lattice constant a 0 to +1.0% epitaxial strain, while the energy of the fhstacking stays almost constant at a value of about 45 meV per Fe-atom higher than the ff-stacking. Therefore, epitaxial strain alone cannot change the stability hierarchy of the stackings we studied. Since epitaxial strain cannot explain the presence of ffstacked areas in experimentally investigated Fe double-layers, we turn now to the kinetic stabilization of the hexagonal-close packed stackings, i.e. if there are any energy barriers between those and the bcc-like stackings. We envision that the growth of the second layer could start at the hollow sites, i.e. positions B or C of the close-packed structures with three next neighbors in the Fe@Ir-layer (see Fig. Therefore, starting from the ff-stacking and fh-stacking, we continuously shifted the Fe@vac-layer along the [112] direction relative to the fcc (111)-plane of the Fe@Ir-layer until we reached the lattice sites of the fb * -stacking. In the inset of Fig. The corresponding energies can be found in Fig. At higher temperatures this simple picture may change though. As was shown previously for the martensitic phase transition in bulk titanium, Moreover, we observe that the fb * -stacking ground state is actually degenerate. A small off-centering towards the direction of the ff-stacking by 0.08 Å leads to a slightly lower energy by about 1.4 meV per Fe-atom as compared to fb * . This result is confirmed by supercell calculations. We investigate next the effect of the change of symmetry on the magnetic interactions for three different stackings: ff, fb * and fh. In addition, we included the hf-stacking to check for the influence of the Fe@Ir-layer. We first present the energy dispersion curves of spin spirals without SOC, which are fitted to the Heisenberg model to obtain exchange constants within and between the two magnetic Fe-layers. We then show the effect of the double-layer stacking on the magnetocrystalline anisotropy. Finally, we investigate the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in detail. The total magnetic exchange interaction can be studied when the spin spiral is propagating within both Fe layers as well as the Ir substrate. Figure On the other hand, the dispersion curves of hf (yellow) and fb * (red) exhibit an energy minimum at q = 0.0 × ( 2π a ) which corresponds to the ferromagnetic state. In the bcc-like fb * -stacking, the Néel state and the row-wise antiferromagnetic state at the BZ edges become extremely unfavorable (E( X)=437 meV and E( Ȳ)=221 meV, which are more than twice as large as the corresponding energies for the close-packed stackings). The occurence of isolated skyrmions depends on the rise of the dispersion curve close to q = 0.0 × ( 2π a ) which can be estimated by using the effective nearest neighbor exchange constant J eff as explained in section II E 1. The layer dependent energy dispersion curves are shown in Fig. Figure It is interesting that the strong FM behavior of the fb * stacking observed in Fig. In order to analyze in detail all magnetic exchange interactions in the different stackings, we provide in Tab. IV the fitted nearest neighbor interactions J ij up to the fifth and the fourth nearest neighbor in J and J ⊥ , respectively. All intra-layer exchange constants J show a high degree of frustration. They oscillate between ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) coupling depending on the shell number. In both Fe-layers, J 1 is positive which shows that the FM state is more stable than the AFM states but the J beyond the first nearest neighbors can become negative. All J have values below 12 meV/Fe which is between J 1 = 5.7 meV/Fe for Fe/Ir(111) Energy E(q)-E FM (in meV) (a) spin spiral in Fe@vac (b) spin spiral in Fe@Ir Energy E(q)-E FM (in meV) Fe@vac Fe@Ir Fe@vac Fe@Ir FIG. plain the occurrence of non-centrosymmetric skyrmions. The MAE is determined by calculating the SOC contribution to the total energy when all spins are pointing parallel along the x, y and z directions. The MAE is then determined by the energy difference E i -E min with i = x, y, z. The easy axis or easy plane is the axis or plane along which the SOC contribution to the total energy is lowest, i.e. E min . Since we perform calculations for asymmetric films there can be unphysical contributions from the Ir terminated side of the film. It is therefore important to explore the dependence on the MAE on the number of Ir MT spheres in which SOC is applied as shown in Fig. In Fig. It is surprising that the centered rectangular structure fb * posesses an easy-plane, where xand y-directions are degenerate, although these directions are not equivalent by symmetry. In the limit of small q, the effect of the MAE on the stability of a spin spiral is a constant energy shift of the whole dispersion curve by + 1 2 K 1 , i.e. it equally disfavors any kind of rotation of the magnetic moments. FIG. The DMI originates from SOC in non-centrosymmetric systems. In our systems, the broken inversion symmetry comes from the Ir-Fe interface, while the strong SOC originates from the Ir 5d-states. The DMI is thus expected to be dominated by the atomic SOC contributions from the Ir(111) substrate. Figure The situation is different for the fb * stacking as shown in Fig. In Tab. V we compare the DMI coefficients D eff and D 1-3 acting on the interfacial Fe (Fe@Ir) of the stackings ff, fh, fb * and hf, which we obtained from fitting the total SOC energies. For stackings ff and fh, we find D eff of about 2.0 meV, whereas fb * and hf give about 1.2 meV. As D eff in all stackings adopts positive values it favours clockwise-rotating spin spirals. These DMI coefficients are in the same range as those for the Fe monolayer on Ir(111) In Tab. V, also the coefficients for the DMI up to the third next nearest neighbor are provided. The values of D 1 are very similar for all stackings. For the ff and the fh stackings, TABLE V. DMI coefficients of Fe@Ir in all stackings determined along Γ-K and Γ-M direction for ff, fh, and hf and along Γ-X direction for fb * (along Γ-Ȳ in parentheses Energy ΔE soc (q) (in meV) Spin spiral vector q (in 2π/a) Energy ΔE soc (q) (in meV) Ir@Fe Fe@Ir Fe@vac Ir-Fe DMI Fe-Fe DMI (c) symmetry aspects of DMI spin spiral in Fe@Ir spin spiral in Fe@vac q soc q soc q soc q soc Fe@vac Fe@Ir Fe@vac Fe@Ir FIG. In order to confirm that the symmetry of the DMI in the fb * stacking depends on the adsorption site of the surface Fe-layer (Fe@vac), we calculated the layer dependent SOC for two different spin spiral configurations as in Ref. However, when the spin spiral propagates in the Fe@vac layer and the Ir substrate [Fig. We next analyze how these differences between the two spin spiral configurations can be understood. In the model of Fert and Levy, The situation is different in the second spin spiral configuration shown in Fig. To summarize, the absence of the Ir-Fe DMI in the Fe@vac spin-spiral due to the reduced symmetry is the origin of the reduced symmetry of the total DMI in the fb * stacking. Thus, the symmetry of the surface Fe-layer indeed determines the symmetry of DMI, hence, not only the symmetry of the interface matters. This confirms that the DMI is anisotropic and could allow for the presence of antiskyrmions in this specific stacking. In order to support the latter statements we present the orbital-resolved partial densities of states (PDOS) of the atoms Fe@vac, Fe@Ir and Ir@Fe in the stackings ff and fb * . The PDOS are given in Fig. The main changes arising from the structural differences between ff and fb * -stackings occur in the PDOS of the Fe atoms in both spin channels. The majority spin states of the two Fe atoms are fully occupied. We observe the largest differences between the two stackings close to the Fermi energy which is populated by minority spin states. In ff, the orbitals 3d x 2 -y 2 and d xy as well as 3d yz and 3d xz of both Fe@vac and Fe@Ir are degenerate. Moreover, all Fe 3d orbitals possess a peak at the Fermi energy. We have overall a three-peak pattern with a small peak at -1.5 eV (bonding states), and two large peaks around E F (non-bonding states) and +1.5 eV (anti-bonding states). In fb * , the degeneracy is lifted and the peak structure changes. We find two very broad peaks below and above the Fermi energy. Around E F , the DOS adopts only small values, especially apparent in the 3d z 2 and 3d x 2 -y 2 states. Thus, the states with non-bonding character vanish, which explains the enhanced thermodynamic stability of the fb * -stacking as compared to the close-packed structures. Moreover, the degeneracy of the 3d yz and 3d xz states is lifted in a particular way. While the new 3d xz orbital rather has a three-peak structure with a large peak at the bonding states at -1 eV, the 3d yz orbital becomes mainly anti-bonding with a large peak at +1.3 eV. This is a result of the symmetry breaking in the centered rectangular unit cell of the fb * structure. The hybridization between the two Fe layers is enhanced especially in the x-and z-direction (i.e. 3d xz and 3d z 2 orbitals overlap strongly), where the interlayer atomic distances are minimal. Moreover, it is reduced in the 3d yz orbital, where the DOS is largest above the Fermi energy and which corresponds to an orientation, where interlayer atomic distances are maximal. Thus, the changes in the electronic structures reflect the symmetry differences between the stackings and can also explain the enhanced thermodynamic stability of the fb * -stacking. Let us focus next on the electronic structure of the Ir-atoms in order to find indications for the reduction of DMI in the fb * -stacking. First, we find no effect of the Fe double-layer structure on the 5d x 2 -y 2 and 5d xy states as they have no outof-plane component and are solely directed towards Ir-atoms of the same layer. This is in contrast to the remaining three orbitals, which are either uniquely directed towards the Fe atoms like 5d z 2 or have at least out-of-plane contributions like 5d yz and 5d xz . Both groups of orbitals are affected differently by the structural changes in the Fe@vac layer. In ff, we find a small peak at the Fermi energy in 5d z 2 orbital, whereas fb * shows rather a minimum. For the 5d yz and 5d xz states the effect is reversed, but to a different degree. We observe a peak three times larger than the PDOS of the ff-stacking at -0.3 eV for the 5d yz orbital, i.e. a strong increase of the PDOS just below E F in fb * . Whereas for the 5d xz orbital, the PDOS is doubled in this energy range as compared to the ff-stacking. Thus, the electronic states of the atoms in the Ir@Fe-layer "sense" the symmetry breaking due to the Fe@vac-layer and react with an unexpected lifting of degeneracy in the 5d yz and 5d xz orbitals. (Color online) Orbital and angular momentum-resolved partial densities of states (PDOS) for the 3dtates of (a) Fe@vac, (b) Fe@Ir and for the 5d states of (c) Ir@Fe in the stackings ff (lines) and fb * (filled). Both majority spins (positive PDOS) and minority spins (negative PDOS) are given. The stacking of the Fe@vac layer changes the hybridization in the Ir@Fe layer as indicated by the arrows. Please note the different PDOS scales for Fe and Ir atoms. Finally, we have determined all quantities in order to study the thermodynamic stability of spin spirals in the different structures at T = 0 K. In Fig. As the DMI coefficients are positive, in all stackings clockwise-rotating spin spirals (along positive propagation directions) are favored. The contribution of the magnetocrystalline anisotropy amounts to The most isotropic structure is the ff-stacking, given in 16(a). Here, both energies (about -5.8 meV) and wavelength (1.7 nm) of the spin spirals along the Cartesian ΓK and ΓM directions are quasi identical. Thus, in this structure no preferred propagation direction exists. As the spin spirals are already stabilized by the exchange interaction, the additional DMI gives rise to the asymmetry of the dispersion curve with respect to the chirality (clockwise or anti-clockwise). Here the DMI favors clockwise-rotating cycloidal spin spirals. Moreover, the DMI shifts the energy minimum to larger q-vectors, thus accelerating the spin spiral. Completely different is the result of the fb * -stacking, presented in 16(b). Here, the anisotropy of the DMI is also reflected in a strong anisotropy of the magnetic texture. Only one spin spiral can exist in the fb * structure, which propagates along the cartesian ΓK direction. It has a relatively long wave length of 3.5 nm and a shallow energy minimum at -1.2 meV. The DMI in the ΓM direction is too small to stabilize a spin spiral along this direction. Therefore this stacking is expected to exhibit a spin spiral only in three directions in space. Very short wavelength spin spirals with low energy result in the fh-stacking shown in 16(c). Spin spirals along the ΓK and ΓM direction should both have a wavelength of 1.1 nm, but the spin spiral along the ΓM direction is energetically favoured by almost 2 meV. Also in the hf-stacking Fig. Spin spiral vector q (in 2π/a) -1.6 -0.8 (q,0,0) (0,q,0) Spin spiral vector q (in 2π/a) -15.6 -17.7 Total energy E(q) (in meV) Total energy E(q) (in meV) Total energy E(q) (in meV) Total energy E(q) (in meV) Thus, all stackings favor spin spiral ground states with different symmetries. They are either stabilized by both magnetic exchange and DMI, as in ff and fh, or only by DMI, as in fb * and hf. There is a more or less strong preference for spin spirals along the ΓK direction depending on the stacking. In fb * , along the y-axis no spin spiral can be stabilized at all, while in ff, spin spirals along ΓK and ΓM direction are degenerate. Let us compare our results with previous STM experiments. In the supposedly ff-stacked regions a spin spiral of 1.2 nm was identified without a preferred propagation direction. We have investigated the interplay between the Fe doublelayer stacking and the stabiliy and the magnetic interactions for 2Fe/Ir (111) ultra-thin films using density functional theory and mapping on an atomistic spin model. We considered in total six different double-layer stackings: the hexagonal close-packed variants ff, fh, hf and hh, and two structures with a bcc (110)-like surface Fe-layer fb * and hb * . We find that the fb * stacking with a bcc (110)-like surface layer is the most stable pseudomorphic structure, whereas the hexagonal close-packed stackings ff and fh are not kinetically/mechanically stable. Even if formed during the growth process, they should transform into the bcc-like stacking at considerable surface coverages. Moreover, we computed the magnetic exchange interaction beyond first nearest neighbors, the DMI beyond first nearest neighbors and the magnetocrystalline anisotropy. We find considerable differences for all magnetic interactions depending on the Fe double-layer stacking. There are no general trends though. Therefore, every structure has to be analyzed individually. In ff and fh we obtain a clockwise cycloidal spin spirals with periods of 1.6 nm and 1.1 nm, respectively, which are stabilized by the frustrated exchange and DMI, while the spin spirals in fb * and hf with wavelengths 3.4 nm and 3.0 nm are stabilized by the DMI. The reduced symmetry arising from the surface Fe-layer in the bcc-like stackings (plane group cm instead of p3m1 for the hexagonal close-packed structures) has fundamental consequences for the symmetry of the magnetic interactions. Not only the exchange interaction is affected, but also the DMI. We can explain this finding based on the density of states of the Fe 3d and Ir 5d electrons. We show that an interfacial DMI may be influenced by a magnetic overlayer further from the interface. This interaction between the surface Fe-layer and the Ir-substrate provides a new opportunity to tune the DMI by imposing different symmetries on the DMI. In the case of 2Fe/Ir (111), the 6-fold symmetric DMI present at the Ir-Fe interface can be modified by lowering the symmetry of the surface Fe-layer. The deposition of a bcc 5d transition metal on 2Fe/Ir (111) should create a large 2-fold symmetric DMI in the interface between Fe@vac and the 5d transition metal. The combination of two DMIs of 6-fold and 2-fold symmetry could enable the stabilization of topologically protected states with spatially varying chirality. This variation of chirality may allow the stabilization of higher order skyrmions (such as S = -2 or S = -3) in multilayer geometry.