Whilst it has long been known that disorder profoundly affects transport properties, recent measurements on a series of solid solution 3d-transition metal alloys reveal two orders of magnitude variations in the residual resistivity. Using ab-initio methods, we demonstrate that, while the carrier density of all alloys is as high as in normal metals, the electron mean-free-path can vary from ~10 Å (strong scattering limit) to ~10 3 Å (weak scattering limit). Here, we delineate the underlying electron scattering mechanisms responsible for this disparate behavior. While site-diagonal, spin dependent, potential scattering is always dominant, for alloys containing only Fe, Co, and Ni the majority spin channel experiences negligible disorder scattering, thereby providing a short circuit, while for Cr/Mn containing alloys both spin channels experience strong disorder scattering due to an electron filling effect. Somewhat surprisingly, other scattering mechanisms -including displacement, or size effect, scattering which has been shown to strongly correlate with such diverse properties as yield strength -are found to be relatively weak in most cases Electrical resistivity is one of the most fundamental properties of materials. At the coarsest level, it distinguishes between metals, semi-conductors and insulators. As such, it provides a window into the properties of the electron glue responsible for cohesion. In metals and alloys the electrical resistivity is directly related to the mean free path, λ e [ε F ], (alternatively the lifetime, τ e [ε F ]) of electrons at the Fermi energy. In a pure crystalline metal at absolute zero of temperature (T = 0 K), Bloch states are eigenstates of the system, λ e [ε F ] and τ e [ε F ] are infinite, and the resistivity vanishes. In disordered solid solution alloys, the chemical disorder that results from the random distribution of the alloying elements on the underlying crystalline lattice induces electron scattering and finite λ e [ε F ] and τ e [ε F ] even at absolute zero. As a result, the T = 0 K resistivity, or residual resistivity r0, is finite and its precise value provides a direct measure of the disorder induced changes in the underlying electronic structure. In a general N-component solid solution alloy the chemical disorder, as measured by the ideal entropy of mixing, is maximal at equiatomic composition and increases with the number of components. Equiatomic High Entropy Alloys (HEA), are exemplars of such maximally disordered alloys in that they are comprised of N≥5 components yet unexpectedly form highly stable, single-phase, disordered solid-solutions on a simple crystal lattice. The first single-phase HEA, NiFeCoCrMn, was synthesized by Cantor et al. Of interest here are the results of recent residual resistivity measurements Furthermore, distinct from many other metallic materials with high resistivity, the disorderinduced short λ e [ε F ] of highly resistive Cantor-Wu alloys does not require strong electron correlation as in incoherent metals Here, we report the first calculations of the residual resistivity of the full set of Cantor-Wu alloys using state-of-the-art ab initio transport theory for disordered alloys. Consistent with experiment, we find that the calculated r0 break into high-r0 (alloys involving Mn/Cr elements) and low-r0 (the others) sets. We show that it is the magnitude of the spin-dependent site-diagonal potential scattering that makes the dominant contribution to r0 and gives rise to this remarkable difference in r0 between the two sets. We explicitly evaluate effects of disorder that go beyond those captured by conventional CPA -local lattice displacements, the distribution of both the magnitude and orientation of the local magnetic moments. Surprisingly, we find that the scattering from local lattice distortions as well as the site-to-site variations in local moment magnitude and orientation are relatively weak in most alloys. This despite the fact that one of these, lattice displacements, has been shown to strongly correlate with such a seemingly unrelated property as yield strength. In solid solution alloys, all electron scattering ultimately results from the disorder-induced siteto-site potential fluctuations. However, to understand the fundamentals of the scattering mechanisms, it is useful to divide the total scattering according to a number of distinguishable submechanisms. Single-site electron scattering can be thought of as resulting from the site-to-site variation (d) in the local potential due to the random distribution of elements. In the presence of magnetism, conduction electrons experience an additional inhomogeneous exchange field (DExch), which further increases the site-disorder and is different in separate spin channels. In the following, we shall refer to site-diagonal disorder as being the combined effects of [d, DExch]. The single-site picture is further modified by including the effects of displacement scattering caused by relaxation of the atoms away from their ideal lattice sites due to the fact that every atom is surrounded by a different configuration of other atoms. Moreover, additional magnetic scattering can arise from fluctuations about the species-dependent single-site average in both the size of the local moments and how they couple amongst themselves -ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, mixed ferro/antiferro, non-collinear, non-coplanar ... Site-diagonal disorder. -Using the conventional spin-polarized KKR-CPA method, we explore the effect of site-diagonal disorder, i.e. [ds, DExch], on the electronic structure and r0 in Cantor-Wu alloys. Figure The underlying reason for the breakdown into two distinct resistivity groups can be understood in terms of disorder smearing of the Fermi surface. Figure Figure For alloys containing only Fe, Co and Ni, the majority-spin 3d band centers are aligned due to minimization of the kinetic energy. As a result, δ ↑ between all atom pairs is small and thus δ/W is always in the weak scattering regime. Because, different local moments form on different species and they couple ferromagnetically, the additional exchange splitting (DExch) which is proportional to the size of the local moment -with proportionality constant ~ 1eV/μB, leads to a large band center mismatch (δ ↓ ) in the minority-spin channel and consequent large disorder scattering (δ ̄/W ̄~1) (see Fig. Assuming that the site-to-site variation of both magnitude and the orientation of the atomic displacements are uncorrelated, their effects on the electronic structure and r0 can be assessed by the alloy analogy model (AAM) Magnetism beyond the single-site approximation. -Unlike in the KKR-CPA treatment of magnetism which deals with species-dependent single-site averaged magnetic moment, in the real alloys, the local moments of each species take on a distribution of values and can possibly point along arbitrary directions. In Fig. Firstly, the local moments in low-r0 alloys are ferromagnetically coupled and display only a small variation in the size of the moments. In high-r0 alloys with Cr, the magnitudes of Cr moments vary widely from negative (antiferromagnetically aligned) to positive (ferromagnetically aligned). In contrast to Cr, the magnitudes of Mn moments fall into two welldefined groups, large positive and large negative. This suggests that large on-site Hund's exchange promotes the formation of local moments on Mn, while the interatomic exchange interaction between Mn atoms is antiferromagnetic. The antiferromagnetic coupling associated with Cr and Mn can be attributed to the approximately half-filled d bands Taking NiCoMn and NiFeCoCrMn alloys as examples, it is noted that supercell calculations find two well-separated Mn moment distributions with opposite orientations and roughly similar amounts of Mn (~ 65%-35%) and Mn ̄ (~ 35%-65%) moments as the ground state. Due to the very localized nature of the Mn local moments such states can also be described within the KKR-CPA approach in a manner analogous to disordered local moment state (DLM) So far, r0 has been calculated assuming collinear spin configurations. However, spin noncollinearity is also possible, particularly in Mn-and/or Cr-containing alloys due to the geometric frustration of antiferromagnetism on a triangular lattice (as the (111) plane of the fcc lattice) In principle, the spin noncollinearity can be dealt with straightforwardly from the spin noncollinear calculations based on the supercell method. However, such calculations for supercell size sufficient to gain good statistics of distributions of spin orientations are extremely demanding and remain a research project in their own right. Such calculations are made particularly difficult by the need not only treat the spin noncollinearity but also include the spinorbit interactions -particularly for Pd-containing Cantor-Wu alloys, making them beyond the scope of this paper. Without such a sophisticated evaluation of the spin noncollinearity at zero temperature (probability distribution of the spin orientations for each species), here we calculate the maximum contribution to the residual resistivity (r0) that can arise from spin disorder. To assess this, we again employ the AAM by using a discrete set of random and uncorrelated spin moments that are distributed uniformly in space, where the magnitude of the species-dependent local moments are obtained from CPA ground state Notwithstanding the overall improved agreement with the measurement resulting from inclusion of the additional scattering mechanisms discussed above, the remaining moderate underestimation of r0 in some alloys (NiFe, NiCoCr, NiFeCoCrMn, NiFeCoCrPd) requires consideration of other possible theoretical shortcomings. The three most obvious being: going beyond the single-site treatment of disorder; inclusion of any possible (but currently mostly unknown except for NiFe In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the abnormal and disparate electronic transport in Cantor-Wu alloys at zero temperature is dominated by electron scattering arising from site-to-site potential disorder. In particular, it is found that Cr and/or Mn produce strong disorder scattering as a result of the proximity of the d-scattering resonance to the Fermi energy which results from their reduced band filling. Additionally, other electron scattering mechanisms are explored explicitly and shown to be small in most alloys with the exception of: NiPd and NiFeCoCrPd, where the effect of displacement scattering is large; NiCoMn, where the DLM-Mn ground state significantly raises r0; and NiFeCoCrMn/NiFeCoCrPd, where the effect of spin-noncollinearity is large. A profound understanding of the electronic transport in disordered alloys not only provides insights on the Fermi surface, but also on the overall effects of disorder throughout the occupied d-bands. As such it sheds light on the bonding mechanisms responsible for many of the exotic properties of HEAs, such as mechanical Our calculations employ the ab-initio spin-polarized fully relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker Green's function method 