We report the influence of 6 MeV Zr 4+ irradiation and post-irradiation annealing (200 °C) in the in-field dependences of the critical current densities J c of 1.3 thick GdBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-d coated conductors grown by co-evaporation. Samples were irradiated with 6 MeV Zr 4+ and fluences between 2.3x10 11 cm -2 and 3x10 12 cm -2 . The correlation between the superconducting critical temperature T c and in-field dependences of critical current densities J c has been analyzed. In addition, random disorder introduced by irradiation was reduced by thermal annealed at 200 °C. The analysis of our experimental findings indicates that the optimal irradiation (reducing random disorder by annealing) results in the suppression of the self-field J c of ≈ 10 % and in-field J c enhancements nearly doubled at about 5 T. A clear correlation between T c , disorder and self-field J c is observed. Additional random disorder and nanoclusters suppress systematically T c and increase the flux creep relaxation at intermediate temperatures (reducing the characteristic glassy μ value). Artificially designed mixed pinning landscapes seem to be a tool to improve critical current densities J c in high temperature superconductors In this work we study the influence of 6 MeV Zr +4 irradiations in the in-field J c dependences and the vortex dynamics of 1.3 μm thick GBCO films by performing magnetization measurements. For comparison (removal of random disorder), similar measurements were performed after annealing the films at 200 °C for 30 minutes. The objective of this study is to find a correlation among the disorder produced by irradiation, the T c and the self-field and in-field dependence of J c . The pristine films display a pinning landscape with sphere-like and irregular precipitates (Gd 2 O 3 ) embedded in the GBCO matrix with typical diameter of approximately 50 nm Assuming that irradiation with energies of a few MeV produces nanoclusters and random point defects (with larger influence on T c ) The GBCO tape was grown by the co-evaporation technique previously described in ref. The magnetization (M) measurements were performed by using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer with the applied magnetic field (H) parallel to the caxis (H║c). The J c values were calculated from the magnetization data using the appropriate geometrical factor in the Bean Model. For H║c, , where ∆M is the difference in magnetization between the top and bottom branches of the hysteresis loop, l and w are the length and width of the film ( l >w), respectively. The measurements were recorded for more than 1 hour. The initial time was adjusted considering the best correlation factor in the log-log fitting of the J c (t) dependence. The initial critical state for each measurement was generated using ∆H ∼4H * , where H * is the field for full-flux penetration Irradiation with 6 MeV Zr +4 is expected to produce random point defects and nm-sized anisotropic defects. Previous irradiation studies of GBCO CCs showed that the optimal dosage to achieve the maximum pinning enhancement at temperatures below 40 K, using either H or O ions are 2×10 16 cm -2 and 1×10 14 cm -2 , respectively Thus, the required dosage should be significantly less. The irradiation was performed at room temperature on pieces with typical area 1.2 x 1.2 mm using ion beam currents between 0.15 and 2.4 nA. The samples were irradiated with the ion beam oriented along the crystallographic c-axis of the GBCO. To guarantee proper thermal contact, the samples were fixed to the holder with silver paint. The irradiation spot was 1.5 mm in diameter. All the samples displayed similar properties before irradiation. Wherever used, the notation IRRx indicates a GBCO film without irradiation (x=0), whereas x = 2.3, 3.5, 7, 17, and 30 correspond to films irradiated with Zr 4+ fluence of 2.3x10 11 cm -2 , 3.5x10 11 cm -2 , 7x10 11 cm -2 , 1.7x10 12 cm -2 and 3x10 12 cm -2 , respectively. After irradiation and for a better comparison of the properties, IRR3.5 andIRR7 were annealed at 200 °C. As no appreciable differences were observed between 30 min and 180 min of annealing, the standard time for this process was established at 30 min. The notation IRRxA corresponds to samples irradiated with doses X and annealed at 200°C for 30 min. Figure Straight lines represent irradiated samples (IRR3.5 and IRR7) and dotted lines, samples annealed at 200°C (IRR3.5A and IRR7A). Table As expected, T c is systematically suppressed when the irradiation fluence is increased. The thermal annealing at 200°C slightly increases the T c and also produces an abrupt magnetic flux penetration at the superconducting transition. This can be associated with a reduction of the random disorder, which increases the vortex pinning due to a reduction in the vortex fluctuations close to T c (associated to variations in λ (T →T c ) Figure With adequate doses (IRR3.5 and IRR7), the in-field dependence of J c is improved, almost doubled at around 5 T. In addition, the comparison between IRR7 and IRR7A (see inset Fig. shows that thermal annealing increases J c (H→0) and produces faster decays of J c (H), which result in similar J c values at μ 0 H =5 T. Following, the in-field dependence of J c (5 K, 27 K and 40 K) at μ 0 H> 0.3 T will be analyzed. For simplicity, J c (H) is approximated as a power-law regime (J c ∝H -α ). The dose dependences of α, J c H→0 and J c 5T after Zr irradiation are presented in Fig. The results indicate that α decreases with the fluence (≈ 0.4 for IRR7) and similar changes take place at 5 K, 27 K and 40 K. For IRR7, J c 5T is nearly doubled compared to IRR0, whereas J c H→0 is almost 25 % lower (i.e. from ≈ 33 MA cm -2 to ≈ 26 MA cm -2 at 5 K). Zr-irradiation fluences higher than IRR7 reduce significantly J c H→0 with negligible effect in the α value. The correlation between α and J c values at small and high magnetic fields is similar to those found in proton and oxygen irradiation Figure Irradiation systematically suppresses the peak at T≈ 20 K. Furthermore, at low temperatures, it provokes a reduction in the S values whereas it has a contrary effect at intermediate and high temperatures. According to the collective creep theory, the dynamics in a glassy vortex phase where t 0 is a vortex hopping attempt time. This equation predicts that, with increasing temperature, the second term in the denominator dominates U 0 , and S approaches the limit 0 ln 1 t t S μ ≈ . The final equation for the pinning energy is = -#$ % % -& with C, a constant factor 5208. For an overall analysis it is necessary to consider G(T), which results in , 0 ≈ , / The inset corresponds to the used G (T) dependence. In the limit of J<<J c the μ exponent can be estimated as ∆ln U(J) / ∆ln J Finally, the influence of the flux creep rates in the single vortex regime (SVR) will be analyzed. SRV refers to negligible vortex-vortex interaction compared to vortex-defect interaction The pinning in type II superconductors may originate in disorder in T c (δT c ) and/or from the spatial variation in the free path l near a lattice defect (δl) , where the exponent n indicates the type of pinning, being 7/6 and 5/2 for δT c and δl pinning, respectively We examined the influence of 6 MeV Zr +4 irradiation effect in a 1.3 μm thick GBCO coated conductors grown by co-evaporation. The results show that the optimal fluence to enhance the in-field dependence is around 7.0x10 11 cm -2 . For this fluence and in comparison with the pristine film, the J c sf is reduced to around 25 % (from ≈ 33 MA cm -2 to ≈ 26 MA cm -2 at 5 K), whereas its value is nearly doubled at about 5 T. Thermal annealing at 200 °C reduces the random disorder and the T c is increased. After annealing and at 5K, J c sf is increased to ≈ 30 MA.cm -2 , which indicates a large contribution of random disorder to the suppression of the J c values at low fields. However, the reduction of random disorder produces poorer in-field dependences, which results 