In this work the magnetic oscillations (MO) in pristine silicene at T = 0 K are studied. Considering a constant electron density we obtain analytical expressions for the ground state internal energy and magnetization, under a perpendicular electric and magnetic field, taking in consideration the Zeeman effect. It is found that the MO are sawtooth-like, depending on the change in the last occupied energy level. This leads us to a classification of the MO peaks in terms of the Landau level (LL), valley or spin changes. Using this classification we analyze the MO for different values of the electric field E z . When E z = 0, the energy levels have a valley degeneracy and the MO peaks occur only whenever the last energy level changes its LL and/or spin. When E z = 0, the valley degeneracy is broken and new MO peaks appear, associated with the valley change in the last energy level. By analyzing the MO peaks amplitude it is possible to extract information about the Fermi velocity and the spin-orbit interaction strength. Finally we analyze the MO frequencies, which can also be associated with the change of LL, valley or spin in the last energy level. In the past few years silicene has been gaining considerable interest in the scientific community When a magnetic field is applied to silicene, the discrete Landau levels (LL) are obtained. As in graphene, due to the relativistic-like dispersion relation these levels are not equidistant Because of the buckled nature of silicene, by applying a perpendicular electric field the spin and valley degeneracy of the LL is lifted We have organized the work as follow: In Sec. 2 we ob-tain the energy levels of silicene in a perpendicular magnetic and electric field, considering the intrinsic SOI and the Zeeman effect. From this we obtain an expression for the ground state internal energy and magnetization. In Sec. 3 we study and classify the MO peaks for different values of perpendicular electric field. In Sec. In the low wavelength approximation, with energies near the Fermi energy, the electrons in silicene are described by a Dirac-like Hamiltonian in 2D for massive fermions. In a perpendicular electric field E z it reads where υ F ∼ 5.5 × 10 5 m/s is the Fermi velocity where λ SO is the intrinsic spin-orbit interaction (SOI) strength and l is the buckle height. We shall consider a perpendicular magnetic field B, so that B = Be z . In the Landau gauge we have A = -Bye x , and the momentum changes following the Peierls substitution Because H only depends on the y coordinate, we can express the wave function as ψ = e -ikx ( ψ A ψ B ), with ψ A/B depending only on y. Then, introducing the ladder matrices σ ± = σ x ± iσ y and making the change of variable Defining the ladder operators where α 1 = a, α -1 = a † and ω L = υ F 2eB/ , ω Z = μ B gB/2 . The energies can be calculated by writing the wave function for each valley and spin as where b η s and c η s are constants, n is the Landau level (LL) index and |s = |± represents the spin state, so that s z |s = s |s . Then, given that σ Eq. ( where β = -1 for the valence band (VB) and β = 1 for the conduction band (CB). When E z = 0, the LL have a doubly valley degeneracy, whereas when E z = 0 this degeneracy vanishes. Notice that without the Zeeman effect the LL n = 0 is always twice less degenerate than the LL n ≥ 1, regardless of E z We shall study the ground state magnetization (T = 0 K) for this system, under the influence of a perpendicular magnetic and electric field, where the energy levels are given by Eqs. However, for both cases the results are similar (see the Appendix for details). In order to compute the ground state internal energy we have to sort the energy levels. We call ξ m the decreasing sorted energy levels, m = 0, 1, 2 . . . being the label index. In general we write 1 where s m = ±1 gives the spin, n m = 0, 1, 2 . . . the LL and η m = ±1 the valley for the m position. If we denote θ = q c -q = N/D -[N/D] to the occupancy factor of the last unfilled Landau level, the internal energy at T = 0 K is In Eq. ( Eq. ( where The last term in Eq. ( For the last unfilled level there could be two cases: (i) it is spin up or (ii) spin down. For spin up, s q = 1 and therefore we can write the total number of spin up and down as N + = Dk + + Dθs q and N -= Dk -. Thus using that The same result holds if the last unfilled level is spin down. Therefore the Pauli magnetization is 1 For the LL n = 0 only the positive root should be taken. See Eq. Notice that this result is independent of how the energy levels are sorted, so that the last term in Eq. ( The magnetization at T = 0 K is M = -∂U/∂B. From Eq. ( where 2 /ξ 0 m /2B, we have where This new contribution M ′ to the magnetization is not present in graphene This is the fundamental equation for our analysis. It shows that the MO peaks are produced whenever ξ q , M ′ or M P changes discontinuously, U being continuous always. Thus the magnetization in pristine silicene at T = 0 K oscillates in a sawtooth pattern, as in graphene The first contribution ∆ξ q comes directly from the discontinuous change in the last energy level, which occurs only when the filling factor q changes. On the other hand, by analyzing Eqs. ( Eq. ( We are interested in how the parameters n q , η q and s q vary with B for different values of elE z . We recall that n q may takes values 0, 1, 2, . . ., while η m = 1 (-1) for the K (K ′ ) valley and s m = 1 (-1) for spin up (down). The value of these parameters depends on the sorted position q, which in turn depends in the mixing of the LL, valley and spin. We consider a conduction electron density n e = 0.01 nm -2 and an area A = 1000 nm 2 . In Fig. In Fig. We showed in Eq. ( Furthermore, each type of MO peak has its own subpeaks, corresponding to different possible ways in which the parameters can change. The type of subpeak can be identified from the change in n q , η q and s q . In general we label the subpeaks as X n η, s , where X = {L, LV, LS, LVS, V, VS, S} identifies the type of MO peaks, as classify in Table Table all cases we shall take 0.6 < B[T ] < 0.685, as in Fig. We consider low elE z such that the parameters change only when the filling factor q does it. Hence in this regime both M ′ and M p are continuous and only ∆ξ q contributes to the MO peaks in Eq. ( For E z = 0 we effectively see that only the peaks LS and S appear. The S peaks always correspond to a change of spin down to up, so its amplitude is always ∆M s = 2N μ B at E z = 0. When elE z = 5 meV, the VS peak appears, and the order of the peaks is LS, VS, S, VS, S,..., as expected. The LS peak always correspond to a change of spin up to down in a K valley. The VS peak corresponds to {K → K ′ , ↓→↑} or {K ′ → K, ↓→↑} , while the S peak always correspond to a change of spin up to down in the K ′ valley. Thus, from Eqs. ( where with n q being the corresponding LL level, as indicated in Fig. where Thus the peaks amplitude is linear with E z , with both the slope and the yintercept depending on λ SO and ω L . By studying how the amplitude of the peaks vary with E z , one could obtain the parameters λ SO and ω L , provided that the magnetic field B and n q of the peaks are known. It is important to notice that for each peak the magnetic field B and n q are different. The Landau level n q could be inferred knowing at which B the type of peak occur, and how is the sorting of the energy levels. For instance, when elE z = 5 meV, we know that the sorting is given by Fig. In the general case the mixing of the parameters n q , η q and s q depends on the specific value of elE z . We saw in Fig. We consider elE z = 64 meV, in which case n q , η q and s q as a function of B are given in Fig. In the same way one can classify the other peaks, leading to the magnetization for elE z = 64 meV shown in Fig. As we see, the mixing of the parameters alters drastically the magnetization. In particular we note that in the two peaks LV 18→14 K ′ →K,↓ and LS 18→14 K,↑→↓ the magnetization increases, which is opposite to all other peaks, where the magnetization always decreases. This feature suggests that the peaks LV 18→14 K ′ →K,↓ and LS 18→14 K,↑→↓ are not produced by the change ∆ξ q , but come from the discontinuities in M ′ and M p . Indeed, the contribution ∆ξ q always lower the magnetization because it comes from the discontinuous change in the last energy level ξ q as B increases. To see this we plot in Fig. We can clearly appreciate two discontinuities in M ′ and one discontinuity in M P . We also see that when this discontinuities occur ξ q is continuous So far we have analyzed only the MO peaks amplitude, but we can also obtain information from their frequencies. For simplicity we shall consider the cases E z = 0 and elE z = 5 meV, such that the only contribution in Eq. ( where ∆q = q 2 -q 1 . Because the MO are sawtooth like, there will be many frequencies involved in its Fourier expansion. Nevertheless we are interested only in the fundamental frequencies, for the others are just harmonics of these ones. To obtain the frequency spectrum we performed a fast Fourier transform (FFT) in the magnetization as a function of 1/B. In Fig. The term ξ L q is only related to the LL, while the term ξ S q is only related to the spin. Then, considering the parameters sorting given by Fig. When elE z = 5 meV the valley degeneracy is broken, which gives rise to another MO frequency ω 3 = 41.33 T, as seen in Fig. The origin of this can be explained by first approximating ξ q for low elE z , so . This can be separated as ξ q = ξ L q -ξ S q -ξ V S q , ξ L q and ξ q are given by Eqs. ( For elE z = 5 meV, the sorting of the parameters n q , η q and s q is given by Fig. We studied the magnetic oscillations (MO) in pristine silicene at T = 0 K. We considered a constant electron density, such that the valence band is full and only the conduction band is available. Under a perpendicular electric and magnetic field, we found analytical expressions for the ground state internal energy and magnetization. We obtained that the MO are sawtooth-like and are entirely produced by the change in the last energy level occupied. This lead us to a classification of the MO peaks in terms of the parameters n q (LL), η q (valley) and s q (spin) which define the last energy level. In general we defined seven types of MO peaks, as indicated in Table We shall analyze the case in which the Fermi energy μ is held constant, instead of the conduction electron density n e . We consider μ > 0 such that last energy level filled always correspond to the CB. The valence band is not taken into account since it is full and thus will not contribute to the MO. Because we consider μ fixed, whereas the number of electrons N may change, we work with the grand potential Ω. For a Fermi energy μ, all energies levels m = 0, 1, 2 . . . , m F all filled, where m F is such that ξ mF ≤ μ ≤ ξ mF +1 . Then the grand potential Ω at T = 0 K is Ω = This last equation is similar to Eq. ( Nevertheless we can see that the slope of ξq slightly changes