Onset of permanent deformation in crystalline materials under a sharp indenter tip is accompanied by nucleation and propagation of defects. By measuring the spatio-temporal strain field near the indenter tip during indentation tests, we demonstrate that the dynamic strain history at the moment of a displacement burst carries characteristics of formation and interaction of local excitations, or solitons. We show that dynamic propagation of multiple solitons is followed by a short time interval where the propagating fronts can accelerate suddenly. As a result of such abrupt local accelerations, duration of the fast-slip phase of a failure event is shortened. Our results show that formation and annihilation of solitons mediate the microscopic fast weakening phase, during which extreme acceleration and collision of solitons lead to non-Newtonian behavior and Lorentz contraction, i.e., shortening of solitons' characteristic length. The results open new horizons for understanding dynamic material response during failure and, more generally, complexity of earthquake sources. is the maximum allowed separation of the bonds (i.e., energy barrier in terms of thermal activation) and m is the number of energylevels (communities in the k-chain). Introduction: Apparent discontinuities in load-penetration depth (P-h) curves are a known characteristic of indentation tests However, the dynamic role of nucleated defects in shaping the relaxation path and the mechanisms by which contact-induced plasticity leads to sharp decreases in load following a displacement bursts is still poorly understood. Here, we infer the relative change of a dynamic spatio-temporal strain field in the vicinity of the indenter tip at the onset of displacement bursts from recorded ultrasound waves. Our results show the existence of local nonlinear excitations hidden in emitted ultrasound waveforms. In particular, we uncover a peculiar mechanism in which multiple solitons propagate at different velocities but converge to collide and annihilate each other during a characteristic ᴧ-shaped collision. Such convergence occurs on a very short time scale and leads to fast acceleration of solitons. We show that the latter solitons clearly squeeze their characteristic length, satisfying Lorentz' contraction law. Results-We indented suspended thin sheets of single crystal mica and recorded the emitted ultrasound signals (high frequency analogues to seismic waves To visualize the temporal evolution of the dynamics of sites , we map the spatial evolution of the degree ki of the i th node , using polar coordinates Evaluating the spatio-temporal pattern of ki(t) as relative change of the strain field and its spatial mean trend <k(t)>, we found distinct patterns of dynamic failure characterized by (Fig. In phase I, the system is pulled from an equilibrium state to a state where all nodes polarize in the outward direction. This occurs in the rising part of <k(t)> in Fig. Frenkel on the shear strength of crystalline solids and later the corresponding well-studied onedimensional Frenkel-Kontorova (FK) model To further illuminate the evolution of moving solitons in our chain, including their interactions and resultant effects on the inferred dynamic strain field, we present the evolution of density profiles based on kinetic energy of the k-chain: where i i dk du dt dt  as the rate of normal displacement (dilatational components), N is the number of sites, and we assume a non-dimensional mass 1 i m  (section 2 of Supplementary Information). The above kinetic energy term only considers the radial deformation of the chain (i.e., expansion or contraction) and energies corresponding to angular deformation has been omitted. We map the angular direction along a k-chain on to a vector q with fixed magnitude and direction Ɵ. Therefore, a system with N elements is characterized by q vectors and the energy E is defined in q -space ( () E q ). To characterize the energy distribution in q-space (pseudo-momentum space), we use the concept of density of states in a 1-d chain as In Figures phases. The attractive interaction of soliton fronts may occur due to the nonlocal nonlinear nature of the medium in which the response at a certain site is transferred to the surrounding regions and induces a spatially long-range response of the medium A striking feature of moving solitons as proposed using several analytical solutions Discussion -Our results provide new fundamental insights into microscopic dynamic failure under a sharp indenter tip. We presented experimental evidence of short-term strain disturbances in the form of moving solitons in the course of displacement-bursts. Tracking the motion of single solitons unraveled their abrupt acceleration that occurs during the fast weakening phase -the most critical phase of any unstable failure. Motivated by our results, we argue that existence of solitons as the shear components to an evolving k-lattice are analogous with the observed rupture fronts moving along an active frictional interface (Fig. In We indented Muscovite Mica specimens (from Princeton Scientific Corp). The indentation of mica sheets was performed parallel to [001] direction. We first suspended a thin sheet of mica on a ring-like structure of ultrasound sensors and carefully glued on the sensors. Then, we mechanically exfoliated the mica by peeling sheets from the top of the specimen. We repeated this process 10 to 15 times to achieve a thin layer (~5-20 μm) of the mineral sheet suspended on the sensors. The central indentation was performed using a micro-indentation instrument (DUH-211). We used different scenarios of loading with loading rates of 3mN/s. Our focus here was on the recoded excitations during loading or creep stage of the tests. In order to detect ultrasound excitations, we utilized piezoelectric sensors with frequency bandwidth of the transducers of 0.1 to 2.5 MHz. In the primary set-up (Fig. We map the recorded acoustic emission array (array time series for each event) to a mathematical graph (ktransform procedure). We use a previously developed algorithm to construct the mathematical graphs from our reordered acoustic emissions with a fixed number of nodes is the employed similarity metric. With this metric, we simply compare the normalized amplitude of sensors in the given time-step. The employed norm in our algorithm is the absolute norm. (4) Threshold level (  ): To select a threshold level, we use a method introduced in (20, 31) and references therein) that uses an adaptive threshold criterion to select  . The result of this algorithm is an adjacency matrix with components given by , , ( ( ), ( )) ( ( ) ( ) ) is the Heaviside function. The constructed lattice is characterized by the average of all nodes' degree (<k>), where the degree, ki, is the number of links formed between each node i and all other nodes in the system. For each node we assign ( ) and then 1 i s  . With this mapping, each node in a given time step acquires one of the states (  or ). The employed method can be understood from the perspective of Fourier transform of equal-time correlation measure over the waveforms in a given time-window. Note that the measure of correlation functions is the root of many scattering experiments and Fourier transform of equal-time correlation function of a certain quantity -such as electron density or amplitude of observer -is the intensity of the scattered (distributed) injected energy space where we shift D(E) in a fixed time-step. We labeled the vertically shifted D(E) as "intensity" in where the masscenter of a soliton usually is in oblique angle with the circumference of the k-chain -as the θ direction in our system. Therefore should not be interpreted as hypersonic regime of propagation. We report relative velocity of a moving kink relative to maximum allowed velocity (c). To estimate the maximum allowed propagation velocity of a kink, we use the Lorentz contraction relation where we could precisely measure the characteristic length of the soliton (ξ) before and after dramatic change of the velocity. To associate <k(t)> with a physical source parameter, we used recorded un-amplified AE signals from known sources of impulsive compressive and shear loads recorded on a ring-like array of ultrasound transducers (Fig. Velocity transition of a moving kink with an average velocity of 0.1C to ~0.8C in transition from phase I→II . The color denotes the passage of time. (B) Normalized soliton profiles with similar color coding as (a). The Lorentz contraction is evident in the profiles as a decrease in the width of the profiles (dashed arrows) when the speed of propagation v is increased. We have shifted the profiles horizontally to show the effect of squeezing on the width of soliton. (C) The width of the soliton shrinks up to ~45% when the relative propagation velocity increases ~6 times of its initial velocity (see Fig. We have done several experiments using commercial ultrasound transducers (pico-sensors, and physical acoustic system-PAC-sensors). In the following, we report three different set-ups of mechanical excitation of sources. While in all indentation tests we employed amplified PZTs , in experiments pertaining impulsive mechanical loadings (compressive or shear) ,we used non-amplified PZTs. This allows us to study the recorded signals without concern on losing the data due to "clipping" of waves which usually occurs for amplified waves emitted from high energy sources. Previously, we stablished that <k(t)> could share significant similarity to evolution of the physical recorded strain fields in stick-slip experiments in rock samples (FigS3 a-b)-Also see References In a series of experiments, first we used recorded unamplified AE signals from known sources of impulsive compressive recorded on an array of ultrasound transducers; (Fig.S.4). Using the spilt Hopkinson pressure bar apparatus, an impulsive stress pulse is generated by a cylindrical steel projectile (the striker bar). The flying striker bar impacts an incident bar of identical material and diameter (Fig. In the main text, we evaluated the quasi momentum-energy space where we used kinetic energy term and ignored other energy terms. Here we point out some other possibilities in estimation of interaction (potential) field and using spectral analysis to analysis the introduced (active) 1-d lattices. In Fig. The first term in right hand of the equation is the kinetic energy term, the second term is interaction energy (potential) energy between the neighborhood sites and the last term is the possible interaction with other fields (such as electrons). In the main text we assumed that the kinetic energy is the dominant term of the energy and we build energy-quasi-momentum space (energy bands) of our 1D lattice based on this assumption. However, one can deduce a potential field Ψ(r ij) for relative stable fields. Here the stable phases are pure expansion or contraction of the k-chain occurs in the first or the second phase. Assuming an isotropic source, the pattern of the k-chain at the stable phase represents the movement of each site from an initial state (the initial state is the noise level of the system). We can infer the relative potential field with assigning a stretched (or compressed) spring with certain stiffness (Fig. While we reported some of the main features of the transferred waves in k-lattice space, we did not address some other features; these include transitions in velocities, weak interaction regime of solitons, bound-state of solitons, possible role of interactions of released charged particles -due to dethatching of molecular bonds-with sound waves (phonons) and its effect on velocity or path of the solitons. The configuration can be idealized with employing two-types of springs which has been configured in an exaggerated in zig-zag form for 0<θ<π. In (c), we show the idealized configuration of the chain using the spring-mass system . Each mass -prior to onset of the solitonic state-has the components of displacement and velocity parallel to the θdirection. At the end of the first phase, the initial equilibrated chain with a0 is deformed and a new lattice-pattern forms with two (idealized) lattice parameters a1 , a2 . Here we have simplified the system with a symmetric configuration around minimum of Δk. The arrows in (c) show the relative velocity of expansion. (D) we show two main deformation modes of the k-chains over uniform deformation : the inward or out-ward (expansion or contraction) deformation (i.e., θ coordinate) .A chain could have the mixed of both modes. The circumferential deformation (shear) (i.e., τ -coordinate) is solitonic state interpolating between two main expansion and contraction modes. We could have clock-wise and counter-clockwise mixed modes. For pure shear mode-state of a k-chain , we will not have isotropic components. One can see that the evolution of a k-chain is transition from pure θ -coordinate deformation to τ -coordinate where the energy of expansion or contraction modes will limit to zero (Fig. Here we provide a semi-theoretical proof of k-chains as a measure of (mean) strain field. To do this, we map the k-chains onto a free electron gas model and use Buehler-Gao's and summation goes over m-main energy levels. The ki is, then, number of within links which is established between sub-levels of i th level. Next, We use a probabilistic argument that probability of finding an energy level with a higher value declines exponentially proportional with the energy level. Furthermore, we can define a maximum kinetic energy μ as a reference point; this is the allowed maximum kinetic energy level (in analogy with the Fermi level). The occupation number of i th energy level is, therefore, given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution [4]: ( )  is the kinetic energy, μ is the internal chemical potential (at zero temperature, this is the maximum kinetic energy, i.e. Fermi energy), T is the absolute temperature kB is the Boltzmann constant. Now, we relate the above argument to stress-strain curve (i.e., force-distance). To this end, we use Buehler-Gao's interpretation of interatomic force versus atomic separation r which is given by (3): Knowing that the solitionc mode -including number of solitons and their interactions -significantly shapes the smoothness of the failure curve, therefore ,we assign the effective temperature to a measure of soliton state in <k>-t curves. This inference suggests that soliton can be used equally as measure of effective temperature. summary, our work indicates that the introduced framework to analyze recorded ultrasound excitations provides a versatile platform to study displacement bursts during contactbased failures and establish novel methods for probing dynamic defects.