A complete knowledge of absolute surface energies with any arbitrary crystal orientation is important for the improvements of semiconductor devices because it determines the equilibrium and nonequilibrium crystal shapes of thin films and nanostructures. It is also crucial in the control of thin film crystal growth and surface effect studies in broad research fields. However, obtaining accurate absolute formation energies is still a huge challenge for the semi-polar surfaces of compound semiconductors. It mainly results from the asymmetry nature of crystal structures and the complicated step morphologies and related reconstructions of these surface configurations. Here we propose a general approach to calculate the absolute formation energies of wurtzite semi-polar surfaces by first-principles calculations, taking GaN as an example. We mainly focused on two commonly seen sets of semi-polar surfaces: a-family (112 ̅ X) and m-family (101 ̅ X). For all the semi-polar surfaces that we have calculated in this paper, the self-consistent accuracy is within 1.5 meV/Å 2 . Our work fills the last technical gap to fully investigate and understand the shape and morphology of compound semiconductors. In the past decades, despite the rapid development in wurtzite (WZ) based semiconductors that led to broad industrial applications, Absolute surface energy is one of the key quantities in surface studies. For the ease of reading, we give a brief introduction to the definition of semi-polar surfaces. Semi-polar surfaces were firstly defined by Baker et. al. Recently, we developed accurate and efficient approaches (passivation scheme) in the calculations of absolute surface energy of WZ polar surfaces To obtain accurate absolute formation energy of semi-polar surfaces is especially challenging due to three reasons: (1) because of the asymmetric nature of the top and bottom semi-polar surfaces in a computational slab, it's difficult to evaluate each semi-polar surface individually; (2) a popular approach in early polar surface studies is to transfer the surface into a wedge or a cluster that mimics it, however, it's almost impossible to construct computationally small enough clusters or wedges for all semi-polar surfaces; (3) due to the step nature of the semi-polar surfaces, it's difficult to directly passivate the bottom surfaces with pseudo hydrogen (pseudo-H) atoms with known pseudo chemical potentials (for details of pseudo chemical potentials (PCPs) of pseudo-H atoms, please read ref. To solve the above problems, the general principle of the algorithm design should be changed. Unlike all the previous practices in polar surface calculations, since it's impossible to directly passivate the bottom surface without severe steric effects, the only logical and possible alternative approach is to modify the bottom semi-polar surfaces of the slab and cut them into surfaces that can be conveniently estimated by passivating proper pseudo-H atoms. However, such cutting and passivation may also result in steric effects at the corner of the cut facts due to the step nature of the cutting scheme, although on the facets, such effects can be largely reduced. Therefore, special treatment on the estimation of the steric effects near the corner of the steps should be taken. These new design principles are significantly different from any early attempts in the estimations of surface energies and can be generally applicable in the stability studies of many difficult surface orientations. In this paper, taking GaN as an example, we propose a general approach to calculate the absolute surface energies of semi-polar surfaces of WZ materials. Our first-principles calculations were based on Density Functional Theory For the aforementioned reasons, we use slab models with a modification of bottom surfaces in all the semi-polar surface calculations. One of two surfaces of the slab are usually passivated to avoid unphysical charge transfers. A direct passivation of bottom surface with pseudo-H atoms is almost impossible to both satisfy the electron counting model (ECM) where μ Ga and μ N are the chemical potentials of the gallium and nitrogen elements, μ̂H X (X = Ga, N) is the PCPs of the corresponding pseudo-H atoms. The summation symbols are kept since the PCPs would depend on the local electronic environment of the pseudo-H atoms. Further, if we assume a thermodynamic equilibrium between the bulk material and surface, we can write where E Ga and E N 2 are the total energies per atom of solid Ga and N2 gas, and ΔH f (GaN) is the formation enthalpy of WZ GaN. This would add restriction to Eq. ( where Δμ N = μ N -E N 2 is the relative chemical potential (ΔH f (GaN) ≤ Δμ N ≤ 0). Based on our previous work, if the pseudo-H atoms have enough space to relax, we can make use of the PCPs obtained from the tetrahedral clusters Therefore, this structure allows us to estimate the PCPs under steric effects: μ̂H N steric can be calculated in a similar way. According to our tests, the PCPs of the simulated steric hydrogen atoms are insensitive to the width and depth of the "well". Here we denoted the width of the "well" as w, and the depth of the "well" as d, Under different choices, difference between the calculated μ̂H Ga(N) steric values is within 1.1%, as shown in Fig. The localized feature of the strain energy is probably due to the concaved structure of the zigzag steps, which assist the stress relaxation. For wedge structures in early literature, such relaxations are relatively difficult due to the flat nature of the bottom (001) surfaces. These tests also suggest that although a direct modification of the bottom surface with zigzag structures may induce steric effects, such effects can be relatively localized and can be reasonably estimated by further simulations. Based on such PCPs, we can determine the absolute surface energies of (112 ̅ X) surfaces: While for group II-VI WZ compounds, such steric effects can be overcome through a real atom passivation, as shown in Fig. Briefly, the workflow of calculating the absolute surface energies of semi-polar surfaces are as following: (1) construct a conventional slab model with two conjugated semi-polar surfaces; (2) modify the bottom surface of the slab into corresponding zigzag structure, which should be passivated by proper pseudo-H subsequently; (3) obtain the PCPs of each pseudo-H used on the bottom surface according to the passivation scheme Unlike early algorithms, our new approach doesn't need to construct a wedge or cluster. Instead, we focused on the modifications of the bottom surfaces of the slabs and converted the unknown surfaces into surfaces that can be directly computed. Although we demonstrated this computational principle on the semi-polar surfaces of WZ GaN, it can also be applicable to other materials or surfaces. Our approach provides a powerful tool to investigate high index surfaces and the ECS of nanocrystals for other compound materials accurately. By applying this method, in this paper, we have calculated (224 ̅ 1), (112 ̅ 1), (112 ̅ 2), (112 ̅ 3), and their conjugate surfaces, as well as (202 ̅ 1), (101 ̅ 1), (101 ̅ 2), (101 ̅ 3), and their conjugate surfaces. Strictly speaking, the most stable surface structures must be determined through exclusive search over all possible surface cuttings and reconstructions. Nevertheless, due to the low symmetry of semi-polar surfaces, it is difficult, if not impossible, to calculate all the possible cutting or reconstructions. To simplify the problem, we constructed the surface structures by cutting the bulk GaN crystal along the semi-polar directions. The cutting plane is moved up and down to cover all possible cuts. Along some semi-polar directions, the cutting surface can pass through two nonequivalent atomic sites, or the two sites can be quite close to the cutting surface. In such cases, we have considered surface structures with (1) one of the two sites included, (2) both sites included, and (3) neither site included. All of the surfaces configurations calculated in this paper are summarized in the supplementary material. On (101 ̅ X) surfaces, possible dimer formations have been considered explicitly. Also on (101 ̅ 1) surface, we have calculated the (4 × 2) Dimer-Vacancy reconstruction, which was reported as the most stable surface structure under N-rich condition For comparison, we have also included the absolute surface energies of polar (0001)/(0001 ̅ ) surfaces and non-polar (112 ̅ 0)/(101 ̅ 0) surfaces, with adatoms or adlayers surface reconstructions identified in previous literature In previous theoretical work However, experimental studies have implied that the crystal shape of epitaxially grown GaN, especially nanostructures, depends more on non-equilibrium growth process. Since growth kinetics and impurity passivation also play important roles in determining crystal shape of GaN, it is essential to undertake the related researches on these important surfaces. Our method and results in this paper indeed provide a significant foundation for possible further investigations. This method here is demonstrated in WZ materials, while its general principles can be extended and applied to many other materials. Additionally, this approach also provides a chance to investigate the interfaces and growth mechanisms of heterostructures like ZnO/GaN, AlN/GaN along semi-polar orientations. In summary, we have proposed a new method to calculate the absolute surface energies of semi-polar surfaces, and analyzed the growth behaviors of GaN crystal. Our new passivation scheme has mostly solved the steric effect and the accuracy in obtained absolute surface energies is within 1.5meV/Å 2 . Based on this passivation scheme, we have calculated the surface energies of different surfaces under various surface structures. We have found that the lowest surface energies of the semi-polar surfaces are quite close. Hence, we theoretically confirmed that zero temperature thermodynamics is not enough to explain the crystal shape of GaN in experiments. Our results provide an efficient and accurate method to calculate the absolute semi-polar surface energies of other materials. Also, our works shall shed light on the determination of crystal shape thermodynamically, and provide a starting point for further kinetics researches. jyzhu@phy.cuhk.edu.hk