Applying a temperature gradient in a magnetic material generates a voltage that is perpendicular to both the heat flow and the magnetization. 1,2 This is the anomalous Nernst effect (ANE), Conventional thermoelectric devices are based on the Seebeck effect in a two-terminal geometry, where two electronic reservoirs at different temperatures result in an electric voltage that arises in the direction of the imposed temperature gradient. A ferromagnetic material generates an anomalous transverse voltage mutually perpendicular to both heat current and magnetization is so-called anomalous Nernst effect (ANE). In the present study, we have carried out thermoelectric experiments on the ferromagnetic topological Heusler compound Co2MnGa, which has previously been shown to exhibit a large AHE and a large Berry curvature-distribution around EF. The structure can also be implicitly viewed as a zinc-blende-type sub-lattice, formed by one Co and Ga in which tetrahedral and octahedral holes are occupied by the second Co and Mn atom respectively. The Co atoms occupy the Wyckoff position 8c (1/4,1/4,1/4), whereas the Mn and Ga atoms occupy the Wyckoff positions 4a (0, 0, 0) and 4b (1/2,1/2,1/2), respectively. Without spin-orbit coupling, there are three nodal lines near EF (Fig. In the first set of transport experiments, we investigate the longitudinal thermoelectric magnetotransport of Co2MnGa. Fig. Next, we measure the magnetization (M) of our sample. The compound is known to be a ferromagnet with a relatively high Curie temperature of (TC ) = 687 K. Further, we measure the anomalous Hall effect of Co2MnGa. We estimate the total Hall conductivity (xy) from the measured Hall resistivity yx and the longitudinal resistivity xx as: In Fig. According to this relation, Co2MnGa should maximally exhibit S yx A = 0.9 μV K -1 (see methods for details). This value is around 7-times lower value than observed in experiment and indicates that the ANE arises from a mechanism that is distinct from the linear scaling of conventional ferromagnets. To gain deeper insight into this large ANE in Co2MnGa, we calculate the transverse thermoelectric conductivity (αyx) plotted in Fig. Based on the linear scaling relation for conventional ferromagnetic metals, one would expect that αyx increases linearly with decreasing T, following the temperature dependence of M. To evaluate this possibility, we calculate α yx , employing: 5 where εnk is the band energy. The {(εnk -μ)fnk + kBT ln [1 + e -β(εnk -μ) ]}-term takes finite values only around the Fermi energy. Therefore, while σxy is related to the summation of n(k) of the all the occupied bands below EF, αyx is related to n(k) of the all bands near EF. Our theoretical calculations show a very large ANC in the system, which is linked to the high Berry curvature induced by the gapping of the nodal lines (Fig. xy (S cm -1 ) ) Single crystals of Co2MnGa were grown using the Bridgman Stockbarger crystal growth technique. For growing a single crystal, first, we have synthesized a polycrystalline sample by induction melting from the high-quality stoichiometric amounts of elemental cobalt (99.999%), manganese (99.999%) and gallium (99.999%) in an alumina crucible. The induction-melted sample is then crushed into powder form and packed in a custom-designed sharp-edged alumina tube, which was sealed in a tantalum tube. The sample was heated to 1523 K and soaked for 10 h to ensure the homogeneity of the melt, and then slowly cooled to 1023 K. Single crystallinity of the as-grown crystal was checked by white-beam backscattering Laue X-ray diffraction at room temperature. The aligned crystal was cut into bar-shaped samples for transport and magnetization measurements. The typical dimension of the crystals used for electrical and thermal transport measurements is 7.5 × 2 × 0.5 mm 3 . Magnetization measurement was performed using a Quantum Design vibrating sample magnetometer (MPMS). The electrical transport properties were measured in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS, ACT option). The standard four-probe method has been used for electrical transport measurement. To correct for contact misalignment, the measured raw data were field symmetrized and antisymmetrized, respectively. The zero-field temperature dependent Seebeck coefficient was measured by the oneheater and two-thermometer configuration using the thermal transport option (TTO) of the For our ab-initio calculations, we employ density-functional theory (DFT) using VASP 