Cooperative effects allow for fascinating characteristics in light-matter interacting systems. Here, we study naturally occurring superradiant coupling in a class of quasi-two-dimensional, layered semiconductor systems. We perform optical absorption experiments of the lowest exciton for transition-metal dichalcogenides with different numbers of atomic layers. We examine two representative materials, MoSe 2 and WSe 2 , using incoherent broadband white light. The measured transmission at the A exciton resonance does not saturate for optically thick samples consisting of hundreds of atomic layers, and the transmission varies nonmonotonously with the layer number. A self-consistent microscopic calculation reproduces the experimental observations, clearly identifying superradiant coupling effects as the origin of this unexpected behavior. With the ability to fabricate them as monolayers, the electronic and optical properties of naturally occurring transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) multilayer structures have attracted renewed interest. While excitons in monolayers are naturally confined within the layer, systematic studies of the band structure as a function of the number of layers show that even though the system becomes energetically indirect, the direct gap at the K -points of the Brillouin zone is preserved even in the bulk limit Up to now, most theoretical and experimental investigations of TMDC structures have focused on the evolution of the bandgap and exciton binding, while changing the dielectric substrate or number of layers. Surprisingly, little or no attention has been paid to changes in the optical spectra of TMDC multilayer structures due to light propagation effects and radiative coupling. Therefore, the studies in this paper will focus on those specific points. In 1954, Dicke As already shown by Hopfield In contrast, a photon emitted by an individual localized oscillator escapes from the sample without re-absorption, thus opening a radiative decay-channel. The oscillator strength, f λ , determines both, the reversible light absorption and the emission, and for an oscillator with transition energy E λ , the associated radiative decay rate is Γ λ f λ E λ ∕ħ In solid state physics, superradiant coupling effects have been studied intensively in semiconductor multiple quantum well (MQW) structures In the present paper, we analyze the influence of radiative coupling and light propagation effects on the optical absorption of TMDCs as a function of the number of layers in the crystal. Similar to semiconductor QWs, absorption of light in the TMDCs leads to the formation of excitons that are confined reasonably well within the individual layers. However, as compared to typical QW excitons, the excitons in TMDC monolayers display huge oscillator strengths, leading to as much as ∼10% extinction of the incoming light for a typical monoatomic layer of e.g., WSe 2 Whereas superradiant light emission cannot be expected in an optically indirect semiconductor, the absorption characteristics at the direct gaps at the K -points in a multilayer TMDC flake can still experience a superradiant coupling with a correspondingly reduced radiative lifetime. In an absorption measurement, the increased radiative decay rate then leads to a reduced percentage of the incoming energy that is irreversibly absorbed by the sample, i.e., to a reduction of the true absorption. To investigate this behavior, we perform a series of conceptually simple broadband white light transmission and reflection experiments to study the cooperative radiative coupling effects in TMDCs as a function of crystal thickness. Using the experimental setup shown schematically in Fig. , where I 0 is the intensity of the incoming signal, I T is the intensity of the transmitted signal, and I R is the intensity of the reflected signal. The experimental transmitted, reflected, and absorption spectra are shown in Supplement 1, together with the corresponding theoretically obtained spectra. The deduced optical density data at the peak of the A exciton resonance are summarized in Fig. To analyze the observed phenomena, we employ a semiclassical theory of radiatively coupled two-dimensional excitons based on the semiconductor Maxwell-Bloch equations for a classical optical field interacting with equidistantly spaced two-dimensional layers. Treating the Hamiltonian of the individual layers within an effective four-band model, screening and radiative coupling of the bands under consideration is included dynamically, whereas contributions of all the other bands and the dielectric environment are contained in a background dielectric tensor where ε k and ε ⊥ represent the in-plane and out-of-plane background dielectric constants, respectively, and P describes the nonlocal, time-and frequency-dependent resonant contributions of the bands under consideration. (We use c. g. s. units throughout the theory.) Using the generalized Coulomb gauge, - where A; E L -∇φ; A and φ are the vector and scalar potentials; and the superscripts T and L denote transverse and longitudinal parts, respectively. On the length scale of the optical wavelength, the resonant quasi-two-dimensional contributions of the individual layers can be approximated by where z n n -1∕2d is the central position of the nth layer, d is the natural layer-to-layer distance, and P nk is the optically induced polarization in the nth layer. The radiative coupling effects result from the interaction of the individual layers with the light emitted by all layers in the sample where E in k z, ω represents the incoming field with a dispersion determined by the dielectric environment of the nonresonant background and substrate, and G 0 z, z 0 , ω describes the radiation of a localized oscillator embedded within this environment. As the material polarization is induced by the total transverse field, the second part of Eq. ( In the linear regime, the transverse part of the optically induced layer polarization is related to the transverse optical field via P T nk ω χ T n ωE T k z n , ω, where χ T n ω is the transverse susceptibility of the nth layer. To compute this susceptibility, we employ the widely used massive Dirac-fermion (MDF) model For the individual layers, we compute the layer susceptibility microscopically from the coupled gap equations and the Dirac-Bloch equations (DBE), as described in detail in Ref. As screening by the surrounding layers influences the spectral position of the exciton and its oscillator strength, the different dielectric environments of the individual layers lead to slightly different resonance frequencies. Therefore, the response of a multilayer structure is generally inhomogeneously broadened due to the individual contributions from the different layers. However, this effect becomes negligibly small for sufficiently thick structures where the distance of most layers from the sample surfaces well exceeds the in-plane exciton Bohr radius. In such cases, the linear susceptibilities of the individual layers within the sample become identical, influenced only by intrinsic screening effects. Alltogether, the transmission and absorption coefficients of a multilayer sample reflect the interplay between the individual layer susceptibilities, the dielectric environment, and the propagation effects. For a monolayer embedded between two dielectrics with refractive indices n T ffiffiffiffiffi ε T k q and n B ffiffiffiffi ffi ε B k q , the amplitude transmission, tω, and reflection, rω, coefficients relating the transmitted and reflected fields to the incoming field are given by The transmitted and reflected intensities are related to the amplitude coefficients via I T n B jtE 0 j 2 , I R n T jrE 0 j 2 , and the incoming intensity is given by I 0 n T jE 0 j 2 . One thus finds for the true absorption coefficient of a monolayer, For a single 2D oscillator with resonance frequency ω 0 and nonradiative decay rate γ, one finds a true absorption coefficient: , where Γ is the radiative decay rate for the monolayer in vacuum, and n n T n B ∕2 is the average refractive index of the top and bottom materials. As a true absorption process not only requires an initial excitation but also a subsequent scattering into an optically dark state, the peak absorption is determined by the interplay between radiative and nonradiative decay rates and reaches its maximum value if both are equal. For a typical nonencapsulated monolayer on top of a fused silica substrate, this gives an extinction coefficient of 10% to 20% of the incoming intensity, depending on the specific material and the nonradiative homogeneous linewidth. Neglecting the changes in the dielectric environment and radiative coupling, the Beer-Lambert law would predict an exponential decay of the transmitted intensity, T N n B n T jtj 2N , leading to an extinction coefficient of roughly 90% for a sample consisting of only five layers, in strong disagreement with the experimentally observed opacity. An increase in the number of layers modifies the transmission and absorption characteristics in two ways: first, it changes the effective background refractive index experienced by the individual layers, and, second, it leads to radiative coupling. The effect of changing the dielectric environment alone is best illustrated by comparing the transmitted intensity of a monolayer on a substrate with that of a monolayer with the same linear susceptibility embedded in bulk. Such a comparison is shown in Fig. Apart from simple dielectric effects, the optical spectra are modified by radiative coupling features, which depend sensitively on the phase coherence between the emitters in different layers. Moderately increasing the number of layers and ensuring that the total sample thickness, N × d , remains much smaller than the optical wavelength in the material, all emitters/absorbers are in phase and the emitted fields from the different layers interfere constructively. Here, the superradiant mode is the only bright one, and the system effectively behaves as a single emitter with an N times enhanced coupling strength. Since the radiative lifetime is inversely proportional to the coupling strength, the enhanced coupling in the superradiant geometry reduces the radiative lifetime and increases the radiative broadening. While the effect of the modified dielectric environment is clearly observable in the transmission characteristics, the radiative broadening is best observed in the true absorption spectra. In Fig. If the total sample thickness is further increased such that it exceeds the optical wavelength, the system essentially develops into an effectively homogeneous medium with a polariton dispersion The diamagnetic shift is fitted using a simple quadratic formula, which yields shifts of the average position of ∼0.77 μeV∕T 2 and ∼0.12 μeV∕T 2 for WSe 2 and MoSe 2 , respectively. The lateral exciton size is obtained from the diamagnetic shift via r X ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi hri 2 p ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 8m r σ p ∕e, where m r is the exciton reduced mass. Using m r ∕m 0 0.17 for WSe 2 and m r ∕m 0 0.27 for MoSe 2 , we obtain r X 2.44 nm and r X 1.21 nm for WSe 2 and MoSe 2 , respectively. Using the natural layer-tolayer distance of d 6.5 Å for both materials, the exciton radius is roughly 2 to 4 times larger than the interlayer distance, resulting in negligible surface effects for samples with N ≳ 7. To analyze the experimental results, we use the values ε k 5.01 and ε k 13.6 for the bulk in-plane dielectric constants for MoSe 2 and WSe 2 , respectively. These are determined by subtracting the resonant contributions to the dielectric constant from those obtained from DFT calculations for the respective bulk parent materials Under superradiant coupling conditions, the peak absorption at resonance is proportional to γN Γ∕γ N Γ 2 , where γ and Γ are the nonradiative and radiative decay rates, respectively. In Fig. Due to the larger background in-plane dielectric constant, the optical wavelength in the WSe 2 sample at the resonance frequency is only roughly 120 nm. Correspondingly, the transition from the superradiant regime to the bulk limit occurs for smaller sample sizes with N ≈ 45, which is again in good agreement with the experimental observations. In Fig. In conclusion, we analyze the optical transmission/absorption properties of exfoliated TMDC samples for different numbers of layers, ranging all the way from monolayers to bulk-like configurations with more than a hundred layers. We carefully characterize the respective sample thicknesses using AFM; for thinner samples, photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy were additionally used. The absorption was quantitatively measured for the A exciton resonance by carefully measuring transmission and reflection simultaneously, and by taking into account all the possible losses. The resulting optical density as a function of sample thickness deviates significantly from the Beer-Lambert law. We model the observed effects employing the semiconductor Maxwell-Bloch equations for a classical optical field interacting with equidistantly spaced two-dimensional layers, where the A excitons are assumed to be well localized within the individual layers. To validate the model assumptions, we carefully measure the excitonic Bohr radii in the two representative bulk TMDs using the diamagnetic energy shift of the excitonic resonance at magnetic fields up to 65 T. The exciton wave functions obtained from these measurements are well localized within the layers and are also in agreement with recent angle-resolved photoemission studies performed in bulk WSe 2 , which reveal a two-dimensional character of the bands at the K -point Vol. 5, No. 6 / June 2018 / Optica