We investigate the potential of a quantum Boltzmann equation without momentum conservation for description of strongly correlated electron systems out of equilibrium. In a spirit similar to dynamical mean field theory (DMFT), the momentum conservation of the electron-electron scattering is neglected, which yields a time-dependent occupation function for the equilibrium spectral function, even in cases where well-defined quasiparticles do not exist. The main assumption of this method is that the spectral function remains sufficiently rigid under the non-equilibrium evolution. We compare the result of the quantum Boltzmann equation to non-equilibrium DMFT simulations for the case of photo-carrier relaxation in Mott insulators, where processes on very different timescales emerge, i.e., impact ionization, intra-Hubbard-band thermalization, and full thermalization. Since quantum Boltzmann simulations without momentum conservation are computationally cheaper than non-equilibrium DMFT, this method allows the simulation of more complicated systems or devices, and to access much longer times. The description of excited quantum many-body systems is among the most difficult tasks in computational physics. Numerous methods have been developed that employ approximations on different levels in order to make the solution of the many-body problem feasible. Starting from the Keldysh formalism, 1 the most prominent approaches are based on either quantum kinetic equations or non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) techniques. In strongly correlated systems, the assumption of welldefined quasiparticles is not justified in many situations. In particular, doped Mott insulators in equilibrium display bad metallic behavior above some rather low coherence temperature, with a scattering length of the order of the lattice spacing, It would therefore be desirable to have a generalization of a kinetic equation which can describe the dynamics in correlated systems such as Mott insulators, in spite of the fact that well-defined quasiparticles may not exist. In fact, on the qualitative level one often argues in terms similar to a Boltzmann equation when explaining the "transfer of occupations" between different energy windows. The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we derive the Boltzmann equation in the limit of infinite dimensions. To ease a later comparison and help the reader's intuition, we first show, in Section II A, the structure of the quasiparticle Boltzmann equation (QPBE) in the limits of infinite dimensions, by neglecting the momentum-dependence in the collision term. Here, the basic assumption is that, even if electronic correaltions strongly modify the spectral function, the basic excitations are still quasiparticle-like and their dynamics subject to the Boltzmann equation. In Section II B we derive a quantum Boltzmann equation (QBE), starting with the non-equilibrium DMFT equations. This more rigorous proof does not require the existence of well defined quasiparticles but only the rigidity of the spectral function. The final structure of the two Boltzmann equations is the same, but the QBE holds under more general circumstances. In Section II C we develop two different approaches on how to account for the laser excitation: (i) Fermi's golden rule and (ii) including the effects of a finite number of laser oscillations and amplitude modulations in first order perturbation theory. In Section II D we report how we parametrise the quantum Boltzmann equation. Numerical details are sketched in Section II E. The results of our numerical simulations are presented in Section III. We focus on the relaxation dynamics of doublons in a photo-excited Mott insulator in Section III A, and discuss the different ways to model the laser excitation in Section III B. The population dynamics in the upper and lower Hubbard band is presented in Section III C and compared to non-equilibrium DMFT. Section III D briefly discusses the scattering amplitude, the only adjustable parameter of the theory, while Section III E reveals the three steps in the thermalization process: (i) impact ionization, (ii) thermalization within the two Hubbard bands, (iii) full thermalization between the Hubbard bands. Finally, Section IV summarizes our results and provides an outlook. In this section, we derive a Boltzmann equation which can qualitatively capture the non-equilibrium DMFT dynamics of strongly correlated systems in certain limits. In contrast to previous work, The QPBE assumes the existence of quasiparticles and describes the time-evolution of the quasiparticle distribution function f (r, k, t), i.e., the probability that a quasielectron wave-packet state centered at phase-space point (r, k) is occupied at time t. It is given by the Fermi distribution f (k) = 1/(e β( k -μ) + 1) in equilibrium, with the single-particle dispersion relation k , the inverse temperature β and the chemical potential μ. The QPBE can capture many aspects of the DMFT dynamics in the limit of weak interactions, On the other hand, we will show that one can write a quantum Boltzmann equation for a distribution function F (r, k, t, ω), which is related to the ratio of the occupied density of states to the spectral function, and can be simplified to F (r, t, ω) in the DMFT limit. The latter can be defined even in the absence of well-defined quasiparticles, and gives F (ω) = 1/(e β(ω-μ) + 1) in equilibrium (a precise definition will follow below). We will refer to this approach as the quantum Boltzmann equation (QBE), although in the literature the term QBE is sometimes also used for the QPBE. Both equations turn out to have the same mathematical structure, which is a local Boltzmann equation, although the meaning of the distribution function is different in the two cases, i.e., more general for the QBE. Hence this local Boltzmann equation can potentially capture many aspects of the DMFT evolution not only in the limit of weak interactions, but also for strongly correlated Mott insulators where the concept of well-defined quasiparticles is questionable. The Boltzmann equation for the time-evolution of the quasiparticle distribution function f (r, k, t) The quantities v r and v k are the velocities of a singleparticle wave-packet in real-and momentum-space and can be derived from the single-particle Schrödinger equation as with the absolute value of the electron charge e, the reduced Planck-constant , the speed of light c, the singleparticle dispersion relation (k), the macroscopic electric and magnetic fields E(r, t), B(r, t), and the anomalous component of the wavepacket group velocity v an (k). where d is the spatial dimension of the system and the scattering amplitude is The vector G is a reciprocal lattice vector and w(k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ) is the scattering probability that gives the probability for a process where two particles with momenta k 0 and k 1 scatter and end up with k 2 and k 3 (or for the inverse process). The two δ-functions ensure momentum-and energy-conservation. It is non-trivial to obtain w(k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ) ab-initio for a real material as it corresponds to the effective interaction. We assume that (k) is already the renormalized dispersion relation and only the residual (i.e. screened) interaction enters into the scattering probability. Furthermore we assume an effective scattering probability (or effective interaction) that does not depend on the momenta, i.e. with the volume of the Brillouin zone V BZ and a constant α. Another difficulty in calculating Eq. ( DMFT methods become exact in the limit of infinite dimensions, where the factor 1 V BZ restores the correct unit and order of magnitude. After we have given up momentum conservation, we also do not have to keep the momentum resolution of the distribution function. Instead we consider the probability that a state at a certain energy (rather than a certain momentum) is occupied, i.e. f (k) → f ( ). With all the above simplifications Eq. (1) reads where j ≡ (k j ), and we have introduced the phasespace factor which yields ∂f ( 0 ) ∂t = 0 if f i is the (equilibrium) Fermi function. At this point the integration is still performed over the momenta, while the integrand only depends on the momenta through the dispersion relation. We can therefore reduce the integrals into an energy integration by introducing the density of states ρ( ) = 1 , so that the collision term Eq. ( Equation ( Let us now derive the QBE from a NEGF perspective in the DMFT limit. We start by reviewing the definition of the distribution function F (k, t, ω). (As before, we discuss spatially homogeneous states in this section, so that quantities do not depend on r). For an in depth discussion of the distribution function and the quantum Boltzmann equation, consider, e.g., Ref. 39. In equilibrium, or in any possibly non-equilibrium time-translational invariant state, the spectral function is defined as where is the retarded Green's function. In a time-translational invariant state, all two-time correlation functions depend only on t -t , and the Fourier transform is taken with respect to this time-difference. Furthermore, the occupied density of states (unoccupied density of states) is given by the corresponding Fourier transform of the hole propagator In equilibrium, the occupied and unoccupied density of states and the spectrum are related through a variant of the fluctuation dissipation theorem 39 In a non-equilibrium steady state, one thus defines the distribution function as the ratio The QBE provides an equation of motion for the timedependent generalization of this energy distribution function. In a general time-evolving state, Eq. ( where F k (t, t ) depends on two times, and The derivation of the Boltzmann equation is based on a separation of timescales: For every two-time quantity C(t, t ) one can introduce the Wigner transform, The description of the dynamics can be simplified if the dynamics with respect to average time t changes on a timescale ∆t which is slow compared to the dependence of C(t 1 , t 2 ) on relative time s =t 1 -t 2 , i.e, slow compared to 1/∆ω, where ∆ω is the scale on which C(t, ω) varies in ω (for a discussion of the relative and absolute time scales s and t cf. below). In mathematical terms, the Wigner transform of the convolution can be represented by the Moyal product and the separation of timescales implies that the terms in the Taylor expansion of the exponential are controlled by the small parameter ∆t∆ω 1 (gradient expansion). Keeping only the leading (zeroth) order, Eq. ( where we used that the advanced Green's function is given by G By analogy to Eq. ( To derive an equation of motion for the distribution function one can use the Dyson equation on the Keldysh contour to get 39 Within DMFT, the lattice problem is mapped to an impurity model, where the environment is constructed such that the impurity Green's function and self-energy equal the local lattice Green's function and self-energy. (For an introduction to non-equilibrium DMFT, see Ref. 17.) The impurity Green's functions (which are local by definition, and carry no k index) satisfy the Dyson equation , where the noninteracting propagator (Weiss field) is given by G 0 = [i∂ t -μ -∆] -1 , with the hybridization function ∆. We thus write Eq. ( This equation is still exact (in the DMFT limit of infinite dimensions). Via the DMFT self-consistency and the local self-energy diagrams in the impurity model, ∆ and Σ are non-linear functionals of the Green's functions, i.e., functionals of the local Green's function G R (t, ω) (or spectral function) and the local distribution F (t, ω). To derive a QBE, we make two approximations: First, we assume the separation of timescales between the relative-time dependence and the average-time dependence of spectral and distribution functions. In the excited Mott phase, spectra and distribution functions can be assumed to be relatively smooth in ω-space, so that the relative-time evolution happens on a timescale of the inverse bandwidth. The average time can be associated, on the other hand, with thermalization and impact ionization processes, which lead to a change of the distribution function. In actual simulations, one may verify that the average-time dynamics of the distribution function is slow compared to the relative time dynamics, and thus a posteriori justify that a separation of timescales is a reasonable approximation. In the present case, we will see that the spectral functions are relatively featureless over the full bandwidth, such that the timescale for the relative-time dynamics is set by the inverse bandwidth, while processes like thermalization and impact ionization are slower by at least an order of magnitude. Even for fast impact ionization processes the QBE works surprisingly well. To implement this approximation, one simply keeps only the leading (zeroth) order term in the expansion (20) of the Wigner transform of the convolutions in the right-hand side of Eq. ( In the same spirit, the leading approximation to Eq. ( and the distribution function F (t, ω). In principle, this should be supplemented by a second equation for the spectral function A(t, ω) itself. However, in many cases it is observed that even for a strongly correlated system, where G R is entirely different from the noninteracting G R 0 , the spectrum remains relatively rigid in the dynamics. We therefore attempt to close Eq. ( where A(ω) is the equilibrium spectral function. With a given input A(ω), Eq. ( The exact functional form of Σ(t, ω) in terms of F (t, ω) and the spectrum A(ω) is complicated, because it includes high-order diagrams. The general self-energy diagram on the Keldysh contour has the form with some two-particle irreducible vertex Γ(t 1 , t 2 , t 3 , t ). To arrive at a QBE with a generic structure, we assume that, though being renormalized with respect to the bare interaction, Γ is fairly local in time (at least in the Mott phase), so that for the sake of evaluating the scattering term of the Boltzmann equation we can replace it by a renormalized Ũ . The latter becomes the only adjustable parameter in the comparison to non-equilibrium DMFT, just like the parameter α in the local QPBE (9). With this, the self-energy in ( Writing the equation for the G > and G < components of G, and using the rigid density of states (27) in combination with the leading order approximation to the Moyal product, i.e, with the phase-space factor (8). We note that this scattering term of the quasi-particle Boltzmann equation yields ∂F (ω) ∂t = 0 if F is the (equilibrium) Fermi function, and in turn, the Fermi function is the only time-invariant fixed point if detailed balance is assumed, i.e., if the integrand in Eq. ( Depending on the non-linear structure of the DMFT self-consistency, a term of analogous functional form can emerge from the second "scattering term" ∆ < (t, ω) + F (t, ω)[∆ R (t, ω) -∆ A (t, ω)] in Eq. ( In conclusion, the above argument suggests that in the presence of a rigid density of states the evolution of the distribution function is given by a local QBE of the same structure as Eq. ( where α is an unknown free parameter and A( ) the interacting spectral function in equilibrium which is assumed to remain unchanged under the non-equilibrium dynamics. With the electron-electron collision term we can simulate how an out-of-equilibrium distribution relaxes back to a Fermi-Dirac distribution. In principle, one could take the distribution function obtained from the shorttime evolution in DMFT, i.e. after a laser excitation, as an initial state of the Boltzmann equation. Here we instead supplement the Boltzmann equation with a natural extension that does also reproduce the transfer of occupied weight from the lower to the upper band. We use two different ways to implement the spectral weight transfer, motivated by Fermi's golden rule and time-dependent perturbation theory applied to electrons in a given band. In a given band structure, the excitation of an electron due to a single-photon process can be regarded as a scattering process of an electron with a photon, and we can treat it within the Boltzmann framework as an additional collision term. We do not describe the reaction of the laser field to the excitation and we assume only a single laser frequency Ω which leads to the simple laser collision term with the transition amplitude ) according to Fermi's golden rule. The argument that the laser period is much shorter than the time-envelope function is not strictly fulfilled for the case we are going to study. Therefore we also apply first order time-dependent perturbation theory in order to estimate the transition rate. We will consider a laser field of the form sin(Ω(t -t 0 )) (34) with the unit vector n. We assume that it couples via the operator -r so that the perturbing potential reads V (t) = E(t) Ô with Ô ≡ -r • n. For the perturbing potential V (t) the transition probability to find an electron that initially was in the state |0 at t = 0 in state |1 at time t is with the energies 0 ( 1 ) of the initial (final) state ( = 1). In the following we assume for simplicity that the transition matrix element is one, i.e. 1| Ô |0 = 1 for all states. In analogy with the derivation of Fermi's golden rule we replace the transition rate in Eq. ( Let us emphasize that the transition amplitude W laser is now time dependent and can become negative as well. The latter represents the coherent dynamics of electrons which are brought back to their original state after being excited. Such coherent processes are usually excluded in Boltzmann theory as they average to zero over longer timescales. On short timescales they can produce internal inconsistencies, at least in principle, since they are associated with negative transition probabilities, which could lead to negative populations. However, if the electron-electron scattering is much slower than the frequency of the coherent processes we can still employ Eq. (36) as an approximation since it is a valid (firstorder) description if we only consider the (phase coherent) laser excitation between the states 0 and 1 . As described in the previous sections, our quantum Boltzmann equation is based on the assumption of a relatively rigid local density of states A(ω), with the Boltzmann equation describing the distribution function F ( ) with respect to this rigid density of states. This approximation is justified retrospectively by comparison to nonequilibrium DMFT results, where it is found to work under certain conditions. For our calculations we use the equilibrium spectral density A( ) obtained from DMFT calculations for a certain chemical potential μ 0 and temperature T 0 and assume that its structure remains unchanged even when energy is pumped into the system, i.e. where G R (ω) is the local retarded Green's function of a system with μ 0 and T 0 . The density of states used in the simulations corresponds to a Mott insulator with Hubbard bands and is shown in Fig. In principle we could solve Eq. ( Eq. ( with scattering amplitude parameter α and normalized scattering-tensor Note that S ijkmn contains all the information about the system i.e., the density-of-states, and is independent of the distribution function and time. In our numerical approach we pre-calculate and store the tensor elements. When the scattering-tensor is known, the timepropagation of Eq. ( The numerical implementation of the Fermi's golden rule laser excitation (section II C 1) is done in the same way as for the electron-electron collision term, where the time-dependent part can be pulled out of the integral. The corresponding laser-scattering tensor reads In case of laser excitations directly calculated from perturbation theory (section II C 2) the transition amplitude does depend on time explicitly which means that we have to calculate a laser-scattering tensor for every time step. In this section we compare the dynamics obtained by the QBE to the non-equilibrium DMFT result for a hypercubic lattice at half-filling. The noninteracting density of states is ρ 0 ( ) = exp -2 /W 2 / √ πW and we use W = 1 as the unit of energy (1/W as the unit of time). We discuss Mott insulating systems with Hubbard-interactions U = 3.0 and U = 3.5 and set the initial inverse temperature to β = 5. The excitations in the upper Hubbard band can be interpreted as double-occupancies of lattice-sites (doublons) while excitations in the lower Hubbard-band are empty sites (holons). We hence define the total doublon density d(t) as in the Boltzmann approach. Figure We choose integer-valued α for each value of U (independent of the laser frequency), such that the short timescale γ extracted from the fit roughly coincides with the short timescale γ DMFT of Ref. 31. The strategy of not fitting the timescales obtained from Ref. 31 more precisely, is motivated by the fact that the choice of t and the fitting time range have a sizeable impact on the value of the time constants (see a more precise discussion below). This makes it meaningless to fit α with more than one significant digit. Interestingly, in spite of the limitations due to the fitting procedure, we clearly find that the second (longer) time scale τ shows the same order of magnitude as the DMFT result τ DMFT (see Tab. I), and the ratio τ γ is almost independent of α for both DMFT and the Boltzmann approach. As mentioned above, there is some freedom in the determination of the time constants listed in Tab. I. First of all, the times γ and τ are extracted from fits of a sum of two exponential functions to the doublon curve over the whole time range. As can be seen in Fig. Furthermore, when comparing the times to the nonequilibrium DMFT results one should keep in mind that the non-equilibrium DMFT has only access to short times after the excitation (maximum time t = 60 in Ref. 31). The final (equilibrium) doublon value was determined from the temperature corresponding to the total energy of the system, and the remaining constants were obtained from a fit in the time interval t ∈ [15, 60]. However, within the Boltzmann framework we can obtain the thermalization times τ and γ from fits of D 2 (t) to the doublon density over the full thermalization time (e.g. t ∈ [15, 1700] for U = 3.0; "Fit 2" in Fig. The data in Tab. I in addition with the previous discussion shows that the doublon-relaxation timescales of non-equilibrium DMFT and QBE are similar within the numerical and methodological tolerance. This result may be unexpected given the fact that the validity of the QBE, which assumes a rigid spectrum, is not a priori clear for the description of strongly correlated systems. When the first order perturbation theory laser is used to model the absorption process (Section II C 2), there are some differences compared to the simpler implementation with Fermi's golden rule. First, we can observe that the excitation due to the laser field is not monotonic but oscillates with twice the laser frequency (upper panel Fig. This narrowing effect implies that the transition rate (Eq. ( Finally we emphasize that the choice of the laser implementation makes little difference on the overall thermalization dynamics (i.e. the relaxation times vary by less than 5%). In Fig. Furthermore, one observes that the non-equilibrium DMFT distribution has a finite electron density within the gap. A part of this effect arises because the Mottgap gets filled with electrons as the energy (or temperature) of the system increases. This is physics beyond the Boltzmann description, as it corresponds to a redistribution of spectral weight in the density of states which contradicts the assumption made in Eq. (37). However, it is important to note that is not the only reason for the presence of spectral weight within the bandgap in the computed non-equilibrium DMFT distribution. It is noteworthy that a finite electron density within the gap (see Ref. 31, not shown here) is reported even at t = 0. The latter is due to the fact that the calculation of the time-resolved photo-emission spectrum was performed by integration only over short time intervals: this results in a purely numerical broadening in the frequency space. Therefore, for a meaningful comparison we convolute the Boltzmann electron distributions with a Gaussian, where the width (σ) is chosen such that the electron density inside the gap is approximately the same as at t = 0 in the non-equilibrium DMFT case calculation (not shown here; σ = 0.14). For both cases (U = 3.0 and U = 3.5) the broadened electron distribution is much closer to the DMFT result (see Fig. So far we have not discussed the role of the scattering pre-factor α that gives the strength of the interaction between excitations and has been used as a free parameter. If α were derived by taking the bare Hubbard interaction U for the vertex w(k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ) in a QPBE, or for the vertex Ũ in (29), we would get α bare = 2π U 2 (see Appendix B). The values we obtain for α in order to fit the time-scales differ significantly from this simple value. Not only the values are different from α bare , also the dependency on U is reversed: α decreases with in-creasing U . The reason for this is that we have used a strongly renormalized spectral density which means that part of the interaction is already included in the density of states. The parameter α would then just be the residual interaction between excitations within this renormalized density of states. Another effect which is disregarded in the Boltzmann approach approach is the filling of the Mott-Hubbard gap due to the laser excitation. This effect is larger for intermediate U (i.e. small band-gaps) and gives rise to additional scattering channels via the in-gap states, leading to a larger α when trying to represent the dynamics in a Boltzmann approach. Indeed, full DMFT simulations yield the most rapid thermalization for intermediate values of U . An advantage of the quantum Boltzmann equation compared to non-equilibrium DMFT is the possibility to simulate the whole thermalization process, not only a short time interval after the laser pulse. By studying the distribution function at different times during thermalization, one finds a third, intermediate characteristic timescale. Right after the laser pulse, the system shows a strong deviation from its original Fermi-Dirac distribution (see Fig. In a second step, the thermalization proceeds through scatterings that leave the doublon and holon numbers unchanged. One doublon (holon) can scatter with another doublon (holon) redistributing the energy within the upper (lower) Hubbard band, or one doublon can scatter with a holon which corresponds to an exchange of energy between the upper and lower Hubbard bands. These doublon-and holon-conserving scatterings are not affected by the gap, hence they take place on a much faster timescale than the long-time thermalization. Since the number of doublons remains unchanged, this additional time scale is not visible in the doublon dynamics shown in Fig. Only on a much longer time scale (τ = 254 in the case U = 3.5 and Ω = 3 π 2 , see Tab. I) the system reaches a full thermalization. This requires the creation of high energy doublons (holons) through multiple scattering processes so that impact ionization can eventually thermalize the number of doublons (holons). These processes constitute the second, long time scale in Fig. We now systematically analyze this intermediate thermalization step by fitting two Fermi-Dirac functions within the lower and upper Hubbard band, respec-tively, to the distribution function F (t, ) in every time step. Such independently thermalized distributions in the upper and lower band are common in semiconductor physics, and have also been observed in more strongly correlated insulators using non-equilibrium DMFT for the ionic Hubbard model. Figure The third thermalization step, full thermalization between the bands (involving further doublon-holon generation), is clearly seen in Fig. We have provided a NEGF and DMFT based derivation of how to construct a quantum Boltzmann equation for the electron population dynamics in strongly correlated systems. The equation is structurally identical to the quasiparticle Boltzmann equation with dropped momentum conservation, but more generally applicable even if well defined quasiparticles do not exist. The basic assumption is that the equilibrium DMFT spectral function A(ω) does not change due to the non-equilibrium dynamics but only the distribution function F (t, ω). We applied the quantum Boltzmann equation to a system in its Mott-insulating phase, where well defined quasiparticles do not exist, and obtained a good qualitative and semi-quantitative agreement with non equilibrium DMFT results. This was shown by a direct comparison to the thermalization dynamics obtained from non-equilibrium DMFT. Both the features of impact ionization, a characteristic feature of early thermalization dynamics, and the ratio between the long-time thermalization time and the impact ionization time are very close to the non-equilibrium DMFT values. Not only the timescales coincide, but the electron distribution itself is in good agreement with the non-equilibrium DMFT distributions at different times. We find that even for a Mott insulator the dominant factor for the thermalization is the phase-(energy-) space that is available for scattering as this is exactly what is described by the Boltzmann term. The applicability of the quantum Boltzmann equation is however limited to cases where the spectral function is not significantly modified by the excitation, as for instance in the case of temperature-induced filling of the Mott-Hubbard gap or a dynamically induced insulator-metal transition. Additionally we have implemented two different laserexcitation models, with and without the inclusion of co-herent excitation processes. We found that the inclusion of coherent effects in the implementation of the laser excitation term captures important details of the DMFT simulations such as oscillations with two times the laser frequency or a transient increase in the double occupancy. We have also been able to pinpoint the physical mechanism behind the oscillations and the overshooting of the doublon population. Finally we were able to observe an intermediate phase where the upper and lower Hubbard bands are populated according to Fermi-Dirac distributions with the same temperature but different chemical potentials. Such an analysis could not be performed on the non-equilibrium DMFT data since the accessible timescales were too short. We conclude that, with a few caveats, an appropriately constructed Boltzmann formalism is able to qualitatively and semi-quantitatively describe thermalization dynamics even in strongly correlated materials. This is useful as the computational cost of Boltzmann simulations is much lower than that of non-equilibrium DMFT making it possible to simulate longer timescales, and to study the thermalization process. Further, its simplicity may help to understand the physical processes observed. As an outlook we would like to discuss two aspects. First, the QBE is applicable in many additional situations. For a weakly correlated metal, the conventional Boltzmann equation with ρ(ω) instead of the interacting A(ω) is recovered, and the scattering amplitude is given by the perturbative result discussed in Appendix B. If we add essentially only a single particle at energy ω, phase-space arguments imply a Fermi liquid relaxation rate ∼ ω 2 and ∼ T 2 . More interesting is the strongly correlated metallic phase with a narrow quasiparticle peak. Here, we expect reasonably good results as long as our assumption that A(ω) is not altered by the non-equilibrium dynamics holds. Second, it is intriguing to extend the formalism also to the case of a finite electric field, calculating transport properties. Here, we additionally need the Fermi velocity v(k) in the Boltzmann equation (1). In the spirit of (optical) conductivity calculations 50 in density functional theory (DFT)+DMFT Let us first write the collision operator for the system described above, where the factor 1 2 in front of the sum is needed to prevent double counting. The factor W σ0σ1σ2σ3 (k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ) is the transition rate from a state with two electrons |i ≡ ĉ † with the function Using the anti-commutation relations for fermionic creation and annihilation operators we can evaluate Eq. (B4) and get (with the indices and dependencies of W dropped) where σ ≡ -σ and G means the sum over all reciprocal lattice vectors G. The two spin-deltas δ σ0 σ1 δ σ2 σ3 represent the fact that spin is conserved in the scattering event and that only electrons with opposite spin may scatter with each other, which follows from the purely local nature of the interaction. As the system is spin degenerate we do not need to distinguish between the distributions for spin up and down, i.e. f (k i ) ≡ f ↑ (k i ) = f ↓ (k i ). If the volume of the system is large we are allowed to use integrals instead of sums over k in Eq. (B3) ( ki → N V BZ BZ d d k i ). The Kronecker-delta then becomes a delta function (δ (k0+k1-k2-k3),G → V BZ N δ (k 0 + k 1 -k 2 -k 3 -G) ≡ V BZ N δ k ) and the T (t)-function may be replaced by a delta function in the case of sufficiently large times (T (t) → δ ( (k 0 ) + (k 1 ) -(k 2 ) -(k 3 )) ≡ δ ). Eq. (B3) then becomes and from comparison with Eqs. ( 