The structure of Ge 22 Ga 3 Sb 10 S 65 and Ge 15 Ga 10 Sb 10 S 65 glasses was investigated by neutron diffraction (ND), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements at the Ge, Ga and Sb K-edges. Experimental data sets were fitted simultaneously in the framework of the reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) simulation technique. Short range order parameters were determined from the obtained large-scale configurations. It was found that the coordination numbers of Ge, Sb and S are around the values predicted by the Mott-rule (4, 3 and 2, respectively). The Ga atoms have on average 4 nearest neighbors. The structure of these stoichiometric glasses can be described by the chemically ordered network model: Ge-S, Ga-S and Sb-S bonds are the most important. Long Sb-S distances (0.3 -0.4 Å higher than the usual covalent bond lengths) are observed, suggesting that Sb atoms can be found in various local environments. Chalcogenide glasses have remarkable physical properties such as their wide transparency window in the mid-infrared range far beyond that of the silica glasses (up to 12, 16, 28 microns for sulfide-, selenide-and telluride-based glasses respectively) A comprehensive description of the structure of these glasses can be helpful for the better understanding of their properties. The structure of the chalcogenide glasses can be described as a covalently connected network of the participant elements. In glasses consisting elements from the 14-15-16 groups of the periodic table, the total coordination number of the elements (N i ) follows the Mottrule The structure of several chalcogenide glasses can be described in the framework of the chemically ordered network model (CONM) [GaS 4/2 ] units were reported in these glasses, as well as [S 3 Ge(Ga)-Ge(Ga)S 3 ] ethane-like units in Sdeficient samples. A small amount of M-M and S-S bonds in stoichiometric samples showed some violation in the chemical order In Ge-Sb-S glasses [GeS 4/2 ] and [SbS 3/2 ] units are the main building blocks as shown in a lot of studies The structure of quaternary Ge-Ga-Sb-S glasses is much less known. Raman scattering spectroscopy and mass-spectrometry investigations In this paper we present our X-ray diffraction (XRD), neutron diffraction (ND) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements on Ge 22 Ga 3 Sb 10 S 65 and Ge 15 Ga 10 Sb 10 S 65 glasses. Short range order parameters are investigated by combining the experimental results using the reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) simulation technique Samples were prepared by conventional melt quenching. High purity raw materials were used for preparing Ge 22 Ga 3 Sb 10 S 65 and Ge 15 Ga 10 Sb 10 S 65 , i.e. 5N for germanium, gallium, antimony or sulphur. Commercial sulphur was further purified by successive distillations to remove carbon (CO 2 , CS 2 , COS) and hydrates or sulphide hydride (H 2 O, OH, SH) impurities. Then, the required amounts of chemical reagents were put in silica ampoules and pumped under vacuum (10 -4 mbar) for a few hours. The tubes were then sealed and heated at 850°C for 12h in a rocking furnace to ensure the homogenization of the melt. After water quenching, the glass rods were annealed near their glass transition temperatures for 6h. The densities of the samples were determined using a Mettler Toledo XS64 system measuring the weights of the samples in air and water. The density values are shown in Table Neutron diffraction experiments were carried out at the 7C2 diffractometer of LLB (Saclay, France). The wavelength of incident radiation was 0.72 Å. Powdered samples were filled into thin walled (0.1 mm) vanadium containers of 6 mm diameter. Raw data were corrected for background scattering, detector efficiency and multiple scattering. The XRD structure factors were measured at the beamline P07 of the Petra III source (Hamburg, Germany). The energy of the incident radiation was 80 keV. Raw intensities were recorded by a Perkin-Elmer 2D detector. Wavelength, detector position and tilting were determined by measuring a LaB 6 standard. 2D counts were integrated circularly and corrected for background, absorption, detector solid angle and Compton scattering by the program Fit2D The extended X-ray absorption fine structure measurements at the Ge, Ga and Sb K-edges were carried out at HASYLAB (beamline X). Glassy samples were finely ground, mixed with cellulose and pressed into tablets. The sample quantities in the tablets were adjusted to the compositions and to the selected edges. The spectra were collected in the transmission mode using fixed exit double-crystal Si(111). The intensities before and after the sample as well as after the reference samples were recorded by ionization chambers filled with a mixture of Ar/Kr (~10% absorption), Ar (~50% absorption) and Kr (~100% absorption), respectively. Intensities were converted to χ(k) curves by the Viper programme Both diffraction and EXAFS are sensitive to pair correlations. However, the ways the partial pair correlation functions are transformed to structure factors or χ(k) curves are different (see below). For this reason the most straightforward and economic procedure of creating models compatible with diffraction and EXAFS data simultaneously is to calculate first partial pair correlation functions and then refine them gradually to reproduce all measurements. In practice this goal is reached by the reverse Monte Carlo simulation technique. The reverse Monte Carlo method The S mod (Q) model structure factor can be calculated from the partial pair correlation functions (g ij (r)) according to the following equations: Here Q is the scattering variable, ρ 0 is the average number density. The w ij N,X neutron and X-ray scattering weights are given by Eqs. and where δ ij is the Kronecker delta, b i is the coherent neutron scattering length, c i is the atomic concentration, and f i (Q) is the atomic form factor. The model EXAFS curves are calculated according to Eq. ( where i is the index of the absorbing component, and γ ij (k,r) is the photoelectron backscattering matrix. In this study the two total structure factors from neutron and X-ray diffraction measurements and 3 χ(k) EXAFS (Ge-, Ga-and Sb-K-edges) data sets are fitted by the RMC++ code The cubic simulation boxes contained 8000 atoms in test runs and 30 000 particles in the final runs presented here. The box sizes were determined according to the experimental densities, which are shown in Table Initial sigma parameters used to calculate the RMC cost function The number of accepted moves was around 1-2 x 10 7 steps. Some 'background' coordination constrains were used to avoid segregated atoms and unrealistically high (7 or more for Ge and Ga, 6 or more for Sb and 4 or more for S atoms) and low (1 and 2 for Ge and 1 for Sb and Ga) coordination numbers. (Models with only these 'background' constraints will be called 'free' or 'unconstrained' hereafter.) The tested models were compared by checking their R-factors, which measures the quality of the fit: Here S mod (Q i ) and S exp (Q i ) are the model and experimental structure factors and the summation runs over the experimental Q i values. The R-factor for EXAFS data is calculated similarly, using the corresponding model and experimental χ(k) curves. The relative R-factor of a configuration (with respect to a reference model) is defined as the ratio of the R-factor of the configuration and that of the reference model. A simple average of the relative R-factors of the five experimental data sets gives a cumulative relative R-factor (R c ), which was used to categorize the investigated model. A four component system has 10 independent partial pair correlation functions (PPCF, g ij (r)), meaning that the same number of independent measurements would be necessary to determine the PPCFs in a purely algebraic way. Various constraints (coordination constraints, forbidding some bonds etc.) can help to decrease the uncertainty of the short range order parameters of the system. For this reason it is advisable to keep the number of allowed bonds at its minimum value. The M-S bonds (Ge-S, Ga-S and Sb-S) were always allowed, the necessity of the M-M and S-S bonds were investigated. The average partial coordination numbers (N ij ) were calculated by integrating the partial pair correlation functions up to the first minimum (r min ) : where ρ 0 is the average density, c j is the concentration of the jth element. To estimate the uncertainty of the average coordination numbers dedicated simulation runs were performed. The value of the investigated N ij was forced to change systematically (in ± 10% increments). By monitoring the Rfactors, the range of N ij values, in which the quality of the fit is appropriate, can be determined. The N i total coordination numbers are calculated as: Assuming that the Ge, Ga, Sb and S atoms are 4-, 4-, 3-and 2-fold coordinated respectively, the investigated compositions are stoichiometric. According to the CONM and earlier Raman scattering spectroscopy results The presence of other bond types did not improve the quality of the fits. It means that neither of the Ge-Ge, Ge-Ga, Ge-Sb, Ga-Ga, Ga-Sb, Sb-Sb and S-S coordination numbers are higher than 0.3-0.4, which is the sensitivity of our method. The partial pair correlation functions calculated from the obtained particle configurations are presented in Fig. The first peak of the Ge-S and Ga-S PPCFs are around 2.22 Å and 2.27-2.28 Å, respectively. These values agree well with that obtained earlier in ternary Ge-Ga-S glasses by XAFS spectroscopy The Sb-S bond length (2.44 Å) is somewhat shorter than that found in Ge-Sb-S glasses by ND (2.48 Å The average coordination numbers are calculated up to 2.9 Å for N GeS and N GaS and to 3.0 Å for N SbS ; the values are presented in Table The average coordination number of gallium (N Ga ) is definitely higher than 3 for both compositions. Due to the small amount of gallium in the Ge 22 Ga 3 Sb 10 S 65 glass, the uncertainty of this number is inevitably higher. Simulation runs were carried out to test the coordination number of Ga. In these runs the average coordination number of the Ga-S pair (N GaS , which is equal to N Ga since Ga-Ge, Ga-Ga and Ga-Sb bonds were forbidden) was constrained at different values and the changes in the quality of the fits were monitored. The R-factors of the curves were an average 20 % higher for those test runs in which the Ga-S coordination number was constrained to be 3, and they only slightly increased (below 5%) when the N GaS = 4 constraint was used. It was thus concluded that the total coordination number of Ga must be close to 4. It is to be mentioned that unconstrained simulation runs gave 3.85 and 3.67 for N Ga in Ge-Ga-S glasses In all M-S curves smaller and less sharp second peaks can be observed in the 2.6 -3.0 Å region (see Fig. Similar pair distances in the 2.6 -3.0 Å region were reported earlier in the Ge-Sb-S system The above results suggest that the observed 'long bonds' are most probably of Sb-S type. The data analyzed in the present study allows the presence of long Ge-S bonds as well. However, as they were not found in Ge-Ga-S glasses The presence of Ge(Ga)-Ge(Ga) second neighbors that share two common S atoms (edge-shared Ge(Ga)S 4 tetrahedra) was also studied. The second coordination shells of Ge and Ga atoms are clearly visible in the corresponding PPCFs, as definite peaks around 3.5 Å. Analysis of the obtained configurations revealed, that the Ge(Ga)-Ge(Ga) distances in the 3.1 -4.1 Å region originate not just from corner sharing (CS) pairs, but the typical distance of edge sharing (ES) Ge(Ga)-Ge(Ga) pairs is also around 3.1 -3.6 Å (see Fig. Ref. The first sharp diffraction peak (FSDP) is considered as a sign of medium range order. According to A quick view at the S ij (Q) partial structure factors (Fig. With some rearrangement of Eq. ( Eq. Ehrenfest relation Short range order of Ge Ge-Ge Ge-Ga Ge-Sb Ga-Ga Ga-Sb Sb-Sb Ge-S Ga-S Sb-S S-S Ge-Ge Sb-Sb Ge-Ga Sb-S Ge-S S-S Ga-S Ge-Sb 