Perovskite oxynitrides are a promising class of material for photocatalytic water-splitting due to their small band gaps and suitably aligned band edges. Recently, epitaxially strained oxynitrides started to attract interest due to the possibility to engineer the anion order and ferroelectric distortions. However, contrary to oxides there have been no studies on the band-gap evolution in oxynitrides with epitaxial strain. Here, we investigate, using density functional theory calculations, the influence of epitaxial strain on the band gap of two different oxynitrides and compare our results with oxides. As opposed to cubic oxides, where both compressive and tensile strain narrow the band gap, we find that the anion order leads to non-degenerate N 2p bands already at zero strain, which leads to opposite and anion order-dependent evolutions of the band gap under compressive and tensile strain. Further, we find that in oxynitrides polar distortions increase the band gap by up to 1 eV for 4% strain whereas for oxides the increase is only about 0.1 eV for the same amount of strain. The reason for this difference is the larger ionic radius of nitrogen leading to larger ferroelectric distortions and a stronger dependence of the band gap on the distortion amplitude. These results imply that ferroelectric distortions are strongly detrimental to light absorption and that their suppression, for example above a critical temperature, should result in a marked decrease in band gap and enhanced absorption of visible light. Perovskite oxynitrides have seen increased interest in recent years due to their absorption in the visible part of the solar spectrum as well as their band edges that straddle the oxygen and hydrogen evolution potentials, making them very promising photoelectrodes for photocatalytic water-splitting The smaller band gap of oxynitrides compared to oxides is one of the main reasons behind the large interest in these materials for photocatalytic water-splitting. The band gap was shown to depend on the anion order Epitaxial strain was shown to alter the anion order in oxynitrides, large compressive strain leading to a trans order, where N-TM bonds form 1D chains along the out- The A site is not shown. of-plane direction (see Fig. At zero strain, the paraelectric phase is cubic (in the room-temperature phase without antiferrodistortive octahedral rotations) and the energies of the TM t 2g orbitals forming the conduction band are degenerate as are the O 2p orbitals forming the valence band. Applying epitaxial strain in the xy-plane changes the energy of orbitals containing x and y components relative to orbitals containing z components. Under compressive strain, orbitals without a z component rise in energy, resulting in a narrowed band gap between raised O 2p x /p y and almost unaffected TM d xz /d yz states. Under tensile strain, the orbitals without a z component drop in energy and the gap is between almost unaffected O 2p z and lowered TM d xy orbitals. Thus both compressive and tensile strain reduce the band gap in oxides, under compressive strain by raising the valence-band edge, and under tensile strain by lowering the conduction-band edge. The ferroelectric distortion on the other hand leads to a stabilization of the O 2p orbitals forming the valenceband edge, along with a destabilization of the TM t 2g π * orbitals forming the conduction-band edge, resulting in an opening of the band gap To assess the prospects of strain-engineered oxynitrides for photocatalysis, we predict in the present work the strain dependence of the band gap in LaTiO 2 N and SrTaO 2 N oxynitrides using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Since the band gap in oxynitrides additionally depends on the anion order, which is also affected by strain, oxynitrides are expected to exhibit a significantly more complex strain dependence of the band gap than oxides. We hence study the observed changes in band gap starting from calculations in the high symmetry phase and increase the complexity by sequentially adding ferroelectric and octahedral distortions and compare our results for oxynitrides with oxides. Our results show that already at zero strain the anion order leads to non-degenerate N 2p bands that form the valence band edge, which leads to opposite evolutions of the band gap under compressive and tensile strain. We also show that strain and anion-order dependent polar distortions lead to a much larger widening of the band gap in oxynitrides than in oxides. Our DFT calculations were performed with the Quantum ESPRESSO package 24 using the gradient corrected PBE exchange-correlation functional For LaTiO 2 N we applied a Hubbard U 28 of 3 eV as we did in our previous study For geometry relaxations of materials epitaxially strained perpendicular to one of the pseudocubic directions, we assume a cubic substrate: We define the magnitude of strain with respect to the unstrained area in the strain plane of the given anion order and distortion mode(s) and set the in-plane lattice parameters to equal lengths and orthogonal to each other. We then relax the out-of-plane lattice parameter and all internal coordinates until the forces converge below 0.05 eV/Å and total energies change by less than 1.4 • 10 -5 eV. Atomic structures were visualized using VESTA A. Band gaps in low-energy phases of strained LaTiO2N and SrTaO2N In Fig. The band gap of the most stable structure in a specific strain range is colored red. Polarity of the structures is indicated by the background: A white background indicates that the most stable structure is non polar while a colored background indicates that the most stable structure is polar. In this figure a slightly different definition of strain compared to the rest of the article is used: we define strain with respect to the lowest-energy unstrained anion order (i.e. the cis structure with a rotation pattern a -b -c + and N-TM bonds along a and b in the case of SrTaO 2 N). considered strain range. For LaTiO 2 N this is discussed in detail in our previous work In these strained structures, there is a simultaneous strain-dependent evolution of the octahedral rotation angles, polar distortions and the anion order, all of which may have an effect on the band gaps. In order to rationalize the observed band gaps, we will first discuss the strain-dependent structure before we return to the evolution of the band gaps. Structural features such as the anion order and the existence of a polarity as a function of strain are shown in Fig. Despite the similar tolerance factors Having discussed the evolution of anion orders and polar distortions as well as differences in octahedral rotations between the two materials, we now return to the band gaps shown in Fig. These results highlight two main differences in the strain-dependence of band gaps in oxynitrides compared to oxides. First, the band gap in non-polar oxides decreases in both strain directions We start our analysis by determining the difference in band-gap evolution of epitaxially strained oxides and oxynitrides in the high-symmetry phase without octahe- dral rotations or polar distortions. To do so, we fix atoms at high symmetry positions and allow only the normal axis to relax. We will restrict our analysis to the difference in band energies between the valence-band minimum (VBM) and conduction-band maximum (CBM) which are located at the R/Γ points of the Brillouin zone in oxides and at the Γ/Γ points in oxynitrides, respectively. While we confirm that for cubic oxides (i.e. SrTiO 3 ) the band gap narrows for both compressive and tensile strain For oxynitrides we expect a combination of the two molecular orbital diagrams shown in Fig. We continue by studying the change in band gap with strain in the ferroelectric phase. For simplicity, we focus on the trans anion order with N-TM bonds and a polar distortion along the out-of-plane (z) direction, which we have shown to be the energetically most stable structure under large compressive strain. The results for the cis order are similar and we will briefly comment on them at the end of this section. In agreement with The large difference in band-gap changes between SrTiO 3 and trans-SrTaO 2 N with compressive strain can be explained by the absolute displacement amplitude of the ferroelectric distortion (see Fig. We take the distance between the equatorial oxygen atoms and the transition metal along the polar distortion as a measure of the ferroelectric distortion amplitude, which is zero in a paraelectric material (see inset in Fig. We therefore, propose that the larger increase in band gap of SrTaO 2 N compared to SrTiO 3 arises from a combination of two factors. Firstly, the enhanced covalence in oxynitrides results in a steeper change of the band gap as a function of the distortion amplitude. Secondly, the exponential dependence of the band gap on the distortion amplitude combined with a larger ferroelectric distortion for SrTaO 2 N leads to a stronger change in band gap. For larger ferroelectric distortions we do not see an increase in the band gap anymore. For SrTaO 2 N we see at -4% strain a flattening of the change in band gap and for LaTiO 2 N, which has larger polar distortions than SrTaO 2 N (see Fig. The observed increase in band gap is hence the result of the ferroelectric distortion but a band crossover at large ferroelectric distortions can slow this increase and even lead to a decrease with increasing compressive strain and ferroelectric distortion. The analysis of the cis structures with TM-N bonds in the in-plane directions leads to a similar conclusion with the difference that, here the ferroelectric distortions are along the in-plane directions and therefore increase with tensile strain absolute value of the band gap by introducing rotations (see Fig. For the cis anion order the investigation is slightly problematic since it is often not possible to let the atomic positions relax while maintaining a paraelectric structure with rotations. However, from our results we do not see any reason why the cis structure should behave differently from the trans structure. We find that for the paraelectric phase the magnitude of the change in band gap with strain is approximately the same for oxides and oxynitrides. However, while for oxides the band gap decreases slightly under both compressive and tensile strain, for oxynitrides the sign of the change depends on the anion order and the resulting alignment of the TM-N bonds with the strain axis. Further, we find that in oxynitrides, ferroelectricity increases the band gap much more than in oxides due to two reasons: First, oxynitrides show a larger polar displacement than oxides because the larger atomic radius of nitrogen leads to expanded lattice parameters and hence stronger polar instabilities compared to oxides. Second, there is a stronger dependence of the band gap on the amplitude of the ferroelectric distortions in oxynitrides due to larger energetic overlap of the N 2p and TM d orbitals. Octahe-dral rotations play a smaller role that manifests mostly in their partial suppression of the polar distortion and therefore a reduction of the aforementioned effects. Using this knowledge we can now explain the evolution of the band gap in the thermodynamically stable phases of SrTaO 2 N and LaTiO 2 N (see Fig. Since ferroelectric distortions occur in SrTaO 2 N for all strain ranges (including unstrained bulk) and in LaTiO 2 N 19 for both compressive and tensile strain, the resulting increase in band gap could adversely affect the performance of oxynitride photocatalysts. The suppression of ferroelectric distortions, for example by increasing temperature, might therefore significantly decrease the band gap and lead to an increased efficiency even for small strains or bulk samples in the case of SrTaO 2 N and other tantalum based oxynitrides 