The experimental manifestation of topological effects in bulk materials under ambient conditions, especially those with practical applications, has attracted enormous research interest. Recent discovery of Weyl semimetal provides an ideal material platform for such endeavors. The Berry curvature in a Weyl semimetal becomes singular at the Weyl node, creating an effective magnetic monopole in the k-space. A pair of Weyl nodes carry quantized effective magnetic charges with opposite signs, and therefore, opposite chirality. Although Weyl-point-related signatures such as chiral anomaly and non-closing surface Fermi arcs have been detected through transport and ARPES measurements, direct experimental evidence of the effective k-space monopole of the Weyl nodes has so far been lacking. In this work, signatures of the singular topology in a type-II Weyl semimetal TaIrTe4 is revealed in the photo responses, which are shown to be directly related to the divergence of Berry curvature. As a result of the divergence of Berry curvature at the Weyl nodes, TaIrTe4 exhibits unusually large photo responsivity of 130.2 mA/W with 4-m excitation in an unbiased field effect transistor at room temperature arising from the third-order nonlinear optical response. The room temperature mid-IR responsivity is approaching the performance of commercial HgCdTe detector operating at low temperature, making Type-II Weyl semimetal TaIrTe4 of practical importance in terms of photo sensing and solar energy harvesting. Furthermore, the circularly polarized galvanic response is also enhanced at 4-m, possibly due to the same Berry curvature singularity enhancement as the shift current. Considering the optical selection rule of Weyl cones with opposite chirality, it may open new experimental possibilities for studying and controlling the chiral polarization of Weyl Fermions through an in-plane DC electric field in addition to the optical helicities. The exploration of the topological effects with useful and unique applications in condensed matter materials attracts a lot of current interest Our experiment is based on the layered orthorhombic ternary compound tantalum iridium tetratelluride (TaIrTe4), which hosts four well-separated Type-II WNs, the minimal number of WNs imposed by symmetry in a WSM without inversion symmetry. It offers a "hydrogen atom" example of an inversion-breaking WSMs Figure While the photo responses at 633 nm, 1.5 m and 10.6 m are linear with excitation power over the whole power range, the response at 4 m is strikingly different in the low power region. In comparison with the responsivity of 22.4 A/W at high power region, the responsivity at low power region is more than three orders of magnitude larger, reaching a maximum slope of 130.2 mA/W as shown in Fig. Firstly, with LP-a excitation, the photo-response is much larger than that with linear polarization along crystallographic b-axis (LP-b). The response is highly anisotropic, and the long axis of the ellipse of anisotropic response is consistent with the crystallographic a-axis (Fig. excitation is larger than that to the right circular polarization (RCP) excitation, which corresponds to circular photogalvanic effect (CPGE). The giant photo responsivity at 4 m is attributable to the shift current response, which in turn can arise from the diverging Berry curvature at the WNs as predicted by recent theory It has been demonstrated experimentally that the shift current response from a Type-I Weyl cone results in a Glass coefficient which is an order of magnitude larger than any other previously measured values Information IV. The rank-4 tensors σ 3 αλβγ that are responsible for third order nonlinear DC optical response have finite elements involving only planar components. The third order nonlinear DC response necessarily involves a DC electric field EDC. Experimentally, EDC can be provided by multiple effects, such as built-in electric field due to work function difference between TaIrTe4 and the metal contacts or photo-thermoelectric (PTE) field after photoexcitation In our approximate calculations, the EDC is treated as an accelerating the Bloch electrons whence displacing the Fermi distribution (see Eq. ( As seen in Eqs. Our density-functional theory (DFT) calculations (see Supplementary Information VI) enable us to calculate the Berry-phase related quantities such as the Berry connections, from which the third order optical response , σ 3 , σ 3 nd σ 3 . The four superscripts, in the order written, correspond respectively to the direction of current, direction of EDC, the two optical field directions. (Fig. According to the above shift current response scheme, the saturation behavior observed at relatively high excitation power (200~500 nW) with 4-m LP-a excitation (Fig. Specifically, the saturation is determined by the competition of photo absorption rate (WVC) and the relaxation mechanism (characterized by a relaxation rate ). If WVC <<, which applies at low excitation region, the shift current is proportional to the intensity as expected, but at high excitation region, WVC>>~, the shift current quickly saturates and becomes intensity independent. The photocurrent rises very quickly at low excitation power (Fig. Besides unusual behavior on the excitation power, the wavelength dependence of photo response provides additional support to the Weyl-nature of the shift current responses. As the divergence of Berry curvature occurs in the vicinity of the Weyl cones, the responsivities at large excitation photon energies (1.55 m and 633 nm) are normal as the transitions are far away from the WNs (Fig. This supports that the unusual low-power responsivity observed at 4 m is related to the singularity The CPGE measurement results are shown in Fig. Apart from the low-frequency component that corresponds to the polarization independent photocurrent response (I∞), two sharp peaks at angular frequencies of 1/π (I1/π ) and 2/π (I2/π ) are observed. The intensity of the minor peak at angular frequency of 1/2π (I1/2π) represents the noise floor of the photocurrent measurement when rotating the quarter-wave plate () over a 2π period. In Fig. According to this result, the in-plane EDC provide additional control knob for chiral carriers beyond the light helicity. At last, we note the Berry curvature enhanced giant shift current response has practical significance for highly sensitive photodetection applications, especially for technically important mid-infrared and terahertz region. The un-optimized maximum room temperature responsivity of 130.2 mA/W at 4 m is ready to catch up the state of art MCT detector (600 mA/W) running at low temperature. The laser sources used in the optical measurements were two quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) Information XIII. Throughout the paper, we assign the light propagation direction as -ẑ, which is along the crystallographic c-axis that is perpendicular to the in-plane direction of the TaIrTe4 flake. TaIrTe4 single crystals were synthesized by solid state reaction with the help of Te flux. All the used elements were stored and acquired in argon-filled glovebox with moisture and oxygen levels less than 0.1 ppm, and all manipulations were carried out in the glovebox. The elements of Ta powder (99.99 %), Ir powder (99.999 %), and Te lump (99.999 %) with an atomic ratio of Ta/Ir/Te =1 : 1 : 12, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Singapore), were loaded in a quartz tube and then flame-sealed under high-vacuum of 10 -6 Torr. The quartz tube was placed in a tube furnace, slowly heated up to 1000 °C and maintained at this temperature for 100 h, and then allowed to cool to 600 °C at a rate of 0.8 °C/h, followed by cooling down to room temperature. The shiny, needle-shaped TaIrTe4 single crystals could be obtained from the product. Freshly exfoliated thin TaIrTe4 flakes were transferred onto a 300 nm SiO2/Si substrate. Standard electron-beam lithography technique was used to pattern electrodes, consisting of 5 nm Cr and 50 nm Au, on the TaIrTe4 samples to form devices. To numerically calculate the photocurrent using DFT, the effect of E DC on the second order optical response is added through a shifting of the Fermi level in the momentum space using the following relationship: where τ is the momentum relaxation time, f 0 is thermal equilibrium distribution, and k is the crystal quasi-momentum. The existence of a-axis orientating E DC would break the mirror symmetry along a-axis direction. In this way, we could calculate the effective third-order DC optical response (rank-4) tensors using: The right-hand side of Eq.( α βγ . The index α, β, γ are dummy indices and can be any direction of crystal axes a, b and c. The second index a is the direction of EDC, which is the a-axis direction.