The pressure evolution of the Raman active electronic excitations of the transition metal dichalcogenides 2H-TaS2 is followed through the pressure phase diagram embedding incommensurate chargedensity-wave and superconducting states. At high pressure, the charge-density-wave is found to collapse at 8.5 GPa. In the coexisting charge-density-wave and superconducting orders, we unravel a strong in-gap superconducting mode, attributed to a Higgs mode, coexisting with the expected incoherent Cooper-pair breaking signature. The latter remains in the pure superconducting state reached above 8.5 GPa. Our report constitutes the first observation of such Raman active Higgs mode since the longstanding unique case 2H-NbSe2. Symmetry breaking across an electronic phase transition always occur along with the emergence of new collective excitations, including oscillations of the amplitude of the order parameter. In charge-density-wave (CDW) systems, translational symmetry breaking gives rise to the amplitudon Raman spectroscopy is a well-known tool for the observation of excitations in materials. It has been extensively used to study amplitudons in various systems exhibiting a CDW order Although in high-T c cuprates a coexisting CDW and SC phase has recently been detected In this Letter we map out the CDW phase diagram of 2H-TaS 2 by following the CDW excitations and gap under high pressure and find that the CDW completely collapses at 8.5 GPa. In the low temperature SC state, we unravel a low energy in-gap collective mode which is attributed to a Higgs mode and whose interplay with the CDW mode points to a similar mechanism of observability as in 2H-NbSe 2 . Beside, in 2H-TaS 2 , this in-gap mode coexists with the usual incoherent Cooper-pair breaking peak at 2∆ clearly differentiating both excitations, and demonstrating that the Higgs mode is a well-defined col-lective mode located below the continuum of quasiparticle excitations in the SC+CDW state. Crystals of 2H-TaS 2 were grown by chemical vapour transport from the pre-synthetic material, using iodine as a transport agent, as already reported In Fig. In addition, only in the ICDW state, we observe multiple weak peaks, labelled (*), which most probably correspond to regular phonons folded to the zone center of the Brillouin zone due to the establishment of the CDW state. While keeping the same energy, the folded CDW phonons (*) smoothly loose intensity and disappear at T ICDW . Beside, as presented Fig. Two peaks are also detected at ∼160 cm -1 (E) and ∼270 cm -1 (A) in the E 2g and A 1g symmetries, respectively. They are measured already at 300 K in the normal state and persist up to the highest pressure. They are not associated to the CDW state and may arise from IR phonons activated by disorder. Fig. As shown Fig. Further evidences of the CDW collapse above 8.5 GPa are found in the folded CDW phonons (*) and the CDW gap (See Supplemental material), which are no longer measured above this critical pressure. All three manifestations of the CDW in 2H-TaS 2 are consistent and point toward a complete collapse of the CDW at 8.5 GPa. Hence we draw a new phase diagram for the CDW in 2H-TaS 2 using Raman spectroscopy, as depicted in Fig. We now turn to the study of the superconducting state, reached above 5 GPa by minimizing the laser heating. While entering it, new features develop above 6 GPa (T c >6.5 K) (See Fig. While increasing further the applied pressure, an additional feature develops at 2∆ (See Supplemental material). It consists in a gap opening below ∼20 cm -1 (c) and an asymmetric peak above (See Fig. Here, the observation of both superconducting features in the SC+CDW state, the in-gap mode and the incoherent Cooper-pair breaking peak at well separated energies is crucial. The evolution of the Cooper-pair breaking peak through the whole pressure phase diagram from the coexisting CDW+SC state to the pure SC state is gradual: the energy follows the evolution of T c and the spectral weight continuously increases as the SC gap takes over parts of the Fermi surface previously gapped by the CDW. In particular we do not observe any dramatic effect of the collapse of the CDW order on the incoherent CPBP. By contrast the in-gap mode intensity abruptly collapses in the pure SC state, as expected for the SC Higgs mode which couples to the Raman probe only via the CDW order. These observations rule out the interpretation of the in-gap mode as a Cooper-pair breaking peak affected by the opening of the CDW gap. They further demonstrate that the Higgs mode is a collective mode located below the continuum of quasiparticle excitations in the coexistence state consistently with theoretical work The proposed mechanism of observability of the Higgs mode in the presence of CDW amplitudons In conclusion, from Raman scattering, we draw a Pressure-Temperature phase diagram of 2H-TaS 2 . The incommensurate charge-density-wave completely collapses at about 8.5 GPa. In the coexisting chargedensity-wave and superconducting state, an in-gap superconducting mode, interpreted as a Higgs mode, is reported. This constitutes the first observation of such Raman active Higgs mode in condensed matter systems since the unique case of 2H-NbSe 2 . It has been clearly differentiated from the usual incoherent Cooper-pair breaking peak which survives in the pressure-induced pure superconducting state and our observations are consistent with the mechanism of observability of the Higgs mode for which an overlap of the charge-density-wave and superconducting gaps on the Fermi surface is necessary. This work paves the way for the systematic search of Higgs mode in superconductors and the study of its visibility while diversifying the coexisting orders.