A short, tutorial introduction to some basic concepts of laserplasma interactions at ultra-high intensities is given. The selected topics include a) elements of the relativistic dynamics of an electron in electromagnetic fields, including the ponderomotive force and classical radiation friction; b) the "relativistic" nonlinear optical transparency and self-focusing; c) the moving mirror concept and its application to light sail acceleration and high harmonic generation, with a note on related instabilities; d) some specific phenomena related to the absorption of energy, kinetic momentum and angular momentum from the laser light. Present-day short pulse, high power laser systems have reached the petawatt (10 15 W) level. When such power is tightly focused in a spot with a diameter of few wavelengths λ (≃ 1 μm for sub-picosecond systems), intensities exceeding 10 21 W cm -2 may be achieved. The corresponding strength of the EM fields is such that any sample of matter exposed to such fields becomes instantaneously highly ionized, i.e. turned into a plasma, and the freed electrons oscillate with momenta largely exceeding m e c (where m e is the electron mass and c is the speed of light). The nonlinear dynamics of such relativistic plasma in a superstrong EM field is the basis of advanced schemes of laser-plasma sources of high energy electrons, ions and photons which are characterized by high brilliance and ultrashort duration. A few years ago we tried to present the basic concepts of the theory of superintense laser-plasma interactions in a primer of about one hundred of pages Our rough selection criterion is to include here preferentially topics on which either we witnessed frequent misunderstanding or we may add something with respect to our primer. Beyond the latter, more complete and advanced introductions may be found in textbooks A look at the dynamics of a single electron in an EM field of arbitrary amplitude is a good warm-up before discussing a many-particle system with collective effects, i.e. a plasma. In non-covariant notation, the relativistic motion of an electron in a given EM field is described by the equations where p = p(t), r = r(t), v = v(t) = p/m e γ, γ = (1 + p 2 /m 2 e c 2 ) Exact relations and solutions can be found for plane wave fields, conveniently described by the vector potential A = A(x-ct) which we take to be propagating along x. The EM fields are given by E = -∂ t A/c and B = ∇ × A = x × ∂ x A. By separating the electron momentum in longitudinal (p x ) and transverse (p ⊥ ) components, it is possible to find two constants of motion: The first relation is the conservation of canonical momentum related to the traslational invariance in the transverse plane (yz). The second arises from the properties of the EM field: if a net amount of energy E is absorbed from the field, a proportional amount of momentum E/c must be absorbed as well. 1 If an electron is initially at rest before it is reached by the wave, then p ⊥ = eA/c and p x = mc(γ -1) at any time. These relations also yield p x = e 2 A 2 /2m e c 3 and imply that, as the field is over (A = 0), an electron initially at rest will be at rest again, i.e. no net acceleration is possible in a plane EM wave. Now consider the case of a monochromatic wave of frequency ω, where k = ω/c and -π/2 < θ < π/2 determines the wave polarization: for instance θ = 0 and θ = ±π/2 correspond to linear polarization (LP), while θ = ±π/4 corresponds to circular polarization (CP). This wave has infinite duration, but one may still assume the same initial conditions as above if the wave is "turned on" over an arbitrarily long rising time. One thus obtains an average drift momentum p x = e 2 A 2 /2m e c 3 (the brackets denote an average over a laser period). The trajectories (Fig. The drift velocity is v D = ca 2 0 /(a 2 0 + 4). By transforming to a frame moving with such velocity along x, the trajectories become closed. For LP the electron performs a "figure of eight" in the plane containing x and the polarization direction (Fig. The parameter a 0 introduced in Eq.( The motion in a plane wave is an useful reference case, but in most cases we have to deal with more complex field distributions, such as a laser pulse with Ponderomotive scattering of electrons by the ponderomotive force (5) of a laser pulse having finite length and width. a finite extension in space and time. At least we may assume the field to be quasi-monochromatic, i.e. to be described by A(r, t) = Re Ã(r, t)e -iωt with A(r, t) ≃ 0 and Ã(r, t) ≃ Ã(r, t), i.e. the envelope function Ã(r, t) describes the temporal variation of the field on a scale slower than the oscillation at frequency ω. The idea is to separate these different scales by writing for the position r(t) ≡ r s (t) + r o (t) where r s (t) ≃ r s (t) and r o (t) ≃ 0, i.e. r o (t) describes the fast oscillation around the slowly-moving center r s (t). In the nonrelativistic case, one obtains equations for the "slow" motion as where F p is named the ponderomotive force (PF). An extension of the PF to the relativistic regime is not straightforward. For a quasi-transverse, quasi-plane wave field one may follow the hint that the non-relativistic PF ( (where a = eA/m e c 2 ) with m eff acting as an effective, position-and timedependent mass . We remark that this expression is limited to a "semi-relativistic case", in which the average velocity |v s | ≪ c, and for smooth field profiles where transverse components are much larger than longitudinal ones (e.g. a loosely focused laser beam). While an electron is accelerated by an EM field, it also radiates EM waves when accelerated. But the "standard" equations of motion (1) do not account for the energy and momentum carried away by the radiation. For example, according to (1) an electron in an uniform and constant magnetic field performs a circular orbit at constant energy; but since the electron experiences a centripetal acceleration, it will radiate and lose energy, so that we expect the trajectory to become a spiral as if the electron was experiencing a friction force. To describe such radiation friction (RF) effects, additional terms must be added to the Lorentz force in order that the motion is self-consistent with the radiation emission. The phenomenon can also be described as the back-action of the fields generated by the electron on itself, so it is also named radiation reaction (RR). RR (or RF) is a longstanding and classic problem of classical electrodynamics. In ordinary conditions the effect is either negligible or at least it can be treated perturbatively and phenomenologically, e.g. inserting a simple friction force. The dynamics of the electron becomes strongly affected by the radiation emission when the energy of the emitted radiation is comparable to the work done on the electron by the accelerating fields ( where m e c 2 is the classical electron radius, and small terms containing the temporal derivatives of the fields have been dropped down where σ T = 8πr 2 c /3 is the Thomson cross section for the scattering of an EM wave, and S = cE × B/4π is the Poynting vector giving the energy flux of the wave (the intensity I = |S|): thus, in this limit the RR force is a drag force which describes the absorption of an amount of EM momentum proportional to the amount of EM energy subtracted from the wave and then radiated away. An exact solution for the motion in a plane EM wave exists also when the RR force The classical theory predicts that the spectrum of the radiation scattered from a relativistic electron peaks at frequencies ω rad ≃ γ 3 ω i ([9], par.14.4), where ω i is the frequency of the incident radiation (ω rad = ω i in the linear nonrelativistic regime). Thus, with increasing γ eventually the energy of a single photon ω rad m e c 2 γ, the electron energy, so that the recoil from the photon emission is not negligible and a quantum electrodynamics (QED) description becomes necessary. This is reminiscent of the well-known Compton scattering, but here the relevant regime involves the sequential absorption of very many low-frequency photons and the emission of several high-frequency photons. A QED theory of RR is still an open issue and is the subject of current research (see For a plasma of electrons and ions at high energy density, a classical approach is adequate. The most complete description of the dynamics is based on the knowledge of the distribution function f a = f a (r, p, t) which gives the density of particles in the phase space (r, p) for all species a (e.g. a = e, i for a single ion distribution). A great simplification arises from the possibility of neglecting binary collisions, since the cross section for Coulomb scattering quickly decreases with increasing particle energy. For further simplicity we neglect any process which may create or destroy particles (such as ionization, pair production, . . . ), as well as radiation friction (RF) whose inclusion will be discussed later. The total number of particles of each species is thus conserved, and the distribution function satisfies a continuity equation in the phase space (the Vlasov equation): where The coupling with Maxwell equations for the EM fields E = E(r, t) and B = B(r, t) occurs via the charge and current densities obtained from f a : The Vlasov-Maxwell system constitutes the basis for the kinetic description of laser-plasma interactions, mostly via numerical simulations based on particle-incell (PIC) codes such a high energy density plasma. Introducing the electron density n e = n e (r, t) and fluid momentum p e = p e (r, t), the cold fluid equations for electrons are with u e = p e /(m e γ e c) and γ e = (p 2 e +m 2 e c 2 ) 1/2 . Eqs.( We consider a transverse EM wave (∇•E = 0) propagating in an uniform plasma with electron density n e . The wave equation for E is given by with the current density J = -en e u e (ions are assumed as an immobile, neutralizing background). For electron velocities |u e | ≪ c, we pose γ e ≃ 1 and neglect the u e × B term, so that u e is proportional to E. This is the basis for the linear optics of a plasma (supposed to be non-magnetized), which can be described by the refractive index n = n(ω) with where ε = ε(ω) is the dielectric function, ω p = (4πe 2 n e /m e ) 1/2 is the plasma frequency and n c = m e ω 2 /4πe 2 is named the cut-off or "critical" density. Wave propagation requires n to be a real number, which occurs when the wave frequency ω < ω p or, equivalently, the plasma density n e < n c , that defines an underdense plasma which is transparent for the frequency ω. If n e > n c the plasma is overdense and reflecting. For λ L = 1 μm, n c ≃ 10 21 cm -3 which falls between the typical densities of gaseous and solid media, respectively. When the EM wave amplitude is such that a 0 1, nonlinear optical effects arise because of both the dependence of γ e on the instantaneous field and the importance of the u e × B term. Thus, the wave propagation depends on its amplitude and higher harmonics of the main frequency are generated. However, for CP there is a particular plane wave, a monochromatic solution for which u e × B = 0 and γ e = (1 + a 2 0 /2) 1/2 is constant in time (this solution is related to the case of the single particle orbits for CP described in sec.2). In this particular case, the electron equation of motion reduces to which is identical to the non-relativistic, linearized equation of motion but for the constant factor γ e that multiplies m e . Thus we immediately obtain that the wave propagation can be described by the nonlinear refractive index n NL with It should be kept in mind that, in general, a nonlinear refractive index should be used with care and that, in particular, ( We consider a EM beam propagating in a plasma along x. We assume that the beam has a standard bell-shaped profile (e.g., Gaussian), so that the intensity will be highest on the axis and decrease to zero with increasing radial distance. r ⊥ . Thus, using taking γ e = (1 + a 2 /2) 1/2 , we obtain that n NL has its highest value on the axis (r ⊥ = 0) and then decreases with increasing radial distance r ⊥ , down to the linear value Fig. Note that the first term is proportional to the beam power. Inserting numbers and recalling that a = eA/m e c 2 , one obtains the threshold power value as Fig. P T ≃ 43 GW(n c /n e ). Thus, this rough model predicts the same scaling with density and order of magnitude as the reference value P T = 17.5 GW(n c /n e ) which is obtained from a more rigorous theory Eq.( Indeed, there are two examples of "relativistic" transparency which are of practical importance and where taking n e < γ e n c as a criterion for wave propagation leads to erroneous predictions. The first is the case of wave incidence on a semi-infinite plasma with a step boundary. In the linear regime, one may assume the profile of the electron density to be unperturbed, so the problem is reduced to imposing boundary conditions at the plasma-vacuum interface which leads to Fresnel formulas ( Thus, for ultrathin targets such that l ≪ λ it is possible to have the onset of transparency even when n e > γ e n c . It is worth noticing, however, that also these models are one-dimensional, i.e. based on plane waves. Multi-dimensional effects play an important role for any realistic laser pulse with a finite transverse profile. In particular, the ponderomotive force may reduce the electron density on axis by pushing electrons away, enhancing the penetration of the laser pulse. We now focus on the interaction of a superintense laser pulse with a strongly overdense plasma (n e ≫ n c ) having a step-like density profile, e.g. n e ≃ n 0 Θ(x) with Θ(x) the Heaviside step function. This problem is relevant to experiments on the interaction of ultrashort pulses with solid targets. In the linear regime, the solution for the problem of the interaction between a plane EM wave and a medium having refractive index n and a steep interface is provided by the matching relations for the wavevectors and by Fresnel formulas for the reflection and absorption coefficients, which depend on the angle of incidence and the wave polarization. Using Actually, there are collisionless mechanisms taking place in the surface region of evanescent field (the "skin layer") which may produce a sizable absorption (see e.g. approach. However, to some extent, collisionless skin layer absorption might be included phenomenologically in the Fresnel modeling by replacing ν ei with an effective collision frequency. Indeed, at very high intensities absorption may be due to the generation of energetic electrons through a mechanism which violates a basic underlying assumption of the Fresnel modeling, i.e. that all electrons remain into the x > 0 region initially occupied by the plasma. Depending on the EM wave polarization, there can be an oscillating Lorentz force component perpendicular to the surface, so that for strong enough fields an electron can be driven from the plasma surface into the vacuum region (Fig. with θ i the incidence angle. In the a 0 sin θ i ≪ 1 limit, R ≃ 1-(4/π)a 0 sin 3 θ i / cos θ i . The magnetic component of the Lorentz force can also act as driver, so that VH may take place also for S-polarization and normal incidence generating electron bunches twice per laser cycle (since the magnetic force term has frequency 2ω). This is also refereed to as "J × B" heating, although the name comes from an earlier suggestion about the contribution of the magnetic force to absorption In addition to energy, EM field contain traslational momentum, its density being g = E × B/4πc. Thus, an idealized quasi-plane-wave "square" pulse of duration τ and transverse area Σ (Fig. where we took n = (cos θ i , sin θ i ) and the surface at x = 0. The maximum pressure of 2I/c is obtained for a perfect mirror (R = 1) at normal incidence (θ i = 0). The above relations are of classical nature, however one may also obtain the radiation pressure kinematically by describing the incident pulse as a bunch of N photons each of energy ω and momentum ( ω/c)n of which a fraction R is elastically reflected at the surface. The classical expression is recovered by the equation for the pulse/bunch energy IΣcτ = N ω. Going back to the classical description, one can also obtain the total pressure from the knowledge of the EM fields by integrating the total force per unit volume over the whole plasma, where ρ is the charge density. To test a simple case, we may assume normal incidence (θ i = 0) so that E • x = 0, and calculate the fields inside the plasma in the linear limit by using Fresnel formulas with n given by ( the electrons in the region of evanescent fields, a charge depletion layer is created at the surface with an electrostatic field which back-hold electrons and exerts a force on ions in the inward direction. This situation is evidence in Fig. By applying the same kinematics leading to Eq.( We thus expect that (referring to the two-dimensional, plane wave geometry of Fig. If the plasma is homogeneous along y, the current j y produces no charge separation and thus no electrostatic field. Indeed, j y generates a magnetic field B z which, while growing in time, induces an electric field E y which counteracts the ponderomotive action. However, the evanescence lengths of F py and E y are different, so that the ponderomotive and electric forces cannot balance locally and a double layer of current is generated, which leads to a B z localized in the skin layer. For an incident EM wave with flat-top profile, i.e. having constant intensity I = I 0 for 0 ≤ t < τ L , both j y and B z are found to grow linearly in time until t = τ L with the maximum value of B z at the time t being where a 0 = I 0 /m e n c c 3 and B L are the dimensionless and magnetic field amplitudes, respectively, of the incident wave. Intense laser pulses (a 0 ≫ 1) can yield high absorption and low reflectivities down to R ≃ 0.5, so that the amplitude of the slowly-varying field B z may approach that of the laser field B L , i.e. ≃ 10 9 Gauss for a 0 ∼ 10. The picture of "vacuum heating" presented in sec.5.1, in which electrons are periodically dragged out of and back into the plasma, is oversimplified. In reality the oscillating components of the Lorentz force drive a collective oscillation of the electron density profile (with the high energy electron bunches being related to the partial "breaking" of such oscillations). We may thus assume that the n e = n c surface oscillates back and forth under the action of the Lorentz force. Thus, the incident laser pulse is reflected from a surface whose position oscillates either at the same frequency of the laser, or twice that value depending on the incidence angle and polarization. If we consider instead the action of the timeaveraged force, i.e. of radiation pressure, the n e = n c surface is pushed inwards, so we have reflection from a surface moving along the propagation direction. The relativistic moving mirror model is able to explain (at least qualitatively) basic features of both the above mentioned scenarios, which are relevant to important applications of superintense interaction with overdense plasmas (e.g. solid targets). It is thus worth to review here some basic relations of reflection from a moving mirror. For brevity and simplicity we consider normal incidence only and we assume a "perfect" mirror whose reflectivity R = 1 in its rest frame. Let the mirror move with velocity V = V x and an EM plane wave of frequency ω, field amplitude Fig. E i and intensity I = (c/4π)E 2 i be incident from the x < X m side, where X m is the mirror position (Fig. The laws of reflection are known in the rest frame of the mirror (L ′ ): the EM wave is reflected with inversion of both the wavevector and the electric field and no change of frequency. Thus we can obtain the frequency ω r and the amplitude E r of the reflected wave in the lab frame (L) by a first Lorentz transformation of the incident wave from L to L ′ , and then by a second transformation of the reflected wave from L ′ to L. The result is where β = V /c. Thus, if V > 0, i.e. if the EM wave propagates in the same direction as the mirror velocity, the frequency is "red-shifted" towards lower values and the amplitude is also lower than for the incident pulse. If V < 0, i.e. if the wave is counterpropagating with respect to the mirror, "blue-shift" and amplitude increase occur. In the highly relativistic limit (β → 1) notice that The above relations might also be found by noticing that, for normal incidence (and thus the electric field parallel to the mirror surface) the boundary condition E ′ (x ′ = X ′ m ) for a perfect mirror at rest in L ′ corresponds to A(x = X m ) = 0 in L for arbitrary motion X m = X m (t), as can be easily demonstrated via a Lorentz transformation and the relations between A, E and B. Thus, by posing where k = ω/c and k r = ω r /c, Eqs.( If we consider an incident pulse of long but finite duration τ , such as the "square" packet in Fig. Now suppose the perfect mirror performs an oscillatory motion, X m = X 0 sin Ωt. To find the reflected field we can use again the condition A(x = X m , t) = 0 and thus write, e.g., from which we obtain, using some math, that the temporal dependence of the reflected pulse is where the J n 's are Bessel functions. Thus, the reflected wave contains a mixing of ω, the frequency of the incident wave, with integer harmonics of the mirror frequency, Ω. An intense laser pulse of frequency ω drives oscillations of the surface of an overdense plasma at frequency ω or 2ω depending on the angle of incidence and the polarization (Fig. where dX m /dt = β m c and t r = t -X m /c. In (29) σ is the mass per unit area of the mirror, so that when referring to an oscillating plasma surface we might roughly estimate σ ≃ m e n e l s with l s the evanescence length (ions are assumed to be at rest). Eq.( Now assume a thin plane mirror of mass density ρ m and thickness l, and a plane wave pulse I = I(t) at normal incidence and with circular polarization so that there are no oscillating components. The mirror is thus accelerated by radiation pressure according to the equation of motion which we name the light sail (LS) equation. As we consider the acceleration of the foil as a whole where F can be estimated as a function of the average intensity I and pulse duration τ , We thus see that present-day femtosecond lasers having τ ∼ 10(2π/ω) and a 0 ∼ 10 are in principle able to accelerate ultrathin targets up to γ m -1 0.1, which corresponds to an energy per nucleon exceeding 100 MeV, while future lasers yielding a 0 ∼ 10 2 could drive relativistic GeV nuclei. In addition, LS acceleration becomes more efficient with increasing speed, the mechanical efficiency η mec (ratio of sail energy E LS over driver pulse energy Iτ , all defined per unit surface) being This relation can be obtained from Eq.( The efficiency of LS acceleration is what makes it attractive for interstellar propulsion of probes from Earth Instability is maybe the word which is more frequently associated to plasma, the obvious reason being that the main obstacle to achieving controlled fusion is that a plasma tends to become unstable in several ways, quickly destroying the desired configuration. The basic laser-plasma interaction processes we reviewed so far (as well as other we did not include) may also lead to, or be affected by instabilities. For example, a laser pulse greatly exceeding the power threshold for relativistic self-focusing may break up in multiple filaments, especially if its intensity distribution is not smooth. As another example, the high-energy electrons produced by laser-plasma interactions typically lead to an anisotropical distribution function which is unstable against electromagnetic perturbations (Weibel instability): the growth of the latter act to deviate particle trajectories in order to create a more isotropic distribution. In the context of laser-plasma interactions one also encounters nonlinear processes where a strong "pump" mode having frequency ω 0 and wavevector k 0 , such as e.g. an intense laser pulse propagating in the plasma or an high amplitude plasma wave, excites two (or more) "daughter" plasma modes whose frequencies and wavevectors are related by the phase matching relations ω 0 = ω 1 + ω 2 and k 0 = k 1 + k 2 . These processes are referred to as parametric instabilities since the daughter modes may also grow at high amplitude at a rate typically proportional to the amplitude of the pump mode. An example is Raman backscattering with corresponds to a laser wave exciting a plasma wave and an EM wave in the backward direction, which can lead to strong reflection from a low density plasma. Covering all the possible instabilities in the laser-plasma scenario is much beyond the limits and scope of the present paper, thus we just give some further detail on instabilities affecting the dynamics of the moving mirror dynamics outlined in Section 6. The plasma surface oscillating under the action of the Lorentz force has been found in simulations to develop ripples which also oscillate at half the driving frequency For a sinusoidal perturbation of wavevector k RT , the RTI growth rate is given by (see e.g. where a = |g| in the case of the gravitational RTI. The case of a plasma surface accelerated by radiation pressure can be viewed as a massless fluid of photons pushing a heavy material fluid, and it is thus unstable with a rate γ RT = (ak RT ) 1/2 . RTI also occurs for a thin interface layer separating two fluids of different pressures, which matches closely the LS scenario where the target is placed between the photon fluid and vacuum. The growth rate of such RTI, for non-relativistic dynamics, has the same form as the preceding formula with a = (2I/ρlc) The fact that an EM wave carries energy and momentum becomes very eyecatching for superintense laser pulses which, as we saw in the preceding section, can heat matter to extremely high temperatures and accelerate a quite macroscopic object to velocities approaching the speed of light. An EM wave with CP also carries angular momentum which, when absorbed by a sample of matter, may cause its rotation. For a CP laser beam of frequency ω, propagating along x and having a radial intensity profile I(r), the density of angular momentum along the x-direction is where g is the density of traslational momentum (sec.5.2). Notice that for a standard bell-shaped profile L x peaks at the edge of the beam. The total angular momentum L x is proportional to the power P of the beam, We have seen in sec.6 than in the reflection from a perfect mirror an EM wave delivers twice of its traslational momentum, and that if the mirror moves at relativistic velocities most of the EM wave energy is converted into mechanical energy of the mirror. However, it can be shown that no momentum is transferred to the mirror. The reasoning is very simple by taking a quantum point of view: the value of the "spin" angular momentum of a photon is , independently of the frequency, and in the reflection the spin is not reversed while the number of photons is conserved for a perfect mirror, so there is no net absorption of angular momentum. In general, absorption of EM angular momentum requires a dissipative mechanism which "destroys" part of the incident photons. At moderate intensities such mechanism is provided by collisions The angular momentum of a laser beam is directly absorbed by the electrons, and the associated torque drives an azimuthal electron current. In turn, this current generates an axial magnetic field: this is known as the inverse Faraday effect (IFE) even if this is somewhat a misnomer. Even with a steady absorption, the axial field cannot grow indefinitely since it is accompanied by the induction of a solenoidal electric field that counteracts the electron rotation and exerts a torque on ions, which ultimately absorb most of the angular momentum. The mechanism is thus similar to that leading to the absorption of transverse momentum (sec.5.3). The scaling of the peak magnetic field on axis B ax with laser and plasma parameters is found to be where η is the absorbed fraction of the laser energy, L is the length over which absorption occurs, B 0 = m e cω/e and other parameters are as previously defined. Notice that B 0 a 0 = B L , the magnetic field amplitude of the laser pulse. Simulations with radiation friction included In fact, in classical electrodynamics the ratio between the amount of energy and of momentum modulus in a wavepacket is c, thus this relation must be conserved if the wavepacket is totally absorbed by a medium. In a quantum picture, one may think of the absorption of a given number of photons, each having energy E = ω and momentum modulus E /c. We stress that we define the PF as a cycle-averaged approximation of the Lorentz force. However, in the literature sometimes the term "oscillating PF" has been used This estimate for the electron energy is commonly refereed to as "ponderomotive scaling"; probably, the name originates from the questionable definition of nonlinear oscillating forces as "ponderomotive" (sec.2.2). This is analogous to the absence of high-frequency longitudinal motion in a CP wave, sec.2.1. Note that ρml in Eq.(30) is formally equivalent to σ in Eq.(29), but here in (30) ρml refers to the total mass of the mirror, i.e. including the ions. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday wave