Time-resolved spontaneous Raman spectroscopy serves as a probe for incoherent quasiparticle and collective excitation dynamics, and allows to distinguish symmetry changes across a photoinduced phase transition through the inelastic light scattering selection rules. Largely unexplored is the role of the Raman resonance enhancement in the time-domain, and the transient interaction between scattering from quasiparticles and collective excitations, with the latter interaction leading to a Fano interference. In this work, we report on the observation of a phonon Raman tensor quench and Fano interference after strong photoexcitation of an intrinsic semiconductor. We observed a dynamic phonon scattering rate asymmetry and spectral asymmetry through simultaneous detection of both the anti-Stokes and Stokes response. The asymmetric phonon scattering rate is ascribed to the combined effect of the transient phonon population and the reduction of the phonon Raman tensor resulting from the photoexcited hole population. This same hole population results in a strong enhancement of the Fano spectral asymmetry. A quantum-mechanical description of the nature and transport properties of the various quasiparticles and collective excitations in semiconductors is integral to characterizing the physical properties of a wide array of technologically relevant materials. Over the past four decades, a range of ultrafast spectroscopic probes have provided us insight into carrier and phonon relaxation dynamics and their respective timescales in semiconductors. Time-resolved spontaneous Raman scattering is a reasonably well-established probe for incohorent phonon population dynamics in semiconductors, for incoming electric field ÊI and scattered field ÊS entail the symmetry A of the Raman-scattering channel χ A . Here we demonstrate a photo-induced resonance quench, and Fano-interference in the transient phononic and electronic spontaneous Raman response of an intrinsic indirect band gap semiconductor. An intrinsic (100) oriented silicon sample (resistivity >10000 Ω• cm) was used for the experiments. Time-resolved Raman scattering experiments were performed using a 740 nm optical pump pulse with a temporal width of 0.3 ps. The transient Raman spectra are recorded in a backscattering geometry using a 512 nm, 1.5 ps probe pulse. Figure The spectra from Fig. and for the Stokes and anti-Stokes response, respectively. and for Stokes and anti-Stokes scattering, respectively. Here T , α and η are the transmission coefficient, absorption coefficient and refractive index at the corresponding photon energies. These optical constants and the Raman tensor are strongly resonance dependent, and usually depend on temperature, which complicates the determination of phonon population based on the above formula. However, as demonstrated in Ref. 34, these correction factors are close to unity well below the resonance energy (3.45 eV). As such, the following relation holds: Using this relation and formula ( A more likely scenario for the observed decrease in scattering strength F • χ 2 arises from the resonant nature of the Raman scattering in silicon at the Raman probe excitation energies used in this study. The scattering is resonant to vertical transitions from the topmost valence band to the lowest conduction band in the Γ -L direction in the Brillouin zone, and is thereby proportional to charge population. We now turn to the line shape of the phonon response, and hole dynamics. Fano interference between the optical phonon and the electronic hole continuum in p-doped silicon is expected to be weak for the 512 nm probe wavelength. where q is the so-called Fano parameter which is inversely proportional to the spectral density of the electronic continuum, and = 2(ω -ω 0 )/Γ with ω 0 the bare phonon frequency, and Γ the line width parameter, which apart from the bare phonon part, has a contribution due to the Fano interference proportional to the spectral density of the electronic continuum. This project was partially financed by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through SFB-1238 project B05, and instrument grant INST217/782-1. We gratefully acknowledge fruitful discussions with Daniele Fausti. R. B. V. acknowledges partial funding through the Bonn-Cologne Graduate School of Physics and Astronomy (BCGS). J. Z. and R. B. V. contributed equally to this work.