Nanoscale confinement of charge carriers gives rise to a rich variety of physical phenomena that are not present in bulk materials, and lies at the heart of many modern optoelectronic applications Charge carriers can be confined in three dimensions (0D quantum dots Recently, 2D materials and its heterostructures have emerged as a promising platform for electronic and optoelectronic applications However, few-layer 2D materials also form natural QWs -van der Waals QWs -where charge carriers are confined to the nanoscale in one dimension and it is therefore natural to expect intersubband transitions to occur. Cross-section TEM images of van der Waals heterostructures have demonstrated defect free and atomically sharp interfaces Here, we introduce the concept of intersubband transitions in van der Waals quantum wells, report their first experimental observation, and provide detailed theoretical calculations. We probe the transitions between the quantized states within both the valence and the conduction band by investigating the MIR optical response of doped TMDs. The TMDs were exfoliated on a Si/HfO2 substrate -specifically chosen to avoid contributions from substrate phonons -and electron or hole doping was induced by applying a gate voltage between Si and TMD. Each investigated flake comprised several terraces of different layer number N, where charge carriers are quantum confined in the out-of-plane direction within the TMD flake, as illustrated in Figure First, we lay the theoretical framework for intersubband transitions in van der Waals QWs. Figure ( This fits very well with the transition energies obtained from the DFT results, shown in Figures Waals quantum wells. We specifically chose exfoliated TMD flakes consisting of terraces (see Figure Importantly, the hot spot -of about 20 nm in diameter -contains out-of-plane polarization components and can therefore excite intersubband transitions inside the TMD flake. We collect the light scattered back by the tip, which carries (quantitative) information about the sample's complex permittivity and thus its absorption at the illumination photon energy Eph. This allows us to spatially resolve intersubband transitions with an unprecedented resolution of 20 nm and a sensitivity high enough to detect the intersubband transition of a single electron (on average) under the AFM tip. By combining interferometric and tip-modulated detection (Figure In order to isolate the absorption signal of intersubband transitions from background Since the charge carriers induced by the applied VBG are confined within a single atomic layer, the absorption due to free charge carriers is much higher than in the few-layer regions, where the same number of charge carriers is distributed over several layers (see SI chapter V). Thus, the relative contribution of Drude absorption is larger in the monolayer region. To corroborate our interpretation, we spectrally resolve the intersubband resonances by changing Eph in small steps. We average the recorded optical signals s3 over the areas of the flake with a constant thickness. Due to the interferometric detection, s3 is a complex signal and allows us to recover both the real and imaginary part of the relative permittivity of WSe2, εWSe2, by using a thin-film inversion model (see SI chapter III) We proceed with discussing the linewidth of the intersubband transitions. As 2D materials have atomically smooth surfaces, we expect that the linewidth of van der Waals quantum wells is not significantly broadened by interface roughness scattering, which is the dominant broadening mechanism in III-V semiconductor quantum wells ] max {ε F , k B Tlog2} , where m1 and m2 are the inplane masses in the first and second subband respectively, m j -1 = m xy -1 (1 , where the difference is determined by the non-parabolicity in the dispersion of holes in the bulk crystal, ε F is the Fermi energy, kB Boltzmann's constant and T the temperature (see SI chapter II for more details). The measured linewidth of Г = 33 meV is larger than these theoretical estimates for the intrinsic linewidth. An additional broadening mechanism in our experiment stems from the sharpness of the AFM tip, providing momentum for non-vertical transitions. In order to quantify this, we examine in more detail the hot spot around the AFM tip apex that excites intersubband transitions. The in-plane momenta contributing to the near-field coupling are given by a broad Bell shaped function (see SI chapter II) peaking at a k-vector that is inversely related to the tip curvature Calculations for this tip radius yield Г = 24 meV (Figure Another key signature of intersubband transitions is the dependence of the sheet absorption α on the carrier density n2D. α is typically obtained in far-field absorption measurements We further demonstrate the versatility of 2D materials by ambipolar electrical control of intersubband transitions in the valence and conduction bands. We tune the carrier density from the p-doped to the n-doped regime and observe intersubband transitions in both cases. Interestingly, at Eph = 117 meV, these transitions occur for different layer thicknesses. As we have seen before, we observe hole intersubband transitions in the N = 5 area of the flake (Figure In conclusion, we reported the first experimental observation of intersubband transitions in few-layer WSe2 crystals with spatially and spectrally resolved measurements supported by detailed ab-initio calculations. The obtained spatial resolution of 20 nm cannot be obtained by classical far-field measurements. Intersubband transitions are not unique to WSe2; they can be found in any gapped 2D material (see SI chapter VIII for similar measurements on MoS2). This study represents a first step into a vast, unexplored field. In a future study, the role of disorder and manybody interactions needs to be investigated more thoroughly in order to provide conclusions on the intrinsic linewidth. Recently, wafer-scale multilayer TMD flakes have become commercially available and progress is being made to reduce the defect density in these large area films Figure 