Light-induced instabilities/degradation in Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) solar cells are a prevalent and urgent issue to resolve to improve performance, uniformity, and reliability. Here, mechanisms contributing to light-induced instabilities are identified focusing on an observed short circuit current (JSC) reduction. External quantum efficiency measurements before and after light soaking identified a reduction in long wavelength photon carrier collection efficiency in the CIGS absorber layer. Using deep level optical spectroscopy (DLOS), the concentration of CIGS EV+0.98 eV deep level is correlated with the amount of JSC degradation, Finally, capacitance voltage (C-V) measurements reveal light induces a large reduction in the depletion depth and reduction of carrier collection and are all correlated with the JSC reduction. Finally, the EV+0.53 eV trap concentrations are shown to correlate with VOC instability but not the JSC reduction confirming that multiple trap-induced mechanism are responsible for the light-induced instabilities. CIGS is an established absorber material for thin-film solar cells due to its high optical absorption, tunable bandgap, and low manufacturing cost In this study, three CIGS solar cells with varying degrees of instability grown by Solibro Research AB were used. First, Mo metal back contacts were deposited on a soda lime glass substrate and then the CIGS absorber layer was deposited by a 2-stage vacuum co-evaporation process. Then the CdS buffer layer was deposited by chemical bath deposition. The front contact was formed by sputtering intrinsic ZnO (IZO) and Al-doped ZnO (AZO) layers. The cells were characterized then ~1 mm 2 sub-cells were physically circumscribed to provide devices with suitable capacitance for the capacitance-based measurements. To understand and identify the role of deep traps responsible for the light-induced JSC degradation, capacitancevoltage (C-V) profiling and deep level transient and optical spectroscopies (DLTS/DLOS) were all performed with external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. The DLTS transients were analyzed using the double boxcar method with rate windows from 0.8 to 2000 s -1 , and the equipment and additional details are described in Ref. 8. For the DLTS and DLOS measurements, the traps were filled with 10 ms and 10 s with +0.4 V pulses, respectively, and the trap emission was recorded at -1.0 V. The DLOS capacitance transients were recorded for 350 s at room temperature with monochromatic light incident with photon energies from 0.5 to 1.4 eV in 0.02 eV steps. C-V measurements were performed using a Boonton 7200 capacitance meter and the net doping profiles (N) were calculated using where A is the device area, εs is the permittivity, and q is the elementary charge. Table To understand the JSC reduction likely due to the trapinduced depletion depth changes, C-V measurements were performed: in the dark to maintain the equilibrium trap occupancy (e.g. traps filled with holes), and with 1.3 eV illumination light to empty all traps in the bandgap. Because the monochromatic light intensity (~10 14 -10 15 photons/cm 2 /s) is much less than the typical above bandgap solar spectra, any changes observed under this illumination will also be observed under normal solar cell operation. From the C-V measurements, the carrier concentration vs. depth was extracted The DLOS measurements in Fig. To complete the defect study throughout the CIGS bandgap, DLTS measurements were performed. Fig. CIGS samples subjected to light soaking results in changes in solar cell performance that are correlated with the EV+0.98 eV level in the case of the observed JSC reduction and EV+0.53 eV level for the VOC changes. The JSC reduction results from loss of carrier collection in the CIGS layer where the EV+0.98 eV level causes a large reduction in the depletion depth when light above 1.0 eV is incident on the sample (i.e. normal solar cell conditions), which is the likely source of the JSC reduction. On the other hand, the VOC change is correlated with the concentration of the near mid-gap EV+0.53 eV level, which may be an efficient recombination center. This suggests there is indeed more than one mechanism for the light-soaking-induced changes in cell performance and reducing the concentration of these two deep levels would help mitigate the light-soaking induced JSC and VOC instabilities. 