Low thermal conductance of metal contacts is one of the main challenges in thermal management of nanoscale devices of graphene and other 2D materials. Previous attempts to search for metal contacts with high thermal conductance yielded limited success due to incomplete understanding of the origins of the low thermal conductance. In this paper, we carefully study the intrinsic thermal conductance across metal/graphene/metal interfaces to identify the heat transport mechanisms across graphene interfaces. We find that unlike metal contacts on diamond, the intrinsic thermal conductance of most graphene interfaces (except Ti and TiNx) is only  50 % of the phonon radiation limit, suggesting that heat is carried across graphene interfaces mainly through elastic transmission of phonons. We thus propose a convenient approach to substantially enhance the phononic heat transport across metal contacts on graphene, by better matching the energy of phonons in metals and graphene, e.g., using metallic nitrides. We test the idea with TiNx, with phonon frequencies of up to 1.18×10 14 rad/s, 47 % of the highest phonon frequencies in graphene of 2.51×10 14 rad/s . Interestingly, we obtain a huge thermal conductance of 270 MW m -2 K -1 for TiNx/graphene interfaces, which is  140 % of the phonon radiation limit. The huge thermal conductance could be partially attributed to inelastic phonon transport across the TiNx/graphene interface. Our work provide guidance for the search for good metal contacts on 2D materials and devices. Effective thermal management is a recurrent challenge for graphene-based devices, especially when the devices operate under a high electric field with a high current density. Up to now, prior reported measurements of the thermal conductance of metal/graphene interfaces are relatively low. (The thermal conductance of most metal contacts One of the reasons contributing to the failure to find metals that make excellent thermal contacts with graphene is lack of in-depth knowledge of the intrinsic heat transport across graphene interfaces. For example, up to now, it is still unclear whether the low thermal conductance of graphene interfaces is due to a large disparity in phonon energy in graphene and metals, Particularly, it is crucial to minimize the amounts of extrinsic defects (e.g., voids and polymer residues) at graphene interfaces, which are inevitably present after graphene transfer but could further impede the interfacial heat transport. Through our prior careful work on Al/graphene/Cu interfaces, we demonstrated that the thermal conductance of interfaces of transferred graphene only approaches the intrinsic values if graphene conforms to the substrates (no voids) and if the amount of polymer residues is sufficiently small. Our samples comprise of transferred graphene sandwiched between two layers of metal films on GaN/sapphire substrates, see Figure We ensure that our graphene is pristine and the interfaces are intrinsic by carefully characterizing our samples by Raman spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM). We apply Raman spectroscopy to examine the quality of the graphene after thermal or e-beam evaporation of metals, see Figure We measure the thermal conductance (GM/G/M) of metal/graphene/metal interfaces (M/G/M, where G denotes graphene and M denotes the metals) by time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR); details of our implementation are discussed in Methods and our previous papers. In Figure For comparison, we also include prior reported thermal conductance of graphene interfaces, including Au/G/SiO2 7 , Al/G/Cu 10 , Al/G/SiO2 12 , Ti/G/ SiO2 8 , Pd/G/Pd We find that for the Au/G/Au and Ag/G/Ag samples, the thermal conductances are relatively low and comparable to prior reported thermal conductance of interfaces of graphene To gain more insights to the thermal transport mechanisms across graphene interfaces and thus understand the origins of the huge GTiNx/G, we compile our measurements and prior reported thermal conductance measurements (Gexp) for a wide range of metal/graphene (blue symbols We first notice in Figure Interestingly, we observe that for most compiled Gexp, the GM/G of graphene interfaces is mostly larger than G of metal/graphite interfaces, see Figure We compare the experimental thermal conductance to the calculations of the phonon radiation limit (eq 3) in Figure Since the transmission is elastic, the transmission probability of phonons from metals to graphene is limited by rad in eq 2 in Methods. rad and thus Grad could be optimized by matching phonon flux in graphene, hG(), to phonon flux in metal, hM(), over a wide range of phonon frequency. (The definition and discussion on rad, hG() and hM() are given in Methods.) This can be achieved by ensuring that the phonon dispersions of graphene and metal are similar, see Figure Next, we examine the role of interfacial binding strength by plotting the ratios of the thermal conductance measurements to the calculations of the corresponding phonon radiation limit, Gexp / Grad, as a function of the interfacial binding energy Eb of graphene interfaces in Figure Interesting, we find that, contrary to other metals, Gexp / Grad exceeds 1 for Ti and TiNx. The fact that Gexp / Grad > 1 suggests the existence of an additional channel for heat transport across the interfaces, supplementary to the elastic phonon transmission considered in the phonon radiation limit. One possible mechanism is sizeable inelastic heat transport across the interfaces, which is well accepted as the dominant heat transport across interfaces of diamonds. In conclusion, we demonstrate a simple approach to enhance the phononic heat transport across metal/graphene interfaces, through a better match of phonon energy in the metals and graphene. The approach leads us to a huge thermal conductance for metallic TiNx contacts on graphene. Interestingly, the thermal conductance of TiNx/graphene interface is larger than the phonon radiation limit, suggesting inelastic phonon transmission could partially contribute to heat transfer across the interface. Our work also advances the understanding on the mechanisms of heat transport across graphene interfaces. For our samples, we choose GaN/sapphire with high thermal conductivity as the substrate to improve the accuracy of our thermal measurements. For the Raman spectroscopy measurements, we first deposited a thin metal (Au, Ag or TiNx) film (5 -10 nm) on graphene/SiO2 by thermal or e-beam evaporation. We then measured the Raman spectra of the metal/graphene/SiO2 samples using a home-built Raman system with a are red shifted to 1606 -1615 cm -1 , and from the magnitude of this shift, we estimate that a carrier concentration We quantify the conformity of graphene to the substrates from the AFM topographic images, see ref 10 for the details. To do so, we obtain the relative height h from the depth histogram in Figure We conduct our TDTR measurements using a home-built setup; a schematic diagram of our setup is included in ref 25. For the samples coated with Au and TiNx, the TDTR measurements were performed using a 5 objective lens with 1/e 2 radii of 10.2 μm and a laser power of < 600 mW, to limit the steady state temperature rise to  10 K. For the samples coated with Ag, however, we need to increase the steady state temperature rise to  20 K due to the relatively weak dR/dT of Ag. We thus used a 10 objective lens with 1/e 2 radii of 5.1 μm and a total laser power of 400 mW. Following a method We derive GM/G/M by comparing the ratio of in-phase and out-of-phase signals of TDTR measurements to calculations of a thermal model. The phonon radiation limit of metal/graphene interfaces can be estimated from the properties of the metal (Cj(ω) and νj(ω)) and the transmission probability from the metal to graphene rad() using eq 2b is a result of the detailed balance of phonon transmission across the interfaces. Here, hG() and hM() = ∑ ν j (ω) D j (ω) / 4 j are phonon flux from the graphene side and the metal side, respectively. hG() and hM() are sometimes called vDOS in the literature, Note that hG() is the phonon flux in graphite, and eq 3 is an integration to the highest phonon frequency in the metal, max. In the implementation, we approximate hG() using an anisotropic model with truncated linear dispersion of graphite; refer to ref 39 for the details of the anisotropic model. For Au, Ag, Pd, Al, Ni, Cr, we approximate max from the average values of the maximum phonon frequencies of longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonons along [001], [011] and [111] directions. For Ti and TiNx, we include optical phonons in the calculations since the velocity of optical phonons is considerable, and thus derive max from the maximum frequencies of optical phonons. For amorphous SiO2, we approximate max from the Debye cutoff frequency of LA branch, , where v L is the speed of sound of LA phonons, n is the atom density of SiO2. For h G (ω), readers are referred to ref 39 for details. The phonon flux from the metal side is Substitute eq S6 into eq S5, we get the radiation limit of metal/graphene interface, Therefore, the phonon radiation limit Grad only depends on the highest frequency of phonons, ωmax,L, and not on other properties of metals. transmission probability αrad is determined with eq 2b for the all phonons. Case 2 (red solid circles), full calculation, transmission probability is restricted to α rad ≤ 1 by both eq 2a and eq 2b. When h G (ω)/h M (ω) > 1, eq 3 cannot be used to determine the radiation limit, Grad of metal graphene interface. However, Figures S2 shows that error of these two cases is generally less than 10 % for all the metal/graphene interfaces we consider in this paper. The number of phonons with hG() < hM() is negligible compared to the total amount of phonons. Therefore, we employ eq 3 for all our analysis in this work. and eq 2b, Pd (pink), Au (green), Ag (blue) and TiNx (red). The transmission probability for TiNx/graphene interface shows two characteristics: (1) rad is generally higher for low-frequency phonons; (2) more high-frequency phonons could transmit to graphene. These two characteristics could contribute to higher thermal conductance of TiNx/graphene compared to other metal/graphene interfaces. M/G/M interfaces, black symbols represent Gexp of single M/G interfaces derived from M/G/SiO2 interfaces, red symbols represent Gexp of metal/HOPG interfaces, and the purple symbol represents Gexp of graphene/SiO2 interface. We reestimate the uncertainties of some measurements from refs 8 and 22. (b) Comparison of the experimental thermal conductance