The ability to gate-induce superconductivity by electrostatic charge accumulation is a recent breakthrough in physics and nano-electronics. With the exception of LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 interfaces, experiments on gate-induced superconductors have been largely confined to resistance measurements, which provide very limited information about the superconducting state. Here, we explore gate-induced superconductivity in MoS 2 by performing tunneling spectroscopy to determine the energy-dependent density of states (DOS) for different levels of electron density n. In the superconducting state, the DOS is strongly suppressed at energy smaller than the gap, , which is maximum ( ~ 2 meV) for n of ~ 10 14 cm -2 and decreases monotonously for larger n. A perpendicular magnetic field B generates states at E <  that fill the gap, but a 20% DOS suppression of superconducting origin unexpectedly persists much above the transport critical field. Conversely, an inplane field up to 10 T leaves the DOS entirely unchanged. Our measurements exclude that the superconducting state in MoS 2 is fully gapped and reveal the presence of a DOS that vanishes linearly with energy, the explanation of which requires going beyond a conventional, purely phonon-driven Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer mechanism. The observation of a transition to a zero-resistance state signals the occurrence of superconductivity but provides virtually no information about the microscopic nature of the superconducting state, whose determination is complex and requires the combination of multiple experimental probes. Among these, the use of tunneling spectroscopy to probe the energydependent density of states (DOS) has traditionally played a central role. For instance, shortly after the appearance of the BCS paper on superconductivity 1 , Giaever's measurements on Al, Sn and In tunnel junctions Starting with LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 interfaces Several of these systems are van der Waals bonded layered compounds in which superconductivity has been induced using ionic liquid gated transistors To perform tunneling spectroscopy of gate-induced superconductivity, we exploit nanofabricated devices based on van der Waals heterostructures The key advantage of the configuration shown in Fig. At the lowest temperature of our measurements (either 1.5 K or 250 mK, depending on the cryostat used), the "vertical" differential conductance exhibits a pronounced low-energy suppression, whose magnitude decreases as the temperature is increased, and disappears for T T c > ~, the critical temperature determined by the resistive transition (defined as the temperature for which the measured resistance is 95% of the normal state value). This behavior, originating from the suppressed DOS in the superconducting state, is illustrated in Fig. We measured the tunneling conductance of 5 devices cooled down multiple times with different applied gate voltage, to investigate accumulation layers with electron density in the range between n ~ 1• 10 14 cm -2 and n ~ 5• 10 14 cm -2 . The measurements exhibit common features, already visible in Fig. These features result from a systematic behavior that we identify by plotting quantities measured on devices gate-biased at different values of electron density n, as a function of reduced variables (eV/ and T/T c ). Fig. The observed systematic trends rule out that the low-energy (i.e., E < 0.5 ∆ ) tunneling conductance is strongly affected by inhomogeneity in electron density, whose presence is virtually unavoidable in ionic liquid gated transistor at low temperature Fig. The dependence of  on n follows that of T c , albeit with larger fluctuations (see Fig. We discuss the evolution of the tunneling conductance in a magnetic field B, starting from the case of field applied perpendicularly to the MoS 2 surface. The tunneling conductance of two different devices measured at increasing values of B is shown in Fig. • 10 14 cm -2 ). In the T c ~ 10 K device, the magnetic field mainly causes the appearance of lowenergy states, affecting weakly the energy scale below which the DOS is suppressed -i.e., the gap (see Fig. This unexpected behavior was observed in all devices investigated. The results are summarized in Fig. If this relation is valid at all, our data would indicate that ξ is much shorter than anticipated. However, since our observations are not expected within a conventional Ginzburg-Landau scheme, it will be essential to first understand the microscopic nature of the observed phenomenon -with coexisting finite resistivity and superconducting correlations-before making any quantitative estimate. Examples of possible scenarios that should be considered to understand our observations are the quantum metal state recently discussed in thin NbSe 2 crystals 27 , or motion of flux quanta causing the superconducting phase stiffness to vanish When the magnetic field is applied parallel to the MoS 2 surface, the DOS remains unchanged. This is shown in Fig. Tunneling spectroscopy, however, provides more information because it shows directly that the in-plane magnetic field does not change the DOS anywhere on the Fermi surface. The results of our tunneling spectroscopy measurements provide new information on the nature of the gate-induced superconducting state. In particular, finding that the low-bias (eV/ < 0.5) tunneling conductance measurements coincide when plotted as a function of eV/ irrespective of the value of n (Fig. The observed low-energy DOS suggests that understanding the gate-induced superconducting state in MoS 2 will require going beyond a conventional, purely phonon driven BCS mechanism. More work will be needed, and it is useful to look at theoretical studies analyzing gate-induced superconductivity in mono or bilayers of MoS 2 (and in other semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides) that have recently appeared in the literature In the main text we have presented all the key experimental observations made in our tunneling spectroscopy experiments and in this supplementary information we address a variety of issues that could not be discussed in the main text in full detail. As for what regards more technical aspects, we describe the device fabrication, and comment extensively on specific parts that proved to be important to improve the spatial homogeneity of carrier density. We also provide the technical specifications of the cryogenic systems employed in the experiments and discuss details of the electrical measurements. In the second part we address a number of points relevant for the interpretation of our data. We compare the tunneling conductance to calculations based on the DOS expected for a fully gapped superconductor and show that they cannot reproduce our observations. We also discuss -and exclude-some possible artifacts that could a priori affect the results of our tunneling spectroscopy, namely the effect of "pinholes" that could be present in the part of MoS 2 acting as tunnel barrier. Finally, we show I-V curves of the accumulation layer that indicate the 2D nature of the superconducting state. The devices discussed in the main text, used to perform tunneling spectroscopy on the gate-induced superconducting accumulation layer at the surface of MoS 2 , were realized by a combination of conventional nano-fabrication techniques and of techniques that have been developed over the last few years to assemble so-called van der Waals heterostructures. The multilayer graphene (MLG) tunneling electrodes are defined by oxygen plasma etching of large flakes that are mechanically exfoliated from graphite onto a Si/SiO 2 substrate. Fig. In our earlier work on gate-induced superconductivity in WS 2 As our work on tunneling spectroscopy progressed, we managed to improve the situation. Specifically, we succeeded in decreasing the carrier density inhomogeneity and in minimizing the detaching of the frozen liquid. We found that two specific aspects of the device configuration and fabrication process have an important influence. The first concerns a so-called "PMMA window" that we used in the past to define the active part of the device (see Fig. There are two possible reasons why removing the PMMA window has such a beneficial effect. The first is that confining the frozen liquid and making the substrate surface non-planar is a dominant cause of mechanical stress, whose relaxation causes the frozen liquid to detach from the surface. The second is that using a PMMA window impedes any successive thermal annealing process (or solvent cleaning process). It follows that a much larger density of polymeric residues is present on devices in which a PMMA window is used. As these residues can strongly affect adhesion to the substrate, their presence may be largely responsible for the detachment of the frozen liquid. Indeed, we have additional evidence (see here below) that the presence of polymeric residues on the substrate surface does play an important role. The second procedure that resulted in a drastic improvement in carrier density homogeneity is a socalled atomic force microscope (AFM) cleaning process We can quantify the improvement in carrier density homogeneity resulting from these changes in the device configuration/fabrication process. In our earlier work on gate-induced superconductivity on WS 2 and MoS 2 variations in carrier density as large as a factor of 2 were rather regularly measured on gated flakes of ~20 m linear dimension. In the present work, instead, we routinely succeeded in achieving fluctuations smaller than 20% on the same devices size: larger density fluctuations were observed only rarely. This result corresponds to a one-order-of-magnitude improvement. Having explained in detail the differences between devices with and without PMMA window for what regards carrier density homogeneity, it is worth discussing other information that can be extracted from the comparison of the general behavior of these devices. The key observation is that the result of the tunneling spectroscopy measurements were virtually identical in the two types of devices. Specifically, the collapse of the low-energy part of tunneling conductance at low energy is the same for both type of devices (that is, Fig. Different cryogenic systems have been used to perform the low-temperature electrical measurements discussed in the main text. The first is a variable temperature cryo-free Teslatron system (Oxford Instruments), equipped with a superconducting magnet allowing the application of fields up to 10 T, and reaching T = 1.5 K as lowest temperature. This system proved to be particularly convenient as it enables very slow and controlled device cooling. With a minimum temperature of T = 1.5 K this system gives enough energy resolution to perform spectroscopic measurements on devices at carrier densities close to optimal doping, having a critical temperature T c ~ 9-10 K (i.e., not much lower than the maximum possible value for MoS 2 ). However, to have the energy resolution needed to investigate devices with a smaller T c -and hence a smaller superconducting gap it is essential to perform measurements at sub-Kelvin temperatures. To this end, we used a Heliox | Schematic top-view of a device used for tunneling spectroscopy measurements with the four-terminal configuration used to measure the bias dependence tunneling conductance. This configuration removes from the measurements the possible influence of the series resistance due to either the MLG strip or to the interface between the gold electrodes and the MoS 2 accumulation layer. In all cases, before cooling and/or performing any electrical measurement, devices were mounted in the cryostat and left under high vacuum for nearly a day, to ensure that all oxygen and humidity possibly present in the ionic liquid were removed. Only then a voltage was applied to the gate electrode and gradually increased through successive cycles, to reach the desired value (a procedure that also takes nearly a day). These precautions ensure the reversibility of the measurements and prevent chemical reactions between MoS 2 and either oxygen/water or adsorbates present at the surface. After the device was gate biased and cooled down, the accumulated electron density was inferred from Hall resistance measurements performed on the different pairs of Hall probes that we attached on each device (Hall measurements were done at a temperature higher than the superconducting critical temperature). The differential conductance (dI/dV-V) measurements were performed in a current-biased fourterminal configuration, using low-noise home-made electronics to add an ac and a dc current and to amplify the resulting voltage signal (see fig. For the different devices investigated, the low-temperature tunneling resistance (i.e., the resistance between the MLG strips and the gate-induced accumulation layer at the surface of MoS 2 ) ranged between several kOhms and approximately 100 kOhms, depending mainly on the thickness of the MoS 2 layer used and the area of the tunneling contact, with most typical values of the order of 10-20 kOhms. The bias-dependence differential resistance did not depend on the absolute value of the tunneling resistance. In the main text, we claimed that a fully gapped superconducting state cannot reproduce the data. Here we provide support to this statement by comparing the measured bias-dependent tunneling conductance with different models for conventional s-wave fully gapped superconductors, in the ideal homogenous case (part 4a), taking into account the presence of carrier density inhomogeneities (part 4b), or including the effect of finite quasi-particle lifetime (part 4c). In all cases, the differential tunneling conductance is calculated directly from the conventional expression of the tunneling current where N S (ε) is the DOS in the superconducting state under consideration, N(0) the DOS at the Fermi energy in the normal state, f(E) and f(E + eV) are the Fermi-Dirac distributions in the electrodes on opposite sides of the tunnel barrier. Expanding f(E + eV) for small values of V (since eV ≪ E F ) and differentiating, we obtain: To compare with experiments, we consider the case of the device whose data are shown in Fig. Inhomogeneity in carrier density could lead to an enhanced tunneling conductance if it was so large to cause the presence of non-superconducting regions (or of regions having a superconducting gap comparable to the lowest T reached in the experiments) in the accumulation layer at the MoS 2 surface. Here we show that an inhomogeneity in carrier density cannot reproduce our experimental results even if we assume that this inhomogeneity is much larger than that extracted from measurements of the Hall resistance in different parts of the device Our data (Fig. In short: charge density inhomogeneity affects strongly the tunneling conductance for large bias, eV ~ , in agreement with what we see experimentally. However, in a fully gapped s-wave state with realistic parameter, density inhomogeneity cannot cause the behavior that we observe in the experiments, namely a tunneling conductance that depends linearly on bias and vanishes for V = 0 at sufficiently low temperature, irrespective of the value of n. An additional possibility to consider is a fully gapped superconductor with a finite quasiparticle lifetime, a situation which is often considered in the analysis of tunneling experiments and that is described phenomenologically by a parametrization of the DOS due to Therefore, a fully gapped superconducting state does not reproduce the tunneling conductance even if we allow for finite lifetime quasiparticle effects. From the normal state value of the measured tunneling conductance, using the known electronic properties of graphite, we can easily estimate the average transmission 〈T〉 of electronic modes responsible for tunneling from the MLG electrode to the MoS 2 accumulation layer. We find 〈T〉 ~ 10 -3 -3 • 10 -5 depending on the specific device considered. Since 〈T〉 ≪ 1 in all cases, our devices are always in the tunneling regime, as we assumed throughout the discussion in the main text. It could however happen that, owing to the presence of a defect in the MoS 2 tunnel barrier (a pinhole) one or a few modes propagating from the MLG electrode to the MoS 2 accumulation layer have a transmission probability T much larger than the average, i.e. T ≅ 1. Such modes would then give an entirely non-negligible contribution to the measured conductance that -having T ≅ 1would not be suppressed at sub-gap voltages (in fact it would likely be enhanced, because of Andreev reflection). One should then consider the possibility that the low-bias conductance that we measure originates from such an effect, and not from the absence of a full gap. Invoking pinholes in the tunnel barrier is not consistent with the observation that the low-bias tunneling conductance is the same in all devices when plotted as a function of eV/: defects such as pinholes are device specific and would not lead to precisely the same behavior in different devices. The effect of pinholes can also be excluded because the bias dependence of the conductance that we measure is the same irrespective of the normal state resistance of the junction considered. Since the normal state resistance of our devices is not much smaller than the quantum of resistance R Q = h e 2 , the presence of even an individual highly transmitting mode would imply that this single mode dominates transport also in the normal state (i.e., not only in the sub-gap regime). Such a conclusion would not be consistent with the observed pronounced suppression of the low-bias differential conductance, which vanishes at low energy. We can be even more specific, because some of the devices that we measured have a normal state resistance R N ≅ 100 k(or even somewhat larger), i.e. substantially higher than R Q . In these devices, even if all the measured conductance was attributed to an individual highly-transmitted mode caused by the presence of a pinhole, we would be forced to conclude that the transmission probability of that mode is at most T~0.2 (or less). A transmission probability T~0.2 is already sufficiently low to be in the tunneling regime. That is: for the highest resistance devices no matter what assumption is made, we have to conclude that transport is in the tunneling regime. In summary, the behavior of the low-bias conductance that we observe experimentally cannot be accounted for by defects in the tunnel barrier causing the presence of highly transmitted modes propagating from MLG to the accumulation layer at the surface of MoS 2 . Due to the small electrostatic screening length at n ~ 10 14 cm -2 (estimated to be approximately 1 nm) the superconducting state induced at the surface of ionic liquid gated MoS 2 transistors is expected to have a two-dimensional (2D) nature irrespective of the thickness of the MoS 2 crystal used. In 2D, although long-range order of the superconducting order parameter is not possible due to thermal fluctuations, quasi-long-range order can still occur, due to the so-called Berezinskĭi-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) mechanism. A BKT transition is characterized by a critical temperature (T BKT, lower than the mean field T c ) below which phase stiffness become finite and a supercurrent can be measured, despite the absence of long-range order. A BKT regime has different peculiar experimental manifestations. One of them is the power law dependence of the I-V characteristics, i.e. V ∝ I α , where α = 1 for T well above T BKT , α = 3 for T = T BKT , and α > 3 for T < T BKT . This behavior has indeed been observed in our devices for temperatures below the onset temperature of superconductivity. This is shown in Fig. The BKT nature of the transition is confirmed by looking at the temperature dependence of the resistance close to T BKT . BKT theory predicts R = R 0 exp (-bt -1/2 ) ( R 0 and b are material dependent parameters, and t = T/T BKT -1), from which it is expected that [d(lnR)/dT] -2/3 varies linearly with T above T BKT , and that it extrapolates at 0 for T = T BKT . Fig. remains to be established. Irrespective of these considerations, what is really worth emphasizing is that our results demonstrate a strategy to perform tunneling spectroscopy on a gate-induced superconductor, and show a wealth of interesting new information not accessible in conventional transport measurements. The relevance of this result goes beyond the specific case of MoS 2 , as the experimental strategies demonstrated here can be applied to explore the gate-induced superconducting states recently discovered to occur in many other layered two-dimensional materials. We present this analysis as an additional confirmation, because -as we discussed in the main text-the scaling of the low-bias tunneling conductance in all devices when data are plotted versus reduced variables already provides clear evidence that electron density inhomogeneity does not play a relevant role at low energy.