In this paper, 3D image data of ore particle systems is investigated. By combining X-ray micro tomography (XMT) with scanning electron microscope (SEM) based image analysis additional information about the mineralogical composition from certain planar sections can be gained. For the analysis of tomographic images of particle systems the extraction of single particles is essential. This is performed with a marker-based watershed algorithm and a post-processing step utilizing a neural network to reduce oversegmentation. The results are validated by comparing the 3D particle-wise segmentation empirically with 2D SEM images which have been obtained with a different imaging process and segmentation algorithm. Finally, a stereological application is shown, in which planar SEM images are embedded into the tomographic 3D image. This allows the estimation of local X-ray attenuation coefficients, which are material-specific quantities, in the entire tomographic image. The characterization of drill core sections, crushed rock and particles of different products from processing is essential for the mining and mineral processing industry. Methods for characterization are as numerous as the parameters to be determined. The subject of major interest in characterization is the 3D morphology of minerals and particles as well as the composition of particles and the spatial distribution of different minerals within the particles. For a long time, morphological parameters such as particle size and chemical assays have been determined separately and set into correlation afterwards. Many wellaccepted and precise analytical methods exist in this field such as sieve analysis, laser diffraction, chemical analysis and X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy. Since the late 1980s, combined methods for simultaneous acquisition of morphological and compositional data have been available and they have seen a substantial development. In recent years, combined scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDS) On the other hand, using direct three-dimensional analysis, such as computed X-ray micro tomography (XMT), the problem of stereology disappears. In XMT of standard laboratory architecture, a specimen is penetrated by X-ray radiation at different angles of rotation. The acquired projection images are then reconstructed to a 3D volume representation of stacked 2D grayscale images. The grayscale value of a voxel (3D pixel) represents the X-ray attenuation coefficient of this volume element, which is a function of average atomic number, wavelength, thickness and density A correlative approach that combines both SEM-EDS and XMT has been utilized recently by Reyes and coworkers In order to overcome such issues, sophisticated algorithms for image processing and analysis are essential for the characterization of particulate systems of multi-component materials such as ores. This involves the determination of different phases as well as particle-wise segmentation of volumetric data In this paper we present results of a correlation analysis of 2D SEM-EDS with 3D XMT images for a greisen-type ore. Therefore, volumetric image data of a sample was obtained via XMT, and for some planar sections of the same sample, 2D SEM-EDS data was obtained with the mineral liberation analyzer (MLA) scanning electron microscope and segmented by software provided by the manufacturer of the microscope. In order to combine these two imaging processes, we will describe a method for embedding (registering) the planar sections obtained via SEM-EDS in the volumetric data. Furthermore, we present a method for the particle-wise segmentation of the volumetric image data with a marker-based watershed algorithm and a post processing step to reduce oversegmentation. For that purpose, we trained a neural network to decide, based on local geometrical and grayscale features of the volumetric image, whether adjacent segments determined by the watershed algorithm should be merged. This method was validated by comparing particle size and particle shape distributions of the segmentation obtained by the MLA software and a corresponding 2D section from the volumetric segmentation method proposed in the present paper. Since the 2D SEM-EDS images do not only contain information about the morphology of particles across the corresponding planar section, but also provide information about the mineralogical composition of the particles, we show how this additional information can be used to extrapolate the mineral classification from 2D SEM-EDS to the 3D XMT data by estimating local X-ray attenuation coefficients. The material considered in this paper is a greisen-type ore from the Zinnwald/Cinovec deposit at the German-Czech border in the "Erzgebirge". The ore mainly comprises of quartz, topaz, zinnwaldite, muscovite and kaolinite. Mica compositions are twofoldincluding a mica of the siderophyllite -polylithionite series (called "zinnwaldite" from hereon) and muscovite In the next step, an epoxy block was prepared. Therefore, the aliquot of 2 g sample material mixed with 1 g graphite and 2 g epoxy resin was used to prepare the grain mount. The resulting epoxy block was cut vertically in order to get sections in the direction of sedimentation. These sections were then tilted by 90 degree and mounted again as 20 mm blocks (B-sections, see The grain mount was scanned using a Zeiss Xradia 510 Versa X-ray microscope. In order to attain volumetric data of a sufficient resolution as well as an appropriate size (3D field of view), a voxel size of 4.5 μm was chosen for the tomography. The parameters of the XMT scan are listed in Table The 3D volume reconstruction was done using the Zeiss XRM reconstructor software. This software works with a filtered back projection algorithm and an additional beam hardening correction method. A manual byte scaling was used to adjust the grayscale 2.2 Computer tomography and mineral liberation analysis Description of ore particles The system used for the additional MLA measurements consists of an FEI Quanta 650F scanning electron microscope equipped with two Bruker Quantax X-Flash 5030 energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers and the MLA software suite, version 3.1.4, for automated data acquisition. In order to correlatively combine SEM-EDS with XMT the same sample that was used in the previous XMT measurements was grinded and polished multiple times for measurements at different planar sections with the MLA. Therefore, consistent operating conditions were applied for each considered planar section using the GXMAP measurement mode at 20 kV acceleration voltages, 10 nA probe current, 1 μm/pixel, 6 ms acquisition time and a step size of 6 pixels. The measurements at the MLA are automatically processed with its provided software, resulting in segmented false color 2D images of planar sections of the sample, where the colors in the false color image represent different minerals each, as seen in Figure Description of ore particles The selection of image processing tools and their careful adjustment to the experimental dataset has a critical effect on the subsequent analysis. In this section, all the additional image processing steps that were applied to the reconstructed 3D XMT image are explained in detail. We assume that the image is observed on a finite set of voxels W ′ ⊂ W being a subset of a bounded region W ⊂ R 3 . The 16-bit grayscale image obtained by the XMT measurement can be represented by a mapping I : W ′ → {0, . . . , 65535} which assigns to each voxel x ∈ W ′ its grayscale value I(x). A first image processing step is to reduce noise in the image. Here, we use the results of a detailed comparison of different algorithms described in In the non-local means method (1) The weighting function suggested in where G σ is a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation σ, Z(x) is a normalizing factor, N is a local window centered at the origin o ∈ R 3 , and h > 0 is a parameter influencing the level of filtering. In (1) and (2) it can be seen that the value of the denoised image I NL (x) at some voxel x ∈ W ′ is a weighted sum of grayscale values of the noisy image I at some other positions y ∈ W ′ . The weights w(x, y) are large, when the voxels x and y have similar grayscale values in their neighborhood, where the size of the neighborhood is determined by the standard deviation σ > 0 of the Gaussian kernel and the local window N. However, if the positions x + z, y + z lie outside of the observation window W ′ for some z ∈ N the corresponding summands are ignored in (2). Thus, the sum for the computation of the kernel in ( where c is a weighting constant which takes values typically in the range from 3/5 to 5/6. A 2D slice of the image processed by unsharp masking is shown in Figure Description of ore particles After having performed all the preliminary image processing operations described in Section 2.3.1, the grayscale image is binarized which means that the foreground phase (particles) is separated from the background. It is quite typical for XMT scans that the grayscale values are not globally consistent, i.e., the transitions between foreground and background are identified on different grayscale levels. This is often related to ring artifacts In order to avoid inconsistencies in the binarization, we apply a local adaptive thresholding technique using Sauvola's thresholds, as described in where m(x) and s(x) are the mean and standard deviation of the grayscale values in a local cuboidal window of the image I centered at the voxel x, respectively. The value of R is the maximum value of the standard deviation achievable for given image type (R = 32768 for 16-bit grayscale image) and k is a parameter which regulates the height of the threshold and typically lies in [0.2, 0.5], see The binarization B : W ′ → {0, 1} of a 16-bit grayscale image I is given by A cutout of a 2D slice of the binarized 3D image is shown in Figure Application of suitable morphological operations to the binarized data helps to avoid small artifacts and correct irregularities at the interfaces between foreground and background. We use a popular smoothing operation called opening, which is a composition of erosion and dilation. In mathematical terms, opening of a set A 1 by a set A 2 can be written as where ⊕ is the Minkowski addition (dilation) and ⊖ is the Minkowski difference (erosion), see Segmentation of particles is performed by a watershed algorithm Neural networks are nonlinear regression models, which are often represented by a network diagram, see Figure where α 0m ∈ R and α m ∈ R d are regression parameters and s : R → R is the so-called activation function. A typical choice for the activation function is s = tanh. The outputs of the hidden units, described by ( The values of the output units T 1 , . . . , T p which are processed towards the output are given by where β 0k ∈ R and β k ∈ R M are regression parameters of the output units. The final output f (x) = (f 1 (x), . . . , f p (x)) ⊤ of the neural network is given by evaluating certain output functions g 1 , . . . , g p : R p → R with the vector T (x) = (T 1 (x), . . . , T p (x)), i.e., The choice of output functions depends on the problem one is trying to solve. For simple regression problems linear output functions can be chosen, i.e., g k (T ) = T k , whereas other problems which require the outputs of the neural network to be normalized use output functions like g k (T ) = exp (T k ) ( p l=1 exp (T l )) -1 . The described regression model, which is defined by ( In our application, the task of the neural network is to decide whether adjacent regions of an oversegmented image should be merged. Therefore, we use the cross entropy which is better suited for classification problems. Since the error functions in ( Description of ore particles we determine this function w manually, based on a small oversegmented cut-out with the size of 200 × 200 × 200 voxels, obtained by the marker-based watershed algorithm. So, for each edge e ∈ E, the value w(e) ∈ {0, 1} represents a response variable for our regression model. Now we have to find suitable features, which describe two adjacent regions of the watershed image in such a way that we are able to reliably decide whether they should be merged or not. Some features considered for two adjacent regions v 1 and v 2 are listed below: 1. The distribution of the grayscale values of the image around the watershed line between v 1 and v 2 and its first four moments. 2. The distribution and the first four moments of the absolute gradient values around the watershed line are considered. We calculated the absolute gradient of the grayscale image with Sobel operators, see The previously mentioned features solely consider local contrast information of the grayscale or gradient image. In order to geometrically describe the watershed line between v 1 and v 2 , the following geometrical features are considered: 4. The eigenvalues of the principal component analysis of the watershed line voxels, see 5. The local curvature is another geometrical feature which is considered by the neural network. These feature vectors are calculated for each pair of adjacent regions v 1 and v 2 . We denote them by x e ∈ R d , where e = (v 1 , v 2 ) is the corresponding edge. Now we can formulate our regression problem by f (x e ) = w(e) for each edge e ∈ E. As for the regression model, we have chosen a single layer network with 75 hidden units and activation function s = tanh as described in Section 2.4.1. The optimal number of hidden units has been determined by a grid-search algorithm, meaning that we trained the network for multiple hidden layer sizes and chose the configuration with the best performance. Since our response variables are one-dimensional, we have only one unit in the output layer for which we chose the output function g(T ) = 1/(1 + exp (-T )), which ensures that the output of the neural network belongs to (0, 1). After training the regression parameters of the neural network based on the manually segmented cut-out, the neural network, denoted by f , can be applied on new image data in the following way: 1. Compute an (oversegmented) image using the watershed algorithm and determine its graph representation G = (V, E) where E contains an edge for each pair of adjacent regions. 2. Determine the local features x e for each pair of adjacent regions. Together with the neural network f , we receive a weight function w : E → (0, 1) for the graph G, where w(e) = f (x e ). 3. Reduce the weighted graph (V, E, w). This is done by thresholding, i.e., Ê = {e ∈ E : w(e) = f (x e ) ≥ λ} with a threshold λ ∈ (0, 1). Alternatively, graph clustering methods, see 4. Determine the connected components of the reduced graph Ĝ = (V, Ê). Merge regions of the same connected component in the oversegmented image. Figure In the previous section we described how the tomographic 3D data was segmented. Additionally we have two 2D MLA images from the same sample at a 10 times higher resolution. The MLA data, which provides additional information about the mineralogical composition of particles, was segmented by the MLA software using a particle deagglomeration algorithm, see Regarding the size characteristics for planar cross-section of a particle P ⊂ R 2 , we consider the area a(P ), the length of the perimeter l(P ), and the mean width w(P ). These characteristics are closely related to intrinsic volumes, being basic descriptors of compact sets While the area of a particle cross-section can be simply estimated by rescaling the number of voxels belonging to that particle, estimation of the perimeter requires a better approximation than direct computation of transitions between voxels. We use the cornercount estimator described in The mean width, see where T x is the projection on the x-axis, i.e., T x ((x 1 , x 2 )) = x 1 , and M α ∈ SO 2 is a matrix which describes a 2D rotation with an angle α and M α P = {M α x : x ∈ P }. Description of ore particles In Figure Various shape characteristics can be deduced for two-dimensional particle cross-sections, see The sphericity factor takes values between 0 and 1, where the value 1 is achieved for a circular particle and lower values indicate higher deviation from the shape of a circle. Another shape characteristic is the convexity factor, which is defined by where q(P ) is the convex hull of P . In this case, the value 1 is obtained for convex particles and lower values indicate higher deviations from convexity. Finally, we consider the elongation factor defined by where ε(P ) is the best fitting ellipsoid to P , l 1 (ε(P )) length of its short semiaxis, and l 2 (ε(P )) length of its long semiaxis. Similarly to the sphericity factor, the value 1 is, among others, achieved for a circle. However, this quantity does not depend on the surface area and is less sensitive to irregularities of the particle surface. Note that the best fitting ellipsoid can be found by principal component analysis A comparison between the distributions of shape characteristics for MLA data and tomographic data is shown in Figure The grayscale value I(x) of a voxel x in the 3D image is closely related to the local X-ray attenuation coefficient of the material at location x. Specifically, there is a wellknown monotone relationship between the grayscale value I(x) and the value of the product ρ(x)μ m (x), where ρ(x) is the mass density of the material at location x and μ m (x) its mass attenuation coefficient, see We now describe in detail how we located the 2D MLA images in the 3D image. Let B MLA , B be binarized 2D and 3D images, respectively. The binarization of the 3D XMT image was described in detail in Section 2.3.2 and since the 2D MLA images are false color images, where each color either represents a mineral phase or the background, it is easy to binarize such an image. For a rotation matrix R ∈ SO 3 we denote the correspondingly rotated 3D image by B R . The location of the 2D image in the 3D image is described by the rigid transformation consisting of some R 0 ∈ SO 3 , describing the rotation of the 3D image, and x 0 ∈ R 3 which is the shift of the 2D image. That is where the image values outside of their corresponding observation windows are set equal to 0. In particular, for the 2D image we have B MLA (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) = 0 if x 3 = 0. The optimization problem described in ( where B MLA (x) = B MLA (-x) for an arbitrary rotation matrix R ∈ SO 3 , we can use the fast Fourier transformation to accelerate computations, see for example Due to the registration of the MLA images described in Section 3.2.1 we now have information about the mineralogical composition for some planar sections of the 3D particle system. We show how this information can be used for predicting local material specific constants based on grayscale values. In this section we will use only one of the given MLA images for the calibration of the prediction model, and the other MLA image for validation. For that purpose let I : W ′ → {0, . . . , 65535} be the 3D grayscale image and I MLA : V ′ → {0, . . . , 255} be a registered MLA image, meaning I MLA is a 2D MLA image after the rigid transformation given by ( in the planar section V ′ . This information about the quartz phase, gained from the MLA image, can be transfered to the 3D tomographic image. To be precise, using (18), we can compute the mean grayscale value of voxels associated with quartz in the 3D image by where |Ω Quartz | denotes the number of voxels in Ω Quartz . Analogously, the mean grayscale value can be computed for other minerals depicted in the MLA image. Table for grayscale values I ∈ {0, . . . , 65535}. One should note that (20) is not suitable for extrapolation, especially since for grayscale values smaller than 4500 the estimated material constants become negative. Nevertheless, (20) estimates the local ρμ m values very well for grayscale values between 1.8 • 10 4 and 3 • 10 4 . Since only one of the two MLA images was taken into account for the calibration of the regression given by ( Still, it is not always possible to determine the underlying mineral solely based on its ρμ m value, because, for example, quartz and kaolinite have similar ρμ m values. A direct relationship between the mean grayscale value and the mass attenuation coefficient μ m can be established under the assumption of constant mass densities of the minerals. For that purpose (20) suggests a regression of the type where the parameters c 1 , c 2 ∈ R have to be determined. However, Figure We presented a method to segment 3D XMT image data of particle systems by combining the marker-based watershed algorithm with a post processing step which utilizes neural networks. By reducing oversegmentation -a common issue of the watershed algorithm -this led to a system of properly segmented 3D particles. We then compared the 3D segmentation with high resolution segmentations of planar sections obtained by MLA, by comparing distributions of several size and shape characteristics. Furthermore, we described a procedure to embed 2D MLA images into the 3D sample using rigid transformations. This gave us additional information about the mineralogical composition of the 3D XMT image along planar sections. Thus we were able to find a quantitative relationship between grayscale values in the 3D image and material specific constants, like the mass density ρ and the mass attenuation coefficient μ m . In a forthcoming study we will extend this approach by analyzing material-specific shape and size characteristics based on the segmentation presented in Section 2.4 and combining these characteristics with grayscale information from XMT data. We expect that such an approach can then allow the prediction of the mineralogical composition of a particle, when MLA information is not available and grayscale values alone are not sufficient for making such decisions. The financial support of the German Research Foundation (DFG) for funding the Xray microscope (INST267/129-1) as well as the research projects (PE1160/22-1 and SCHM997/27-1) within the priority program SPP 2045 "Highly specific and multidimensional fractionation of fine particle systems with technical relevance" is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Sabine Gilbricht for her work at the MLA and Roland Würkert for preparing the epoxy blocks.