LiOsO3 undergoes a continuous transition from a centrosymmetric R 3c structure to a polar R3c structure at Ts = 140 K. By combining transport measurements and first-principles calculations, we find that Ts is enhanced by applied pressure, and it reaches a value of ∼250 K at ∼6.5 GPa. The enhancement is due to the fact that the polar R3c structure of LiOsO3 has a smaller volume than the centrosymmetric R 3c structure. Pressure generically favors the structure with the smallest volume, and therefore further stabilizes the polar R3c structure over the R 3c structure, leading to the increase in Ts. Ferroelectric materials are actively explored in both fundamental science and applied research for their potential industrial applications such as non-volatile memory devices, sensors and solar cells The polar properties of both conventional (insulating) ferroelectrics and polar metals can be tuned by external factors such as atomic substitution, chemical ordering and pressure. In a classical paper, Samara et al. In this work, we combine transport measurements up to 6.5 GPa and first-principles calculations to show that hydrostatic (positive) pressure can enhance the transition temperature of LiOsO 3 , in contrast to conventional ferroelectrics. Recently, a novel "cubic Dirac point" is predicted in the R 3c phase, which transforms into three mutually crossed nodal rings in the R3c phase Single crystals of LiOsO 3 were synthesized by a highpressure solid state reaction as described elsewhere Density functional theory (DFT) calculations within the ab initio plane-wave approach, as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) In LiOsO 3 , this resistance exhibits a kink at T s . Therefore, the metallic nature of LiOsO 3 offers an elegant method to follow T s under pressure using a simple resistance (R) measurement, as opposed to the more elaborate dielectric constant measurement for tracking T C in conventional ferroelectric materials. Figure Figure DFT calculations were performed to understand the observed pressure effect on T s of LiOsO 3 . Figure To understand why pressure favors the polar structure R3c over the non-polar structure R 3c, zero-temperature thermodynamic functions of LiOsO 3 were computed via DFT calculations. Figure Under pressure, enthalpy replaces energy as the thermodynamic function. Therefore, the increasing enthalpy difference between R3c and R 3c structures leads to the enhancement of T s , which is consistent with our experiment. Furthermore, the enthalpy difference between R3c and R 3c structures, and the Li displacement squared in R3c LiOsO 3 (see the supplementary material) almost increase linearly with pressure, which is also consistent with the experimentally observed linear T s (P ) displayed in Fig. Using the relation H = E+P V , the total energy E and P V for different structures of LiOsO 3 , with respect to R3c, are illustrated in Figs. Figure Note that the enhancement of T s via pressure in LiOsO 3 will be thwarted by the stabilization of a different structure. As Fig. In summary, the pressure dependence of structural transition temperature T s in polar metal LiOsO 3 was measured up to ∼ 6.5 GPa. T s increases linearly under pressure, reaching 250 K at ∼ 6.5 GPa. The experimental result is corroborated by first-principle calculations which show that pressure further stabilizes the polar R3c phase over the centrosymmetric R 3c phase and enhances the polar properties in the R3c structure. The enhancement of T s arises from the fact that the volume of the polar R3c structure is smaller than that of the non-polar R 3c structure, and pressure generically favors the structure with the smallest volume. This criterion can also be applied to insulating ferroelectrics, which predicts pressure increases polarization and T C in ZnSnO 3 and LiNbO 3 See supplementary material for the method for determining T s and further details on theoretical investigations including the structure search and the connection between the volume and oxygen octahedra rotations.