The nature of the metal-insulator transition in thin films and superlattices of LaNiO 3 only a few unit cells in thickness remains elusive despite tremendous effort. Quantum confinement and epitaxial strain have been evoked as the mechanisms, although other factors such as growth-induced disorder, cation non-stoichiometry, oxygen vacancies, and substrate-film interface quality may also affect the observable properties of ultrathin films. Here we report results obtained for near-ideal LaNiO 3 films with different thicknesses and terminations grown by atomic layer-by-layer laser molecular beam epitaxy on LaAlO 3 substrates. We find that the room-temperature metallic behavior persists until the film thickness is reduced to an unprecedentedly small 1.5 unit cells (NiO 2 termination). Electronic structure measurements using X-ray absorption spectroscopy and first-principles calculation suggest that oxygen vacancies existing in the films also contribute to the metal-insulator transition. he metal-insulator transition (MIT) in LaNiO 3 ultrathin films and superlattices In this work, our first-principles calculations show that dimensionality and strain alone are not sufficient to induce the MIT in LaNiO 3 on a LaAlO 3 substrate even at one-unit-cell thickness. To reveal the nature of the transition, we use atomic layer-by-layer laser molecular beam epitaxy (ALL-Laser MBE) Atomic layer-by-layer growth. Figure The ultrathin LaNiO 3 films were further characterized by X-ray reflectivity (XRR) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). Figure Metal-insulator transition. Resistivity vs. temperature curves for LaNiO 3 films with thicknesses ranging from 1 to 4.5 u.c. are presented in Fig. The dependence of T MIT and ρ(300 K) on film thickness and surface termination is shown in Fig. Electronic structure calculations. We performed both density functional theory (DFT) and density functional theory plus dynamical mean field theory (DFT + DMFT) calculations of the density of state (DOS) of the Ni 3d orbitals for 1 u.c. (LaO termination) and 1.5 u.c. (NiO 2 termination) LaNiO 3 films on LaAlO 3 substrates. For comparison, the DFT and DFT + DMFT results for bulk LaNiO 3 with lattice parameters corresponding to the LaAlO 3 substrate-induced strain are shown in Fig. where n x 2 Ày 2 and n 3z 2 Àr 2 represent the number of electrons in orbitals with x 2 -y 2 and 3z 2 -r 2 symmetries, respectively, is due to the strong quantum confinement effect which decreases the bandwidth of the 3z 2 -r 2 orbital relative to that of the x 2 -y 2 orbital, overcoming the level shift (pushing the 3z 2 -r 2 down) from the strain effect and leading to positive orbital polarization. The strong electronic correlations treated in DFT + DMFT reduce the electron kinetic energy, decreasing the effect of quantum confinement. Orbitial polarization is then driven by the level splitting, and has the opposite sign to the prediction of the DFT calculation. The spectra calculated for the 1 u.c. LaNiO 3 film are consistent with those of the interfacial layer in (LaNiO 3 ) 4 / (LaAlO 3 ) 4 superlattices computed previously also using DFT +DMFT The electronic structure of the 1.5 u.c. film is more interesting, distinct from either the 1 u.c. layer or bulk. The top layer of the 1.5 u.c. film is terminated as the NiO 2 surface and each Ni ion is only five-fold coordinated, with the vacuum interface missing the apical oxygen ion. The missing ion adds charge to the surface bands leading to strong charge transfer and to new physics. We find that the surface layer is an orbital-selective Mott insulator, with the d 3z 2 Àr 2 orbitals in a Mott insulating state (see the large self-energy shown in Fig. X-ray absorption spectroscopy. Detection of oxygen vacancies in thin films is challenging; however, advanced X-ray spectroscopic techniques probing electronic states that can be modified by oxygen vacancies may provide clues A close examination of the pre-edge peak shape reveals a shoulder on the higher-energy side of the main peak. Figure It is difficult to quantify the amount of oxygen vacancies in the LaNiO 3 films. However, we can observe the change in the amount of oxygen vacancies with the film thickness by plotting the spectral weight of the shoulder peak, A shoulder /A total , where A is the area under the peak, as a function of film thickness. The result for the 7 Pa growth oxygen pressure is shown in Fig. The effect of oxygen vacancies on the MIT is shown in Fig. Orbital polarization. The X-ray linear dichroism (XLD), i.e. the difference between two XAS spectra obtained with different linear polarizations, at the Ni L edge is a sensitive tool for detecting orbital polarization Linearly polarized X-rays can preferentially probe these strongly directional orbitals. Figure The two spectra correspond to photons polarized parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis of the film, respectively, and the XLD signals are marked by the green areas. For the 1.5 u.c. film, the spectrum for the polarization parallel to the c-axis shifts to lower energies relative to that obtained with perpendicular polarization, indicating a splitting of the e g orbitals (Δe g in Fig. The overall negative values of the orbital polarization are consistent with an expansion of the lattice along the direction normal to the film surface under compressive strain While our DFT + DMFT calculations predict the LaNiO 3 ultrathin films to be metallic whereas experimental observation shows that they are insulating, they do show that the metallic states are fragile and could be easily upset by disorder or oxygen vacancies. The top layer of the 1.5 u.c. film reveals strongly reduced and incoherent spectra at the Fermi energy originated from the oxygen vacancy effect due to the absence of the apical oxygen ions. It is plausible that theoretical calculations of the 1 u. c. ultrathin film with oxygen vacancies would yield an insulating state. It is known that oxygen vacancies affect the electronic structures and transport properties in bulk transition-metal oxides The discovery of oxygen vacancies as a critical factor is important for the fundamental understanding of the MIT in ultrathin LaNiO 3 films. Furthermore, oxygen vacancies are an additional parameter to dimensionality and strain for tuning the room-temperature MIT in LaNiO 3 . For example, electric-fieldinduced oxygen vacancy formation has been accomplished by electrolyte gating with ionic liquids in VO 2 Sample preparation. ALL-Laser MBE was used to grow the few-unit-cell-thick LaNiO 3 films, which also allows us to investigate the properties of the films with different nominal terminations. We found that on our AlO 2 -terminated LaAlO 3 substrate, prepared by HCl etching followed by annealing at 750 °C in flow of oxygen Transport measurements. In-plane transport measurements were carried out between 4.2 K and room temperature by using the van der Pauw configuration with contacts at the corners of the films with 5 mm × 5 mm surface area. X-ray absorption spectroscopy. X-ray absorption and linear dichroism measurements were carried out at Beamline 4.0.2 of the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and Beamline U4B of the National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory in TEY mode with an energy resolution of ∼ 0.1 eV. The average probing depth for soft X-rays in the TEY mode was estimated to be about 5 nm. The X-ray spot was focused down to ∼100-μm diameter in the normal incidence geometry. Samples were characterized using nearly 100% horizontally or vertically polarized X-ray beams at an incidence angle of 15°from the sample plane. In such a grazing measurement geometry the X-ray electric field is oriented parallel to the surface for vertically polarized light, and almost perpendicular to the surface for horizontally polarized light, thus providing maximum sensitivity to changes in orbital character along the different crystallographic axes. XRR measurement. The XRR measurement was conducted at Beamline X14A of the National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The Xray wavelength was 0.7793 Å. The incident beam size was 0.3 mm (v) x 1.5 mm (h) and the reflectivity was measured using an Si avalanche photodiode detector with a Ge (111) crystal analyzer. The simulation of the reflectivity curves was performed with the IMD code STEM measurements. TEM samples were prepared by adhering the as-grown LaNiO 3 film to a sacrificial Si crystal with M-Bond adhesive. Cross-sectional cuts were made through this stack, and the sample was thinned by mechanical polishing in a wedge geometry followed by final thinning using a Gatan PIPS-II system. All data were acquired on the Titan-class TEAM 0.5 instrument at the Molecular Foundry at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory with geometric aberrations in the probe forming optics corrected to the third order. Data were acquired at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV with a 17 mrad convergence semiangle. The annular bright field collection semiangle was 6-25 mrad and the simultaneously acquired annular dark field images had a collection semiangle angle of 53-270 mrad. Images were recorded in sequential pairs with a 90°rotation offset in order to correct for the linear and nonlinear instrumental drift according to Ophus et al. First-principles calculation. We adopt DFT for the structural relaxation and both DFT + DMFT and DFT for the DOS calculation in both 1 u.c and 1.5 u.c. LaNiO 3 thin films on the LaAlO 3 substrate and bulk LaNiO 3 . We use the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) code for the DFT calculations by taking the exchangecorrelation potential to be the generalized gradient approximation using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. A k-point mesh of 6 × 6 × 1 is used for the slab calculation while the mesh of 6 × 6 × 6 is used for bulk. The plane-wave energy cutoff E cut is set to be 600 eV. All internal atomic coordinates and the (001) axis lattice parameter of both structures are fully relaxed for both structures while the in-plane lattice constants are fixed. The tetragonal symmetry is imposed during the structural relaxation meaning that the in-plane lattice constants are fixed to the LaAlO 3 in-plane constant (~3.81 Å) while the angles between lattice vectors are constrained to be at right angles. Both tilting and rotation of NiO The thickness of the LaAlO 3 substrate used in both the 1 u.c and 1.5 u.c LaNiO 3 film calculations was 6 u.c. for this symmetrical geometry of the slab. The thickness of the vacuum is as large as 6 Å. We have checked that increasing the vacuum thickness to 10 Å does not change the physics discussed in the paper. Namely, it produces a similar DOSs as shown in Fig. For DFT + DMFT calculations, we first construct the localized subspace of Ni d and O p orbitals from the DFT band structure spanning the 12 eV energy range of the Ni d and O p band complex by using the maximally localized Wannier function, then perform the DMFT self-consistent calculations for the correlated subspace of Ni d orbitals. We used the continuous time quantum Monte Carlo method 