Recently, a covalent-like quasi-bonding was unveiled for the inter-chain interaction in a promising semiconductor, few-layer Tellurium. Such quasi-bond offers comparable bond lengths and strengths with those of a typical Te-Te covalent bond, which may lead to much easier transformations between the quasi-bonds and the covalent bonds. Here, we show a few structural phase-transitions among four Te allotropes in few-layer Te under charge doping. In particular, the semiconducting α-phase can transform into a smaller-bandgap β-phase, evensmaller-bandgap γ-phase and then metallic δ-phase in a Te bilayer. In a tri-layer, a metallic chiral α+δ phase is more stable under initial electron doping, leading to the appearance of chirality. Variations of electronic structures aside, these transitions are accompanied by the emergence or elimination of inversion centers (α-β, α-γ, α-α+δ), structural anisotropy (α-γ, γ-δ) and chirality (α-α+δ), which could result in substantial changes in optical and other properties. In light of this, this work opens the possibility toward building mono-elemental electronic and optoelectronic heterostructures or devices. It also offers a platform for studying relations between charge doping and electric/optical properties. Mono-and Few-layer Tellurium were recently unveiled a promising quasi-onedimensional layered material by both experimental demonstrations 1-5 and theoretical predictions Although these properties are rather striking, the β, γ and δ phases are, however, less stable in neutral and strain-free FL-Te and may spontaneously transfer into the most stable alpha phase. It is thus crucial to maintain these less-stable phases using a long-lasting and feasible way. Recently, the ionic liquid gating technique has been rapidly developing However, these transitions are resulted from changes of bond angles but are not from breakdown or formation of new bonds as required in the transitions among these Te allotropes. Few-layer Te (FL-Te) is a rather special case that the covalent characteristic of inter-chain CLQB largely lowers the energy costs for forming inter-chain and breaking intra-chain covalent bonds. It would be thus interesting to know if sole-charge-doping could manipulate covalent bonds in structural phase-transitions of Te and maintain those meta-stable Te phases, which may substantially extend the fields that doping techniques apply. Fundamental interests Here, we theoretically predicted structural transitions among these Te phases solely induced by charge doping. Either 2L or 3L exhibits three transitions among four phases. These transitions are accompanied by elimination or emergence of structural inversion symmetry and chirality, gradually reduced bandgaps, likely topological states or structural isotropy, which suggest diverse potential applications in terms of electronics, optics and related fields. We revealed the reasoning of all these transitions at the wavefunction level, including the emergence or extinction of central inversion symmetry or chirality. We also showed Raman spectra and band alignments of α, β and γ phases and discussed electric properties of these phases. Phase diagram. Fig. The electron doped β-Te is, however, energetically less favored in comparison with electrondoped γ-Te. At a doping level of 0.01 e/Te, γ-Te becomes energetically more stable than other phases until a level of 0.13 e/Te, beyond which δ-Te is the most stable one. In terms of 3L, the hole doped α-β transition was still found at 0.04 h/Te, however, the α-γ transition vanishes, instead, an α to chiral-α+δ transition occurs at a doping level of 0.08 e/Te. The absent of γtrilayers is consistent with its rapidly reduced stability in 3L and thicker layers We therefore leave this area undefined in our present phase diagram and will discuss it elsewhere. In the following paragraphs, we intend to understand these three phase transitions, namely α-β, γ-δ and α-to-chiral-α-δ. Emergence of mirror symmetry. Fig. Both phases coexist up to 0.05 h/Te or 0.10 e/Te, at which the α-bilayers structurally transform to β-bilayers without barriers. The transition regions were thus marked with meshes in Fig. As a result of the varied bond lengths, lattice constant b expands under electron doping but shrinks in the positively charged region (Supplementary Figure Charge reduction was found at the inter-atomic region between Te4 and Te2/Te5, suggesting weakened Te4-Te2/Te5 bonds. These weakened bonds are thus prone to move Te3/Te4 toward an adjacent chain; this transfers an α-bilayer to a β-bilayer. Such redistribution of charges could be well explained by doping-dependent bandstructures. At doping levels under 0.05 h/Te, eigenstates of the highest valence band (VB1) were unoccupied between the S and G points of the first BZ (Fig. Semiconductor to metal transition. An α-bilayer is unstable and is prone to transform into a β-bilayer upon electron doping. Both β-and γ-bilayers share the same feature that they are comprised of rhomboid chains, but in a parallel and a network forms, respectively, as shown in Fig. Here, the competition of γ-and δ-phases is thus highly relevant to the comparison of stability of these chains. We plotted distances d1, d2 and d3 in Fig. The reinforced inter-sublayer interaction thus keeps the in-plane inter-chain distance (d3, blue pentagrams) nearly unchanged up to a level of 0.14 e/Te and slightly increased beyond that level due to a finite Poisson's ratio. These tendencies of bond-length variations suggest that the rhomboid chains are still network-like, in different from isolated zigzag chains as δ-bilayer behaves under high doping levels. The δ-phase coexists with the γ-phase in all considered doping levels. Its CB1 states around the S (ψ δ CB1,S) and X (ψ δ CB1,X) points are two anti-bonding states (Fig. Surface chirality. Surfaces of Te few-layers, with broken translational symmetry and unbalanced interlayer coupling, may play a role in phase transitions. A Te-trilayer is the thinnest layer being comprised of both surface and inner layers. A chiral-α+δ phase emerges in Tetrilayers. Fig. (unfilled green pentagrams) are smaller than those of other bonds. These two shortened bonds result in a central inversion symmetry, introducing chirality to both wavefunctions of CB1 and doping induced charge reduction (Supplementary Figure For the top-layer, the charge reduction undercuts both Te1-Te2 and Te1-Te3 bonds (from 2.92/2.86 Å to 3.48/3.36Å, respectively), which substantially pushes Te4 moving leftward forming two new covalent bonds with Te2 and Te3. This movement transforms l-α-to r-αchains. Raman spectroscopy is a feasible technique for experimental identification of these phases. Fig. and AA 1 11 (α-phase). By these distinct indicators, these three phases can be distinguished by Raman spectroscopy. These transitions in 2L could be understood from an energy-level point of view. Semiconductors usually response against charge doping, but Te few-layers are exceptions that they promote charge doping. Fig. The β-and γ-bilayers have the highest VBM (-4.67 eV) and lowest CBM (-4.97 eV), respectively. Such a deep CBM of γ-bilayer and high VBM of β-bilayer are even comparable with and 0.29 eV higher than the VBM of α-bilayer (-4.98 eV), respectively; this explains the reason why a tiny amount of electron-doping leads to the γ-phase more energetically stable and hole-doping stabilizes the β-phase. In light of this, the gating/doping induced phase transitions appear a new degree of freedom to tune the electrode-channel contact. In addition, the doping induced phase changes and the accompanying shifts of valence and conduction bands allow Te few-layers to be adaptively doped. The more the electrons doped, the faster the conduction band lowers (α to γ with a drop over 1 eV). This adaptive doping also works for the hole doping. If Te few-layers were used as channel materials in an FET, this adaptive property of Te may substantially change the density of carriers or/and carrier mobility with a rather small additional gate voltage; this may offer a chance to break the thermodynamic limit for the subthreshold swing. Since α and γ bilayers have comparable energies (energetic difference of 1 meV/Te), it is rather likely to build an α-γ Te heterojunction. This junction takes a type-III alignment that may utilize an extra-sensitive gate control and giant carrier density tunability. In summary, we have predicted structural phase transitions among the α, β, γ, δ and chiral-α+δ phases in 2L to 4L Te layers under sole charge doping. Four transitions were discussed in details and understood with doping induced evolution of conduction or valence states and the resulting charge redistributions. The CLQB is peculiarly interesting in Te fewlayers that its bond length is usually around 3.4 -3.5 Å, being only 0.5 -0.6 Å larger than that of a typical Te-Te covalent bond. Given the only 15% bond length difference and covalent characteristics of Te-Te CLQB and covalent bonds, it is straightforward that these two types of bonding may transform to each other under charge doping, external strain or among the others. Simultaneously, the transformation of bonding thus results in structural phase transitions, accompanied by electric and optical transitions. It suggests that heterojunctions with a type-I, type-II or type-III alignment could be built using only one element by stacking its different allotrope layers together. Another feature of these transitions lies in that a phase may transfer to another phase under working conditions of a device, e.g. new phase induced by laser excited hot electrons or by electric gating resulted charge doping, which may realize more efficient control of its physical properties. We used term ``adaptive doping" here. It also suggests that new phases may emerge in nanostructured layered materials because of the surface induced confinement effects. Second harmonic generation is a highly sensitive optical detecting method. Appearances of structural inversion centers in the β-, γ-and chiral α+δ-phases should substantially change the signals of it, indicating potential applications of these transitions and the charge stabilized-phases in non-linear optics. Such a phase diversity is, we believe, a unique property of strongly inter-chain coupled 1D-like layered materials. Therefore, we expected other multiple phase transitions in other 1D-like layered materials, like AuSe. These phase transitions also imply high potentials in applications of non-violated memories, actuators and ultra-compact electric devices. In light of this, exploration of different Te phases may boost an emerging research filed for mono-elemental heterostructures and devices. Density functional theory calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation for the exchange-correlation potential, the projector augmented wave method Surface maps of valence and conduction bands shown in Fig. Charge doping on Te atoms was realized with the ionic potential method As each layer may take left-hand α (l-α), right-hand α (l-α) and δ chains, few-layer Te may have considerable arrangement and combinations. The number of possible phases consist of these three kinds of layers are listed as follow. As the number of layer increases, the diversity of phases increases rapidly and reaches 25 for 4L. 