We investigate the binary phase diagram of helium and iron using first-principles calculations. We find that helium, which is a noble gas and inert at ambient conditions, forms stable crystalline compounds with iron at terapascal pressures. A FeHe compound becomes stable above 4 TPa, and a FeHe2 compound above 12 TPa. Melting is investigated using molecular dynamics simulations, and a superionic phase with sublattice melting of the helium atoms is predicted. We discuss the implications of our predicted helium-iron phase diagram for interiors of giant (exo)planets and white dwarf stars. Matter under extreme compression exhibits rich and unexpected behaviour, such as unconventional chemistry Static experiments using diamond anvil cells have reached pressures of 1 terapascal (TPa, 1 TPa = 10 7 atmospheres) In this context, we use quantum mechanical calculations to explore the phase diagram of helium and iron, two of the most abundant elements in the Universe. Helium nuclei formed in the early Universe during Big Bang nucleosynthesis, and the primordial 25% mass fraction of helium makes it the second most abundant element after hydrogen. In addition, thermonuclear reactions within the interiors of stars fuse hydrogen to form helium. Therefore, helium is found inside many astrophysical objects, from planets, to stars, to white dwarf stars, and it plays a central role in their behaviour. For example, recent experimental and theoretical work has shown that helium metallises at TPa pressures Helium has two electrons in the closed-shell 1s state, and is chemically inert under ambient conditions. The only known helium compounds are either metastable, involving ionised species such as HeH + 2 Iron has one of the highest binding energies per nucleon (the highest is 62 Ni) and is therefore also very abundant In this work we investigate the possibility that, under extreme compression, helium might form stable compounds with iron. The high abundances of helium and iron make it crucial to understand the helium-iron phase diagram for astrophysical modelling of the interiors of giant planets, including the increasing number of exoplanets being discovered Our strategy is to search for high-pressure compounds of helium and iron using first-principles quantum mechanical density functional theory (DFT) methods as implemented in the castep code stability of a compound s with respect to the constituent elements can be evaluated by calculating the Gibbs free energy of formation per atom ∆G s = (G s -(G He N He + G Fe N Fe ))/(N He + N Fe ), where G s is the Gibbs free energy of the compound s, G A is the Gibbs free energy per atom of A, and N A is the number of A atoms in compound s. The Gibbs free energy has contributions from the electrons, which we calculate using DFT, and from the quantum and thermal nuclear motion, which we calculate using DFT within the harmonic approximation together with the recently proposed nondiagonal supercell approach We show the static lattice phase diagram of the heliumiron system in the pressure range 1-100 TPa in Fig. The structure searches find several compounds of helium and iron that are energetically competitive in the TPa pressure range, and the most stable have stoichiometries FeHe and FeHe 2 (see Fig. The first is an orthorhombic structure of space group Cmmm with nine atoms in the primitive cell, which forms around 12 TPa. The second has a space group of I4 1 /amd symmetry with six atoms in the primitive cell, and becomes the most stable FeHe 2 structure above 47 TPa. The third has P 6/mmm space group and three atoms in the primitive cell, but is not thermodynamically stable. Structure files for all of the helium-iron compounds are provided as Supplemental Material The helium-iron compounds that form at the lowest pressures have the FeHe Cmcm and the FeHe 2 Cmmm structures shown in Fig. We next investigate the effects of temperature on the formation of helium-iron compounds upon increasing pressure. If the effects of nuclear motion are neglected, FeHe forms at pressures above 4.1 TPa, and the inclusion of quantum and thermal nuclear motion lowers this pressure to 2.7 TPa at 10, 000 K. FeHe 2 only forms at a higher pressure of about 12 TPa, and therefore we focus on the FeHe compound to study the formation of helium-iron compounds under pressure. We use ab initio molecular dynamics simulations in conjunction with the Z-method performed using the quantum espresso package In Fig. Our results suggest that the FeHe compound should form at the pressures accessible to dynamic compression experiments. Furthermore, the formation pressure of FeHe is predicted to be within the pressure range found at the core of Jupiter, with a core-mantle boundary pressure of 4.2 TPa and temperature of 20, 000 K, and at the highest pressures found at the centre of Saturn, with a coremantle boundary pressure of 1 TPa In conclusion, we have used first-principles methods to study the binary phase diagram of helium and iron. We have found that compounds can form at pressures of several TPa, suggesting that they might be found inside giant (exo)planets and white dwarf stars. We have also predicted that the most stable FeHe compound exhibits a superionic phase with sublattice melting of the helium atoms within a wide range of temperatures and pressures. Overall, our results show that helium can form compounds at terapascal pressures. with previous reports [S22], we find that fcc iron becomes stable compared to hcp iron at pressures in the range 7.4 TPa to 21.7 TPa, and a body-centered tetragonal (bct) iron is the most stable structure above 35 TPa. The bct structure approaches the bcc structure with increasing pressure. The effects of temperature are shown in Fig. For the helium-iron FeHe stoichiometry, there are two different structures that are energetically competitive: (i) a structure of space group Cmcm with 8 atoms in the primitive cell, and (ii) a structure of space group F m3m with 2 atoms in the primitive cell (rock-salt structure). The relative enthalpies of these structures are shown in Fig. For the helium-iron FeHe 2 stoichiometry, there are three different structures that are energetically competitive: (i) a structure of space group P 6/mmm with 3 atoms in the primitive cell, (ii) a structure of space group I4 1 /amd with 6 atoms in the primitive cell, and (iii) a structure of space group Cmmm with 9 atoms in the primitive cell. These structures are depicted in Fig. We investigate superionicity and melting in the FeHe Cmcm structure using molecular dynamics simulations performed with quantum espresso [S32]. We used pseudopotentials converted from castep with the following strings: He 1|0.7|27|31|36|10(qc=9.2) Fe 3|1.2|30|35|40|30U:40:31:32(qc=10) We note that the computational expense of the molecular dynamics calculations forced us to use pseudopotentials with larger core radii than those used for the lattice dynamics calculations. Nonetheless, we have calculated the phonon density of states at 10 TPa for the FeHe Cmcm structure and confirmed that the hard and soft pseudopotentials lead to consistent results (see Fig. It is interesting to note that the Lindemann criterion correctly predicts the existence of a superionic phase. This criterion associates nuclear vibrations with structural changes and states that a solid melts when the ratio of the rootmean-square nuclear vibrational amplitude and the interatomic separation exceeds some critical value, u 2 /a λ c , which is usually taken to be λ c = 0.1. The Lindemann criterion using the smallest He-He distance as the interatomic separation a predicts that the helium sublattice melts at temperatures of a few thousand Kelvin, but at those temperatures the Fe-Fe Lindemann ratio is significantly smaller than λ c . These results suggest that, upon increasing temperature, the helium chains melt within the iron channels in FeHe before the iron channels themselves melt. We note that quantitatively, the Lindemann criterion results significantly deviate from the molecular dynamics results. FIG. We have calculated the helium melting curve using MD in a similar manner to that described above for FeHe We will report full details of this calculation in a separate publication. The iron melting curve is taken from Ref. [S36], in which density functional theory in conjunction with a two-phase coexistence approach was used.