transition metal (TM) ferrimagnets over a wide temperature range. Extracted from the field-driven magnetic domain-wall mobility,  was as low as 7.2 × 10 -3 and was almost constant across the angular momentum compensation temperature T A , starkly contrasting previous predictions that  should diverge at T A due to vanishing total angular momentum. Thus, magnetic damping of RE-TM ferrimagnets is not related to the total angular momentum but is dominated by electron scattering at the Fermi level where the TM has a dominant damping role. represents the magnetization relaxation phenomenon, describing how quickly magnetization spins reach equilibrium Several theoretical models for magnetic damping have been proposed Antiferromagnets, which have alternating orientations of their neighboring magnetic moments, have recently received considerable attention because of their potential importance for spintronic applications Motivated by the aforementioned result, in this letter, we investigate the magnetic damping of ferrimagnets across the angular momentum compensation temperature, which will allow us to understand magnetic damping in antiferromagnetically coupled system. We selected rare earth (RE)-transition metal (TM) ferrimagnets for the material platforms because they have an angular momentum compensation temperature T where antiferromagnetic spin dynamics are achieved For this study, we prepared perpendicularly magnetized ferrimagnetic GdFeCo films in which the Gd and FeCo moments were coupled antiferromagnetically. Specifically, the films were 5-nm SiN/30-nm Gd23.5Fe66.9Co9.6/100-nm SiN on an intrinsic Si substrate. The GdFeCo films were then patterned into 5-μm-wide and 500-μm-long microwires with a Hall cross structure using electron beam lithography and Ar ion milling. For current injection, 100-nm Au/5-nm Ti electrodes were stacked on the wire. A Hall bar was designed to detect the DW velocity via the anomalous Hall effect (AHE). We measured the magnetic DW motion using a real-time DW detection technique Next, a d.c. current was applied along the wire to measure the anomalous Hall voltage. Then, a current pulse (12 V, 100 ns) was injected through the writing line to nucleate the DW in the wire. The created DW was moved along the wire and passed through the Hall bar because of the presence of μ H. The DW arrival time was detected by monitoring the change in the Hall voltage using a real-time oscilloscope. The DW velocity could then be calculated from the arrival time and the travel distance between the writing line and Hall bar (500 μm). μ H for all T * . Such linear behavior can be described by 〈v〉 μ μ H μ H , where μ is the DW mobility and μ H is the correction field, which generally arises from imperfections in the sample or complexities of the internal DW structure Therefore, in the subsequent analysis, we chose the larger solution α in the vicinity of T and the smaller solution α far away from T and connected the solution continuously in between. The other material parameters such as M , M , s , and s are estimated by measuring the net magnetic moment of GdFeCo film, |M |, for various temperatures. Because M includes contributions from both the Gd and FeCo sub-moments, the submagnetic moments, M and M , could be decoupled based on the power law criticality [see details in refs. Figures Figure (see the dotted line in Fig. [42], Stanciu et al. investigated the temperature dependence of the effective Gilbert damping parameter based on a ferromagnet-based model and found that the damping diverged at T . Because they analyzed the magnetic resonance in ferrimagnetic materials based on a ferromagnet-based model, which cannot describe the antiferromagnetic dynamics at T at which the angular momentum vanishes, it exhibits unphysical results. However, our theoretical analysis for field-driven ferromagnetic DW motion based on the collective coordinate approach can properly describe both the antiferromagnetic dynamics in the vicinity of T and the ferromagnetic dynamics away from T Our results, namely the insensitivity of damping to the compensation condition and its low value, have important implications not only for fundamental physics but also for technological applications. From the viewpoint of fundamental physics, nearly constant damping across T indicates that the damping is almost independent of the total angular momentum and is mostly determined by electron spin scattering near the Fermi level. Specifically, our results suggest that the 4f electrons of RE elements, which lie in a band far below the Fermi level, do not play an important role in the magnetic damping of RE-TM ferrimagnets, whereas the 3d and 4s bands of TM elements have a governing role in magnetic damping. This result is consistent with the recently reported theoretical and experimental results in FeCo alloys In conclusion, we investigated the field-driven magnetic DW motion in ferrimagnetic GdFeCo alloys over a wide range of temperatures across T and extracted the Gilbert damping parameter from the DW mobility. The estimated Gilbert damping parameter was as low as 7.2 × 10 -3 and almost constant over the temperature range including T , which is in stark contrast to the previous prediction in that the Gilbert damping parameter would diverge at T due to the vanishing total angular momentum. Our finding suggests that the magnetic damping of RE-TM ferrimagnets is not related to the total angular momentum but is mostly governed by the scattering of electrons at the Fermi level where the TM element has a dominant role for the magnetic damping. (c) 