Atom probe tomography enables precise quantification of the composition of second phase particles from their early stages, leading to improved understanding of the thermodynamic and kinetic mechanisms of phase formation and quantify structure-property relationships. Here we demonstrate how approaches developed for small-angle scattering can be adapted to atom probe tomography. By exploiting nearest-neighbor distributions and radial distribution function, we introduce a parameter free methodology to efficiently extract information such as particle size, composition, volume fraction, number density and inter-particle distance. We demonstrate the strength of this approach in the analysis of a precipitation-hardened model Al-Zn-Mg-Cu highstrength lightweight alloy. Al-Zn-Mg-(Cu) alloys of the 7XXX Al-alloys are precipitation-strengthened Al-alloys exhibiting high-strength and expected to play an important role for lightweight transportation. The precipitation sequence in the bulk of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys has been studied and is well established Over 50 years of theoretical developments in the small-angle scattering community have enabled the development of a complete formalism to fit experimental results with analytical functions to derive microstructural characteristics An Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy was cast into a 200mm*190mm*40mm ingot in a vacuum induction furnace. The ingot was homogenized at 475 °C for 1.5 hours and water quenched followed by hot rolling at 450 °C to 3mm thickness and water quenched. Samples were then solution treated at 475 °C for an hour and quenched in water, immediately followed by an aging treatment at 120 o C for 30 minutes, 2 h and 24 h. An overaging step was performed on the 24h aged sample by further aging for 6 h at 180°C. A specimen was also analyzed immediately after quench. It will be further called 'as quenched' even though it has in fact undergone roughly 6h of natural ageing before APT analysis which may have already caused some degree of clustering. Table The total voltage was increased to maintain an average detection rate of 1 evaporative event per 100 pulses. Datasets containing 50-150 million ions were acquired for each aging state. Data reconstruction and analysis were performed using the Integrated Visualization and Analysis software (IVAS 3.6.14). The partial structural information from within the dataset allowed to calibrate the reconstructions parameters as described by Gault et al. The aging response was followed by Vickers hardness measurements using a 0. From a typical dataset, two integral information can be obtained: the global composition and the matrix composition. The former is derived from counting the relative number of ions of each element within the mass spectrum. The latter can be derived from the distribution of isolated atoms for the determination of the matrix composition (DIAM) method For characterizing the precipitates present in the volume, we use radial distribution functions calculated with each solute of a specific species as the central atom. The calculation is then repeated for each species separately. The RDF n i-j (r) is the number of atoms of species j at a distance r of an atom of species i. To speed up the calculation, the RDF is computed on a randomly-selected subset of atoms, which does not affect the results, since the RDF is normalized by the composition. Calculation of an RDF for one solute in a 40 million ions dataset was timed to take approx. 20 minutes, while it lasted only approx. 1 minute on a subsampled dataset (1 in 40 ions). Even though subsampling increases statistical noise for low counts and should be used with care, no significant effect was observed. The n i-j (r) enable to compute the average composition C i-j (r) of element j at a distance r of an element i: We call C i the average composition of element i . In an isotropic system, C i ⋅ C i-j (r) is the correlation (convolution) of the spatial composition of element i and that of element j. At large r this convolution necessarily approaches C i ⋅ C j . We can subtract this final value and introduce the i -j pair correlation function (PCF) γ i-j (r): Where γ i-j (r) = 0 when there is no correlation, which is always true for large r. It can be rewritten: or to highlight that only the fluctuation of composition ΔC i , i.e. the difference with the average, is relevant to the PCF. This correlation function is analogous to that introduced by Debye and Bueche where γ i-j 0 (0) = 1 and γ i-j 0 = 0 at large r. γ i-j 0 (r) is only dependant on the geometry of the objects. In particular, for i = j, we have the auto-correlation: From its definition, the value of γ i-j at the origin ΔC i 2 is the mean squared composition fluctuation, which directly depends on the quantity and composition of the objects. Contrasting with γ i-i 0 (r), ΔC i 2 is exclusively composition-based, it is essentially immune to typical APT reconstruction artefacts such as local magnification or preferential field evaporation caused by the difference in the electric field necessary to induce field evaporation for different species or phases We assume 2 phases of homogeneous composition in element i, i.e. precipitates composition C p i in a matrix of composition C m i . We further assume that both share the same atomic volume Ω. While this is never strictly true, the difference in atomic volumes between phases is usually small compared to the possible apparent density differences due to e.g. local magnifications which should be true for any i. Within these assumptions we can calculate the average of the product of the composition fluctuations: In particular, for i = j ΔC i 2 = f v (1 -f v )(C p i -C m i ) 2 The value of the pair correlation function at r = 0, in combination with the matrix composition obtained from DIAM, provides a mean to derive both the volume fraction and the precipitates composition, irrespective of the particles shape and without being affected by local magnification. The normalized correction function γ 0 (r) can be calculated analytically for simple shapes. For a sphere of radius R, i.e. of homogeneous density and with a sharp interface with the matrix, it is given by For a size distribution of spheres (e.g. normal, log-normal,...) this can be readily integrated numerically. We have fitted all the experimental γ i-j (r) for all aging conditions independently, but with the same size for all i -j pairs. We use a lognormal distribution of spheres with a 20% dispersity. We also add a contribution of an excluded volume The results are a complete set of ΔC i 2 and R for all times and i. The next step is to compute the C p i from eq. ( This combined DIAM and RDF-based protocol was applied to characterize the matrix composition and the precipitates evolution over the course of the aging process. Figure While Cu low composition may be more sensitive to noise and ranging issues, Zn and Mg global dataset composition should be essentially independent of aging time and equal to the nominal composition. While this is observed initially, the global composition in Zn, and to some extent in Mg, eventually drops to a lower value in the peak aged state, and more importantly so after over aging. This could only be attributed to a loss of solutes to grain boundaries or to often-reported instrumental issues related to the preferential field evaporation of specific solutes The results show a number density in the range of 10 25 m -3 of solute-rich clusters approx. 1 nm in size form in the as-quenched state. This might be caused by the natural aging during sample preparation. The precipitates composition in the three solutes plateaus after 30 min to approx. 75 at % Al, 13 at % Zn, 10 at% Mg and 2 at % Cu. Over the first 2 hours at 120°C aging, nearly spherical zones enriched in solutes form and develop into GP zones with a number density of 10 24 -10 25 m -3 . In the peak aged condition, the precipitates' composition does not reach that of the η' phase and thus can be considered as GP zones. It should also be noted that within the precipitates, Cu remains in low composition and almost unchanged at 120°C aging, while exhibiting a strong increase in the overaging step. This likely originates from the low diffusivity of Cu, together with the solubility in the precipitates 