In the present work we study the spider's hair flow-sensing system by using fluid-structure interaction (FSI) numerical simulations. We observe experimentally the morphology of Theraphosa stirmi's hairs and characterize their mechanical properties through nanotensile tests. We then use the obtained information as input for the computational model. We study the effect of a varying air velocity and a varying hair spacing on the mechanical stresses and displacements. Our results can be of interest for the design of novel bio-inspired systems and structures for smart sensors and robotics. The ability of spiders in colonizing many habitats is also due to the fact that they interact efficiently with other animals for catching preys, escaping from predators and detecting potential partners also during the night. Spiders present a very complex and advanced sensing system based on tactile (or mechanical) Several numerical simulation works are available in the literature, but they are mainly related, for instance, to the engineering design and analysis of bio-inspired micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) (see, e.g., Ref. In this work, we employ fluid-structure interaction (FSI) simulations to study the behavior of spider's hairs in air. We investigate the effect of a varying flow velocity on the sensing capabilities, quantified in terms of displacements and von Mises stresses; and of a varying spacing of the hairs. The morphology of the hairs and their elastic properties are obtained experimentally, through Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), optical microscopy and nanotensile tests, and are used as inputs in the numerical simulations. The hairs are obtained from an exoskeleton of Theraphosa stirmi kept under controlled feeding and environmental conditions. The tested samples are prepared following the same procedure reported by Blackledge et al. For the morphology characterization by SEM, we use a Zeiss Supra 40 (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) at 2.30 kV. The metallization is made by using a sputtering machine Q150T (Quorum Technologies Ltd, UK) and the sputtering mode is Pt/Pd 80:20 for 5 minutes. In addition, we employ optical microscopy (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) at 10x magnification for the extraction of an average value of the hair diameter. For the mechanical characterization, we use a T150 UTM nanotensile machine (Agilent Technologies Inc., USA) with a 500 mN load cell. The displacement speed is 10 μm s -1 with the frequency load at 20 Hz. The declared sensitivity of the machine is 10 nN for the load and 1 Å for the displacement in the dynamic configuration. The FSI simulations are carried out in COMSOL Multiphysics® A single spider's hair is considered and it is approximated with a truncated cone of height L = 1000 μm, base diameter Db = 30 μm and tip diameter Dt = 15 μm. The computational domain for the fluid flow is composed of a 3D box of width 100 μm and height 1200 μm, with inlet and outlet positioned 1000 μm before and after the hair, respectively. Moreover, a chitin of thickness h = 100 μm is considered below the hair. We assign linear elastic material properties, using a Young's modulus E = 600 MPa (i.e. in the order of the measured value), a Poisson's ratio ν = 0.25 and a density ρh = 1425 kg m -3 (taken close to the respective values for chitin The inlet velocity is chosen from 0.1 to 1 m s -1 , which is in the range of the velocity field measured around flying insects Fig. The stress-strain curves extracted from the nanotensile test on different hairs are shown in Fig. Fig. Neglecting the shear deformation, the displacement at the tip of the hair is given by: where we have inserted the expression of the maximum bending moment, equal to Therefore, inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. ( . An analogous reasoning can be made on the von Mises stress, except for the fact that its expression is more complicated because it must include, together with the bending stress, also a shear term and the stresses deriving from the substrate. For simplicity, considering only the maximum bending stress σb,max: , obtaining K ≈ 1.943•10 - 6 s (R 2 -value 0.9944). Consequently, the numerically-derived expression of the drag coefficient is: Considering the expression of the maximum bending stress in Eq. ( for fitting, obtaining Kσ ≈ 67840 kg m -2 s -1 (R 2 -value 0.9917). In this case, the drag coefficient is: Both expression of CD are in the same order of magnitude of the data available in the literature, e.g. for perfect spheres or cylinders Usually sensors are based on linear responses, since only one parameter is necessary to correlate the quantity to measure to an electric signal, and we observe that the spider's sensing system present a similar behavior. Thus, this effect can be particularly interesting for the design of new sensors and MEMS for fluid flow measurements. The effect of the hair spacing, here denoted with Δs, is quantified by monitoring the response of the second hair with respect to the first one. Specifically, we measure the variation of the maximum displacement at the hair tip and of the maximum von Mises stress at the hair base. As shown in Fig. This result suggests that the relative position of flow-sensing hairs is probably dictated by the mutual interference. Therefore, we have observed that there is an optimal configuration to maximize the spider's sensing capabilities: this happens when there is the maximum density of hairs (i.e. number of hairs per unit length of the substrate) capable of sensing a certain level of stress. This optimal density of hairs is compatible to what is observed experimentally, as shown in Fig. We have used FSI numerical simulations to investigate the behavior of Theraphosa stirmi's hairs under a fluid flow. We have extracted the morphology and the elastic properties of the hairs from experimental tests. The simulation study has allowed to compute the mechanical response of the hair under a varying flow velocity, suggesting a linear relationship between maximum displacement and mean inlet velocity, as well as between maximum von Mises stress and uavg. In addition, we have considered the spacing between two hairs, showing that when the spacing is low the wake of the first hair affects the sensing capability of the second one. Therefore, this suggests that the optimal hair spacing in spiders might derive from fluid dynamic reasons and from the need of maximizing the sensing capabilities. These results can be of interest for the optimal design of novel sensors and MEMS for fluid flow measurements. 