Cobalt-porphyrin catalyzed reductive decomposition of CO 2 to CO is investigated based on the Koper's water facilitated CO 2 reduction mechanism using simple but accurate protocol based on thermodynamics. In our protocol, accurate predictions of standard redox potentials and free energy differences are achieved by combining strengths of both density functional theory and experimental observations. With the proposed protocol, we found that the proton transfer from H 2 O takes place at -0.80 V vs. RHE at pH=3 through a concerted pathway and, as a result, the key intermediate for the CO generation, i.e., [CoP-COOH] -is formed. Since the redox potential of the proton transfer agrees well with experimentally observed CO 2 reduction potential, we successfully clarified that H 2 O plays an important role in the reductive decomposition of CO 2 to CO. This result is valuable not only for understanding the cobalt-porphyrin catalyzed reductive decomposition of CO 2 but also as a guide for the development of new catalysts. Electrochemical fixation of carbon dioxide is one of the promising and imperative countermeasures to mitigate global warming and energy storage problems, where CO 2 gas is electrochemically converted to fuels and commodity chemicals. Their mechanism successfully explained the reaction at pH=7 in water. However, it is also known that CO 2 reduction takes place in aqueous medium at much lower pH (pH = 3), Very recently, Yao et al. proposed an interesting reaction mechanism that starts from the H + binding to the N site of CoP ([CoP•H]) + . Maybe the other main reaction routes also exist. All the above mechanisms assume that H + plays an important role in the CO 2 reduction. Contrary to this, Koper et al. proposed a novel CO 2 reduction mechanism in aqueous medium based on their experimental 9 and computational Then, a proton is transferred from the water molecule and a carboxyl group is created as Finally, CO gas is released by following the similar reaction proposed by Leung et al. The key step in this mechanism is Eq. 2, where the water molecule not the proton becomes the proton source to facilitate CO 2 reduction. However, by considering the pH of the pure water which corresponds to the proton concentration of 10 -7 mol/l, it is not so easy to imagine that the water molecule has an ability to provide enough protons so that a large amount of CO 2 reduction takes place. Therefore further investigations are necessary. The goal of this paper is to shed light on the details of the Koper's water facilitated CO 2 reduction mechanism, i.e., Eqs. 1 -3, 9,25 using simple but accurate protocol based on thermodynamics, which combines density functional theory (DFT) and experimental data. In this study, the cobalt porphine (CoP) complex (Fig. B3P86 is known to reproduce the geometries of cobalt complexes. where F and ∆G • are the Faraday constant and the standard Gibbs free energy difference of the target reaction, respectively; E toSHE is the factor to convert reference system from the vacuum level to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). We employ the value of 4.28 V ) is necessary. This value is obtainable from the experimental pK a value of water and the free energy of a single proton in water where R, T , and pK a (H 2 O) denote the gas constant, temperature, and pK a value of water (= 14), In this paper, both sequential and concerted reaction mechanisms, shown in Fig. [ At first, we discuss the sequential reactions. In this mechanism, there are two possible reaction routes, i.e., [CoP-CO 2 ] -firstly reacts with H 2 O and, then, e -comes or vise versa. In case we assume [CoP-CO 2 ] -reacts with H 2 O first, the reaction route in Eq. 2 is decomposed into two elementary reactions as and the subsequent e -transfer reaction given by The free energy difference of the proton donation reaction (Eq. 6) is shown in Table . 1. The proton donation reaction is the endergonic reaction and the ∆G • = 0.50 eV is quite large. Therefore, CO 2 reduction does not proceed by this route. Next, the reaction route starting from the electron transfer is considered. Since the redox potential of the reaction: 3), this reaction occurs at slightly lower potential than the one-electron reduction potential of CoP (-0.43 V, see Table However, by considering the experimental results in Ref. 9, which reports that the direct proton reduction is diffusion limitation at pH = 3, CO 2 reduction via this route may not be dominant. Table Next, the possibility of the concerted reaction is investigated, where a water molecule and an electron react with [CoP-CO 2 ] -in a single step as shown in Fig. Finally, we investigate the effect of the hydrogen bonds on the standard equilibrium potential of the concerted reaction. It is reported that both CoP and CoP -do not form the hydrogen bond with surrounded water molecules while [CoP-CO 2 ] -and [CoP-COOH] - forms such bonds at CO 2 or COOH moiety. The standard equilibrium potential of the concerted reaction using the cluster-continuum model is shown in Table Table We investigated the details of the Koper's water facilitated CO 2 reduction mechanism From the comparison of the three different pathways, we concluded that the water facilitated CO 2 reduction takes place through the concerted pathway. We successfully explained, for the first time, the details of the cobalt-porphyrin catalyzed electrochemical reduction of CO 2 at low pH region (pH of around 3). The importance of our findings from the point of view of materials design is that the equilibrium potential of Eq. 8 can be controlled by changing the catalyst, meaning it becomes useful guide to design not only the cobalt-porphyrin complexes but also other catalysts, such as MOFs and metal alloys. So far, the binding energies of H and COOH to the catalyst are used as the guide to design new catalysts. (13) Cheng, M.-J.; Kwon, Y.; Head-Gordon, M.; Bell, A. T. Tailoring metal-porphyrin-like active sites on graphene to improve the efficiency and selectivity of electrochemical CO 2 reduction. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 21345-21352. (14) Wannakao, S.; Jumpathong, W.; Kongpatpanich, K. Tailoring metalloporphyrin frameworks for an efficient carbon dioxide electroreduction: selectively stabilizing key intermediates with H-bonding pockets.