Graphene/MoS 2 heterostructures are formed by combining the nanosheets of graphene and monolayer MoS 2 . The electronic features of both constituent monolayers are rather well-preserved in the resultant heterostructure due to the weak van der Waals interaction between the layers. However, the proximity of MoS 2 induces strong spin orbit coupling effect of strength ∼1 meV in graphene, which is nearly three orders of magnitude larger than the intrinsic spin orbit coupling of pristine graphene. This opens a bandgap in graphene and further causes anticrossings of the spin-nondegenerate bands near the Dirac point. Lattice incommensurate graphene/MoS 2 heterostructure exhibits interesting moiré patterns which have been observed in experiments. The electronic bandstructure of heterostructure is very sensitive to biaxial strain and interlayer twist. Although the Dirac cone of graphene remains intact and no charge-transfer between graphene and MoS 2 layers occurs at ambient conditions, a strain-induced charge-transfer can be realized in graphene/MoS 2 heterostructure. Application of a gate voltage reveals the occurrence of a topological phase transition in graphene/MoS 2 heterostructure. In this chapter, we discuss the crystal structure, interlayer effects, electronic structure, spin states, and effects due to strain and substrate proximity on the electronic properties of graphene/MoS 2 heterostructure. We further present an overview of the distinct topological quantum phases of graphene/MoS 2 heterostructure and review the recent advancements in this field. The successful isolation of graphene from bulk graphite No such charge-transfer has been observed in 5:4 bilayer heterostructure which has minimal strain. This finding is consistent with the experimental observations of Diaz et al. An enlarged view of bands near the Fermi energy reveals that bands acquire a parabolic shape near the Dirac point due to proximity effects. A Rashba-type spinsplitting is expected in this system because of the broken inversion symmetry and strong SOC effects arising from the MoS 2 layer. Moreover, due to the intrinsic SOC of graphene, a spin-gap opens at the Dirac point and bands anticross each other yielding the resulting band dispersion shown in Fig. As we mentioned above while discussing the electronic bandstructure of 5:4 and 4:3 bilayer heterostructures, the shifting of the Dirac point above the lowest conduction band of MoS 2 indicates the occurrence of a charge-transfer from graphene to the MoS 2 monolayer. We also argued that this charge-transfer is mainly triggered by strain. The effect of strain on the electronic properties of graphene [72] Interestingly, Guinea et al. In order to further understand the effect of strain on the direct bandgap at Dirac point, location of band edges of MoS 2 monolayer, and change in the orbital features near the Fermi-level, we plot the aforementioned quantities as a function of x in Fig. 3 Model Hamiltonian and topological phase transitions In this section, we study the heterostructure using a tight-binding theoretical framework. First, a linear transformation that connects the primitive lattice vectors of graphene and MoS 2 is written as where are the real primitive vectors (for x = graphene and MoS 2 ) with M = diag( 4 5 , 4 5 ). It can be shown Because of the honeycomb structure, the Brillouin zone of the graphene/MoS 2 4 : 5 heterostructure has similar features to graphene, with two valleys 3 , a α = 5a G = 4a M , where the K and K valleys of graphene and MoS 2 are mapped onto the same positions of the first Brillouin zone of the supercell upon folding [see Fig. We use a tight-binding formalism that couples up to next nearest neighbors i j in MoS 2 with minimal three-orbital basis. In MoS 2 , the basis can be represented at low-energy by three orbitals (d z 2 , d xy and d x 2 -y 2 ), as discussed above and in Ref. where α † jνσ label the ν-orbital at site j of the Mo-lattice with spin σ . The first term considers the on-site energy of atom j and orbital ν. The second term describes hopping between Mo orbitals to nearest and next nearest neighbors. Strong MoS 2 spin orbit coupling is considered from atomic SOC contribution, (see Eq. 25 and Table IV in Ref. To model graphene, we adopt the usual single-orbital representation for the triangular lattice with two-atom basis that couples only nearest neighbors i j where ε of the first term describes the on-site energy, and the second term considers hoppings to the nearest neighbors with coupling strength t g . The presence of a substrate generates a perpendicular electric field to the graphene layer. This electric field causes a spin orbit coupling that can be described by a Rashba Hamiltonian of the form [93] where α, β describes spin up and spin down states, |d i j | is the unit vector that connects A atom of graphene to its nearest neighbor B atom. The Rashba spin orbit interaction is weak in graphene i.e., t R = 0.067 meV We consider coupling only between neighbors across the layers between the graphene p z -orbital and MoS 2 d-orbitals, which is described as where t ν i, j is represented by a tunneling amplitude where |r m,i -r g, j | is the distance that connects atoms in both layers, normalized to a constant η = 5a g . t ν describes the effective coupling between p z and d-orbitals using a Slater-Koster approach where n i are directional cosines. The numerical values of the coupling constants are set to be in agreement with what is expected: the coupling t z 2 is larger than t xy and t x 2 -y 2 , due to a higher overlap. The numerical values used here, V pdπ = -0.232 eV and V pdσ = 0.058 eV, do not affect the main conclusions nor qualitative behavior, as we will discuss below. This Hamiltonian is capable of reproducing the low energy dispersions close to the K and K points with great accuracy. TMD parameters are adapted from Liu et al. The full band structure of the heterostructure along high symmetry lines (Γ -M-K-Γ ) is shown in Fig. As the MoS 2 low energy conduction and valence bands show different SOC and orbital characteristics. Tuning graphene's potential relative to the MoS 2 may then result-in different proximity effects onto the Dirac bands. Results of such tuning yields three distinct states as shown in Fig. Notice that the spin state in K is reversed in the K valley due to time reversal symmetry, whereas the staggered potential value is the same for both valleys. Further analysis to study the changes of topological characters accompanied with the change of these band phases is discussed below. To gain more insight into this gate dependent phase transition, we study the spin S z and AB lattice pseudospin σ z content of the eigenstates. The bands closest to the neutrality point are characterized using equations for each state |Ψ i . We find that, as shown in lowest panels of Fig. To better understand the physics of this heterostructure system, an effective model that describes the results is vital. Based on the symmetries of the graphene-MoS 2 heterostructure, we propose the following Hamiltonian for the states near neutrality, where all the terms respect time reversal symmetry E-E F ( The effective Hamiltonian provides an excellent fit to the tight-binding model results where t, ∆ , S 1 , S 2 and R are constants to be found by fitting them to the tight-binding or first principles band structure. σ i , τ i , s i are Pauli matrices where i = 0, x, y, z, ( 0 is used for the unit matrix); σ i acts on the pseudospin A, B space, τ i on the K, K valley space, and s i operates on the spin degree of freedom. H 0 describes pristine graphene at low energy Let us analyze the effect of some terms in this effective model. H S 2 (diagonal spin orbit coupling) breaks the particle-hole symmetry by oppositely shifting bands. The staggered potential (H ∆ ) opens a gap in the otherwise linear dispersion of H 0 We analytically find the parameters at zero momentum k = 0 that both fit the band structure and satisfy the spin and pseudospin expectation values in Eq. ( Top panel of Fig. The parameters of the effective Hamiltonian change smoothly with gate voltage, as shown in Fig. At the semi metallic phase, both terms are nearly equal, while for trivial gap band gate voltages, the staggered term |∆ | overcomes the diagonal spin value |S 2 |. Notice that large diagonal spin orbit coupling and staggered potential terms that characterize the dynamics near K and K valleys are very similar to the structure in TMDs. Away from the K point the heterostructure exhibits linear dispersion with a very slight drop in Fermi velocity ( 2%), nearly independent of V g . The effective Hamiltonian provides a reliable description of the graphene-MoS 2 heterostructure at different gate voltages. It also allows us to further investigate the topology of bands heterostructure. The nature of the gapped phases generated due to the application of an effective gate voltage can be characterized by calculating Berry curvature Ω n (k) and Chern number per valley C n [100] for the valence bands nearest the gap band using the following equations: where n is the band number, v x (v y ) is the velocity operator along the x(y) direction It has been shown that interesting edge states in systems with borders are accompanied by a non-vanishing Berry curvature in each valley, as seen in graphene ribbons and TMD flake edges Finally, TMDs substrates play a major role in determining the magnitude of effective parameters induced onto the graphene layer due to proximity effects. The most important of these parameters are the diagonal SOC and the staggered potential. In Fig. V Gate (eV) -0.5 0 0.5 〈S z 〉 Fig. inverted and the direct bandgap regimes is a generic feature, which is expected to exist for all TMD substrates. Superimposing graphene and two-dimensional TMDs leads to the appearance of a moiré pattern which produces a number of interesting effects in these hybrid heterostructures. The interaction between the layers results in an effective lattice symmetry breaking for the low-energy graphene-like states of the structure. The states near Dirac points of graphene experience sizable sublattice asymmetry and spin-orbit coupling due to the proximity of the TMD layer, opening a gap in the band structure, akin to the effect of boron nitride on graphene. However, the strong spin-orbit coupling in TMDs transfers to the graphene states with dramatic consequences. It is important to note that the relatively weak van der Waals interactions between layers leave most of the linear-dispersion (Dirac cone) of graphene intact, and no charge transfer occurs between graphene and MoS 2 layers at ambient conditions. However, the reduced symmetries break the Dirac point singularity and opens bandgap of few meV in the electronic bandstructure, with eigenstates having subtle spin and sublattice spinor content. One can moreover realize unique control over the charge-transfer phenomenon between the MoS 2 and graphene layers by means of strain or applied gate voltages between the layers. We have shown that the direct bandgap can be significantly tuned by applying biaxial strain on the MoS 2 substrate. We have further analyzed that an interlayer effective gate voltage can drive the system through a phase transition between a trivial direct band and a non-trivial inverted bandgap structure. The latter phase is achieved whenever the neutrality point is shifted towards the valence bands of the TMD, as the spin-orbit coupling is found to dominate over the sublattice asymmetry (staggered) effect in that regime. The agreement between first-principles and tight-binding model calculations assures that this predicted effect is robust and should be observable in experiments. Moreover, the effective Hamiltonian is suggestive that this behavior is quite general, and that other TMDs would have similar effects on graphene, as characterized by complex Berry curvature and corresponding Chern numbers. The notion of being able to drive a material system across a topological transition is interesting. However, the possibilities of achieving quantum spin Hall and valley Hall effects in such system, when a finite-size structure is driven into the inverted bandgap regime are indeed tantalizing. The growing interest on hybrid heterostructures of graphene/MoS 2 , in general graphene/TMD or graphene/2D-material for new physical behavior or technological applications calls for more theoretical research in this direction. Researchers have started exploring the effect of intercalation of small metallic ions between the two monolayers of graphene and TMD. It would be interesting to study the diffusion, adsorption, and intercalation of various different types of elements on the electronic, mechanical, thermal, photoluminescence, energy storage, and catalytic properties of such heterostructures. Changes in the properties due to substrate-induced or externally-applied strain, as well as the formation of domain walls or grain boundaries, is a subject to investigate further-especially as large area samples may exhibit multiple domains. The presence of distinct topological phases in graphene/TMD heterostructures indicates there is a need to characterize distinct topological states using topological invariant numbers, as done for topological insulators. A Weyl semimetallic phase may be realized at the trivial to non-trivial topological insulators phase boundary in similar heterostructures. The proximity effect of physisorption of another graphene monolayer or another MoS 2 monolayer on graphene/TMD heterostructures might yield intriguing phenomena in the electronic and thermal properties of these heterostructures. The effects due to doping, vacancies, chemical pressure, temperature, and anisotropic strain require systematic studies for the thorough exploration of these systems before devices can be fully developed. Lastly, since these heterostructures seem to be promising candidates for bio-sensing applications, changes in their properties in contact with chemical or biological entities would be important to pursue.