Evaporation kinetics of pendant droplets is an area of immense importance in several applications in addition to possessing rich fluid and thermal transport physics. The present article experimentally and analytically sheds insight into the augmented evaporation dynamics of paramagnetic pendent droplets in the presence of a magnetic field stimulus. Literature provides information that solutal advection and solutal Marangoni effect lead to enhancement of evaporation in droplets with ionic inclusions. The major crux of the present article remains to modulate the thermo-solutal advection with the aid of magnetic field and comprehend the dynamics of the evaporation process under such complex multiphysics interactions. Experimental observations reveal that the evaporation rate enhances as a direct function of the magnetic moment of the solvated magnetic element ions, thereby pinpointing at the magnetophoretic and magneto-solutal advection. Additionally, flow visualization by Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) illustrates that the internal advection currents within the droplet are strengthened in magnitude as well as distorted in orientation by the magnetic field. A mathematical formalism based on magneto-thermal and magneto-solutal advection effects has been proposed via scaling analysis of the species and energy conservation equations. The formalism takes into account all major governing factors such as the magneto-thermal and magneto-solutal Marangoni numbers, magneto-Prandtl and magneto-Schmidt numbers and the Hartmann number. The modeling establishes the magneto-solutal advection component to be the domineering factor in augmented evaporation dynamics. Accurate validation of the experimental internal circulation velocity is obtained from the proposed model. The present study reveals rich insight on the magneto-thermo-solutal hydrodynamics aspects in paramagnetic droplets. Fluid dynamics, thermal and species transport within and from microliter droplets is emerging as an established field of research since the past few decades owing to the critical role microdroplets play in different systems, applications, and processes. Broadly speaking, important applications of droplets and sprays(a populous collection of microdroplets) Standalone droplets are in general categorized into two types, the pendant, and the sessile droplets. While the latter rests in equilibrium on a solid surface and surrounded by the ambient gas phase; the former suspends in equilibrium from the tip of the solid surface (often a needle or thin structures) with the ambient gas phase shrouding the majority of the droplet surface. In addition to the equilibrium of phases, surface properties like wettability and surface energy also play vital roles in case of the sessile droplets. Some well documented studies involving thermofluidics of sessile droplets are reports by Hu and Larsen Pioneering investigations on the evaporation dynamics of fuel based pendant droplets was initially reported by Godsave The law assumes spherical droplet, with constant diffusion rate, evaporating in a quasi-steady gas phase in an isobaric manner, and with uniform droplet temperature. Over the years, seminal studies on pendent droplets have evolved, such as by Kuz Fluid dynamics, thermal and species transport phenomena in conducting or magnetically active fluids in presence of magnetic field (commonly termed as magnetohydrodynamics), has been an area of sincere interest within the academic community given the rich physics of the problem. In general, such flows are characteristics of geophysical flows (such as mantle convection, flows within the magnetosphere, etc.), or in astrophysical flows (such as the convective zone within stars, gas flows in accretion disks, etc.). At small or man-made scales, such dynamics can be observed in systems such as plasma reactors, particle accelerators, etc. In recent times, magnetohydrodynamics has been of interest in ferrofluid based targeted drug delivery. Ferrofluids or magnetic fluids are stable solutions of magnetically active dispersed phase (mostly nanoscale iron particles in case of ferrofluids) in a carrier solution (Laroze et al. Computational analysis and stability theory has been also extended to thermal and mass transport systems in fluid flow under influence of magnetic fields. Mudhaf and Chamkha Thereby, detailed study of the literature reveals several interesting facts. Firstly, the influence of magnetic field on fluid flows and heat transfer have been studied, but in general computationally. Secondly, the majority of such studies deal with ferro-convection, which is typical of fluid systems of high electrical conductivity in the presence of very strong magnetic fields. Thereby, the field at hand has paid very scarce attention to realistic thermofluid problems, such as the simplistic case of a paramagnetic fluid undergoing evaporation in the presence of a magnetic field. The present paper aims to understand the complex behavior and interplay of fluid dynamics and heat transport during theevaporation process of a paramagnetic droplet (achieved employing solvated magnetic salts) in the presence of anapplied magnetic field. Study of evaporation of ionic solution droplets (Jaiswal et al. This would induce redistribution of the ionic concentration in the fluid, thereby changing the evaporation kinetics, which is a gist of the focus of the present article. Experimentally understanding the physics of coupled thermofluidics and magnetism in evaporating droplets could have far-reaching implications in microfluidic multiphysics. In the present experiments, three paramagnetic salts, viz. anhydrous iron (III) chloride (FeCl The experiments were performed using a customized setup and figure The following sections discuss the physics and mechanisms of evaporative dynamics of paramagnetic pendent droplets in conjunction with magnetic fields. Figure In eqn. 2, D is the instantaneous equivalent spherical droplet diameter, D 0 is the initial diameter of the droplet, k is evaporation rate and t is the elapsedtime duration of evaporation. This has also been explained FIG. Surface tension plays an important role in the thermofluid dynamics of pendent droplets as the pendant hangs stably against gravity by virtue of surface forces at the needle-fluid interface. When the magnetic field is applied against such magnetically active fluids, it is expected that the paramagnetic ions in these typical salts will tend to align or orient to the direction of the magnetic field, and this may affect the physical as well as chemical transport properties of the solution. Typically, studies have shown that hydrated ions in salt solutions tend to desorb away from the surface towards the fluid bulk, thereby leading to change of the effective surface tension compared to water Thereby, the nickel sulphate based salt exhibits the weakest improvement in evaporation owing to its low value of the magnetic moment. However, the increment in evaporation rate at 0.24 T is ~ 3 times compared to the zero field case. This large enhancement cannot be explained by the minimal changes in surface tension under field effect and hence additional experimental support is required to understand mechanism completely. Given the fact that role of surface tension change has been removed from consideration as a potential mechanism to explain the enhanced evaporation, further possible mechanisms must be worked upon. Evaporation in case of pure fluids in absence of ambient advection is by molecular diffusion The model 3-5 In eqns. However, the evaporation dynamics of salt solution droplets has been explained in the literature It has been reported that solutes or inclusions change evaporation dynamics of droplets PIV studies were performed to ascertain and quantify the internal circulation dynamics and were performed during the very initial stages of evaporation to avoid effects of changes in the bulk concentration of the solute phase within the evaporating droplet. The PIV was performed during the first 5 minutes of evaporation of respective experiment wherein the bulk concentration of the solute phase has been determined toincrease within the limit of 10% of the original value. The PIV image acquisition was performed at 10 fps for a period of 60 seconds and contour plots were obtained based on the averaged spatial velocity distribution for the whole data set. Figure During the PIV, the illuminating laser is positioned so as to coincide with the plane of dominant circulation to the best possible extent, such that accuracy in determining the average circulation velocity is sufficient. In the presence of magnetic field, it is typically observed (from figure 7 (b)) that the plane of dominant circulation shifts and the circulation becomes dominant about the vertical axis perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. Accordingly, the average circulation velocity and contours are determined via repositioning of the laser and imaging camera. Additionally, the overall magnitude of the circulation velocity is observed to increase as a function of field strength. The reorientation of the circulation plane can be explained based on the principle of Fleming's rule. In the presence of a magnetic field, the flow of charge (due to the ionic circulation within the droplet) experiences a force orthogonal to both its own direction and the magnetic field. Thereby, the ionic circulation is reoriented in the new plane. Furthermore, the paramagnetic ions within the fluid respond to the magnetic field orientation and experience additional drift velocities, thereby augmenting the overall circulation velocity as well. It is evident from the visualization studies (Figure Having established that internal advection enhances evaporation rate via shear-induced replenishment of the vapor diffusion layer and that the strength of circulation velocity enhances strongly as a function of magnetic field, the mechanism requires being understood. As discussed For the evaporating droplet under the influence of magnetic field, the energy balance at any instant can be expressed as . , where m ̇, h fg , k th , C p and ρ refer to the change in mass lost as vapour, the enthalpy of vaporization, the thermal conductivity, specific heat and density of the liquid, respectively. ∆T m , U c,m and V f represent the temperature difference across the droplet bulk and interface created due to evaporation, the spatially averaged internal velocity (in the absence of magnetic field) and the spatially averaged internal circulation velocity under the influence of magnetic field. The left-hand side of the equation represents the energy flux due to the evaporative loss and right-hand side includes heat conduction across the fluid, convective component of energy which comprises of the thermo-convective circulation and the magneto-thermoconvective circulation, respectively. As the droplet surface cools down due to evaporation, finite difference in temperature is generated across the droplet bulk and the interface, which leads to possible thermal convection within the droplet. Furthermore, uneven cooling of the pendent shape leads to surface convection or thermo-Marangoni convection along the droplet surface In the present condition, the absence of electric field leads to restricting of the Eqn. 7 as Since the field is assumed to be purely unidirectional (only between the cylindrical poles) and the internal flow has been visualized to occur orthogonally to the field direction, the system can be scaled to yield The acceleration can be scaled as a~V f /t (where the time period can be further scaled as t ~ R/V f ), thereby leading to the approximate scaled expression as Accordingly, the approximate expression for the internal circulation velocity under magnetic field influence can be expressed as a function of the zero fields internal circulation velocity as Based on the expression of the internal convection velocity in terms of the thermal gradient generated within the droplet, the augmented velocity under field effect can be expressed as In the preceding set of eqns., q, E ⃗ , B ⃗ , V ⃗ , σ e , F , m, a, t, and R represent the charge of the solvated ions, electric field intensity, magnetic field strength, velocity, the electrical conductivity of the fluid, Introducing the Marangoni number (Ma) in absence of magnetic field and due to thermal gradients within the droplet as . ( . The expression can be further reduced in the form . ( In eqn. 17, the Ma is >>1 for stable internal circulations to manifest within the droplet Which can be further condensed as . The 2 nd term on the right-hand side of eqn. 19 represents the geometric mean of two dimensionless numbers which is absent in the analysis of simple salt based droplet evaporation However, the flow visualization study reveals enhancement in internal circulation velocity by 2-3 times, which cannot be sufficiently explained by the magneto-thermal component. Thereby, although potent to induce enhanced evaporation, the magneto-thermal component cannot completely explain the observation and further probing is necessary. In a similar manner, the circulation velocity induced by buoyancy forces within the droplet is evaluated and the associated Rayleigh number is expressible as where the temperature difference responsible to induce buoyant convection within the droplet can be expressed as . In eqn. Given the possibility that both thermal Ma and Ra based convection can improve droplet evaporation, the dominant mode needs to be determined. Nield The critical Ma and Ra rely on the Lewis number (Le = q 0 d k ⁄ )and therefore the variation in evaporation regime regulates the stability pattern of the internal advection. Based on the analysis of Nield for zero magnetic field case in Figure Stability plot of the Rayleigh and Marangoni numbers for pure water and different magnetic salt solutions based droplets of varying concentration in the absence of magnetic field. Stability criteria lines proposed by Nield Further, the same stability plot has been presented in case of finite magnetic field environment governing the evaporation process. For the magnetic field case, the effective Ma T,m was evaluated and has been plotted against Ra in Figure Accordingly, iso-Ha lines However, the present points do not go beyond the line of Nield, which represents zone of unconditionally stable circulation. Hence, it cannot be clearly reasoned that magneto-thermal advection is the governing mechanism for enhanced evaporation. Comparison of magneto-thermal Ma and Ra for different magnetic salt solution droplets with varying concentration evaporating under the effect of magnetic field. Iso-Ha lines have been presented to understand the effect of magnetic field strength on the stability regimes. In multi-component droplets where only one component is evaporating, the effective concentration of the solute phase enhances as the solvent loses mass due to evaporation. In the present case, the paramagnetic ion concentration within the system enhances with the ongoing evaporation of the droplet. Furthermore, solvated ions are surface active agents, which exhibit preferential adsorption or desorption towards the interface or the bulk of the fluid. Thereby, during the evaporation process, a gradient of concentration is expected to exist across the droplet interface and bulk. Furthermore, the pendent shape leads to non-uniform evaporation, leading to the occurrence of concentration gradients at the interface also. Such gradients lead to changes in the value of surface tension (Figure The dynamic bulk and interfacial ion concentration of FeCl 3 at 0.2 M droplet during the progress of evaporation The salt induced internal circulation has also been confirmed by Savino and Fico ,, where ṁ, D, ∆C m , U c,m and V f,c represent rate of change of mass of the evaporating droplet, coefficient of diffusion of solute in the solvent, difference between the bulk and dynamic interfacial concentrations, internal circulation velocity due to solutal gradient in absence of field and a athe magneto-solutal circulation velocity due to the interplay of the solutal gradient and the applied magnetic field. The internal circulation velocity due to solutal gradient is expressed in a similar fashion as the thermal case,U . ( Rearranging further and applying the condition that the Ma s is greater than unity for stable circulation to occur, the expression can be obtained as Having established the magneto-solutal advection as the major mechanism governing the enhanced evaporation dynamics, its degree of dominance over the magneto-thermal advection needs to be understood. Figure Comparison of the thermal Ma against the solutal Ma in absence and presence of magnetic field. The stability curves represent different iso-Le (Joo Comparison of magneto-thermal Ma against the magneto-solutal Ma. The stability curves iso-Le (Joo The present article aims at understanding the influence of magnetic field on the evaporation kinetics of paramagnetic solution pendent droplets. Experiments were conducted to study evaporation kinetics of pendant droplet for different magnetic salt solutions under magnetic fields of variant strengths. The classical D 2 law is valid but evaporation rate enhancement under influence of magnetic field is observed through experimentation. Literature results point out that presence of solvated ions within the droplet leads to augmented evaporation due to solutal advection within the droplet. The advection current shears the droplet interface, which in turn replenishes the vapor diffusion layer surrounding the droplet with ambient air, thereby improving evaporation. It is further observed from experiments that the degree of enhancement of evaporation is directly proportional to the magnetic moment of the solvated paramagnetic ions, which hints at the role of magnetohydrodynamics mediated internal advection. Particle Image Velocimetry studies reveal that the internal advection velocity enhances with the application of magnetic field and also changes the o C) and evaporation rates for different salt based droplets (at zero and 0.24 T fields denoted as k 0T and k 0.24T respectively) at 1 atm