Dislocation interactions at the crack nucleation site were investigated in near-α titanium alloy Ti-6242Si subjected to low cycle fatigue. Cyclic plastic strain in the alloy resulted in dislocation pile-ups in the primary α grains, nucleated at the boundaries between the primary α and the two-phase regions. These two phase regions provided a barrier to slip transfer between primary alpha grains. We suggest that crack nucleation occurred near the basal plane of primary α grains by the subsurface double-ended pile-up mechanism first conceived by Tanaka and Mura. Superjogs on the basal a dislocations were observed near the crack nucleation location. The two phase regions showed direct transmission of a 3 dislocations between secondary alpha plates, transmitted through the β ligaments as a[010], which then decompose into (a/2) 111 dislocation networks in the β. The β ligaments themselves do not appear to form an especially impenetrable barrier to slip, in agreement with the micropillar and crystal plasticity investigations of Zhang et al. Near-α titanium alloys such as Ti-6242Si are used in elevated temperature service in aero-engines, e.g. in the compressor, especially in the 400-550 • C range. A wide range of temperature, stress and loading frequency combinations are experienced across the flight cycle; for example during take-off stresses in the disc bore can be high before the thermal field has equilibrated, and so room temperature fatigue behaviour can be an important consideration. Titanium alloys are generally notch sensitive and so crack initiation from the microstructure is often of greater concern than in other alloy systems where lifing can mostly be considered in terms of crack growth. Extensive research on fatigue crack initiation mechanisms have been performed, including metallographic observations of crack initiation Ti-6242Si develops a wide variety of microstructures depending upon the thermo-mechanical history, with microstructure having a significant effect on fatigue behaviour However, the two-phase regions having thin secondary alpha (α s ) plates in retained β also play a role. The two-phase region was found to be a barrier for slip transmission between primary alpha grains during low cycle fatigue In lamellar microstructures fatigue cracks initiate either within slip bands in α lamellae or along prior beta grain boundaries Despite this extensive research, very few observations have been made of the dislocation structures associated with naturally initiated fatigue crack initiation sites, as opposed to those associated with cyclic plasticity from gauge sections, or SEM studies of the orientations and coarse microstructural features associated with cracking. However, it has recently become possible, with focused ion beam milling, to perform such sitespecific studies. In this paper, we perform such studies with the aim of elucidating the dislocation mechanisms near a fatigue crack origin, in order that more fatigue-resistant microstructures and alloys might be developed in future. The dislocation mechanisms associated with fatigue crack nucleation and the role of the twophase regions are discussed in detail. The Ti-6Al-2Sn-4Zr-2Mo-0.1Si (wt.%) alloy investigated in this work was melted from elemental stock and then processed by rolling in both the β and α + β domains, recrystallized in the α + β domain at 950 • C for 5 h and air-cooled. The alloy was then aged at 593 • C for 8h and air cooled to promote nanometrescale Ti 3 Al precipitation. This processing route resulted in bimodal microstructure with 50% volume fraction of α p in the transformed β. The initial microstructure of the alloy can be found in our previous work Low cycle fatigue (LCF) tests were carried out on cylindrical plain fatigue samples with a 2.9 mm diameter and 15 mm long gauge length using a Mayes servohydraulic machine with an Instron 8800 controller. A trapezoidal waveform with a ramp up/down time of 1 s, a 1 s hold at maximum stress of 95% of yield stress (831 MPa ), 1 s hold at minimum stress and an R ratio of 0.05 was used. One sample failed after 23,914 cycles. A Zeiss Auriga field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM) in secondary electron imaging mode was used for fractography. Dislocation analysis was conducted using a JEOL JEM-2100F TEM/STEM with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. TEM samples were prepared using the focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out technique in a dual beam FEI Helios NanoLab 600 using a 30 kV Ga ion beam. Foils were extracted near the crack origin from the fracture surface. To protect the area of interest, a gas injection system was used to deposit a Pt-containing protective layer. Samples were made electron transparent by thinning down to a thickness of 150 nm. To obtain the orientation relation between α s and β ligaments in a two phase region of the foil, Transmission Kikuchi Diffraction (TKD) was carried out. TKD data was collected on the same Auriga SEM used for fractography, at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV and at a working distance of 2 mm. The stage was tilted to 30 • to make the sample in the TKD holder normal to the electron beam. Detailed description of the orientation relations found by TKD can be found in Tong et al The fracture surface was investigated and smooth, nearplanar crack initiating facets were found very slightly below the sample surface, Figure Foil 1 contained three different two phase regions and two α p regions, Figure A high dislocation density was observed in initiating facet α p (1), Figure The interactions between the long dislocation lines and the other dislocations resulted in the formation of superjogs in the long dislocation lines, indicated by white arrows in Figure Figure This section discusses the dislocation activities in foil 2, Figure The slip activities across the five different α p grains in foil 2 are shown in Figure It was observed that the dislocations in the first four grains (1-4) piled-up, forming well-defined slip bands, and that those Orientation of c-axis (degrees) slip bands underwent slip transfer across the α p grain boundaries (indicated by arrows in Figure The slip activity in primary alpha grain α p (1) is shown in Figure Figure Figure In contrast, grain 5 did not show planar slip bands; instead homogeneous deformation was observed, Figure Two phase region α s + β(2) in foil 2 was selected for further study. The various α s plates and β ligaments investigated are shown in Figure Figure We will first discuss the dislocation behaviours found in both near-origin faceted fatigue crack growth and in the initiating grain, and compare to the observations made previously for similarly-oriented grains from the gauge section Isolated dislocations are rarely observed in this alloy, indicating that dislocation groups or arrays are responsible for deformation. The two foils investigated exhibit strongly planar slip in the α p grains; due to the lack of forest hardening, this kind of planar slip leads to a low rate of work hardening. Planar slip in Al-containing hcp α-Ti is believed to be a consequence of the short range ordering of Ti and Al atoms The pile-ups in α p (1) of foil 1 near crack nucleation are dense, thick, double ended and non-classical, Figure The various slip systems in grain α p (1) in foil 1 were not observed to interact strongly, except the jogging of isolated straight dislocation lines, Figure In foil 1, the α p grain possessing a double ended pile-up had no neighbouring α p grains, instead being bounded (in the section observed) by two-phase regions. Because of its higher critical resolved shear stress (CRSS), it can be difficult to activate c + a pyramidal slip. It's observation in the present case can be rationalised as being a consequence of constraint by the adjoining two phase regions. The pile-ups in this grain did not transfer across the boundary and it was also observed that the mixed components of the straight dislocations also piled-up, Figure Many instances of slip transfer were observed between the similarly oriented α p grains in foil 2, Figure The observation of dislocation loops originating from the α p /α s + β boundary in Figure The schematic in Fig. The one-to-one correspondence between a 3 dislocations in all three α s plates investigated shows that these dislocations transferred across the β. These are the edge components of the dislocation loops. During this slip transfer process, the β plates are also sheared, resulting in a[010]-type dislocations. Since a 3 direction in α plate has no closely matched (a/2) 111 slip direction in the β plate, this relatively closely aligned a[010] slip is expected. The following reaction could occur during slip transmission across the α s /β boundary where r a 3 is a residual dislocation resulting from the misorientation and mismatch between the a 3 and b 010 dislocations. Such residual matrix dislocations can be observed near the α s /β boundary, Figure The two possibilities for the existence of these a 010 dislocations are either (i) that the intersection of b 1 and b 2 dislocations might have resulted in the formation of this dislocation, as described in Nb This decomposition is favored under high stresses due to the much higher mobility of b 1 and b 2 dislocations than b 010 dislocations Generally, it is believed that fatigue crack initiation in Ti alloys occurs by facet formation Based on the observations in foil 1 near the fatigue crack initiation, the following crack nucleation mechanism is proposed. Near the crack initiation, substantial dislocation activity was observed in grain α p The back stress developed by these dislocations is negative in the vicinity of pileup in the first plane, which would cause plastic flow in the reverse direction in the neighbouring plane during subsequent reverse loading An alternative explanation for the formation of the double ended pile-up might be the occurrence of multiple cross-slip events, as observed in the grains from the gauge section of the same sample The crack might then nucleate from the accumulated dislocation pile-ups in the following ways: (i) along the slip band The microplasticity produced by the slip bands within individual grains has been considered as an important parameter in microstructure sensitive computational methods by D.L. Mc-Dowell et al. The stress distribution due to this double ended pile-up together with the dislocation structures in the α p grain is shown in the schematic, Figure where 2a is the grain size, n is the number of stress cycles, ∆τ is the cyclic shear stress applied to the grain, κ is the lattice friction stress and h is the slip plane interplanar spacing. The tensile stress would split the atomic planes along the dislocation lines A new microstructural level critical stored energy density criterion proposed by Wan et al. The fatigue indicator parameter (FIP) suggested by C.P. Przybyla et al. The dislocation structures associated with the fatigue crack initiation site in aged bimodal Ti6242Si subjected to low cycle fatigue were examined, and compared to those previously found in the gauge and to those found in grains associated with crack growth. The following conclusions are drawn. 1. The alloy mainly deforms by cooperative movement of a large number of dislocations in the primary alpha grains, which predominantly deform by planar slip; interaction between the different operating slip systems is relatively rare. These pileups are found to be localized within the grain when the grain shares its boundary with two-phase regions or dissimilarly oriented grains; the slip bands transfer across the boundary when the grain has similarly oriented neighbour. The boundary between the primary alpha grain and a two phase region acts both as a dislocation source and as a barrier to slip transfer between primary alpha grains. 2. Dislocations in two phase α + β regions were observed to nucleate from the α/β boundaries as dislocation loops. A number of basal a loops were observed on basal planes in the α s plates; the edge component of these loops were found to transfer across the retained β ligaments. As the a 3 slip direction in the α s plates doesn't have a closely aligned slip direction in the β, direct transmission needs higher stress. These a 3 dislocations become a[010] dislocations in the β and subsequently decompose into a pair of mobile (a/2) 111 dislocations, observed as dislocation networks in the β. 3. The high dislocation density observed in one of the primary alpha grains nearest the initiation site suggests that crack nucleation occurred from this grain. c + a pyramidal slip was observed in this grain, which may be a consequence of the constraint imposed by the α s +β two phase regions on the either side of this grain, as well as the applied stress. Dislocations were observed to be piled up on both the ends of the grain, with positive and negative dislocations observed on neighbouring slip planes. Such structures can result from the incomplete reversibility of dislocation motion due to a slightly higher friction stress in the reverse direction than in the forward direction. This kind of double ended pile-up results in a large tensile stress between the two planes, providing a mechanism of crack initiation by plane splitting along the dislocation lines. The observation of superjogs on the basal dislocations provides a rationale for why such cracks nucleate near rather than on the basal plane. Crystallographic orientation of the α p grains with the loading direction in foil 2.