Crowdion defects are produced in body centred cubic metals under irradiation. Their structure and diffusive dynamics play a governing role in microstructural evolution, and hence the mechanical properties of nuclear materials. In this paper we apply the analytical Frenkel-Kontorova model to crowdions and clusters thereof (prismatic dislocation loops) and show that the Peierls potential in which these defects diffuse is remarkably small (in the micro eV range as compared to the eV range for other defects). We also develop a coarse-grained statistical methodology for simulating these fast-diffusing objects in the context of object kinetic Monte Carlo, which is less vulnerable to the low barrier problem than naïve stochastic simulation. Crowdions 1 Frenkel-Kontorova model From a theoretical point of view, their most attractive feature is the analytical tractability afforded by their one-dimensional nature. Below we introduce the Frenkel-Kontorova model where the sum runs over the close-packed string containing one additional atom, which have mass m, position z n , and are connected by harmonic springs with constant β. The interaction with the surrounding "perfect" lattice is encoded in the periodic potential V (z n ). Assuming the atomic displacement u n ≡ z n -na varies slowly with the atomic index n, it can be described by a continuous function u(z, t), with boundary conditions u(-∞) = a, u(∞) = 0, corresponding to the single additional atom in the string. a is the equilibrium spacing, and is given by r 0 √ 3/2 for the 111 direction in a bcc crystal with lattice constant r 0 . The simplest choice for the lattice potential is V 0 sin 2 (πz/a), and if we seek a static solution to the Euler-Lagrange equation corresponding to Eq.( where μ 2 = 2π 2 V 0 /βa 4 . This displacement profile smoothly varies from 0 to a as z goes from -∞ to ∞, with the variation taking place over a lengthscale 1/μ. Thus μ encodes the width of the crowdion, reflecting the relative strengths of the intra-string (β) and surrounding lattice (V 0 ) interactions. z 0 is the crowdion centreof-mass coordinate, i.e. its position in the 111 string. In the continuum limit, the energy of a static crowdion can be calculated by inserting the displacement profile Eq.2 into the (static) Hamiltonian Note how the two terms in the energy, corresponding to the intra-string (β) and surrounding lattice (V 0 ) interactions, are equal at every point. Also, E 0 is independent of z 0 , and so is independent of position. This is an artefact of the continuum limit we have taken, and discreteness can be approximately reintroduced by assuming the crowdion's profile remains fixed as it moves through the crystal, and exploiting the equipartition of the energy between string and lattice to write i.e. the continuum solution is evaluated at each discrete atom. The Poisson summation formula then leads to a Fourier series for the Peierls potential for the defect: This is the potential in which the defect moves, and the cosech(π 2 n/μa) factor strongly suppresses its magnitude when μa < 1, which is the case for crowdions. This is delocalization: the intra-string interaction is greater than the lattice interaction, meaning the displacement is spread over many atoms. Moving the defect centreof-mass one lattice parameter corresponds to tiny motions of many atoms, leading to a suppressed migration barrier. The first term in the series is adequate, and which is in the μeV range for reasonable values of the parameters (see Atomistic simulations and the analysis carries forward, leading to a displacement solution Potential (eV) Position along <111> string axis (lattice units) Potential (eV) Position along <111> string axis (lattice units) V, potential V_1 where and ξ = 2πj/αμa and q The input parameters can be determined from density functional calculations, and the results for the migration barrier heights for V, Nb, Ta are 6.8×10 -4 , 0.25×10 -4 and 0.087 × 10 -4 eV respectively, and those for Cr, Mo, W are 12 × 10 -3 , 2.4 × 10 -3 and 2.6 × 10 -3 eV respectively. A clear group-specific trend emerges, with the group VI metals having a deeper local minimum, and hence a larger migration barrier, than their group V counterparts. Still, all these barriers are remarkably low. Crowdions cluster together to form b = 1 2 111 prismatic dislocation loops, and the Frenkel-Kontorova model can be extended to treat these clusters where x is the separation between the crowdions' centres of mass Most defects migrate stochastically through the crystal with a diffusivity D that takes the form D = D 0 exp(E mig /k B T ), corresponding to hops through the lattice that occur with an Arrhenius rate proportional to exp(E mig /k B T ) (T is the temperature, E mig is the migration barrier and k B is Boltzmann's constant). This expression depends on the implicit assumption that E mig k B T , i.e. the hops are rare events. This clearly does not apply to crowdions for all but cryogenic temperatures. Indeed, for E mig k B T , the diffusion is effectively free. For 1D motion in a sinusoidal potential, an exact solution for the hop rate exists for all temperatures, see e.g. Molecular dynamics simulations Firstly assume that the direction-changing transition is a Poisson process with rate Γ. Then the time intervals between changes of direction will be exponentially distributed, with pdf ψ(t) = Γ exp(-Γt). If we further assume that, during the time interval t spent between direction changes, the crowdion diffuses normally with diffusivity D, then the hop lengths x, conditioned on the time interval t, will have the normal distribution Since the hops are independent, we can reorder the series of hops, treat each 111 direction independently in 1D, and project onto 3D space at the end. The fact that the directions along which the crowdion can diffuse are linearly dependent is immaterial, as shown below. In the bcc lattice, there are four (unsigned) 111 directions along which crowdions can move, with unit vectors ê1,2,3,4 . The final position of the crowdion is x f = 4 i=1 s i êi , where s i is the sum of the signed hop lengths in the i direction. Each of these hop lengths is normally distributed with zero mean and variance D∆t (and the ∆ts are exponentially distributed, though that is not required). The total time t = 4 i=1 t i where t i is the time spent hopping in each direction, i.e. the sum of the ∆ts for each direction. The expected value for |x f | 2 is given by Only at the smallest scales is the anisotropy of the diffusion evident. The time t spent on a particular 111 direction is drawn from an exponential distribution, then the distance diffused on that direction prior to the change is drawn from a normal distribution with variance Dt. where in the second line we used the fact that variances add in sums of normally distributed random variables, and that E(s 1 s 2 ) = E(s 1 )E(s 2 ) = 0 by independence. The êi s need not be orthogonal. With the above assumptions, the pdf W for the crowdion position x at time t satisfies the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation This reflects the sum over all possible hop lengths and times, and the second term is the probability density for the particle remaining at x = 0 until time t, W (x, 0) = δ(x). Inserting the above forms for ψ and Λ then taking Fourier transforms in x and Laplace transforms in t, W (x, t) → W (k, s), leads to Now, since we can differentiate W (k, s) twice with respect to k and set k = 0 to get (minus) the Laplace-transformed expected value for x 2 . Inverting the transform gives So for sufficiently large times, the effective diffusivity is that of the 1D fast motion, but how long until this approximation is reasonable is controlled by the rate of direction changes, Γ. Indeed, for t 1/Γ, x 2 ∼ DΓt 2 /2. The MD simulations of for crowdions in tungsten, whereas the migration energy for vacancies is found to be 1.78eV. This suggests that, on the timescale of vacancy diffusion, crowdion diffusion is effectively isotropic, and the 1D nature of hops can be neglected. Crowdion clusters/prismatic loops, on the other hand, stick to single 111 directions for much longer. Whilst rotations for very small loops are not impossible Stochastic computer simulations are most efficient when the events being sampled have rates as similar as possible. A kinetic Monte Carlo simulation of, say, crowdion and vacancy hopping would spend the vast majority of its time moving crowdions since their barriers are so low compared to those for vacancies (this is known generically as the low barrier problem). A more efficient approach would be to sample the directionchanging events, and then draw the crowdion's 1D motion from a normal distribution with appropriate timedependent variance, as in the analytical approach above. Fig. In this paper, we have derived the surprising result that clusters of crowdions (aka prismatic dislocation loops) can move through a bcc crystal lattice virtually unimpeded (aside from dissipation). The periodic (Peierls) potential in which they move is fractions of a micro eV: several orders of magnitude lower than even that for an isolated crowdion. The reason for this is delocalization -the lattice displacement induced by the additional atoms is spread over many atoms, meaning the translation of its centre of mass corresponds to the tiny motions of many more atoms. This is analogous to how the existence of dislocations allows the plastic deformation of crystals at far lower applied stresses than their "theoretical strength" would suggest. We then showed that the highly anisotropic diffusion of crowdions, which atomistic simulations have demonstrated, can be safely neglected at timescales sufficiently far above the timescale for direction changes. This will aid the development of hybrid mesoscale Monte Carlo simulations of defect structure evolution, by avoiding the low barrier problem associated with the suppression of the Peierls potential. Loops would need to contain several million defects to have the >10,000 boundary crowdions required.