A dielectric nonlinear response in model two-phase composites, prepared from a displacive ferroelectric material with a dominant dielectric response due to a single oscillator ferroelectric mode and a dielectric material, is characterized by the existence of new modes due to geometric resonances below the percolation threshold in the ferroelectric matrix. The geometric nature of oscilations depends on composition and geometric properties of the mixture. Generation of higher frequency modes is studied within our model and discussed for displacive ferroelectric materials of the BaT iO3 type. The Bergman Representation of the effective dielectric function together with our model for spectral function recently introduced are used simultaneously with theory of absorption in finite displacive ferroelectric crystals in quasistatic approximation to describe the physics of the composite. The boundaries of the present study are within this quasistatic approximation. New ways how to optimize material properties for nonlinear optics is outlined. 1 Introduction. 2 Model of two-phase microcomposite displacive ferroelectric medium. 3 Theory of absorption in finite displacive type ferroelectric crystals in quasistatic approximation. 4 Bergmann Representation of the effective dielectric function. 5 Nonlinear susceptibility of microcomposite displacive ferroelectrics. 6 Discussion. 1 Introduction. Dielectric response of ferroelectric microcomposite materials formed from orderdisorder ferroelectric and dielectric grains as components have been shown recently 2 Model of two-phase microcomposite displacive ferroelectric medium. Model microcomposite displacive ferroelectric materials are considered here to be those materials which are composed from two phases: a normal dielectric material, and a ferroelectric material undergoing in bulk at some temperature a second order displacive phase transition from paraphase to ferroelectric phase. For simplicity we assume that our model microcomposite consists of packed spherical particles. We assume that the interparticle free volume due to random packing of spheres is semiempirically taken into account in our calculations of effective dielectric properties of the composite due to properties of the Bergmann Representation spectral function, see in where: , ε ∞ is high-frequency dispersions mechanisms contribution, Γ is the inverse relaxation time, ω is frequency and ω 0 is the soft mode resonance frequency. Note that in the case of order-disorder ferroelectrics one correspondingly considers the limit of an overdamped oscillator. We assume that the ferroelectric (F) material is characterized in bulk by a single second order phase transition critical temperature T C . Contributions of other hard modes present in the bulk material to the dynamic dielectric function ε F of the pure ferroelectrics F are included approximately in the high-frequency contribution ε ∞ . We consider those lower frequencies at which the soft mode contribution dominates the response. The oscillator strength f , the soft mode frequency ω 0 and the inverse relaxation time Γ in this material are temperature dependent quantities in general. The soft mode is softening at the center of the Brillouin zone: The numerical constant a takes the following values: a = 1 above the transition temperature T C , and a = 1 2 below that temperature, in correspondence with the Landau theory The volume concentration of macroscopic domains, formed from grains containing the dielectric D is x. To perform orientational numerical estimates one may use such numerical values of material constants occurring in our model system, which are characteristic A starting point in our calculations is to consider dielectric response of a finite-size ferroelectric grain in a dielectric medium. Differences in dielectric functions between two materials, finite size and depolarization field effects lead to a dielectric response which is different from that of a bulk ferroelectric material. When concentration of grains increases then the electric field which is external to a given grain is modified due to other grains. Thus multiplication effects due to mutual influence of many grains in a given medium may lead to new phenomena as concerning the dielectric response of such a system. The general approach to the description of the effective medium is based on the Bergmann Representation of the effective dielectric constant. This approach is used in our last section but one using a simple model spectral density function, the limiting cases of which lead to the Maxwell-Garnett Theory and which simultaneously describes well the percolation transition in a very transparent form. 3 Theory of absorption in finite displacive type ferroelectric crystals in quasistatic approximation. A ferroelectric displacive type ellipsoidal sample inserted in a medium with dielectric constant ε D responses to a homogeneous external electric field E M . A resulting electric field E in the quasistatic approximation is homogeneous too, and is equal to, where the depolarization field is given by: Here ε is a dielectric function of the sample, γ is a depolarization factor of the grain for which 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1. Note that spherical shape of isotropic grains represents the most simplified version of grains shape description. It will be used here, thus the depolarization factor is γ = 1 3 . It is convenient to introduce the effective dielectric constant ε * as a change of the electric induction field due to a change of the electric field in zero external field E M instead of a dielectric constant ε as change of the electric induction field due to the change of the electric field E in zero field limit. Then we obtain: After substitution of the soft mode behavior for the ferroelectric material (1) we obtain: where The renormalized soft mode strength f * is given by: and the renormalized (former soft, now hard) mode frequency behavior is: The inverse relaxation time Γ is found to be unchanged in this grain. The frequency behavior of ε * is qualitatively the same as that of ε. Quantitatively both quantities are not the same, the oscillator strength is decreased (f * < f ), and the mode frequency is substantially increased (ω * 2 0 >> ω 2 0 . Moreover the high-frequency dispersions mechanisms contribution ε ∞ changes to ε * ∞ : The high frequency contributions are also renormalized and the high-frequency dielectric function is smaller for dielectric medium with dielectric constant smaller than the original high-frequency constant of the pure ferroelectric material, and vice versa. Results of this section concern the single ferroelectric crystallite in a dielectric homogeneous medium. The composite material corresponds with this situation in the limit of very small concentration of ferroelectric crystallites with very large intergrain distances. Increasing concentration of crystallites their distance decreases and the electric field acting on a given crystallite becomes modified due to presence of other crystallites. Consequently the effective dielectric response changes from that described above. To describe corresponding modifications we have to include not only effects of a finite crystallite dimensions but also a finite intergrain distances effects via concentration effects. We consider such effects in next sections. To discuss the whole concentration range we need to consider not only the situation in which dielectric medium contains ferroelectric particles but also the inverted one in which ferroelectric matrix contains small dielectric particles. 4 Bergmann Representation of the effective dielectric function. A two-phase composite with sharp boundaries between two phases has been shown Here g(n, x) is the spectral density function containing all information about geometry and other properties of the composite. It is possible to show, using formulas from which is a normalization condition, and by: The zeroth moment is found to hold for general conditions, but the first moment has the form (12) only in the case of statistical isotropy .g(n, x).dn. The first two terms describe the modified dielectric high-frequency response and the last term represents a sum of contributions due to oscillator processes generated by the microcomposite, each process corresponding to a specific value of the parameter n. It contributes with the modified strength Φ * (n), the weight g(n, x), and the resonance frequency ω * 0 (n), where: and where: Dependence on the geometric and topological factors is fully contained in the spectral density function g(n, x). From ( In ( for x above the percolation threshold, which was already determined in the previous section at the critical concentration x C = 2 3 . In this region an infinite dielectric cluster is present and there are finite ferroelectric and other dielectric clusters. The concentration dependence of this contribution due to geometric resonances reflects the Maxwell-Garnett Theory type of the effective medium behavior of finite clusters forming some kind of a dipolar medium. Below the percolation concentration we assume that the geometric resonances due to remaining finite ferroelectric and dielectric clusters are present simultaneously with infinite ferroelectric cluster. This region is characterized by a concentration independent position n T = 2 9 of the corresponding peak in the spectral density function. For concentrations below the critical concentration both relative intensities have the following form In this region the weight a(x) decreases from the value 1 (for x = 0)to the value 0 (for x = x C ). The weight g 0 (x) decreases here from the value 1 (for x = 0) to the value 0 (for x = x C ). Note that the sum of weights is one: a(x) + g 0 (x) = 1. Above the percolation transition we assume the constant concentration independent form of the densities g 0 (x) = 0 and a(x) = 1. Note that the spectral density function (16) satisfies the zeroth moment and first moment conditions in the whole range of concentrations x. One should note that a broader peak in the spectral density function would lead to many other oscillator-like resonance terms in the effective dielectric function describing a distribution of geometric resonance frequencies. Such a picture would be more acceptable on the intuitive base. Here we consider a simple case of a single (effective) geometric resonance. Our model approach, however, still contains essential features of the realistic response function and represents some extension of the theory behind the Maxwell-Garnet Theory as well as behind the Effective Medium Approach. In this way we succeeded to formulate physically more acceptable model response function for the ferroelectric composite which is still sufficiently clear in its structure. Substituting our spectral density function from (16) to the expression for the effective dielectric response function (10) we obtain: The first three terms describe modified high-frequency response, the last two terms describe frequency response in the form of two simple resonances. The last but one term corresponds to the response of an infinite ferroelectric cluster below the percolation threshold. The ferroelectric displacive-type infinite cluster responses in the same way as it is assumed to be present in pure bulk ferroelectric material. However, its relative intensity is decreased by the factor (1x)g 0 (x) and vanishes at and above the percolation threshold. The last term describes a response of small finite clusters and isolated particles in the whole concentration range. This response process vanishes at concentration x = 0, where a pure ferroelectric matrix is present, and at concentration x = 1, where a pure dielectric matrix is present. In both limits there are present no additional contributions due to dipolar properties of the medium. The strength of finite clusters response is given by ε D .(1x).a(x)Φ * (n T ). Their frequency is in the form similar to that of a finite particle from 5 Nonlinear susceptibility of microcomposite displacive ferroelectrics. Spontaneous birefringence of ferroelectric materials usually depends linearly or quadratically on spontaneous polarization depending on the character of the paraelectric phase Here d ijk (2.ω) are coefficients (i, j, k, .. denote axises) at doubled frequency ω and are defined by: Here L is the index for the linear susceptibility. The sign + or -in the relation (21) above depends on the character of the process. As in where χ comp is the composite dielectric susceptibility in an isotropic medium approximation, and δ il is the Kronecker delta. Studying the longitudinal polarization, we obtain for the nonlinear polarization P N L,i : where here d ijk coefficients for ω 1 = ω 2 = ω is d ijk (2.ω) : d ijk (2.ω) = χ 2 comp (ω).χ comp (2.ω)δ ijk (2.ω). ( Here (comp) is the index for the composite susceptibility. Second harmonic generation is thus described by nonlinear longitudinal (l) polarization P N L,l as: The strength of the new geometric resonance pole and the frequency of the new geometric resonance pole are both temperature and composition dependent quantities. Together with another free parameter, the value of the dielectric constant of the dielectric component, a wide range of microcomposite properties may be prepared depending on the targeted second generation harmonics. 6 Discussion. In sections above, Introduction, Model of two-phase microcomposite displacive ferroelectric medium, Theory of absorption in finite displacive type ferroelectric crystals in quasistatic approximation, Bergmann Representation of the effective dielectric function and Nonlinear susceptibility of microcomposite displacive ferroelectrics we discussed theory of absorption in finite displacive type ferroelectric crystals in quasistatic approximation two-phase microcomposite displacive ferroelectric medium using the Bergmann representation of the effective dielectric function and nonlinear susceptibility of this microcomposite was calculated. Let us assume that the above described nonlinear coefficients d ijk are macroscopic quantities averaged over distances much larger than the average fluctuation length of the microcomposite. It is clear that the second harmonic generation in microcomposites due to geometric resonances will display new interesting properties. Changing pure composition concentration, changing chemical composition, eventually introducing the third composite component (theory of which is a little bit more complicated than the theory outlined above) one can obtain a wide diapason of composite properties as concerning the electromagnetic field response. For example optimization of materials with electrooptic properties expected for given device application may be enhanced using nonlinear properties of microcomposites described above.