Generalizing the classical Thomson problem to the quantum regime provides an ideal model to explore the underlying physics regarding electron correlations. In this work, we systematically investigate the combined effects of the geometry of the substrate and the symmetry of the wave function on correlations of geometrically confined electrons. By the numerical configuration interaction method in combination with analytical theory, we construct symmetrized ground-state wave functions; analyze the energetics, correlations, and collective vibration modes of the electrons; and illustrate the routine for the strongly correlated, highly localized electron states with the expansion of the sphere. This work furthers our understanding about electron correlations on confined geometries and shows the promising potential of exploiting confinement geometry to control electron states. Inquiry into the physics of geometrically confined electrons is a prominent research theme in modern physics and chemistry Past studies have shown the crucial role of system size on electron states To address these questions, we resort to the CI method in combination with analytical theory to construct and analyze the ground state wave functions of two-and three-electron systems The ground-state wave function and energy of N electrons on the sphere are determined by the timeindependent Schrödinger equation: where Ĥ = K + V and r i is the position of electron i. The kinetic-energy term K = N i=1 i /2R 2 , R is the radius of the sphere, and Li is the angular momentum operator of the electron i. The potential energy term We resort to the CI method to construct the ground state wave functions with certain symmetries We first construct the basis wave function Ψ n ({ r i }), where n represents a complete set of quantum numbers to characterize the state of the system. For the twoelectron system, |n = |l 1 , l 2 , l, m , which is the common eigenstate of L2 , Lz , and L2 1 . For the three-electron system, |n = |l 12 , l 1 , l 2 , l 3 , l, m , which is the common eigenstate of the mutually commuting L2 12 , L2 1 , L2 2 , L2 3 , L2 , and Lz . From the linear combination of Ψ n ({ r i }), we construct wave functions Ψ Xp n ({ r i }) with certain symmetries. The superscript X p indicates that the wave function is exchange-symmetric (X = S) or exchangeantisymmetric (X = A), and has even (p = e) or odd (p = o) parity. The relevant matrix elements of the kinetic and potential energies are: In this work, the units of length, energy and angular momentum are the Bohr radius a B = 4π 0 2 /m e e 2 , e 2 /4π 0 a B , and , respectively. R/r B 1 and R/r B 1 in the small-and large-R regimes, respectively. For a two-electron system, the construction of the ground-state wave function must obey the Pauli exclusion principle. The orbital wave function of the two-electron system is either exchange-symmetric or exchange-antisymmetric depending on the spin state of the electrons. We discuss both cases in this section. Construction of symmetrized ground state wave functions For the two-electron system, the common eigenstates |l 1 , l 2 , l, m of L2 , Lz , L2 1 , L2 2 constitute the bases of the complete Hilbert space, denoted as H . Note that |l 1 , l 2 , l, m can be constructed by direct products of single particle states using Clebsch-Gordan coefficients We search for the ground state wave functions in the subspaces of H (0, 0) and H (1, 0). According to angular momentum algebra, all the basis wave functions in H (0, 0) are exchange-symmetric and with even parity Note that no base of the subspace H (1, 0) is both exchange symmetric and with even parity. In fact, any wave function in H (1, 0) with even parity must be exchange antisymmetric (see SI). We denote the basis states in H Se (0, 0), H So (1, 0), H Ae (1, 0) and H Ao (1, 0), as , where i completely determines the values of l 1 , l 2 , l, m in ε(l, m), as shown in preceding discussion. Any state in these subspaces can be expressed as a linear superposition of |Ψ Analysis of ground states In Fig. Figure To show the relative contributions of the potential and kinetic energies to the total energy E 0 , we plot the V 0 /K 0 vs R curve in Fig. To characterize the correlation of the two electrons on the sphere, we compute the reduced two-electron probability density ρ 2 (γ) as a function of their angular distance γ where P ( r 1 , r 2 ) is the probability density of finding electron 1 and electron 2 simultaneously at r 1 and r 2 on the sphere. According to Born's statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics, In Figs. 2(e)-2(h), we plot the ρ 2 (γ) curves for all the four kinds of Ψ Xp ( r 1 , r 2 ). We see that when R is small, the correlation between the two electrons is relatively weak. With the increase of R, sharp peaks on the ρ 2 (γ) curves are developed at γ = π [see Figs. In other words, a strongly correlated electron state results from a combination of multiple monochromatic states. The configuration of two highly localized diametric electrons found on a large sphere is consistent with the preceding energetics analysis, and it has connections to Wigner crystallization occurring in the twodimensional electron gas in a uniform, neutralizing background when the electron density is less than a critical value The correlation between the two electrons can also be characterized by the mean inverse separation d-1 12 , which is defined as d- For all four kinds of Ψ Xp ( r 1 , r 2 ), we numerically show that d-1 12 decreases monotonously with R, and asymptotically to 1/2 in the large-R limit. Asymptotic behaviors in the small-and large-R regimes In this section, we perform perturbation analysis in the small-R regime, and propose small oscillation theory (which is also called "strong-coupling perturbation theory" We first apply perturbation theory to analyze the ratio of the potential and kinetic energies V 0 /K 0 for all four kinds of wave functions Ψ Xp ( r 1 , r 2 ) in the small-R regime. The total angular momentum quantum number in the unperturbed state (Coulomb interaction is turned off) is denoted i 0 . The ground-state energy and wave function can be written as where , and Keeping up to the first-order term, we have Note that both RV Xp i0i0 and c i /R are independent of R. Here, i 0 = 1 for Ψ Ae ( r 1 , r 2 ), and i 0 = 0 for Ψ Se ( r 1 , r 2 ). For Ψ Se ( r 1 , r 2 ), V 0 /K 0 ∼ 1/R. For Ψ So ( r 1 , r 2 ), Ψ Ae ( r 1 , r 2 ), and Ψ Ao ( r 1 , r 2 ), V 0 /K 0 ∼ R. These scaling laws are consistent with the inset in Fig. On a large sphere, the localized electrons at diametric poles, as shown in Figs. 2(e)-2(h), are inevitably subject to small vibration due to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. The two-particle case has been analyzed in the quantum regime Here, we perform a semi classical analysis of the small vibration of the electrons that can be readily extended to the three-electron case. The classical Hamiltonian to describe the small vibration of two particles around the diametric equilibrium positions at ( θ1 = π/2, φ1 = 0) and ( θ2 = π/2, φ2 = π) on the sphere is where With the orthogonal transformation Eq.( where ω = R -3 2 /2. θ 1 and θ 2 describe the relative vibration of the two electrons. The vibrational energy [the second term in Eq. Quantization of the reduced Hamiltonian in Eq. ( From Eq.( . Our numerical results based on the CI method conform to this scaling law, as shown in Fig. The value of the quantum number n in Eq. ( For the three-electron system, we focus on the case of identical spin states. The ground-state wave functions must be exchange antisymmetric. We consider both odd and even parities. These ground-state wave functions are denoted as Ψ Ap , where p = e (even parity) or p = o (odd parity). In comparison with the two-electron system, we find richer vibration modes for the three-electron system in the large-R regime. Construction of symmetrized ground-state wave functions For the three-electron system, L2 We construct the ground-state wave functions in the subspace H (0, 0). ε(0, 0) = {|l 12 = l 3 , l 1 , l 2 , l 3 , l = 0, m = 0 }, where the first equality is due to the zero total angular momenta. The basis set ε(0, 0) is completely determined by L = (l 1 , l 2 , l 3 ). FIG. By the standard coupling of three angular momentums, we obtain the eigenstate wave function of the threeelectron system (see SI): Note that by Eq. ( Figure In Fig. We also define the mean inverse separation d-1 ee of any two electrons to characterize their correlation. d-1 ee = R | ri-rj | P ( r i , r j )dS i dS j . We recognize that d-1 ee = V 0 R/3. It is numerically shown that d-1 ee decreases monotonously with R and approaches 1/ √ 3 ≈ 0.577 in the large-R limit. Specifically, for R increasing from 5000 to 10 000, d-1 ee decreases slightly from 0.582 to 0.581 for Ψ Ao and from 0.586 to 0.584 for Ψ Ae . Asymptotic behaviors in the small-and large-R regimes In this section, we present asymptotic analysis of the ground states of the three-electron system in the small-and large-R regimes. The relevant theoretical results are consistent with the energy curves in Fig. For small R, we perform perturbation analysis around the zeroth order wave function Ψ Ap L0 , where the subscript refers to the state of L 0 = {l 1 = 1, l 2 = 1, l 3 = 1} for Ψ Ao and L 0 = {l 1 = 1, l 2 = 2, l 3 = 3} for Ψ Ae . For both cases, l = 0, and m = 0. The zeroth-and first-order corrections to the ground-state energy E 0 are: 6/R. Therefore, up to the first-order correction, we have 0 /E (0) 0 ∝ R. This linear dependence of V 0 /K 0 on R agrees well with the numerical result presented in the inset of Fig. We proceed to analyze the small vibration of the three strongly correlated electrons in the large-R regime. The equilibrium positions of the electrons are at the vertices of a regular triangle circumscribed by the equator of the sphere: ( θ1 = π/2, φ1 = 0), ( θ2 = π/2, φ2 = 2π/3), and ( θ3 = π/2, φ3 = 4π/3). By introducing a set of collective coordinates η r (r = 1, 2...6) like in the treatment of the two-electron system, the classical Hamiltonian of the three-electron system is where )ω 1 (see SI). These six collective coordinates describe three types of vibrations: the relative in-plane vibration between any two electrons (by η 1 and η 2 ), the out-of-plane vibration (by η 3 ), and the rotation of the whole system along three mutually perpendicular axes (by η 4 , η 5 , and η 6 ). In the large-R regime, the vibrational energy is proportional to R -3/2 , and the rotational energy scales with R in the form of R -2 (see SI). By ignoring the rotational motion, quantization of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Applying the virial theorem to Eq. ( To determine the values for n 1 and n 2 in Eq. In summary, we generalized the classical Thomson problem to the quantum regime to explore the underlying physics in electron correlations. We constructed symmetrized ground-state wave functions based on the CI method, systematically investigated the energetics and electron correlations, and proposed a small-oscillation theory to analyze the collective vibration modes of the electrons. As a key result of this work, we illustrated the routine to the strongly correlated, highly localized electron states with the expansion of the sphere. These results provide insights into the manipulation of electron states by exploiting confinement geometry. Finally, it is of interest to speculate on the connection of the Nelectron system to the classical Thomson problem 