We report on the charge spill-out and work function of epitaxial few-layer graphene on 6H-SiC(0001). Experiments from high-resolution, energy-filtered X-ray photoelectron emission microscopy (XPEEM) are combined with ab initio Density Functional Theory calculations using a relaxed interface model. Work function values obtained from theory and experiments are in qualitative agreement, reproducing the previously observed trend of increasing work function with each additional graphene plane. Electrons transfer at the SiC/graphene interface through a buffer layer causes an interface dipole moment which is at the origin of the graphene work function modulation. The total charge transfer is independent of the number of graphene layers, and is consistent with the constant binding energy of the SiC component of the C 1s core-level measured by XPEEM. Charge leakage into vacuum depends on the number of graphene layers explaining why the experimental, layer-dependent C 1s-graphene core-level binding energy shift does not rigidly follow that of the work function. Thus, a combination of charge transfer at the SiC/graphene interface and charge spill-out into vacuum resolves the apparent discrepancy between the experimental work function and C1s binding energy. The outstanding transport properties of graphene (high carrier mobility, ballistic transport observed up to room temperature, ability to sustain large current densities, exceptional optical and mechanical characteristics) make it an attractive material for the study of two-dimensional physics, as well as for application in many devices either as passive (e.g., as electrode material) or active component (e.g., as channel material in a transistor). For successful interface engineering and device optimization using graphene either as electrode material or active layer, control of the work function is essential as it generally governs energy level alignments through the heterostructure. This is a considerable theoretical and experimental challenge due to (i) the intrinsic low-dimensionality of FLG and the peculiar band structure of the graphene -bands sensitive to substrate interactions and (ii) the intrinsic nonuniformity of graphene thickness in macroscopic samples. Here, we have studied the work function of FLG epitaxially grown on 6H-SiC(0001), using high-resolution XPEEM and ab initio DFT calculations of a relaxed interface. Work function values obtained from theory and experiment are in qualitative agreement: the work function increase is reproduced for each additional graphene plane on the surface. Compared to free-standing graphene, the work function of the stack is modulated by the charge transferred from interface states to graphene, creating an interface dipole moment. The charge transfer is independent of the number of graphene planes but a thickness-dependent partial charge spill-out is predicted, explaining the experimental C1s core-level additional shift in graphene. The results provide a coherent explanation of why the layer dependent core level shift does not rigidly follow that of the work function. The sample of epitaxial FLG grown on a Si-terminated 6H-SiC(0001) surface was obtained by sublimation of the SiC substrate at 1400°C for 5h under ultra-high vacuum NanoESCA instrument (Omicron NanoScience, Oxford Instruments) which has already been described elsewhere. Before XPEEM imaging, the sample was heated at 550°C in vacuum to remove adsorbates, confirmed by micro-spectroscopy of the C1s core level. The C 1s spectrum of the clean surface showed the typical graphene component at 284.4 eV and graphene-SiC interface components at higher binding energy (285.0-285.5 eV). We employed Density Functional Theory (DFT) The resulting heterostructure containing the interface has a vacuum layer 50 Å thick to insure no sizeable cross-talk between the slab's periodic images, a 14.87 Å-thick SiC slab made of 18 silicon atoms and 18 carbon atoms, and 9 hydrogen atoms saturating the C-terminated bottom surface. Following Varchon et al., The work function is the minimum energy required to extract an electron to a potential far from the surface. where eV vacuum is the vacuum potential and E F is the Fermi energy. Figure The FLG thickness was measured using LEEM and C 1s XPEEM. Figures The C1s core level spectra of the 1, 2 and 3 LG domains marked in Fig. Photoemission threshold image series were recorded with synchrotron and laboratory He I radiation with FoV 115 m and 34 m, respectively. Prior to the fitting procedure, the images were corrected for two effects: first, the Schottky effect due to the high electrical field at the surface induced by the first extractor lens of the objective, which shifts the work function value typically by -98 meV at 12 kV extraction voltage; the second correction accounts for the non-isochromaticity of the imaging spectrometer in the dispersive direction (vertical axis on the images). LG they report a 200 meV shift. Taking into account the error bars, our values are close to but slightly smaller than Hibino's. This is also the case when comparing the 1 to 2 LG work function shift with KFM results reported by Filleter et al., Thus the C1s binding energy and the work function value do not undergo a rigid shift; therefore, charge transfer between the graphene and the substrate alone is not sufficient to explain the results. The theoretical calculations discussed in Sec. IV address precisely this question. The interlayer distances after relaxation of the heterostructure are plotted in Fig. Weng et al. Table Indeed, the calculated WF of bulk graphite is 4.5 eV, while for relaxed graphene it is 4.4 eV. On the other hand, the calculated WF of free-standing graphene under the 8% stress of our model is 5.1 eV. Therefore the impact of tensile stress on the WF of few-layer graphene is to increase it by ~16%. While stress tends to increase WF of several graphene planes, the deformation of the BL tends to lower its WF value: for a planar BL with only the distance to the surface Si atoms optimized, we found a larger WF 0 planar = 4.13 eV. On the other hand, we also found that for the same planar graphene model WF of the first graphene layer decreases slightly from its value obtained from the fully relaxed model, to WF 1 planar = 4.17 eV. The reason is that the first graphene layer interacts more strongly with the artificially deformed BL moving closer and raising the value of WF 1 . For subsequent graphene layers (n=2-4), the BL is screened by the first graphene plane and does not have such a strong impact on WF n . Here we discuss the consistency of our interface model results and the experimental data on the work function and the C 1s core levels. The experimental work function shifts by 50-60 meV per graphene layer, whereas the C 1s binding energy in graphene shifts by almost 100 meV per layer. Figure where A is the interface area and the z direction is perpendicular to the interface. To estimate the interface dipole and how it is affected by the number of graphene layers on SiC, the net charge density was obtained using the following two methods. In method I the net charge was obtained by subtracting the charges of SiC and graphene slabs from the heterostructure charge. If the impact of the interface on the location of the atoms is short-ranged, quickly decaying into the bulk-like regions, then this procedure is able to remove the bulk charges from both sides of the interface, leaving only the net interface charge. Formally the net charge density of the interface structure, Δρ SiC+FLG , can be written as where ρ SiC+FLG is the total charge density of the interface structure, ρ SiC and ρ FLG are the total charge densities of the SiC and FLG slabs, respectively, and ρ SiC ̅̅̅̅̅ and ρ FLG ̅̅̅̅̅̅ are the total charge densities of the SiC and FLG sides of the interface which include the charge exchanged across the interface. The total charge densities can be further decomposed in their positive and negative components arising from the contributions from the ions and electrons, respectively. Therefore The alignment between the charge densities of the SiC of the heterostructure and the bare SiC slab was straightforward as shown in Figure In the case of the graphene slab, the alignment with the graphene in the SiC/graphene heterostructure is more difficult because the interface has a considerable impact on the graphene layer separation, moving them closer to each other than in the free-standing graphene slab. In other words, the contribution of the ionic charge density in graphene shown in Eq. 4, ρ ion FLG ̅̅̅̅̅̅ -ρ ion FLG , is considerable and extends several angstroms away from the interface. We assumed the most external graphene layer in the heterostructure to be the reference for alignment between the charge densities of the 5-layer graphene slab (5LG) and the SiC/BL/4LG heterostructure, since the 5 th graphene layer is the layer least affected by the interface in all our stack models containing different number of graphene planes. From that alignment we obtained the z 0 = 0 position of the graphene plane in 5LG closest to SiC. For the other alignments (between the (n+1)LG slabs and SiC/BL/nLG heterostructures, for n = 0, 1, 2, 3) the graphene plane closest to SiC was fixed at the value of z 0 determined from the 5LG. The upper panel of Fig. In method II we have subtracted from the density of the graphene side of the interface the densities of the appropriate number of single graphene planes. In this case, ρ ion FLG and ρ e FLG in Eq. 4 are the ionic and electronic charge densities of a free-standing single graphene plane repeated the necessary number of times depending on the number of graphene planes in the SiC/FLG structure. Although this method does not take account of the electronic charge located in the inter-planar regions of graphene in the stack, it intrinsically accounts for the inter-planar graphene separation. The total charge alignments for SiC/BL, SiC/BL/1LG and SiC/BL/4LG obtained with method II are shown in the upper panel of Fig. The results obtained with both methods follow the same trends. Table The interface dipole variation supports the hypothesis that the WF dependence on the number of graphene planes is due only to electrostatics, i.e. interface charge transfer to an increasing number of graphene layers. However it does not explain the simultaneous near invariance of the measured C1s core level in SiC and the amplitude of the C 1s core level shift in graphene with respect to the WF shift. The interface dipole is the product of the charge transferred across the interface and the separation of the positive and negative charges. Table However, due to the atomically-thin character of few-layer graphene, part of the transferred charge leaks into vacuum as shown in Table These results should be of interest in the perspective of more complex heterostructures, for example by epitaxial growth of a semiconductor on top of FLG to open and control gaps in the graphene. The layer dependent charge spillage may therefore be as important a parameter as the work function shift, and the combination of the two may allow more complex band engineering. We (2.0 eV) taken on the Si atom #4 in the figure is slightly smaller than its calculated bulk value (2.32 eV) due to the small thickness of the SiC slab employed, which allows surface and interface states to reach the central region of the slab. The PDOS are similar for all C atoms in the buffer layer, which are represented by only one line in the graph. The PDOS are also similar for the bonded Si interface atoms #1a and #1b, both represented by only one line in the graph. The PDOS associated with the lonely Si interface atom #2 differs from the ones taken at atoms #1a and #1b only by its higher density of states near the edges of the band gap. This is expected since those edge states are associated with the dangling bond localized at the unpaired interface atom #2. The edge state near the SiC CBE is fully occupied and pins the Fermi level near the SiC CBE. Even though these interface states are quite close to the SiC band edges, conferring a metallic character to the interface as previously observed, Figure 