Ballistic heterojunctions of Dirac materials offer the opportunity of exploring optics-like phenomena in electronic systems. In this paper, a new perfect lens through special positive refraction is predicted with omnidirectional Klein tunneling of massless Dirac fermions. The novel optics component called a superdiverging lens (SDL) is the counterpart of a Veselago lens (VL). The use of SDL and VL creates a device that simulates the ocular vision. This atypical refraction is due to electrons obeying different Snell's laws of pseudo-spin and group velocity in heterojunctions with elliptical Dirac cones. These findings pave the way for an electron elliptical Dirac optics and open up new possibilities for the guiding of electrons. In the past, the resemblance of photons and electrons has been well used for technological applications where electron microscope is perhaps the most famous example. Nowadays, both entities are closer by the emergence of relativistic materials Negative refraction is a striking effect in light and electron optics In this paper it is shown that using ballistic systems with elliptical Dirac cones is possible to obtain super-diverging lens (SDL). The specific condition for a heterojunction formed by one isotropic and other anisotropic Dirac materials is established for redirecting electron flow and creating virtual focus. This perfect lens displays a complete absence of backscattering regardless of the angle of incidence. The omnidirectional conservation of pseudo-spin leads to the first realization of a super-Klein tunneling (SKT) of pseudo-spin 1/2 particles. Such effects emerge because electrons have different refraction laws of pseudo-spin and group velocity when the Dirac cone parameters are changed at the interface. In this way, singular phenomena and novel applications can be achieved. For instance, the use of these superlenses forms an optical device capable of "seeing" with electrons. The SDLs may be implemented without being necessary a split-gate structure. Transmission of massless Dirac fermions is considered in a device formed by the junction of relativistic materials, as shown in figure Ballistic transport is warrantied when the coherence length and mean free path are larger than the device's dimensions In order to describe the scattering of massless Dirac fermions it is applied the Dirac-like Hamiltonian of pseudo-spin 1/2 particles for the region I, where p is the linear momentum, v F the Fermi velocity, and σ = (σ x , σ y ) the Pauli matrices. The Hamiltonian (1) depicts the electron dynamics of isotropic systems such as pristine graphene and related Dirac materials is put forward for studying the particle dynamics in anisotropic pseudo-relativistic systems with the components of the linear momentum. This expression is relevant for establishing the pseudo-spin Snell's law. For calculating the transmission probability of electrons crossing the interface, the wavefunction in the region I is |Ψ I = |Ψ i + r|Ψ r . The first (second) state on the right side corresponds to the incoming (reflected) electron wavefunction. The coefficient r is the probability amplitude of the reflected electron. The wavefunction in the region II is given by |Ψ II = t|Ψ t , where t is the amplitude of the transmitted wave. Using the boundary condition Ψ I ( r)| x=0 -= ξΨ II ( r)| x=0 + , where ξ is a real quantity which can be obtained by integrating the inhomogeneous Weyl equation where the conservation of probability current density j x indicates that T (φ, φ ) = ss |t| 2 cos φ / cos φ instead of |t| 2 . The complete specification of T (φ, φ ) in equation ( The conservation laws of E, p y , and j x , which are schematically represented in figure has similar form than isotropic case, it points out singular effects. In equation ( is the radius (vertical half-width) of the circular (elliptical) energy contour at the Fermi level, as seen in figure It is worth to identify how massless Dirac fermions are scattered under the conditions ρ = ρ and s = ±s . In figure where the isotropic case is restored when λ 1 = λ 2 = 1. For V = V , equations ( An appropriate characterization of these systems requires to link φ and θ . Thus, the transmission probability (3) as a function of θ is obtained (see appendix A). The application of diverging condition in the Snell's law (5) reduces to tan θ = (x 0 /x 0 ) tan θ, where x 0 = λ 1 x 0 (see appendix B). Heterojunctions with this specific scattering of electrons are shown in figure where λ 1 = cot α and λ 2 = cot β are the geometrical parameters of the elliptical Dirac cone in the region I, as shown in figure is calculated (see appendix B). Setting ρ = ρ in equation ( } is the critical angle. The high reflectivity of particles impinging far away the normal incidence favors the robustness of super-divergence, as shown in figure On the other hand, the same device for obtaining the SDL can also be used as VL [see figure and the Snell's law in equation ( The use of SDLs and VLs can be taken into account for designing novel electron optics instruments. For instance, a device having both SDL and VL is shown in figure In summary, the super-diverging lens based on heterojunctions of anisotropic relativistic Dirac materials has been shown. Novel Veselago and super-diverging lenses can be fabricated in two and three-dimensional systems whose electronic band structure presents different Dirac cones parameters in both sides of the junction. The refraction of massless Dirac fermions is governed by a generalized Snell's law in anisotropic media offering advantages in the manipulation of pseudo-spin and guiding of electrons. These novel Snell's laws of pseudo-spin and group velocity allow to calculate the exact direction of outgoing electron beams without considering the approximation of circular Dirac cones in anisotropic media. The special positive and negative refraction of electrons evidence exceptional phenomena, such as superdiverging particles flow, omnidirectional Klein tunneling, and enhanced Veselago lenses, whose control can be of relevant importance in quantum information. The feasibility of designing novel devices using super-diverging lenses may lead to unusual technological applications, where electron eye is a particular example. This new topic called as electron elliptical Dirac optics opens up the possibility of feedback with lightoptics in metamaterials. The high efficiency in the particle transmission of anisotropic heterojunctions can considerably improve the operation of well-known optics devices. Thus, inverting the above equation system and substituting in equation (A.1), the linear momentum as a function of θ is obtained. Using the equation system (A.6) and equation (A.2), the group velocity magnitude is independent of the particle energy but having an elliptical angular variation by the anisotropy in the dispersion relation (A.2). Hence, the conservation of p y in terms of θ leads to the Snell's law given by which corresponds to systems with two anisotropic relativistic media. The relation between φ and θ can be obtained substituting the group velocity (A.7) in equations (A.5) Therefore, the probability transmission as a function of θ and θ can be expressed as . Equation (A.10) is the analog of Fresnel coefficient in the electromagnetic theory This result is very important for obtaining a superlens because the focus does not depend of θ. The expression (B.5) can also be derived from the general focus equation doing ρ = ρ . The focus has an angular dependence when ρ = ρ , as shown in figure 