Superconductivity in iron pnictides is unconventional and pairing may be mediated by magnetic fluctuations in the Fe-sublattice. Pressure is a clean method to explore superconductivity in iron based superconductors by tuning the ground state continuously without introducing disorder. Here we present a systematic high pressure transport study in Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 single crystals with x = 0.057, which is near the antiferromagnetic instability. Resistivity ρ = ρ0 + AT n was studied under applied pressure up to 7.90 GPa. The parameter n approaches a minimum value of n ≈ 1 at a critical pressure Pc = 3.65 GPa. Near Pc, the superconducting transition temperature Tc reaches a maximum value of 25.8 K. In addition, the superconducting diamagnetism at 2 K shows a sudden change around the same critical pressure. These results may be associated with a possible quantum critical point hidden inside the superconducting dome, near optimum Tc. Unconventional superconductivity observed in ironbased superconductors is in close proximity to an antiferromagnetically ordered state. Despite extensive studies in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 close to optimal doping, there had been no systematic study on how the normal state evolves across the antiferromagnetic phase boundary. Here we probe the phase diagram close to the antiferromagnetic boundary through measurements of resistivity and magnetization by tuning the applied pressure in a sample with x = 0.057. Normal state resistivity changes from non-Fermi liquid to Fermi liquid with increasing pressure. It shows almost linear temperature dependence at a critical pressure of P = 3.65 GPa, where T c is maximum. In addition, the residual resistivity ρ 0 and the resistivity at T c all change around the same critical pressure. From the magnetization data, the superconducting diamagnetism at 2 K shows a sudden change at a critical pressure of P = 3.5 GPa, in accordance with changes in resistivity. These results may be due to a possible QCP at optimum T c , similar to the case of BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 Single crystals of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 with x = 0.057 were synthesized by a flux method. Figure Interestingly, all parameters in Fig. Note that in chemically doped (Co, Rh, Ni) BaFe 2 As 2 at ambient pressure, there is no change in magnetization across the dome. Figure In summary, electrical resistivity and magnetization under pressure were measured in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 with x = 0.057. Resistivity shows linear temperature dependence around a critical pressure of 3.5 GPa where T c is maximum. Furthermore, we detected signs of an accompanied change in the superconducting volume. These results are most likely due to a possible pressure tuned QCP hidden inside the superconducting dome of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 .