ABSTRACT. The interactions between nanoparticles and solvents play a critical role in the formation of complex, metastable nanostructures. However, direct observation of such interactions with high spatial and temporal resolution is challenging with conventional liquid-cell transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments. Here, a windowless system consisting of polymer nanoreactors deposited via scanning probe block copolymer lithography (SPBCL) on an amorphous carbon film is used to investigate the coarsening of ultrafine (1-3 nm) Au-Pt bimetallic nanoparticles as a function of solvent evaporation. In such reactors, homogeneous Au-Pt nanoparticles are synthesized from metal ion precursors in situ under electron irradiation. The nonuniform evaporation of the thin polymer film not only concentrates the nanoparticles, but also accelerates the coalescence kinetics at the receding polymer edges. Qualitative analysis of the particle forces influencing coalescence suggests that capillary dragging by the polymer edges plays a significant role in accelerating this process. Taken together, this work: 1) provides fundamental insight into the role of solvents in the chemistry and coarsening behavior of nanoparticles during the synthesis of polyelemental nanostructures, 2) provides insight into how particles form via the SPBCL process, and 3) shows how SPBCL-generated domes, instead of liquid cells, can be used to study nanoparticle formation. More generally, it shows why conventional models of particle coarsening, which do not take into account solvent evaporation, cannot be used to describe what is occurring in thin film, liquid-based syntheses of nanostructures. Understanding the factors that control the structure and morphology of nanoparticles, A windowless thin film system with a non-volatile fluid could overcome these challenges. This type of system requires a relatively stable solvent with slow evaporation rates that can carry nanoparticles in the high vacuum environment inside a TEM. Polymer inks prepared by dissolving metal ion precursors, chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) and chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), in an aqueous solution of PEO-b-P2VP were cast onto DPN tips and then deposited onto amorphous carbon films in the form of nanoreactors. Amorphous carbon films are favorable for in situ TEM compared to hydrophobic silicon nitride thin films (conventionally used in SPBCL experiments), due to their decreased electron scattering and increased stability under an electron beam. Au-Pt nanoparticles dispersed in polymer nanoreactors were generated in situ by locally irradiating the precursor-containing polymer nanoreactors with the electron beam of a TEM. To slow down the kinetics in non-irradiated regions, the sample was cooled to cryogenic conditions (typically < -160 °C) with liquid nitrogen prior to exposure. Upon irradiation, ultrafine nanoparticles with diameters typically between 1-3 nm were rapidly generated within the field of view of a few frames (Figure High energy electrons can induce chain breaking and polymer removal in vacuum at low temperature by both knock-on (electron-induced bond breaking and atom displacement) and thermal effects, known as the electron beam evaporation process. By analyzing the HAADF movie of sequential scans, where the signal intensity quantified the projected mass for each pixel, We also note that the whole polymer region, including the shrinking filaments, shows a variation in intensity on the order of a few nm suggesting that local polymer evaporation plays a significant role in the removal process. HAADF quantification of the polymer region shows a three-stage process which can be aligned with the three stages of filament formation and removal (Figure Stages 1 and 3 show similar rates of mass loss, which can be attributed to relatively uniform evaporation of polymer. In stage 2, the rate of mass loss is almost an order of magnitude greater suggesting that the kinetics of filament removal are faster. This rapid removal possibly stems from the large surface area of the thin filaments. Note that in this in situ STEM experiment, the electron flux in each pixel is the same, and no correlation can be found between the beam scanning direction and polymer evaporation dynamics. Therefore, nanoscale polymer evaporation by the electron beam is both spatially and temporally non-uniform. The dynamics of ultrafine Au-Pt nanoparticles in polymer thin films were studied for the 50% Au case by recording sequential ADF images (Movie S2, Figure To study the interaction between the polymers and nanoparticles, the nanoparticles in each frame were tracked (Figure During the evaporation process, the nanoparticles undergo substantial coalescence as seen by the decrease in their number (Figure In addition to coalescence, other types of nanoparticle dynamics typical in solutions were observed. For instance, small nanoparticles/clusters, < 1 nm, re-dissolve into the polymer solvent, especially when close to larger nanoparticles (Figure The kinetics of particle coalescence were monitored over four sequential frames before a nanoparticle pair fully coalesced into a single particle (Figure Quantitatively, the edge-to-edge distance between all of these nanoparticle pairs decreases in a linear manner, which suggests that the migration kinetics of these nanoparticles are in a steady state (Figure In the second type, the coalescence shows a sudden acceleration. This occurs when one of the particles interacts with the edge of the receding polymers, which points one particle towards another (Figure The observation that nanoparticle pairs approach each other at a steady rate (Figure When the receding edge is perpendicular to the line connecting a nanoparticle pair, the capillary force exerted on the particle at the edge is not balanced, and this accelerates nanoparticle coalescence. The capillary effect was qualitatively analyzed using a planar model, where the edge of a thin, continuous fluid film with thickness, δδ, is passing through a fixed circular rigid disk of radius, RR, in the zz direction (Figure In summary, we have shown how polymer nanoreactors, when coupled with in situ electron microscopy, can be used to reveal the evaporation dynamics of PEO-b-P2VP polymers, and the interaction between thin films and ultrafine Au-Pt nanoparticles under electron irradiation. This work has two important implications for understanding the interactions between particles and solvents. First, nanostructures containing elements with a large miscibility gap at room temperature (e.g., Au-Pt) may be generated by coalescence of ultrafine alloy nanoparticles, which can be first synthesized by fast reduction with a strong reducing source (e.g., an electron beam in this study). Such kinetically trapped nanostructures may result in the formation of relatively stable particles without phase separation, as reported in the literature. Collectively, these conclusions provide important insight into the SPBCL process, in particular how smaller particles at early stages of the process coarsen to form larger multicomponent nanoparticles. Materials. Chloroauric acid hydrate (HAuCl4•xH2O, ≥99.9% trace metals basis) and chloroplatinic acid hydrate (H2PtCl6•xH2O, ≥99.9% trace metals basis) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(2vinylpyridine) (PEO-b-P2VP, Mn = 2.8-b-1.5 kg/mol, polydispersity index = 1.11) was purchased from Polymer Source, Inc. Dip-pen nanolithography (DPN) 1D pen arrays (type M, with gold coating) were purchased from Nanoink, Inc. ScanAsyst-Air atomic force microscopy (AFM) probes were purchased from Bruker Nano Inc. Amorphous carbon films supported on copper TEM grids were purchased from Ted Pella Inc. and Electron Microscopy Sciences. Deionized water was produced from a Millipore Milli-Q purification system (resistivity at 25 °C = 18.2 MΩ•cm). Precursor-containing Polymer Ink Preparation. PEO-b-P2VP and metal ion precursors (HAuCl4 and H2PtCl6, respectively) were dissolved in deionized water with deliberately varied molar ratios of metal species. The resulting solution had a polymer concentration of 5 mg/mL and a 4:1 molar ratio of pyridyl groups to total metal species. Freshly prepared inks were stirred for at least 4 h at room temperature prior to use. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). Amorphous carbon films were transferred to Si wafers prior to AFM measurements (See Supporting Information Text S1). AFM measurements were performed on a Bruker Dimension Icon in tapping mode using Bruker ScanAsyst-Air AFM probes (k = 0.4 N/m). A Hitachi HD-2300A equipped with Thermo Scientific NORAN System 7 energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detectors was operated at 200 kV for scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging in annular dark field (ADF), high-angle ADF (HAADF), bright field (BF) and secondary electron (SE) modes, as well as EDS analysis. A JEOL JEM-3200FS was operated at 300 kV for high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). In both microscopes, Gatan 626 single tilt liquid nitrogen cryo transfer holders were used to support the samples. The samples were inserted into the microscope column, and then cooled down to cryogenic conditions under vacuum by liquid nitrogen before electron irradiation. In situ (HA)ADF movies were recorded at a resolution of 512 px × 512 px, scan area of 51.79 nm × 51.79 nm, and pixel dwell time of 20 μs (Movie S1) or 7.5 μs (Movie S2). The probe current was 0.168 nA. EDS analysis was performed after fixing the area of interest by scanning the area using a lower flux electron beam until the nanoparticles did not grow further. EDS of individual nanoparticles was performed with manual drift correction based on the HAADF signal. EDS quantification was performed with the Thermo Scientific NSS software after background removal and matrix correction by the Proza method (Phi-Rho-Z). A Gatan K2 Summit direct electron detector was used for HRTEM imaging at a resolution of 3710 px × 3838 px (pixel size is 0.013 nm for the imaging conditions used). Lattice Spacing Analysis. The scale of HRTEM images was calibrated based on a standard Au (100) thin film sample supplied by Ted Pella Inc. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was performed on HRTEM images, which generated a 4096 px × 4096 px image of the real part. The spatial frequencies per pixel in the FFT image in x and y directions are equal. Average radial intensity profiles were calculated by integrating the central circular area of the FFT image with a radius of 512 px. The background due to the amorphous carbon substrate and polymers was fitted and subtracted in the final presentation in Figure Noise Reduction. We estimated the standard deviation of the noise by filtering the Fourier transform of a frame from the movies with a long-pass filter cut off at 1/5 px -1 , then inverse 