Microwave impedance measurements indicate a non-linear absorption anomaly in single wall carbon nanotubes at low temperatures (below 20 K). We investigate the nature of the anomaly using a time resolved microwave impedance measurement technique. It proves that the anomaly has an extremely slow, a few hundred second long dynamics. This strongly suggests that the anomaly is not caused by an intrinsic electronic effect and that it is rather due to a slow heat exchange between the sample and the environment. Conductivity of single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWC-NTs) remains an intensively studied subject due to the potential applications of SWCNTs as interconnects It was clarified that metallic SWCNTs form the socalled Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid 7,8 phase 9-15 while the semiconducting SWCNTs have a diameter dependent gap of about 0.5 -2 eV which is appropriate for transistor or optoelectronic applications. In addition to their underlying tubular structure (which we call "primary" structure), SWCNTs form a hexagonal arrangement, known as bundles (the "secondary" structure), due to van der Waals force Resistivity for a macroscopic SWCNT sample was shown to be characterized by a semiconductor-like temperature dependence with a T c = 10 . . . 100 K (using the notation in Ref. 17). This is due to the bundle-bundle contacts that act as transport barriers. Microwave conductivity, based on the microwave cavity perturbation Corzilius et al. Herein, we study this non-linear microwave absorption effect further. The focus is on unraveling the nature of the anomaly. We employ a recently developed time resolved Q measurement For the opposite process, i.e. after irradiating the cavity with microwaves, it recovers to its low microwave power value after a similarly long waiting time. This behavior shows that the non-linear microwave absorption in SWCNTs is a process with an extremely slow dynamics, which strongly argues that it is related to heating effects rather than to an electronic process which should follow a prompt behavior. We studied SWCNT samples from the same batch as in Ref. 27 and these samples were used for a number of other studies including Raman The cavity is coupled to the rest of the microwave circuit with two loop antennae in a transmission configuration. The transmission is advantageous as it avoids unwanted parasitic microwave signals which are related to the use of microwave duplexers in a reflection geometry The loaded cavity has a typical Q ≈ 3, 000 -5, 000 which corresponds to a cavity transient time τ = Q/2πf 0 ≈ 50 ns. This means that the method allows essentially to measure the cavity Q factor down to about 50 ns -1 μs (the value depends on the Q value). We also employ a more conventional frequency swept Q measurement method in order to reproduce the previous results on the non-linear microwave absorption. In Fig. Before presenting our results, we briefly discuss why conventional Q factor measurements are not capable of providing information with a good time resolution. The simplest and most conventional way to obtain Q values of microwave cavities is to sweep the frequency of a source and to detect the cavity response The recently developed cavity transient method fills the gap between the few 10 ns and few seconds range as it allows to determine the Q factor for as short as 10 × τ . It is based on irradiating the cavity on resonance with microwaves for about 5 -10 × τ in a pulsed manner To investigate the time dynamics of the non-linear mi-crowave absorption, we performed two types of experiments. In the first type, we start irradiating the sample with short microwave pulses after it was allowed to thermalize for a longer period of time (200 s) without microwave irradiation. The pulses themselves serve two purposes: they irradiate the sample in a controllable manner and also the pulses allow to read out the state of the cavity. The second experiment consists of irradiating the sample for a long period of time (200 seconds) and then applying short microwave pulses to read out the Q factor of the cavity. To simplify to subsequent discussion, we refer to these experiments as "heating" and "cooling". In Fig. For the cooling experiment, we let the sample thermalize for 200 sec, when no microwave irradiation is employed. This is followed by a massive irradiation of 10 mW power applied for 200 seconds, afterwards read-out pulses with a duration of 1 μs were used. The result is also shown in Fig. Note that the effect is by no means related to the copper cavity as for other type of samples, e.g. the K 3 C 60 , we did not observe a similar effect down to the lowest temperatures The cause of the anomalous heating effect present in single walled nanotube bundles is probably related to its unique heat conduction properties, which is expected to be very high, according to theoretical predictions around 2000 -6000 W/m•K The thermal conductivity is expected to actually become 0 as temperature approaches zero. The situation worsens when the investigated sample is bulk, which causes the drop of κ to the range of 50 to 200 W/m•K at room temperature Taking into account that our sample consists of unaligned tubes with short lengths, one expects the thermal conductivity to be as low as in glasses at low temperatures. Not to mention that shorter length, lattice defects and vacancies also lower the value of κ, each by a factor of 1 -3 We presented a time resolved measurement of microwave conductivity in single wall carbon nanotubes. The experiments indicate a non-linear microwave absorption anomaly which occurs with an extremely slow timescale (of a few hundred seconds). This suggest that heating of the SWCNTs is responsible for the anomalous behavior as a truly electronic effect is expected to occur on a much faster timescale. The result may explain some of the low temperature microwave anomalies in carbon nanotubes. 