We propose as key of superconductivity in (hole-doped) cuprates a novel excitation of magnetic origin, characteristic of two-dimensions and of purely quantum nature: the antiferromagnetic spin vortices. In this formalism the charge pairing arises from a Kosterlitz-Thouless-like attraction between such vortices centered on opposite Néel sublattices. This charge pairing induces also the spin pairing through the action of a gauge force generated by the nodouble occupation constraint imposed in the t-J model of the CuO planes of the cuprates. Superconductivity arises from coherence of pairs of excitations describing Zhang-Rice singlets and it is not of standard BCS type. We show that many experimental features of the cuprates can find a natural explanation in this formalism. Thirty years after the discovery of the first high-T c superconducting cuprate To present how this is realized in the (hole-doped) cuprates is the fundamental aim of this paper. One discovers that through this key idea many structural features of the phase diagram of the cuprates could be understood and many physical properties successfully computed. The derivations are based on well-defined conjectures and approximations and many experimental consequences are consistent with availabla data, as sketched in the final section. Let us stress that, due to their structure, the antiferromagnetic vortices are specific to quasi-2D doped antiferromagnets and some phenomena they give rise to, like the charge pairing discussed above, the induced spin-pairing and the metal-insulator crossover of in-plane resistivity, are peculiar to this approach and do not appear in this form in other approaches to the physics of cuprates. Whenever we succeed we present the intuitive ideas at the beginning of the section, giving later on a brief summary of their formal implementation and deferring to the references for the explicit proofs. This paper reviews the results on a mechanism for superconductivity arising from a long joint project on a spin-charge gauge approach to the physics of cuprates initiated with Z.-B. Su and L. Yu, to whom I express a deep gratitude for all the knowledge and ideas shared with me. Along the way we profit of fundamental contributions from many researcher, among which a leading role have been played by F. Ye and G. Bighin, but it is also a pleasure to cite as co-authors J.-H. Dai, L. De Leo, G. Orso, A. Ambrosetti, M. Gambaccini and last but not least to gratefully acknowledge the original insight by J. Froehlich. The high T c cuprates share a layered structure incorporating one or more copperoxygen (CuO) planes; an excellent recent summary of their properties can be found in Ref. Most of the researchers believe that for the hole-doped cuprates, considered in this paper, the key actors in the superconducting transition are the so-called Zhang-Rice singlets where i, j denote nearest neighbour (nn) sites of the lattice, c the hole field operator, P G the Gutzwiller projection eliminating double occupation, α the spin indices and summation over repeated spin (and vector) indices is understood, here and in the following. A typical value for the nn hopping is t ≈ 0.3 eV and for the anti-ferromagnetic Heisenberg coupling J ≈ 0.1 eV. (These are the values used in the numerical computations reported in the last section.) Furthermore to get a reasonable shape of the Fermi surface in the tight binding approximation one adds to the nn hopping term at least a nnn term with coefficient t ′ , |t ′ | ∼ 0.03 -0.1 eV, strongly material dependent. Let us briefly sketch the structure of the phase diagram of the (hole-doped) cuprates; for a very recent review see Ref. Two natural questions arising from the previous sections are: how the antiferromagnetic vortices appear in the t-J model and how much they explain of the above sketched phenomenology of the cuprates. Let us come back to the t-J model. Inspired by an idea pioneered by Anderson Consider the Heisenberg spin 1/2 chain, describing the 1D t-J model in the limit of zero doping and take as reference state that with the spin antiferromagnetically ordered, the semiclassical ground state mimicking the Néel order in 2D. Now let us insert a dopant by removing the spin from a site; as a consequence the two neighbouring spins will be ferromagnetically aligned. Let then the empty site to hop by a simultaneous opposite hopping of the spin, then we get two separate excitations. There is an empty site, but with neighbouring spins antiferromagnetically aligned, thus carrying charge but not spin; the corresponding excitation is the holon. There is another site where there is a domain wall between two different Néel sublattices, hence carrying spin 1/2 but neutral; the corresponding excitation is the spinon (see e.g. Ref. Let us sketch how the picture described in the previous section can be implemented mathematically in the path-integral formalism using Chern-Simons gauge fields, in the so-called spin-charge gauge approach; for details see Ref. where ǫ μνρ is the Levi-Civita anti-symmetric tensor in 3D. Then the spin-charge (or SU (2) × U (1)) gauged model so obtained is exactly equivalent to the original t-J model. In particular the spin and charge invariant correlation functions of the fermions fields c jα of the t-J model are exactly equal to the correlation functions of the fields exp[i γ j B]P (exp[i γ j V ]) αβ c jβ , where c denotes now the fermion field of the gauged model, γ j a string at constant euclidean time connecting the point j to infinity and P (•) the path-ordering, which amounts to the usual time ordering T (•), when "time" is used to parametrize the curve along which one integrates. (For a careful discussion of boundary conditions and further details, see Ref. Let us give the key ideas of the proof of the above theorem for the partition function. We represent the partition function of the gauged model in the first-quantized formalism in terms of the worldlines of fermions. After integrating out the gauge fields, due to the chosen coefficients of the Chern-Simon action, the effect of the coupling to B μ (V μ ) is only to give a factor e ±i π 2 (e ∓i π 2 ) for any single exchange of the fermion worldlines, so the two effects cancel each other exactly. The two signs in the phases correspond to the two possibilities of under-crossing or over-crossing of the worldlines; due to the Gutzwiller projection there are no intersections between the worldlines, so the crossing are well-defined. We just mention that the role of the strings γ, appearing in the representation of the fields in the theorem, is to "close" the worldlines emerging when a fermion is created and annihilated, to guarantee gauge-invariance also in the correlators. To discuss the t-J model in 1D we simply restrict the lattice to 1D and choose the strings γ parallel to the lattice, whose space direction we label with the index 1, towards +∞ but infinitesimally shifted in the orthogonal direction, labelled by the index 2, to avoid the intersections with the worldlines of the fermions. We apply to the fermion of the gauged model the spin-charge decomposition discussed in Sec. 3, but now we identify exp[i γ j B]h j as the holon and P (exp[i γ j V ]) αβ sjβ as the spinon fields. The Chern-Simons coupling automatically ensures that the corresponding field operators obey both semionic braid statistics. As we will see the two strings introduced above are precisely the "dressing" alluded in Sec. 2, reproducing in fact the correct result in 1D. To understand this result we start noticing that in absence of holons the spin of the Heisenberg model is written in terms of sα as S = 1 2 s * α σ αβ sβ , where σ denote the Pauli matrices. Therefore, to come closer to the picture discussed in the previous section we first gauge-fix the SU (2) gauge invariance imposing (even in the presence of holons) the requirement that the spins are antiferromagnetically ordered, by setting where |x| = x 1 + x 2 . (In 1D for j a lattice site we have simply |j| = j, but this notation is useful in 2D.) After the holon-spinon decomposition introduced above the action of the gauged t-J model at doping δ is given by The two-point correlation function of the hole can be written as: where x, y are lattice sites and x 0 , y 0 are euclidean times. Let us discuss the case of 1D. Since the 0-component of B appears linearly in (5) , we can safely integrate it out getting for the numerator of (5) the constraint (with μ, ν = 1, 2, z ∈ R 3 ): By imposing the gauge-fixing B 2 = 0 one finally gets so that the holon field turns out to be given by exp[i If the doping is δ, the fermion c α of the 1D t-J model in the tight-binding approximation has a Fermi momentum π(1 -δ)/2 since two fermions with opposite spin can have the same momenta. For the spinless fermion h * the Fermi momentum would be π(1 -δ) since only one spinless fermion con have a fixed momenta. However, if we consider the phase string attached to the spinless fermion in The treatment of the spinon is slightly more involved. Since we have already gauge-fixed the SU (2) gauge-invariance in (3), the gauge field V has to be integrated without gauge-fixing. Then we split the integration over V into an integration over a field V , satisfying the gaugefixing condition V 2 = 0 and its gauge transformations expressed in terms of an SU (2)-valued scalar field g, i.e., V μ = g † V μ g + g † ∂ μ g. Notice that P (exp[i We now find the configuration of g that optimize the partition function of holons in a fixed, but holon-dependent, background. It is rigorously proved in Ref. . This is precisely the "string" of spin flipping that we have encountered in the preliminary qualitative discussion in the previous section. Finally we set g = U g m , with U ∈ SU (2) describing the fluctuations around the optimal configuration. We write and we will call in the following the s α again "spinons". One such spinon can be identified with the 1/2-spin local configuration in the previous section. As a "mean field" approximation we neglect the fluctuations U in the calculation of V . Proceeding now as done for the B field and integrating over V 0 one finds that V 1 is diagonal and one of the two components of P (exp[i V ]) acts erasing the pure phase factor of g m , the other acts doubling this phase factor. One can then show that in this way one can reproduce in the t-term of (4) equals s * αi s αj , whereas in the J-term, where there are no holons, it equals ǫ αβ s αi s βj . But under the constraint s * αj s αj = 1 the following identity holds: |s * αi s αj | 2 + |ǫ αβ s αi s βj | 2 = 1 so that if one optimizes the t-term choosing |s * αi s αj | = 1, simultaneously one optimizes also the J-term. This optimizing property is somewhat strange, since the same expression in terms of V gives rise to different expressions in terms of the spinons s in the t-and the J-terms. It is intrinsically due to the SU (2) gauge degrees of freedom, absent in the more standard gauge approach of the slave boson formalism, which involves only U (1) gauge degrees of freedom. Let us finally briefly comment on why in the picture of Sec. 3 the position of the spinon, corresponding to a spin kink, is different from that of the holon. The reason is that if we eliminate the holons in the remaining Heisenberg chain there is a gas of spin kink-antikinks that interpolate between two semiclassical realizations of the Néel order, related by parity in 1D. However, since as well known there is no Néel order in 1D, this gas is dense and e.g. an anti-kink of this gas annihilate a spin kink generated by the holon leaving a spin kink arbitrarily far from the holon position. Carrying the know-how gained in 1D we come back now to the physical 2D model. Let us try naively to export to 2D the string mechanism discussed in 1D in Sec. 3. We immediately find a big difference: when there is a string of spin flips in a chain the two adjacent chains will have the spin with the same orientation of those of the string and being the spin interaction antiferromagnetic this configuration costs an energy proportional to the length of the string, i.e. holon and spinon connected by a string of spin flips are confined! Here we see the appearance of a new actor that in our discussion in 1D we have overlooked: a gauge force between spinon and holon. Mathematically its origin comes from the spin-charge decomposition of the fermion of the (gauged) t-J model: This decomposition is clearly invariant under the U (1) gauge transformation: h j -→ h j e iΛ j , sjα -→ s jα e iΛ j (we can also replace s by s) , with Λ a real lattice function. We call this emergent symmetry slave-particle (or h/s) gauge symmetry, not to be confused with the charge gauge symmetry whose gauge field is B. At least in the long wavelength continuum limit one can make this symmetry explicit by introducing the related gauge field that we denote by a μ . This can be done in absence of holons simply by assuming a continuum limit of the spinon field s of the form s xα (x 0 ) -→ s α (x) + (-1) |x| p α (x), where s and p in the r.h.s. are continuum fields. Integrating out the ferromagnetic component p, as shown in Ref. where g ∼ ǫ D-1 J -1 and v s ∼ Jǫ is the spinon velocity, with ǫ the lattice spacing, in the following set to 1. Furthermore a μ (x) = s * α (x)∂ μ s α (x), with μ a space-time index, and the implicit constraint s * α s α = 1 is understood. However, in 1D there is an additional Θ = π term (A hedgehog gas discussed in Ref. for ω, | k|, ω/| k| ∼ 0, where χ is the diamagnetic susceptibility and κ the Landau damping. By plugging as typical energy scale T we see that there is a typical momentum scale, the socalled Reizer If we accept the suggestion coming from the 1D model for the statistics of holon and spinon, one should search for a semionic representation of the hole field also in 2D. However in 2D the typical topological excitation is the vortex, not the kink, characteristic of 1D. Therefore the analogy with 1D suggests the appearance of a charge-vortex attached to the holon and a spin-vortex attached to the spinon and this is indeed what happens. These vortices are somewhat analogous to those introduced by Laughlin in the FQHE and in fact a semionic representation of the hole was advocated by him We can recognize ∂ μ arg( z -j) as the vector potential of a vortex centered on the holon position j, i.e. centered on an empty site of the t-J model. We already see here that strings in 1D are replaced in 2D by vortices. The vortices in ( Then ideally one would search a configuration of g, depending on the holon configuration, optimizing the holon-partition function in that g background, and around that configuration, g m , one would consider spinon fluctuations. We didn't succeeded to find rigorously such configuration as in 1D, but we still found a configuration optimal "on average" by expanding the holon partition function in terms of holon worldlines in the first-quantization formalism as done in in onedimension. Looking at (4) we see that on links appearing in the J-term, thus not containing holons, the optimization requires |(σ In the links of the hopping term the holons are coupled to the complex abelian gauge field: In Ref. [32] and of a numerical simulation (L. Qin, unpublished) we conjecture that at least on average the optimal flux per plaquette is π(1 -δ) for sufficiently small doping and temperature. On the other hand, it is well known that at high doping or temperature a vanishing flux per plaquette is favored. Therefore we expect a crossover corresponding to the melting of the π-flux lattice and we propose to identify such crossover, which we denote by T * , with the experimental "lowpseudogap" crossover in the cuprates on the basis of comparison between theoretical curves and experimental data, in particular of in-plane resistivity as discussed in Sec. 10. Consistently with the terminology used in Sec. 2 for the phenomenology of the cuprates, we call PG also for the t-J model in our approach the region below the π → 0 crossover and we call SM the region above. We see from ( x ) 11 = 1. We find that g m involves a spin flip at the holon position as in 1D. Hence writing g = U g m with U as in restricted to the magnetic Brillouin zone (BZ). One thus obtain two "small FS" centred at (± π 2 , ± π 2 ) with Fermi momenta k F ∼ δ. When the holon is combined with the spinon to reconstruct the hole with dispersion in the full BZ, the Dirac structure of the holon suppresses the spectral weight outside of the magnetic BZ We recognize in the term (-1) |j| ∂ μ arg( z -j) the vector potential of a vortex centered on the holon position j, with opposite vorticity (or chirality) for the center in opposite Néel sublattices. These are finally the antiferromagnetic spin vortices alluded in the beginning of the paper. As one see they are along the spin direction, z, of the magnetization; they are the topological excitations of the U (1) subgroup of the SU (2) spin group unbroken in the antiferromagnetic phase. These vortices are of purely quantum origin, since of Aharonov-Bohm type, inducing a topological effect far away from the position of the holon itself, where their classically visible field strength is supported. Hence in this approach the empty sites of the 2D t-J model, mimicking the Zhang-Rice singlets and corresponding to the holon locations, are the cores of spin vortices, a quantum distortion of the antiferromagnetic spin background, recording in their vorticity the Néel structure of the lattice. Therefore they are still a peculiar manifestation of the antiferromagnetic interaction, like the more standard antiferromagnetic spin waves. We now show that these vortices are responsible both for short-range AF and for charge-pairing. The effect of the spin vortices appeared in the last section is twofold: acting as impurities on the gapless spin waves of the Heisenberg model describing undoped cuprates they "localize" them, more precisely they make them gapped. Furthermore being a 2D gas of vortices with both chiralities ( corresponding to centers in the two Néel sublattices) they undergo a Berezinski-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition. Since they are centered on holons the KT attractive pairing induces a charge pairing. Mathematically the presence of the antiferromagnetic spin vortices is recorded in the field V of ( A quenched average, • , over the positions of the center of spin-vortices yields the following estimate within the above approximations is given by where m s ≈ δ| log δ|. Hence the gapless spinons s forming the spin waves of the CP 1 (or equivalently O(3)) model describing the undoped system, traveling in a gas of spin vortices centered on holons acquire a gap ≈ J(1 -2δ) δ| log δ|, converting the long-range AF of the undoped model in the short-range AF when doping exceeds a critical value. This is selfconsistent with the previous assumption of SU (2) symmetry restoration at large scales. We thus see that in this approach the transition corresponding to the onset of short-range AF is indeed due to the antiferromagnetic spin vortices. We now show that the same term where ∆ is the 2D Laplacian. In the static approximation for holons As expected the holon-pair order parameter decreases with doping and its scale is proportional to J and not to t, as natural due to its magnetic origin, but reduced by the effect of the empty sites. In the next section we show that this charge pairing, due to the antiferromagnetic spin vortices, indeed leads to superconductivity. The charge pairing alone does not yet lead to hole-pairing, since the spins are still unpaired. It is the slave-particle gauge attraction between holon and spinon that induces the formation of short-range spin-singlet (RVB) spinon pairs at a lower temperature T ps , in a sense, using the holon-pairs as sources of attraction . More in detail: the spinon gap is due to the presence of a gas of unpaired spin vortices and when the charge-pairing occurs the tight vortex-antivortex pairs don't contribute anymore to the spinon gap. Hence charge-pairing leads to a lowering of the spinon energy proportional to the density of spinon pairs. Furthermore, the monomial quartic in the holons of the J term of the action in (4) which involves the RVB spinon-pair field is repulsive and its condensation energy is negative and decreased by the formation of spinon pairs. However fortunately the lowering of the spinon gap implies an enhancement of the contribution of the vacuum energy of the slave-particle gauge field. The competition between these two effects finally produces a saddle point with finite density of RVB spinon-pairs. From the combined charge-and spin-pairs we get a gas of incoherent spin-singlet hole-pairs. Finally, at a even lower temperature, the superconducting transition temperature T c , the hole pairs become coherent and a d-wave hole condensate (in BCS approximation) appears, leading to superconductivity. The appearance of two temperatures, one for pair formation and a lower one for pair condensation, is typical of a BEC-BCS crossover regime for a fermion system with attractive interaction As remarked above in this approach a key ingredient of the spinon pairing is the monomial quartic in the holons of the J term in (4) that we have so far ignored. Rewritten in terms of the spinon fluctuations s and neglecting the subleading contribution of V this Heisenberg term is given by: J 2 h * j h j h * i h i |ǫ αβ s αi s βj | 2 . This interaction term is clearly positive, hence repulsive, due to the semionic mean-field approach, contrary to the similar term in the slave-boson approach. It can be reasonably neglected in the normal state, since in mean field it is of O(δ 2 ), but as soon as holon-pairing becomes relevant the quartic holon monomial may become in mean-field O(δ) and it cannot be neglected anymore. To investigate its effect we apply a Hubbard-Stratonovic (HS) transformation and go to the continuum limit. Denote in this limit the HS field by ∆ μ s , μ = 1, 2 and treat the holon pairs in mean field. Then the additional term that one obtains to add to the spinon lagrangian in Treating the HS field in mean-field one finds This doubling arises because for a finite density of spinon pairs there are two (positive energy) excitations, with different energies, but the same spin and momenta. They are given, e.g., by creating a spinon up in the presence of the pairs and by destructing a spinon down in one of the RVB spin-pairs. The lower branch exhibits a minimum with an energy lower than m s , analogous to the one appearing in a plasma of relativistic fermions For this competition the slave-particle gauge field is the relevant actor. In fact, since the spinon is gapped in absence of RVB pairing its contribution to the gauge effective action is a Maxwell term of the form As soon as the RVB pairs in mean-field condense at T ps the slave-particle global gauge symmetry is broken from U (1) to Z 2 in mean-field. The Anderson-Higgs mechanism then implies a gap for the gauge field a μ . However if we reinsert the phase fluctuations of the holon-pair and spinonpair order parameters, the true superconducting transition is shifted below T ps , which remains just as a crossover. In fact below T ps the low-energy effective action obtained integrating out spinons is a Maxwell-gauged 3D XY model, where the angle-field φ of the XY model is the "square root" of the phase of the long-wave limit of the hole-pair field and the gauge field is the slave-particle gauge field (suitably dressed). The holon contribution is subleading and will be ignored here. The euclidean effective action is then given by where, since in the range considered v s /T ∼ J/T << 1, we extended the integration to the full Euclidean space-time R 3 , but retaining the temperature dependence of the coefficients in the action. The gauged XY model has two phases: Coulomb and Higgs. If the coefficient, ∼ |∆ s | 2 /M s , of the Anderson-Higgs mass term for a is sufficiently small, the phase field φ fluctuates so strongly that actually no mass gap is generated. This is the Coulomb phase, where there is a plasma of standard slave-particle "magnetic" (not spin!) vortices-antivortices. In the presence of a temperature gradient a perpendicular external magnetic field induces an imbalance between vortices and antivortices, giving rise to a Nernst signal, even if the hole pairs are not condensed yet. Therefore we conjecture that T ps corresponds in the phase diagram of cuprates to the onset of non-superconducting diamagnetic and vortex Nernst signals. Since it is dominated by spinons physics, this crossover is essentially independent of details of the Fermi surface, hence material-independent. For a sufficiently large coefficient of the mass term for a the gauged XY model is in the broken-symmetry phase: the fluctuations of φ are exponentially suppressed and we have a quasi-condensation (power-law decaying order parameter) at T > 0; accordingly the "magnetic" vortex-antivortex pairs become dilute, so the slave-particle gauge field is gapped and hence suppressed in the long wavelength limit. At the same time the holon, and hence the hole, acquires the gap outside the nodes of the d-wave order parameter; this is the superconducting phase. Therefore, the superconducting transition is almost of classical 3D XY type, driven by condensation of "magnetic" vortices and related to phase coherence as in BEC systems, in spite of the BCS-like charge-pairing discussed above. When we reinsert the phase fluctuations of the charge-pair order parameter we are going beyond the BCS approximation. The main effect is to reproduce between T ph and T c the phenomenology of Fermi arcs coexisting with gap in the antinodal region discussed in Sec.2. Indeed when a gas of incoherent holon pairs is present, the scale of the inverse correlation length ("mass" m ph ) of the quanta of the phase of the holon-pair field separates self-consistently low energy modes with a Fermi liquid behavior from high energy modes with a d-wave superconducting behavior. More precisely an approximate evaluation of self-energy correction for the holon, Σ, due to these phase fluctuations in the longwavelength continuum limit gives where ∆ h ( k) is the d-wave holon-pair order parameter and ω h ( k) the holon dispersion. Clearly if m ph = 0 one goes back to the BCS approximation and in the opposite limit m ph → ∞ the correction vanishes. The value of m ph decreases with T , thus lowering T one finds a gradual reduction of the spectral weight on the FS at small frequency as we move away from the diagonals of the Brillouin zone, due to the d-wave structure of ∆ h ( k). Simultaneously at larger frequencies we have the formation and increase of two peaks of intensity precursors of the excitations in the superconducting phase. The sketched mechanism of spectral weight suppression on the FS exhibits the fingerprint of the presence of the slave-particle gauge field, because the smooth interpolation between Fermi liquid and superconducting behaviour discussed above is actually due to the interaction of the phase of the holon pairs with the gauge field In this final section we compare some experimental data with theoretical computations performed within the above sketched approach to the t-(t ′ )-J model, with some experimental inputs for one doping to fix parameters that are then used consistently in all the calculations. So one may verify that many experimental features of the low-energy physics of hole-doped cuprates can find a natural explanation within the formalism presented here. • Phase diagram. In Fig. (a) • In-plane resistivity ρ . Since the hole is composite, due to the slave-particle gauge "string" between holon and spinon the in-plane resistivity is dominated by the slower of the two excitations (Ioffe-Larkin rule exhibits an (approximate) universal behaviour A comparison between experiments and theory is shown in Fig. • Nernst signal. One expects that the amplitude of the spin-pair order parameter ∆ s is roughly proportional to the intensity of the Nernst signal and a comparison of the equilevel curves for ∆ s obtained solving the gap equation ( (a) ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▼ , compared with experimental data from Ref. • Superfluid density ρ (s) . For the same reason given for in-plane resistivity one finds that the superfluid density satisfies Ioffe-Larkin rule and in the underdoped region it is dominated by the spinons. From shows an universal behaviour 