The spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) and anomalous Hall effect (AHE) are observed in a Cr2O3/Ta structure. The structural and surface morphology of Cr2O3/Ta bilayers have been investigated. Temperature dependence of longitudinal and transverse resistances measurements confirm the relationship between SMR and AHE signals in Cr2O3/Ta structure. By means of temperature dependent magnetoresistance measurements, the physical origin of SMR in the Cr2O3/Ta structure is revealed, and the contribution to the SMR from the spin current generated by AHE has been proved. The so-called boundary magnetization due to the bulk antiferromagnetic order in Cr2O3 film may be responsible for the relationship of SMR and AHE in the Cr2O3/Ta bilayer. It is known that the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) provides a mechanism to couple charge and spin of electrons and results in spin Hall effect (SHE) in non-magnetic (NM) heavy metals. Among those, the Spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) is a special magnetoresistance that no charge current flows in the FM layer, which depends on the relative orientations between the magnetic moments of FM layer and the spin polarization direction of NM. SMR has been observed in ferromagnetic insulators, (0001)-oriented Cr2O3 has an layer of net surface magnetic moment whereas the bulk keeps antiferromagnetic. In this work, both SMR and AHE signals are observed in Cr2O3 (15)/Ta (5) bilayer. To exclude the magnetic proximity effect (MPE) of platinum, tantalum was adopted as spin source. Our result is different from that previous work of Cr2O3/W structure, In our experiments, 15 nm thickness Cr2O3 thin films were grown on Al2O3 (0001) substrates by using pulse laser deposition (PLD) in oxygen ambience. The PLD chamber utilized a KrF laser of 248 nm wavelength. The laser energy density was kept at 1.8 J/cm 2 with a repetition rate of 3 Hz and the target to substrate distance was maintained at 5 cm during the deposition. The base pressure of the chamber before deposition was less than The schematics of the angular α, β, and γ dependence are displayed in Fig. Clearly, Rxx keeps almost constant with varying γ, confirming that no AMR exists in our structure. Oppositely, with rotating β, the variation of Rxx coincides with cos 2 β, consisting with the SMR behavior. Fig. It is known that the spin-dependent parameters are consistent with the thickness of NM. Fig. where the resistivity is measured along the direction of the electric-current flow I (along the x direction); is the Hall resistivity component recorded in the plane perpendicular to I (along the y direction); is a constant resistivity offset; is the i-axis component of the moments; ∆ (caused mainly by the real part of spin mixing conductance Gr) 13 contributes to the conductance modulation that depends on the in-plane component of the magnetization; while ∆ (caused mainly by the imaginary part of spin mixing conductance Gi, which can be interpreted as an effective exchange field acting on the spin accumulation) 13 contributes only when there is a magnetization component normal to the plane (AHE), as discussed below. In Figs. rotations data of the SMR, which is consistent with SMR theory. For a 5-nm-thick β-phase Ta film with the high resistivity approximate 320 μΩ•cm, 3 the experimental for the spin Hall angle = 0.03, the spin-flip diffusion length of γ = 1.8 nm, Fig. As a result of relative weak exchange interaction between spins and antiferromagnetic order, its direct interactions on SMR and AHE can be neglected. To confirm the observations, Fig. To confirm the angular dependence of Rxy, the measurement rotating the samples along with the angle α, β, γ under 3 T are shown in Figs. 6(a) -(c), respectively. As shown in Fig. 