In this paper, we perform large-scale electron-correlated calculations of optoelectronic properties of rectangular graphene-like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon molecules. Theoretical methodology employed in this work is based upon Pariser-Parr-Pople (PPP) π-electron model Hamiltonian, which includes long-range electron-electron interactions. Electron-correlation effects were incorporated using multi-reference singles-doubles configurationinteraction (MRSDCI) method, and the ground and excited state wave functions thus obtained were employed to calculate the linear optical absorption spectra of these molecules, within the electric-dipole approximation. As far as the ground state wave functions of these molecules are concerned, we find that with the increasing size, they develop a strong diradical open-shell character. Our results on optical absorption spectra are in very good agreement with the available experimental results, outlining the importance of electron-correlation effects in accurate description of the excited states. In addition to the optical gap, spin gap of each molecule was also computed using the same methodology. Calculated spin gaps exhibit a decreasing trend with the increasing sizes of the molecules, suggesting that the infinite graphene has a vanishing spin gap. Despite many attractive properties, graphene has still not found applications in opto-electronic devices, because of the lack of a band gap. Therefore, in recent times, considerable amount of research effort has been directed towards graphene nanostructures such as quantum dots, In our theoretical approach we consider RGMs to be systems whose low-lying excited states are determined exclusively by their π electrons, with negligible influence of σ electrons. As a result we adopt a computational approach employing the Pariser-Parr-Pople (PPP) π-electron Hamiltonian, The schematic diagrams of RGMs considered in this work are shown in Fig. • . Within the PPP model based theoretical methodology adopted here, small variations in bond lengths and angles do not make any significant differences to the calculated optical properties of such structures, as demonstrated by us earlier. As discussed in the previous section, with hydrogen passivated edges, the molecules considered here are π-conjugated systems, and, therefore, in this work we employed Pariser-Parr-Pople (PPP) effective π-electron model Hamiltonian, where κ i, j is the dielectric constant of the system, included to take into account the screening effects, and R i, j is the distance (in Å) between the carbon atoms involved. In the present set of calculations we have used two sets of Coulomb parameters: (a) the "screened parameters" We initiate the computations by performing restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) calculations for the closed-shell singlet ground states of the RGMs considered here, by employing the PPP Hamiltonian (Eq. 1), using a computer program developed in our group. In addition to the point-group and spin symmetries, CI wave functions obtained in these calculations also possess electronhole (e-h) symmetry, which is a consequence of: (a) employing only nearest-neighbor hoppings rendering the systems bipartite, and (b) all molecules considered are half-filled, i.e., have one electron, per carbon atom. Conventionally, the 1 1 A g ground state is assigned the negative (-) e-h parity, while dipole selection rules require that the one-photon excited states should possess not only opposite spatial parity (u, i.e., ungerade), but also opposite e-h parity, i.e., positive (+) parity. Therefore, all B 2u /B 3u optically active excited states considered in this work have positive (+) e-h parity. In smaller RGMs, all the orbitals were treated as active during the CI calculations. However, in cases of larger molecules namely RGM-50, -54, and -56, we had to resort to the frozen orbital approximation to keep the CI expansion tractable. This consists of freezing a few lowest energy occupied MOs, and removing the corresponding symmetric virtual MOs from the list, as described in our earlier works. 2. The intensity of the first peak in the spectra increases significantly with the increasing size of RGMs. 3. We also note that all y-polarized peaks are non-degenerate, and correspond to excited states of symmetry 4. With the increasing length of the RGMs along a given orientation (zigzag or armchair), the optical gap decreases. In Table In this section, we present our results obtained from the PPP-model based CI calculations. First, we present the results on the nature of ground state wave function of RGMs, followed by their spin gaps. Finally, we present and discuss the calculated linear optical absorption spectra of these molecules. Before discussing the nature of ground state wave functions of RGMs, we would like to make a brief general comment about the number of active orbitals involved in the MRSDCI calculations performed on these molecules. For RGM-n, n = 28 to 42, all the n MOs of the systems were included in the MRSDCI calculations. However, from n = 50 to 72, it was no longer possible to perform accurate calculations with all the n MOs treated as active. Therefore, for these cases, some low-lying occupied MO's, were frozen, while their unoccupied counterparts were deleted. As a result, the number of active orbitals (N act ) for n = 50 -56 was 42, while for n = 72, it was 44. The final choice of N act for each molecule was decided after careful convergence considerations both for the singlet-triplet gap, and the optical absorption spectra. For n = 50, we have explicitly presented the convergence of optical absorption spectra with respect to N act . Because, to compute the spin gaps we needed energies of 1 1 A g and 1 The dominant electronic configurations contributing to the ground state MRSDCI wave functions various RGMs are presented in Table Spin gap of an electronic system is the energy difference between the lowest triplet and singlet states. For RGMs, the lowest singlet state is 1 1 A g ground state, while the lowest triplet state is the 1 3 B 2u state, whose spatial part of the wave function consists predominantly of the single excitation |H → L , just as in the case of 1 1 B 2u state. Thus, at the TB level, 1 1 B 2u and 1 3 B 2u will be degenerate, and, therefore their spin and optical gaps will be identical. However, if the two gaps are found to be different for RGMs, it can only be due to electron-electron interactions. Therefore, difference in the spin and optical gaps is a measure of the electron correlation effects in RGMs. With this in mind, we computed the spin gaps of RGMs up to RGM-72, using our PPP model based MRSDCI approach. Given that the size of these CI calculations (see Table From the inspection of Table We present the important configurations contributing to the many body wave functions of 1 3 B 2u states of various RGMs in Table It will also be interesting to compare the experimental values of the spin-gaps of individual hydrocarbon molecules corresponding to these RGMs, with our calculated values. Therefore, we urge the experimentalists to measure the spin gaps of RGMs studied in the present work. In this section, we present optical absorption spectra of RGM-n, with n ranging from 30 to 56, computed using the PPP model, and the MRSDCI approach. Before discussing the results of our calculations, in Table The calculated spectra of these RGMs are presented in Figs. Before discussing the spectra of individual RGMs, we discuss the general trends observed in our calculation: 1. For each RGM-n, the absorption spectrum obtained using the PPP-CI approach is blueshifted in comparison to the TB model. 2. For all the RGMs, absorption spectra obtained using the screened parameters are red-shifted compared to those obtained using the standard parameters. Energy (eV) Energy (eV) 3. In all cases, the first peak of the spectrum is due to optical excitation from the 1 1 A g ground state to 1 1 B 2u excited state, and corresponds to the optical gap. As per electric dipole selection rules, this peak is y-polarized. The wave function of the 1 1 B 2u state for all the RGMs is dominated by singly-excited configuration |H → L , where H and L, respectively, denote the HOMO and the LUMO of the system. 4. For all the RGMs, the first peak is not the most intense peak. For a number of RGMs, several high energy peaks are more intense than the first one. This result is in sharp contrast with the TB model results. 5. Dominant configurations in the wave functions of the excited states corresponding to the lower energy peaks are single excitations, while those in the higher energy peaks are dominated by double and higher excitations. In Table Clar and Schmidt 32 , Arabei et al. a TDDFT method, b TDPPP method, c DFT(Kohan-Sham) method 10/17 Konishi et al. Koch et al. In the spectra computed using the screened parameters, IV peak is the most intense, and it is due to a B 2u state, located at 5.12 eV, whose wave function is dominated by the |H -2 → L + 2 excitation. For the standard parameter calculations, peak V is the most intense one, due to a B 2u state located at 6.01 eV, along with a small mixture of B 3u state located at 5.87 eV, with wave functions dominated by configurations |H -3 → L + 3 , and |H→L; H → L + 4 -c.c., respectively. The detailed wave analysis of all the excited states contributing peaks in the computed spectra is presented in Tables The hydrogen passivated structural analog of RGM-36 is tetrabenzocoronene, for which we were unable to locate any experimentally measured optical absorption spectrum. Therefore, we can only compare our calculations to the theoretical works of other authors, for which also we could find just one TDDFT based computation of the optical absorption spectra by Malloci et al. For both the screened as well as the standard parameters computed absorption spectra, peak VIII is the most intense one. In the spectra computed using the screened parameters, the most intense peak is located at 5.99 eV, and is due to states of symmetries B 2u and B 3u contributing almost equally to the oscillator strength, with their many-particle wave functions dominated by configurations |H -3 → L + 3 , and |H -2 → L + 5 +c.c., respectively. In the spectrum computed using the standard parameters, the most intense peak is located at 6.57 eV, due to a B 3u state, with wave function dominated by |H -5 → L + 2 +c.c. excitations. The detailed wave analysis of excited states contributing peaks in the spectra computed by the screened, and the standard parameters is presented in Tables S16 and S17 of the Supporting Information. Ruiterkamp et al. In the spectra computed using the screened parameters, peak IV is most intense, and it is due to a state of B 2u symmetry, located at 5.16 eV, along with a small contribution from a B 3u state, located at 5.17 eV. The wave functions of these states are dominated by single excitations |H -2 → L + 2 , and |H -1→L + 5 -c.c., respectively. For the standard parameter calculations, peak VI is the most intense one, corresponding again to a mixture of a B 2u state (at 6.23 eV), and a B 3u state (at 6.17 eV), with wave functions dominated by excitations |H -4 → L + 4 , and |H → L + 1; H -6 → L -c.c., respectively. The detailed wave function analysis of the excited states contributing to various peaks in the spectra calculated by the screened and standard parameters, respectively, is presented in Tables Teranthene is the hydrogen-saturated structural analogue of RGM-42, for which no experimental, or theoretical data is available, as far as optical absorption spectrum is concerned. However, Konishi et al. In the spectrum computed using the screened parameters, peak III is most intense, corresponding to a B 3u state located at 3.96, whose wave function is dominated by |H -3→L -c.c. single excitations. For the standard parameter calculation, peak VII is most intense, corresponding again to a B 3u state, but located at 5.47 eV, with a small mixture of B 2u state located at 5.33 eV. The wave functions of the two states are dominated by single excitations, |H -3 → L -c.c., and |H -1 → L + 1 , respectively. The detailed wave analysis of all the excited states contributing to peaks in the calculated spectra using the screened and the standard paremeters, is presented in Tables For RGM-50 and larger structures, it would have been computationally very tedious to perform MRSDCI calculations retaining all the MOs, therefore, we decided to freeze a few lowest-lying occupied orbitals, and delete their electron-hole symmetric highest virtual orbitals. For the case of RGM-50, we froze/deleted four occupied/virtual orbitals, so that the total number of MOs involved in the calculations reduced to forty-two, same as in case of RGM-42. In order to demonstrate that this act of freezing and deleting the MOs does not affect the calculated optical absorption spectra, we have performed the calculations for RGM-50, with four and seven frozen/deleted orbitals, leading to 42/36 active MOs. From the calculated absorption spectra presented in Fig. On comparing our results to the calculations by other authors, we find that the value of the optical gaps reported by Viruela-Martín et al. In the spectra computed using the screened parameter, peak V is most intense, and is due to a B 2u state located at 5.04 eV, along with a small intensity due to a B 3u state located at 4.90 eV. The wave functions of the two states are dominated by configurations |H -3 → L + 3 , and |H -5 → L + 1 +c.c. excitations, respectively. In the standard parameter spectrum, peak VIII is most intense, and is mainly due to a B 2u state located at 6.38 eV, along with a small contribution of a B 3u state located at 6.45 eV. The dominant contributions to the many-particle wave functions of these two states are from single excitation |H -4 → L + 4 , and the double excitation |H → L + 6; H → L + 1 -c.c., respectively. The detailed wave function analysis of all the excited states contributing peaks in the spectra computed using the screened and the standard parameters, are presented in Tables S22, and S23, respectively, of the Supporting Information. For the case of RGM-54, we performed MRSDCI calculations after freezing/deleting six occupied/virtual MOs, i.e., with forty two active MOs. For this molecule, we were not able to locate any experimental results, or other theoretical calculations, thus, making our results the first ones. We hope that our calculations will give rise to future theoretical and experimental works on this system. Calculated optical absorption spectra for RGM-54 are presented in Figs. In the screened parameter calculations, next we find a group of three well-separated peaks, with strong, and almost equal, intensities, located at 2.56 eV, 2.83 eV, and 3.09 eV. The first of these peaks corresponds to an x-polarized transition, while the next two are y-polarized. In the standard parameter spectrum as well, the next three peaks are quite strong, and well separated, but they have their intensities in the ascending order, while the middle peak (peak III) appears as a shoulder of peak IV. The locations of these peaks are blue-shifted compared to their screened parameter counterparts, and are 3.20 eV, 3.69 eV, and 3.98 eV. The polarization characteristics are also different, with two of the peaks exhibiting mixed polarization. At higher energies, in the screened parameter spectrum there are well defined high-intensity peaks at energies 3.71 eV (x/y polarized), 3.95 eV (x polarized), 5.14 eV (y polarized), and 5.40 eV (x polarized). Out of these the peak located at 5.14 eV (peak IX) is the most intense peak of the computed spectrum. This peak is due to a B 2u state, whose wave function is dominated by the |H -3 → L + 3 singly-excited configuration. In the standard parameter spectrum, beyond 4 eV, there are a number of low-intensity peaks or shoulders, except for a peak located at 6.56 eV (peak XII), which is the most intense one, and exhibits mixed polarization. This peak is due to a B 3u state located at 6.51 eV, along with a smaller contribution to the intensity from a B 2u state located at 6.61 eV. The wave functions of the two states are dominated by singly excited configurations, |H -2 → L + 7 +c.c., and |H -3 → L + 3 , respectively. The detailed wave function analysis of all the excited states contributing peaks in the spectra computed using the standard parameters, and the screened parameters, are presented in Tables S24, and S25, respectively, of the Supporting Information. Again, due to a large number of electrons in the system, for RGM-56 we froze/deleted seven occupied/virtual orbitals, so that the total number of active MOs involved in the calculations reduced to forty-two, same as in case of RGM-42, RGM-50, and RGM-54. The hydrogen saturated analog of RGM-56 is quateranthene, for which no experimental measurements of optical absorption spectrum exist. However, Konishi et al. In the spectra computed using screened parameter, peak III is the most intense one, and it is due to a B 2u state located at 2.76 eV, with a smaller contribution to the intensity from a B 3u state located at 2.82 eV. The wave functions of the two states are dominated by doubly-excited configurations |H → L; H → L + 1 -c.c., and |H → L; H -2 → L -c.c., respectively. In the standard parameter spectrum, peak V is most intense, and is entirely due to a B 2u state located at 4.34 eV, whose wave function derives most important contribution from the singly-excited configuration |H -2 → L + 2 . The detailed wave function analysis of the excited states contributing to varioius peaks in the spectra computed using the screened and standard parameters is presented in Tables S26, and S27, respectively, of the Supporting Information. In this paper, we have presented the results of our correlated-electron calculations of spin gaps and optical absorption spectra of rectangular graphene-like polycyclic aromatic molecules, with the number of carbon atoms in the range 28-56, using PPP model Hamiltonian, and the MRSDCI approach. We analyzed the ground state wave functions of these molecules, and found that with the increasing size, they exhibit significant configuration mixing leading to diradical open-shell character. Results of our calculations on the spin gaps of these RGMs, when extrapolated to infinite graphene, suggest that it has a vanishing spin gap, implying weak electron correlation effects. This result is consistent with the widespread assumption that graphene is a weakly-correlated material. For the case of optical absorption spectra, we generally found very good agreement with the experiments performed on hydrogen-saturated structural analog of each RGM, wherever experimental data was available. In certain cases, where no experimental data was available for the H-passivated molecule, the comparison was instead made with the measurements performed on t-butyl group saturated systems, and some quantitative disagreements were encountered, most severe of which were for RGM-42. It will be very interesting if future experimental measurements could be performed on the H-passivated molecules in those cases. For the case of RGM-36, and RGM-54, no experimental measurements exist, while for the case of RGM-54, even prior theoretical calculations do not exist. Thus, results of our calculations on these molecules could be tested in future measurements of their absorption spectra. Table Theory Experiment Table This work Screened Standard 1.66 Table Table Experiment In the following tables, we present detailed information about the excitation energies, dominant many-body wave-functions, and transition dipole matrix elements of excited states with respect to the ground state (1 1 A g ). The coefficient of charge conjugate of a given configuration is abbreviated as 'c.c.' while the sign (+/-) preceding 'c.c.' indicates that the two coefficients have (same/opposite) signs. Symbol H denotes HOMO, while L denotes LUMO. Similarly Hn and L + m denote n-th orbital below HOMO, and m-th orbtial above LUMO, respectively. The symbol |H → L denotes a singly excited configuration obtained by promoting one electron from HOMO to LUMO, with respect to the closed-shell Hartree-Fock reference state. Similarly, one can deduce the meaning of other singly-excited configurations such as |H -1 → L + 2 etc. The symbol |H → L; H -1 → L + 1 denotes a doubly-excited configuration obtained by exciting two electrons from the Hartree-Fock reference state, one from HOMO to LUMO, the other one from HOMO-1 to LUMO+1. Nature of other doubly-excited configurations can also be deduced, similarly. Table a TDDFT method, b TDPPP method Table |H → L; H -6 → L + 1 -c.c. (0.3067) |H -11 → L + 1 +c.c. (0.2359) 12/23 |H -4→L; H → L + 1 -c.c. (0.0682) |H -1→L; H -4 → L -c.c. (0.1899) |H→L + 3; H → L + 7 +c.c. (0.3611) |H→L; H -7 → L + 3 +c.c. (|H → L; H -2 → L + 4 -c.c.(0.3445) |H → L; H -6 → L + 2 -c.c.(0.2926) |H -1 → L; H -1 → L + 7 -c.c.(0.1957) |H → L; H -3 → L + 5 -c.c.(0.1675) |H → L; H -1 → L + 7 +c.c.(0.2847) |H → L; H -6 → L + 2 -c.c.(0.2512) |H → L; H → L; H -1 → L + 2 -c.c.(0.2976) |H → L; H -3 → L + 1 + c.c. |H -6 → L; H -1 → L +c.c.(0.2361) |H -6 → L + 2 -c.c.( |H → L + 6; H → L + 1 -c.c.(0.2247) |H → L; H -1 → L + 10 -c.c.(0.1985) |H → L; H -2 → L + 3 -c.c.(0.2100) |H → L; H -1 → L + 4 -c.c.(0.2050) |H → L; H -2 → L + 6 -c.c. (0.4033) |H → L; H -2 → L + 8 -c.c. (|H -11 → L + 1 -c.c. (0.3254) |H → L + 17 +c.c. (0.2814) |H → L; H -3 → L + 1 -c.c. (0.2563) |H → L; H → L + 7 +c.c. (0.2369) |H → L; H -4 → L + 1 -c.c. (0.2488) |H -4 → L + 4 (0.|H -6 → L; H -1 → L +c.c. (0.3414) |H → L + 2; H → L + 4 -c.c. ( |H → L; H → L; H -1 → L + 1 (0.4445) |H → L; H → L; H -2 → L + 2 (0.3259)