The problem of determining the porous silicon (PSi) optical constants, thickness, porosity, and surface quality using just reflectance data is board employing evolutionary algorithms. The reflectance measurements were carried out of PSi films over crystalline silicon (c-Si) substrate, and the fitting procedure was done by using a genetic algorithm. The PSi is treated as a mixture of c-Si and air. Therefore, its effective optical constants can be correlated with the porosity trough effective medium approximation (EMA). The results show that genetic fitting has a good match with the experimental measurements (Near UV-Vis reflectance) and the thickness obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Porous silicon (PSi) is a nanostructured material Therefore, it is possible to tune the PSi electrical and optical properties through the porosity by using a combination of fabrication parameters such as the current density, electrolyte composition, temperature among others extrinsic and extrinsic parameters. PSi has a high surface area, diverse surface chemistry It is common to use ex-situ techniques such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) Other works are focused on describing the kinetics of the chemical reaction and following the formation of the porous film in real time to determine some properties of PSi in-situ The calculation of the optical constants (refractive index n(λ), and extinction coefficient, k(λ)) is usually made by fitting the reflectance or transmittance spectra. However, the methods are not trivial, in fact, they represent an inverse problem. This problem of estimating optical constants and thickness using only transmittance or reflectance data has been addressed by using fitting procedures and optimization algorithms. However, in the case of PSi, due to the nature of the random porous formation, it is necessary to consider other parameters such as porosity and interface roughness because this variety of inhomogeneities causes light scattering. These inhomogeneities and roughness are no longer negligible, and they can introduce a significant error in the determination of the optical constants Optimization algorithms solve this kind of problems, especially evolutionary algorithms because they can avoid local minima following many search pats simultaneously To add the porosity percentage and roughness interface, the electrical permittivity of PSi can be described as an effective medium. This method takes into account the system as a mixture composed by a host medium with ˆ m (c-Si) with inclusions within it, characterized by ˆ i , which allows the determination of the optical properties in the linear regimen. Thus, the PSi is modeled as an effective medium To overcome this problem, this work proposes a methodology based on genetic algorithms to fit the near-specular reflectance (6 • incidence) spectrum of single films of PSi over the c-Si substrate. A simultaneous determination of PSi properties such as optical constants, thickness, porosity, and interface roughness is made only by using reflectance measures. The system is considered as a silicon (c-Si) single crystal, and by using an effective medium approximation (EMA) the algorithm can determine the refractive index η(λ), extinction coefficient κ(λ), PSi thickness, interfaces RMS roughness (σ) (Air/PSi and PSi/Si substrate) and the porosity. The model is tested by using several films of ptype Si fabricated with different anodization times. Also, the thickness of the PSi samples was determined by the genetic fit and compared with the thickness obtained by electron scanning microscopy (SEM) images. Four PSi films were fabricated by electrochemical etching using hydrofluoric acid (HF) in aqueous media. Heavy boron doped Si (p ++ ) with 0.005 Ω cm of resistivity and [100] crystalline orientation it was used. The samples were cut into squares and cleaned by the RCA standard method. The etching was carried out by using an electrolyte composed of HF/ ethanol in 3:7 volume ratio and a regimen of a constant current of 20 mA/cm 2 . The porous formation was followed by photoacoustic using the methodology proposed by Ramirez-Gutierrez et al. Optical characterization of PSi films was carried out using a Perkin Elmer UV-Vis Spectrophotometer Lambda 35 in the near-normal (6 • ) relative specular reflectance mode from 1100 to 210 nm range. The spectrophotometer was selfcalibrated using an aluminum mirror, and the samples were measured over the Si substrate. It means that the reflectance is the optical response of the PSi thin film Si substrate (PSi/Si structure). The spectra were corrected following the Eqs. 1 and 2 to obtain the absolute reflectance. T eo ) and the measured reflectance of a Si substrate (R (Si) relative ). After the optical characterization, the samples were cut to determine the films thickness. A MIRA3 TESCAN microscopy was used with a 5.0 kV electron acceleration voltage. Before the analysis, samples were fixed on the holder with copper tape. The samples were not covered with gold before the SEM analysis. Fig. Besides, on the Fig. The method of the optical admittance is valid in the case of a linear regimen, that is very convenient because the optical constants can be expressed regarding dielectric constant of the medium (ε = ε 1 + iε 2 ) as follows: The Eqs. 3 are useful because the dielectric constant of two-component materials (host and filling material) can be expressed through the effective medium approximation (EMA) ˆ Si + pˆ To determine the reflectance of multilayers systems, the optical admittance method where r Ri,Li (0) and t Ri,Li (0) are the usual Fresnel coefficients defined for optical admittance The c i-1,i parameter is related with the light polarization given by The phase matrix is defined by Eq. 8, where Ni is the complex refraction index and d i is the medium thickness. Finally, the transfer matrix of the multilayer structure is defined as and the reflectance and transmitance are determined by This method permits to calculate the total response of multilayer systems based on porous silicon (PSi) such as distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) The genetic algorithm used in this work is useful to determine the optical constants, porosity, roughness, and thickness of PSi by using its reflectance spectrum and an effective medium approximation where p is the porosity, d the PSi thickness, σ 0 the roughness in the interface air/PSi, and σ 1 the roughness in the interface PSi/Si. The parameters defined in the chromosome are used to calculate the theoretical reflectance spectrum (R G (λ)), and it is compared with the experimental (R exp (λ)) trough the penalty function (Eq. 12). R exp (λ) is the absolute reflectance of PSi/Si structure obtained by using Eq. 1. Thus, the method to estimate the parameters related in the chromosome (Eq. 11) is a problem of least squares fitted between as a measured and theoretical reflectance. The values of some genes are constraints The genetic algorithm used for this calculations is described in the next steps and it is based on the works of references 1. Population: a number of J P0 individuals (chromosomes) are created by choosing a random value for every single gen. The values of genes have to satisfy the constrain conditions (Eq. 13). 2. Reproduction: each individual V f ather has given a number K of f offspring. For that, another individual of the same generation called V mother is select randomly. The offspring is given by two reproduction ways determined with ρ probability. where ρ 1 is the probability of inheriting the father's gene and r is a random number used to decide it. 3. Mutation: a certain number of individuals are mutated to introduce new genes in order to avoid local minima. The mutation is generated in the chromosome as following: where τ is a weight function parameter and N (0,1) is a random value from a normal distribution. 4. Family competition: every chromosome is used to simulated the reflectance spectrum by using the Looyenga EMA rule (Eq. 4) and the optical admittance method (Eqs. 9 and 10). The penalty function (Eq. 12) is evaluated for each individual. After, the family competition starts. The individual who has the best fit is the best adapted, it survives to the next generation and becomes a new father. If the new generation gives back a better fit, the mutation value τ is reduced by a factor f . Finally, the steps mentioned above are repeated a J G0 times. The value J G0 is the number of generations, and the individual with the lower value of penalty function represent the bets adapted and is the solution to the problem. Using the genetic fit, some results from the analysis of measured reflection signals are presented. For all simulations, a J P0 = 50 individuals were used for each generation with K of f = 15 offsprings during J G0 = 100 generations. The parameters obtained were the films thickness, porosity, interface roughness, and etch rate. Further, a comparison between thickness obtained by a genetic fit and by SEM is given. Fig. In all samples, the current density during the anodization was 20 mA/cm 2 . It means, due to the self-limited character of the reaction As SEM images show (Fig. Finally, Fig. By using the algorithm described in the section 4, the optical parameters of four PSi thin films was determined. The algorithm determines the porosity, thickness, and interface roughness simultaneously. In this case, the anodization current remained constant at 20 mA/cm 2 and the etching time was changed in order to determine the etching rate and the evolution of the interface roughness. It was found that under the etching conditions used for these experiments, the self-limited character of the reaction is kept, and the average porosity and etch rate are constants. PSi has no stable surface because it has a diversified chemical surface (Si-H, Si-C, -Si-O, Si-N). During PSi aging, some surface modifications take place, such as silicon oxides formation. This methodology does not consider the contribution of another surface chemical species or the participation of the Si x O y thin film that was formed during the passage of time. The main problem related with the estimation of optical parameters of PSi films is connected with good UV-Vis experimental measurements. For this reason, it is always recommended to correct the reflectance measurements by using a reflectance pattern, in this case, the reflectance spectra were corrected by using the theoretical reflectance of c-Si to obtain the absolute reflectance. Finally, this methodology represents a powerful tool to determine the optical and morphological parameters of PSi thin films just by using the reflectance spectrum in the UV-Vis range that represents an advantage over microscopy techniques or ellipsometry.