Substrate engineering provides an opportunity to modulate the physical properties of quantum materials in thin film form. Here we report that TiSe 2 thin films grown on TiO 2 have unexpectedly large electron doping that suppresses the charge density wave (CDW) order. This is dramatically different from either bulk single crystal TiSe 2 or TiSe 2 thin films on graphene. The epitaxial TiSe 2 thin films can be prepared on TiO 2 via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in two ways: by conventional co-deposition using selenium and titanium sources, and by evaporating only selenium on reconstructed 1 Thin film growth using MBE has been shown to be a powerful tool for studies of correlated materials. Layered transition-metal dichalchogenides (TMDC) have been extensively studied due to their interesting physical properties, including the emergence of superconductivity and CDW order. The CDW transition temperature for monolayer TiSe 2 on graphene is slightly higher than that of bulk crystals. In this work, we grew TiSe 2 on rutile TiO 2 (100) (TiSe 2 /TiO 2 ) and bi-layer graphene (TiSe 2 /graphene) substrates using MBE and characterized its electronic structure via angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). We find that the TiSe 2 films on TiO 2 (TiSe 2 /TiO 2 ) are heavily electron doped and do not show the signatures of a CDW in ARPES spectra. Furthermore, after depositing selenium on vacuum-annealed TiO 2 substrates (thereafter noted as Se:TiO 2 ), Se atoms reacts with the reconstructed substrate surface, and organizes into epitaxial films of TiSe 2 . Our experiments on TiSe 2 /TiO 2 films provide a way to tune the chemical potential and change the ground state property of thin films through substrate engineering. Previous researchers have reported the band structure of TiSe 2 (either in bulk form or TiSe 2 /graphene), At the M point, the bottom of an electron band reaches just below E F . We measured the Fermi surface and band structure of TiSe 2 /graphene at ∼ 20 K, shown in Fig All the three features mentioned above, including lack of CDW, large electron doping and the "copy" band α at M, have little thickness dependence from 3ML to 24ML, as is demonstrated in Supplemental Fig. Rutile TiO 2 (100) surface undergoes a (3 × 1) reconstruction above 670 • C. During this process parts of surface atoms are lost, leading to a terraced surface with exposed atoms of titanium. We further compared the band structure of TiSe 2 /graphene and the TiSe 2 films grown on TiO 2 . Figure Figure Next we continue to characterize the quality of the TiSe 2 films on TiO 2 . TiSe 2 is a layered material with hexagonal lattice and a lattice constant of a = 0.354 nm. TiO 2 (100) surface is rectangular with lattice parameters a = 0.459 nm, c = 0.295 nm. We can view the (100) surface of the substrate as a distorted hexagonal lattice, but this still leads to a large and anisotropic strain of more than 20%, as is shown in Figure With the chemical composition and surface quality verified for TiSe 2 /TiO 2 and Se:TiO 2 , we now turn back to the explanation of their electronic band structures. The two main features of TiSe 2 films on TiO 2 are the large electron doping and the suppression of the CDW. Currently the origin of the CDW in TiSe 2 is still under debate. Some attribute it to a Peierls charge density wave, which is created by a spontaneous crystal distortion driven by the electron-phonon interaction. The most unusual aspect of this system is the magnitude of its doping. Changing postgrowth annealing temperature of TiSe 2 can control Se vacancy defects, which may act as electron dopants. It is plausible to assume the interfacial charge transfer from work function difference as the origin of the electron doping in TiSe 2 films on TiO 2 . The work function difference between TiSe 2 Below we consider an indirect effect from the TiO 2 substrate: the strong interfacial bonding between TiSe 2 and TiO 2 leads to a growth window with higher growth temperature. More Se vacancies are created during growth under this condition compared to the case of TiSe 2 /graphene, resulting in electron doping and suppression of CDW in TiSe 2 . The ideal growth temperature for TiSe 2 /TiO 2 and Se:TiO 2 is consistently higher than that for TiSe 2 /graphene. The ideal growth temperature for TiSe 2 /TiO 2 and Se:TiO 2 is between 350-380 • C, below which the growth yields amorphous films. On the other hand, if we grow TiSe 2 /graphene at any temperature above 250 • C, there will be no formation of new RHEED streaks. This means that at this temperature, the Se re-evaporation rate is to high to allow the growth of TiSe 2 on graphene. This substrate-induced growth temperature difference between graphene and TiO 2 can be explained by the growth dynamics. Graphene provides much weaker interfacial interaction, therefore the ideal growth temperature is low. In contrast, TiO 2 surface tends to form stronger bonds with TiSe 2 on the interface, thus a higher growth temperature is needed to provide sufficient diffusion rate necessary to form pristine films. At the growth temperature of TiSe 2 /TiO 2 and Se:TiO 2 (380 • C), Se re-evaporation can be very strong, according to the results of TiSe 2 /graphene from both Fig 4(f) and a previous STM study. To summarize, we can explain the suppression of charge density wave order by the large electron doping, and explain the electron doping by Se vacancies created by substrate induced change of growth conditions. The doping is because of the change of growth condition instead of a direct effect of substrate, which can explain why this effect is independent of film thickness up to 24ML. We grew TiSe 2 on rutile TiO 2 (100) substrates using MBE, in which substrate effects provide large doping to TiSe 2 that suppresses CDW order. This demonstrates that, in the course of tuning the chemical potential of thin film samples, we can add a large and flexible offset by selecting and engineering the substrate. The substrate-induced doping, compared to conventional methods including alkali metal atom intercalation and ionic liquid gating, provides a cleaner way of doping thin films in that it does not provide external impurities to the system. In addition, our results demonstrate that pristine TiSe 2 thin films can form on reconstructed TiO 2 substrate after Se deposition, which may pave the way to new growth methods of other chalcogenide/oxide heterostructure, and improve our understanding of the chemical property of the reconstructed surface of oxides. Previous studies doped electrons into TiSe 2 to a maximal level of ∼0.06 electron per unit cell, and observed superconductivity. For TiSe 2 /TiO 2 , Shinkosha STEP TiO 2 (100) substrates were mounted on a molybdenum sample holder with silver paste and placed into an MBE chamber. The base pressure of the MBE chamber was 8 ×10 -11 torr. Substrates were then degassed at 450 -650 • C, and cooled down to 360 • C for growth. Ultra-high purity titanium (99.995%) and selenium (99.999%) were then deposited onto the substrate. The crystallinity was examined using reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). The films were then annealed at 380 • C for 2 hours (except for the ones noted with "Low Temperature Anneal" in Fig. For TiSe 2 /graphene, the TiSe 2 films were grown by MBE on bilayer graphene (BLG) epitaxially grown on 6H-SiC. The successful growth of Se:TiO 2 relies on the preparation of substrate. TiO 2 rutile (100) surface undergoes a (3 × 1) reconstruction at temperatures above 670 • C, exposing Ti atoms from surface layers to vacuum. After growth, the films were transferred in situ to the ARPES end station of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource beamline 5-2. The base pressure in the ARPES chamber was better than 4×10 -11 torr. Circular right polarization was used during the measurement. The high symmetry cuts were done with photon energy of 46 eV, and the energy resolution is better than 25 meV; Reciprocal space maps were measured using photon energy of 82 eV, and the energy resolution is better than 44 meV. The angular resolution is better than 0.4 • . 