The synthesis, structural description, temperature dependent magnetic susceptibilities and field dependent magnetizations of a series of rare earth garnets of the form Li3RE3Te2O12 (RE = Y, La, Pr, Nd, Sm-Lu) are reported. The structure of Li3Dy3Te2O12 is refined from powder X-ray diffraction data. The field dependent magnetizations saturate for some of the members by 9 Tesla at 2 K. Of particular interest for further study in this family is the behavior of the Pr, Tb, Dy and Yb garnets. Geometric magnetic frustration occurs when the crystal structure of a compound inhibits that system's preferred long-range magnetic ordering arrangement. While the fully-Li-occupied sites are ordered, intermediate Lithium contents result in random site occupancy and thus a degree of structural disorder on all Lithium sites. All samples were synthesized by standard solid state reaction. Powders of Li2CO3 (Alfa Aesar, 99.0%), TeO2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) and the appropriate rare earth oxide (all Alfa Aesar and at least 99.99%) were mixed together in the proper stoichiometric ratio and ground with an agate mortar and pestle for at least 5 minutes, then placed in an alumina crucible. Li2CO3 was stored at 120°C for 24 hours before use. All rare earth oxides (Y2O3, Pr6O11, Nd2O3, Sm2O3, Eu2O3, Gd2O3, Tb4O7, Dy2O3, Ho2O3, Er2O3, Tm2O3, Yb2O3 and Lu2O3) were heated at 800°C for at least 3 days before use. Samples were placed into a furnace at 800°C and heated in air for two days with intermediate grinding. After one day of heating the temperature of the furnace was slowly increased to 1000°C (with the exception of the Lu compound, which was only heated to 900°C). Samples were removed from the hot furnace and air quenched to room temperature. Samples frequently contained an impurity phase, Li4TeO5, which was reduced or eliminated with further heating in all cases. Attempts to synthesize the La, Ce and Sc members of this family under our conditions resulted in no detectable garnet phase. Room-temperature powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) measurements were taken using a Bruker D8 Advance Eco diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) and a LynxEye-XE detector. The Bruker EVA program was used for phase identification. Powder LeBail and Rietveld Refinements were performed using Fullprof Suite. Magnetic susceptibility measurements were taken using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) Dynacool with a vibrating sample mount. Samples were placed in plastic sample holders, and measured as polycrystalline powders. Temperature-dependent DC magnetic susceptibility measurements were taken in an applied field of 1,000 Oe between 1.8 and 300 K. Field-dependent susceptibility measurements were taken at 2 K. All compounds in the family Li3RE3Te2O12 (RE = Y, Pr, Nd, Sm-Lu) were found to crystallize in the space group Ia-3d with the garnet structure, in agreement with previous results. Previous studies have suggested that the Li atoms which sit on the tetrahedral interstitial sites can be observed through standard laboratory X-Ray Diffraction. These results indicate that the model containing Li atoms is a slightly better fit. Critically for the magnetic properties, the rare earth atoms are fully ordered in one set of crystallographic sites, and the geometry of the magnetic ions is shown in Figure The temperature-and field-dependent magnetic susceptibilities were measured for all Li3RE3Te2O12 compounds. The temperature-dependent susceptibilities were fit to the Curie-Weiss Law, χ = C / (T -θW), where χ is the magnetic susceptibility, C is the Curie constant, and θW is the Weiss temperature. The effective magnetic moment per RE 3+ ion was then calculated by the equation μeff =√8C. The resulting values are collected in Table The magnetic characteristics of the materials studied will now be described on an individual basis. The magnetic susceptibility plots and Curie-Weiss fits are shown in Figure Temperature-and field-dependent magnetic susceptibility curves for Li3Nd3Te2O12 can be seen in Figure A Curie-Weiss fit in the low-temperature region as shown in Figure As the Eu 3+ ion has angular momentum values of L = 3, S = 3 and J = 0, Eu 3+ has an expected magnetic moment of 0 μB. However, the magnetic susceptibility appears to show some temperature dependence as seen in Figure The magnetic susceptibility measurements for Li3Gd3Te2O12 can be seen in Figure A high-temperature Curie-Weiss fit was performed for Li3Tb3Te2O12 with no temperature independent term, resulting in values of C = 36.5, θW = -9.8 K, and μeff = 9.8 μB. This value for effective magnetic moment is in good agreement with the expected value for the free Tb 3+ ion of 9.75 μB. The negative Weiss Temperature is indicative of dominantly antiferromagnetic coupling between spins, but the lack of clear ordering above 1.8 K suggests that Li3Tb3Te2O12 may be slightly magnetically frustrated with a frustration index f of over 5. A heat capacity measurement conducted by Mukherjee et al. suggests magnetic ordering at 1.04 K, The DC magnetic susceptibility curves of Li3Dy3Te2O12 can be seen in Figure Interestingly, this transition was not observed by Mukherjee in the magnetic susceptibility data, but is seen in the heat capacity data where there is a clear ordering transition at 1.97 K Applegate, on the other hand, clearly observes the transition in the magnetic susceptibility data The temperature-and field-dependent magnetic susceptibility curves for Li3Ho3Te2O12 are shown in Figure The magnetic susceptibility data for Li3Er3Te2O12 is shown in Figure Figure A Curie-Weiss fit in the low-temperature regime (60-100 K) yields values of C = 24.9, μeff = 8.1 μB and θW = -38.3 K. The negative Weiss temperature suggests antiferromagnetic ordering, and as there is no clear magnetic ordering transition above 1.8 K, this suggests magnetic frustration with a frustration index f of 21 or greater, although at these temperatures this may still result from CEF effects. A plateau-like feature is visible in the temperature-dependent susceptibility data below 30 K. This type of feature is not unusual in Tm-containing compounds Susceptibility vs. temperature and magnetization vs. applied field curves for Li3Yb3Te2O12 can be seen in Figure The measured effective magnetic moments of the Li3RE3Te2O12 family, both high-and low-temperature values, are plotted in Figure The story is quite different in the low-temperature data; immediately apparent is the fact that the measured moments at low temperatures are consistently lower than the ideal free ion values, often by significant margins. The singular and quite notable exception to this trend is Tm, where the measured values for both the 8-fold garnet and 6-fold coordinated compounds are higher than the ideal value (data is unavailable for the 8-fold coordinated pyrochlore Tm2Ti2O7). In addition to this anomaly, the values for the three structure families vary much more than in the high-temperature case, with sometimes large separations between values for the same element. No unambiguously clear trends are immediately apparent, although it is noted that the effective moments in the 6-fold coordinated borates tend to be relatively close to the ideal values, while the 8-fold coordinated garnets show a large degree of element-dependent variability. Finally, it is noted that the Er-containing compounds seem to show the most variation with change in structure, with the 8-fold coordinated pyrochlore having almost the ideal magnetic moment, while the 8-fold coordinated garnet is over 20% lower than the ideal value. The magnetization at 9 T in cases where saturation or near saturation was observed in the M-H curves are plotted in Figure A series of rare-earth containing lithium garnets of the form Li3Ln3Te2O12 (Ln = Y, Pr, Nd, Sm-Lu) has been synthesized. The lattice parameter a has been determined for each compound via LeBail fit on room-temperature Powder X-Ray data, and the results, where they overlap, are in good agreement with previously published values and demonstrate a clear lanthanide contraction. Magnetic susceptibility measurements have been taken, and Curie-Weiss fits performed. Several of the compounds observed exhibit some degree of magnetic frustration, and only Li3Dy3Te2O12 shows a clear magnetic ordering transition above 2 K. Many of our results are in reasonable agreement with previous studies .02623 Figure 