The requirement for metamaterial perfect absorbers (MPA) based on doped semiconductors is steadily increasing due to the available matured fabrication and simulation technology. There is a particular interest in developing terahertz (THz) perfect absorbers using doped semiconductors for achieving characteristics such as polarization-independence, wide-angle, and broadband absorption. We report MPA based on patterned arrays of tapered micro-cylindrical structures of doped silicon to enable them with broadband, wide-angle, and polarization-independent response. In this work, we modeled the MPA structures using COMSOL Multiphysics® to evaluate its electromagnetic wave response using the software's RF Module running in parallel on a Beowulf cluster. We evaluated the doped silicon MPA structures for its response in the frequency spectrum of 0.1 to 5.0 THz for transverse magnetic and transverse electric polarizations at the normal and oblique incidence up to 75 degrees. This proposed doped silicon MPA was found to support a perfect absorption for a wide frequency spectrum from 1.7 to 3.9 THz along with insensitivity towards polarization and incident angles up to 60°. The execution of MPA on simplified Beowulf cluster significantly reduced the simulations time by the orders of magnitude compared to the sequential simulations. In the past decade, metamaterials have been explored to a great extent due to their phenomenal ability to manipulate light. Metamaterials are judiciously engineered structures of optical materials capable of responding to any region of the electromagnetic spectrum and support optical properties such as cloaking, polarization-independence, wide-angle, and broadband optical response for a diverse list of applications As the most elementary design, one-dimensional (1-D) absorbers are simple to fabricate but their response is typically polarization and incident-angle dependent, whereas twodimensional designs are more promising when it comes to performance, but they are still sensitive to the polarization and the incident angle of the electromagnetic radiation. On the other hand, three-dimensional (3-D) absorbers can not only provide a true polarization and incident-angle independent response, but they are also consistent with current microfabrication technology. In our previous work In this work, we have explored 3-D absorbers based on doped silicon MPAs using periodic arrays of tapered cylindrical structures The complex permittivity of the doped silicon is portrayed by the Drude model where ε∞ = 11.7 is the free space dielectric constant of the intrinsic silicon, ωp is the plasma frequency, and γ is the carrier scattering rate. The plasma frequency and the carrier scattering rate are a function of carrier concentration and mobility of the doped silicon, which can be experimentally measured through Hall effect analysis. In this paper, we choose ωp = 2π × 5.22 THz and γ = 2π × 1.32 THz for doped silicon MPA modeling as reported in This particular geometry of tapered cylindrical structures was selected due to its top structure axial isotropy that leads to a polarization independent and broadband optical response Optical responses of the doped silicon-based MPA structures were obtained by modeling its unit cell in RF module of COMSOL Multiphysics v5.3b in the frequency domain. Floquet boundary conditions were employed for the side faces of the unit cell. For the top face, excitation port was deployed with diffraction to include the influence of the scattered waves, and for the bottom face, an output port was employed. The excitation port and the output port were suspended in a thin column of air in the model. The S11 and S21 parameters were employed to calculate the frequency dependent absorbance, A(ω), transmittance, T(ω), and reflectance, R(ω), for the transverse magnetic (TM) and the transverse electric (TE) incident waves. The model was simulated for a frequency spectrum of 0.1 to 5.0 THz and an oblique incidence of 0 to 75°. For qualitative analysis, the power dissipated in the entire structure was also studied using the inbuilt function power loss density in COMSOL Multiphysics RF module. COMSOL was executed parallelly using distributedmemory parallel operations. The simulations were executed on 2 Intel Xeon E5 processors with 16 cores running at 2.50 GHz and 64 GB of RAM for each processor. COMSOL has an inbuilt support for message passing interface (MPI) which enables distributed computations in parallel. Hence, COMSOL was set up to run on a Beowulf cluster with COMSOL's inbuilt cluster computing features. The optical response of the doped silicon MPA for normal and oblique incidence is shown in Fig. The optical response of doped silicon MPA has several resonant peaks which need to be examined to understand the physical mechanism responsible for such broadband absorption. We analyzed the magnetic field distribution (Fig. For the low-frequency peaks, the incident magnetic field is mainly concentrated in the air cavities formed between the adjacent silicon tapered cylinders as evident from Fig. 