Eliashberg theory provides a theoretical framework for understanding the phenomenon of superconductivity when pairing between two electrons is mediated by phonons, and retardation effects are fully accounted for. BCS theory is often viewed as the weak coupling limit of Eliashberg theory, in spite of a handful of papers that have pointed out that this is not so. Here we present very accurate numerical solutions in the weak coupling limit to complement the existing analytical results, and demonstrate more convincingly the validity of this limit by extending the analytical results to first order in the coupling constant. The Eliashberg theory of superconductivity 1 provides a framework for superconductivity in which the pairing "glue," in this case phonons, is not so much a "glue" as a mediator of the interaction between two electrons. In contrast, the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity 2 uses a pairing potential to model the attractive interaction between two electrons. Being a potential the interaction is instantaneous, although retardation effects are mimicked through a cutoff in the potential, albeit in wave-vector space and not in frequency space. Eliashberg theory is sometimes referred to as the "strong-coupling" extension of BCS theory. The reason no doubt is that superconducting materials in which retardation effects play a significant role (e.g. Pb and Hg) also tend to have a stronger electron-phonon coupling than those in which their role is minor (e.g. Al). Furthermore, in Eliashberg theory the quasiparticles have a finite width and their residue is no longer unity, and both of these factors contributed to this misnomer. In fact, both Eliashberg and BCS theory are weak coupling theories in the sense that the starting point is a Fermi sea of electrons, so what really delineates the two is that the former explicitly includes retardation effects while the latter does not. Formally, the strong coupling limit in both these theories can be investigated (and have been -see Refs. [3 and 4] for BCS and Refs. [5 and 6] for Eliashberg theory). However, particularly at finite temperature these calculations are beyond the limit of validity of the formulation, as the condensation of preformed pairs, whose constituents do not form a Fermi sea, is the physically relevant process, which is not described by these theoretical frameworks. That this is not universally the case was first noted by Karakozov et al. We proceed as follows. First we provide a quick synopsis of Eliashberg theory. We take some effort to review the so-called "standard" approximations to arrive at the self-consistent equations for the order parameter as a function of Matsubara frequency only. As emphasized in Ref. [19] these approximations are quite controlled precisely in the weak coupling limit, and have properly been avoided or modified for further more recent refinements in the theory. The Eliashberg equations are 21 along with the equation for the order parameter: These are supplemented with the electron number equation, which determines the chemical potential, μ: Here, N is the number of lattice sites, where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature, μ is the chemical potential, and g ǫF is the electronic density of states at the Fermi level in the band. The energy ǫ k is the electronic dispersion of this band (a single band is assumed for simplicity). The equations are written on the imaginary frequency axis, and are functions of the Fermion Matsubara frequencies, ω m ≡ πk B T (2m -1), with m an integer. Similarly the Boson Matsubara frequencies are given by ν n ≡ 2πk B T n, where n is an integer The functions Z(k, iω m )) and χ(k, iω m ) are related to the electron self energy through 19 where Z and χ are both even functions of iω m (and, as we've assumed from the beginning, k). The function φ(k, iω m )) is the so-called pairing function, and is related to the electronic anomalous Green function. These equations relate these three functions to one another through the electron-phonon propagator, contained in with α 2 kk ′ F (ν) the so-called Eliashberg function. In what follows we will assume that the phonon spectrum is given by an Einstein spectrum and that the coupling is wave vector independent. Therefore, and the kernel, Eq. ( where the constant λ is the dimensionless electronphonon coupling constant and ω E is the Einstein phonon frequency. Normally a direct Coulomb repulsion is also included in the pairing equation; we omit this here since we want to focus on the effects of retardation. The fourth equation, Eq. ( The case of a constant density of states but with a finite bandwidth was examined in Ref. [22]; it is apparent from that work that in the weak coupling limit this bandwidth is irrelevant for T c . 23 Equations ( It is also standard practice to define a "gap function," ∆(iω m ) ≡ φ(iω m )/Z(iω m ), so that the remaining equa- (12) Equations ( As mentioned in the Introduction, one can examine Eliashberg theory in limiting cases of weak coupling (λ → 0) and strong coupling λ → ∞. Interestingly, Eq. ( The equation for T c within BCS theory is (we now set k B = 1 and h = 1) where λ ≡ g ǫF |V |, with |V | some attractive and instantaneous potential between two electrons. The inclusion of the renormalization, Z, modifies this equation to read One can immediately write this like Eq. ( A. Improved Tc in the λ → 0 limit To emphasize this latter point we first examine the Eliashberg T c equation, Eq. ( We immediately caution that this is a dangerous step to make, as emphasized by Cappelluti and Ummarino. Since we are interested only in the weak coupling limit λ << 1, Eq. ( where Q ≡ Q/ω E , and in the second line we have added and subtracted the factor 1/(1 + ω2 m ). Eq. ( This equation looks like a perturbative expansion in λ; if we neglect f (ω m ), and further neglect the second complicated-looking term in Eq. ( where I 0 can be evaluated in terms of the asymptotic expansion of digamma functions Upon neglecting the last term, the result is that we obtain the usual BCS T c equation given by Eq. ( (21) This equation is clearly an approximation since the sec-ond term has a dependence on ω m ; this reflects the approximation inherent in Eq. ( Use 14 to replace the term in braces in Eq. ( where we have used the fact that Following Refs. [13 and 14] we solve Eq. ( in contrast to Eq. ( B. Improved gap function in the λ → 0 limit One of the physical features of the square well model referred to in the previous section is that the gap function is a constant for a range of energies equal to the BCS Approx. Eq. [13] Analytical Result, Eq. [27] With Z(ω m ) = 1 FIG. phonon frequency (here, ω E ) to either side of the Fermi energy. This is already not true with the approximation provided by Eq. ( In an effort to further improve this result and refine our understanding of the weak coupling limit, we proceed to A plot of ∆(ωm) vs. ωm ≡ ωm/ωE for λ = 0.3, 0.2, and 0.1 as indicated, obtained numerically. Also shown is the approximation given by Eq. ( determine f (ω m ) at least as a correction to zeroth order in λ (and thus an overall correction to the gap function to first order in λ). For this purpose we substitute Eq. ( where c is a constant given by c = - (29) and are two functions of ω m . Both g 1 (ω m ) and g 2 (ω m ) are non-singular as λ → By this we mean that a 1/|ω m ′ | term is absent (as opposed to I 0 , for example, the sum multiplying λ in Eq. ( where c ′ is a constant obtained numerically from the sum in Eq. ( and we now have a more accurate explicit expression for the gap function, valid to order λ. Three thin curves showing this result for λ = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 on the scale of Fig. To better appreciate the remaining discrepancies, we show in Fig. defined as δ∆ num (ω m ) ≡ ∆ num (ω m ) -∆ 0 (ω m ), where ∆ num (ω m ) refers to the numerical solution In this section we provide solutions for Eq. ( straightforward, and follows what we did earlier. A noteworthy nuance is that the m = m ′ term on the right side of Eq. ( The difference with the previous section is that Z(ω m ) is now included. The sum in Eq. ( which interpolates smoothly from (1 + λ) at low frequencies to unity at high frequencies. Including this in the steps leading to Eq. ( Following with the same type of analysis as that leading With Z(ω m ) FIG. to Eq. ( and where g 1 (ω m ) is the same function given in Eq. (32). As previously mentioned, Eq. ( Written out explicitly, Eq. (36) reads With Z(ω m ) FIG. While Eqs. (39) looks very much like Eq. ( It is worth noting that with the explicit function of Matsubara frequency given by Eq. ( that the gap function is definitely not constant for frequencies up to the Einstein frequency, as in BCS theory. Additional gap structure as a function of frequency will arise in the term proportional to λ, but this structure will of course be weak in this limit. By now extensive solutions have been shown in innumerable papers for the gap function solution to the Eliashberg equations, as indicated in the various reviews cited. In this paper we fill a hole in this tabulation, by presenting numerical solutions and analysis in the weak coupling limit. The difficulty until now has been the number of Matsubara frequencies required for demonstrable convergence. For example, we have used more than 120 000 (positive) Matsubara frequencies to achieve convergence for some of the low electron-phonon couplings used in this study. We have also obtained analytical solutions to first order in the coupling constant to reinforce these numerical solutions. The main messages of this study, reinforcing those of Refs. [13 and 14] are (i) the weak coupling expression for superconducting T c has a reduced pre-factor multiplying the phonon frequency scale, (ii) the gap function approaches a Lorentzian function of frequency as λ → 0, and first order corrections provide very good, quantitatively correct results when compared to numerical results. This corrects the impression that the frequency dependence of the order parameter is a feature that arises in Eliashberg theory only beyond the weak coupling regime. In fact it remains a characteristic of the superconducting state even in the weak coupling limit, in contrast to the picture provided in the BCS model calculation. Further investigation will include results in the superconducting state, below T c and at zero temperature. In particular, the gap edge at zero temperature, given in BCS theory by an analytical result similar to that of T c (Eq. (13 or 14), will also acquire a correction in weak coupling Eliashberg theory analogous to that for T c , i.e. Eq. (26 or 37), so that the gap ratio remains universal as λ → 0. 10 Another avenue of possible investigation, perhaps through the Josephson Effect, is to determine whether the frequency dependence of the gap function can be measured, even in weakly coupled superconductors like Aluminium. We were alerted to T c solutions in the literature after this paper was submitted. In Ref. [35] expressions were derived for T c in the weak coupling limit for any shape of α 2 F (ν), while in Ref. [36] the authors use a more general framework that nonetheless reproduces the correct prefactor for T c in the weak coupling limit. We are grateful to Roland Combescot and Jim Freericks for bringing these papers to our attention.