Gyroscopic metamaterials -mechanical structures composed of interacting spinning topshave recently been found to support one-way topological edge excitations. In these structures, the time reversal symmetry breaking that enables their topological behavior emerges directly from the lattice geometry. Here we show that variations in the lattice geometry can therefore give rise to more complex band topology than has been previously described. A 'spindle' lattice (or truncated hexagonal tiling) of gyroscopes possesses both clockwise and counterclockwise edge modes distributed across several band gaps. Tuning the interaction strength or twisting the lattice structure along a Guest mode opens and closes these gaps and yields bands with Chern numbers of |C| > 1 without introducing next-nearest-neighbor interactions or staggered potentials. A deformable honeycomb structure provides a simple model for understanding the role of lattice geometry in constraining the effects of time reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry breaking. Lastly, we find that topological band structure generically arises in gyroscopic networks, and a simple protocol generates lattices with topological excitations. Materials with nontrivial band topology have captured the attention of condensed matter scientists since their discovery in electronic systems In mechanical systems, these chiral edge waves have recently been demonstrated using structures composed of coupled gyroscopes In this article, we go beyond simple geometries and find the flexibility to design lattices with desired band gaps and desired topology. In particular, we examine tunable lattices with Chern numbers |C| > 1 as well as multiple gaps with edge modes of opposite chirality, we examine the effects of competing time reversal symmetry breaking with inversion symmetry breaking, and demonstrate a design strategy to achieve band topology in lattices with seemingly arbitrary unit cells. A spring-coupled gyroscopic metamaterial is composed of spinning gyroscopes that hang from a pinned pivot point. (A) f is the vector from the pivot point to where a force acts. When the only force is gravity, f = cm (B) Gyroscopes in the metamaterial are coupled to their neighbors in the lattice via a spring which is attached to the free end. (C) The linearized equation of motion for our system relates the displacements via angles between bonds and the local gyroscope's local x-axis (indicated by dotted lines in this view from above). A simple realization of gyroscopic metamaterials is a collection of coupled gyroscopes which hang from a pivot point and spin rapidly enough for their angular momentum to lie approximately along the primary axis, as shown in Fig. where f as the vector from the pivot point to the point acted upon by force, F . Considering small displacements of each gyroscope allows a linearized description. Denoting the displacement from the equilibrium position in the plane as ψ = x + iy, the equation of motion for a single gyroscope under the influence of gravity becomes: Note that throughout this paper, without loss of generality, we choose the angular momentum vector of a hanging gyroscope to point down. Noting the similarity between Equation 2 and the Schrödinger equation for a quantum particle, we use the same notion of time reversal symmetry as is used in quantum mechanics, namely ψ → ψ * and t → -t. While ψ → ψ * corresponds to a reversal of momentum for a quantum particle, in the context of gyroscopes, ψ → ψ * carries out a reflection of the gyroscope's displacement about a horizontal axis passing through its pivot point. Performing this operation on the equation above, we find that Equation 2 is time reversal symmetric. Thus, a spinning top precessing under the influence of gravity does not break this notion of time reversal symmetry. Introducing interactions, however, allows the structure to break time reversal symmetry. The simplest setting to see this is a network of gyroscopes coupled by linear springs. For small displacements, the forces exerted on one gyroscope by another are proportional to the component of the net displacement along the line connecting them. For a given pair of gyroscopes p and q, it is convenient to extract the component of the net displacement ψ p -ψ q along the bond by rotating the system to the local x-axis of p, taking the real part of expression, and then rotating back. The resulting force in complex form is given by: where k 0 is the spring constant of the bond. Using this result, the equation of motion for two gyroscopes can then be written as: where Ω k = k 0 2 e /(Iω) and Ω g = mg cm /(Iω). We define the time reversal operation as ψ T R p (t) = ψ * p (-t). By taking the complex conjugate of ψp and rewriting in terms of ψ T R p , we see that the equations of motion are changed only by e i2θ → e -i2θ . Therefore, we see that time reversal symmetry is preserved under reflections that are parallel or perpendicular to the bond The full equation of motion for a hanging gyroscope with more than one neighbor can be similarly expressed: ( As before, time reversal symmetry is only preserved if all bonds are either parallel or perpendicular to each other since in this case, a coordinate system can be chosen so that bonds lie along the x and y axes, constraining the prefactor e 2iθpq to be real for all bonds in the network. To date, the only ordered lattices that have been considered in this framework are the honeycomb lattice and simple distortions thereof To demonstrate the considerable flexibility of gyroscopic metamaterials, we begin by considering the twisted spindle lattice shown in Fig. In the limiting case of the honeycomb lattice, which has two sites per unit cell, we find a single gap with clockwise topologically-protected edge modes where P j ≡ |u j u j | is the projection matrix and ∧ is the wedge product, and we find that the Chern number is equal to the number of chiral edge modes, which suggests the same bulk-boundary correspondence for these systems as in electronic Chern insulators Twisting the spindle lattice through a Guest mode, as shown in Fig. What determines the chirality of edge modes? Unlike in Maxwell lattices recently found to be topological From a design perspective, the two simple tuning parameters of angle and interaction strength are sufficient to cover a broad range of topological phenomenology without introducing staggered interaction strengths, including edge modes with either chirality, the opening and closing of gaps, and bands with Chern number ±1 and ±2. These behaviors demonstrate the versatility of gy-FIG. All configurations shown so far break time reversal symmetry, which is a necessary ingredient for band topology in Chern insulators Fig. This behavior warrants further investigation. During the deformation of the honeycomb into the bricklayer geometry, the band gap closes and the two Dirac points in the spectrum touch at a point. Surprisingly, these Dirac points are preserved even in the canted bricklayer configuration, as shown in Fig. As detailed in the Supplementary Information, this protection of the Dirac cones arises due to a subtle pseudo-reflection symmetry. The symmetry consists of reflecting the positions of gyroscopes about the x axis and shearing their relative positions such that the tilt angle φ is invariant, while leaving the gyroscopes' displacements unchanged. This pseudo-reflection is a symmetry of the equations of motion, and thus of the normal modes Breaking inversion symmetry is the canonical mechanism for opening gaps in the phonon spectra of mass-andspring lattices The behavior of excitations confirms the Chern number calculations in all three regions, as indicated in Fig. ). The result shown in Fig. As seen in the first term of Eqn. 5, contributions to on-site pinning -ie. terms in which ψp depends on ψ p -come not only from gravitation precession terms (Ω g ), but also from coupling to adjacent sites. For lattices with unequal coordination at different sites, balancing the full 'site pinning frequency', Ω p , for each site can be used to enhance or remedy the effects of site inequivalence: We can test if site pinning inequivalence is the mechanism preventing the α-(ET ) 2 I 3 lattice from having gaps. Indeed, reducing the precession frequencies of the sites with higher coordination numbers enables a band gap with chiral edge modes (Fig. We have seen that both time-reversal symmetry and site equivalence are tied to lattice geometry and connectivity. Turning now toward engineering new topological gyroscopic lattices, we can summarize the principles of the previous sections as follows: I Breaking time reversal symmetry via bond angles is a necessary, but not sufficient condition for creating a lattice with a non-trivial band topology. II A competition between time reversal symmetry and site equivalence determines whether or not a lattice can have topological modes. Lattice connectivity is relevant for determining the effective on-site precession frequencies to achieve equivalence. Using these two principles, one can construct topological metamaterials beginning with an arbitrary unit cell and subsequently balancing pinning frequencies according to Equation Figure The results demonstrated in this section show that topology is not specific to one family of lattices in gyroscopic networks and is in fact ubiquitous. Many topological lattices can be created using only simple principlesopening a myriad possibilities for material design. In this article, we explored the interplay between lattice geometry and topological order in gyroscopic lattices -including the effects of broken time reversal symmetry and site equivalence. Along the way, we found examples of lattices with multiple band gaps containing edge modes of either chirality in the same structure and Chern numbers |C| > 1. We then identified general principles which are helpful in designing lattices with desired topological band structures. Building on our observations, we used a simple prescription that yields mechanically stable topological gyroscopic lattices and lattices with multiple band gaps. The ubiquity of band topology in gyroscopic metamaterials provides a broad palette with which to design topological behaviors in elastic structures. Further study could investigate the interplay between band topology and nonlinear excitations in gyroscopic networks or interspersing both clockwise and counterclockwise spinning sites. An example of a deformed kagome lattice structure exhibits two topological gaps. (B) A mechanically stable lattice with one topological gap (upper gap) demonstrates that gyroscopic lattices need not be undercoordinated to be Chern insulators. The propagation of edge modes is in the same direction as the kagome lattice. (C) A 3-site-per-unit-cell lattice structure with one topological gap (lower gap). The propagation of edge modes is in the same direction as the honeycomb lattice. (D) An example of a 4-site-per-unit-cell lattice structure with three topological gaps. The propagation of edge modes is in the same direction as the kagome lattice for all three gaps. Band topology in our gyroscopic lattices is encoded in the Chern number. To calculate the Chern number for gyroscopes on a lattice, we first find the band-structure using the linearized equation of motion, Eqn. 6 of the main text. For each site in a unit cell, we assume a solution which is composed of clockwise and counterclockwise propagating modes: where A indexes the n sites in a unit cell. The resulting equations can be expressed as the 2n × 2n dynamical matrix which is a function of the wave vector, k. This dynamical matrix resembles hopping model matrices seen for lattice calculations in quantum mechanics. Diagonalizing the dynamical matrix yields 2n frequencies of the dispersion bands at each value of k. The eigenvalues come in positive/negative pairs, but each pair represents the same oscillation in real space. Because of this redundancy, we discuss only the positive eigenvalues for each system. At each value of k, each mode has a corresponding eigenvector, u j k , characterizing the amplitudes and phases of the gyroscopes' collective motion. The Chern number of each band is given by an integral of the Berry curvature, F( k): where A j (k) = i u j |∇ k u j . In this work, Chern numbers are calculated numerically using the phase-invariant formula where P j ≡ |u j u j | is the projection matrix and ∧ is the wedge product. We simulate our gyroscopic networks by numerically integrating the following equation with a fourth-order Runge-Kutta method: where ω is the spinning frequency of the gyroscope, I is the principal moment of inertia, f denotes the distance from the pivot point to the position where the force, F , acts. In our simulations, we consider only a gravitational restoring force and the effect of linear springs coupling neighbors in the lattice. The lattice band structure maps our system to a tightbinding calculation in the limit where Ω g Ω k . Although most calculations presented in this paper and previous experiments where R = Ω k /Ω g . In the limit of strong pinning (Ω g Ω k ), W ≈ (9/8)Ω 2 k /Ω g . Thus, for this particular case, the gap remains open, which explains the similarity of Figure When Ω g Ω k , the motion of each gyroscope is approximately circular and we may write the displacement of the gyroscope as ψ n = e -iΩt u n + e iΩt v * n , where u n is the amplitude of precession determined by gravity, v n is the counter-rotating amplitude, and Ω is the precession frequency of the normal mode. With the displacement written in this way, our equation of motion can be written as: Assuming , where the sum is over all neighbors m of gyroscope n. We note that this term is the origin of the next-nearest neighbor coupling connecting our system to the Haldane model. When the result for v n in terms of u n is substituted into Eqn. 13, we obtain where θ nml = θ nm -θ lm is the angle between the bonds nm and lm, the second to last sum is over all pairs of neighbors m and m of n, and the last sum is over all neighbors m of n and neighbors l of m. Here, our last term corresponds to next-nearest neighbor coupling. To compare directly with the topological Haldane model, we will analyze the lowest-order terms for the sums over the nearest neighbors and next-nearest neighbors: Ω k is similar to Haldane's nearest neighbor tunneling amplitude, and Ω 2 k /8Ω g is the next-nearest neighbor tunneling amplitude. As in Haldane's model, the next-nearest neighbor coupling terms have a complex exponential. In tight binding systems, this phase factor is calculated using the Peierls substitution as θ = A • d , where d is along the tunneling path. In gyroscopic systems, the phase factor is governed purely by the lattice geometry. Previous work studied the topological phase transition that occured when the honeycomb lattice was deformed through a bricklayer transition into a 'bowtie' lattice As shown in Fig. FIG. Surprisingly, Dirac points are preserved in the canted bricklayer configuration, despite the fact that shearing the bricklayer configuration breaks time reversal symmetry. While time reversal symmetry is broken, a combination of time reversal and discrete symmetries can stabilize the Dirac points To see the pseudo-reflection symmetry, we index gyroscopes by the label (n, m) as shown in Fig. ẏn,m = -Ω g x n,m where the plus and minus signs correspond to (n + m) being odd or even, respectively. The equations of motion exhibit a symmetry under the exchange (n, m) → (n, -1 -m) -that is, if r n,m ≡ r n,-1-m = (x n,-1-m , y n,-1-m ), then r satisfies the same equations as r. To prove this, we apply the original equations with (n, -1 -m) and note that if m was even, then -1 -m is odd, so that the ± signs are taken to ∓, and the result follows. This symmetry exchanges any pair of connected gyroscopes with another pair that are connected by a spring with the same slope, so we immediately find that the energy is invariant under this symmetry. This is only possible when the action of the symmetry preserves both the connectivity of the lattice and preserves the directions of bonds up to rotations by 180 degrees. As a result, among the family of deformed honeycomb lattice, this pseudo-reflection symmetry arises only for the bricklayer and canted bricklayer geometries. The pseudo-reflection symmetry acts in real space, but also transforms momentum space. By Bloch's theorem, r n,m = e i k• Rn,m u, where u takes one value for A sublattice sites and another for B sublattice sites. It follows that If we define R n,m = (n+m cos φ, m sin φ) ≡ (x n,m , y n,m ), then applying (n, m) → (n, -1 -m) gives y n,m -sin φ). Setting r n,m = exp [ik • R n,m ] up to a phase factor which is independent of n and m provides a correspondence between k and k: Choosing our unit cell to contain (n, m) = (0, 0) and (0, -1), we denote the degrees of freedom The pseudo-reflection symmetry operation, now defined as takes Ȧ ↔ Ċ and Ḃ ↔ Ḋ. We now show that the pseudo-reflection symmetry (A, B ↔ C, D and k y → -2 cot φk x -k y ) fixes a line in momentum space on which modes can be classified as even and odd under the action of the reflection. In general, a band crossing can be avoiding due to hybridization FIG. The dispersion of the canted bricklayer geometry has protected Dirac points. Along the line ky = -cot φkx in momentum space, symmetric and antisymmetric modes decouple. The modes that are symmetric (antisymmetric) under pseudo-reflection symmetry are shown as blue (orange) curves. Since the symmetric and antisymmetric modes cross, Dirac cones appear in the spectrum, even though time reversal symmetry is broken. Here, we set Ωg = Ω k and the tilt angle φ = 1 radian. (i.e. a coupling between the bands). However, the even and odd bands which arise are decoupled and can therefore provide a protected crossing. Consider the wavevectors k such that k = k + G, where G is either zero or a reciprocal lattice vector. This condition defines a line of momenta on which the equations are already symmetric under (A, B) → (C, D). Now, the variables (A+C, B+D) and (A-C, B-D) are symmetric and antisymmetric under the pseudo-reflection symmetry, which implies that we expect them to be decoupled from each other. Below we compute the dispersions for each set of variables separately along the line defined by kk = 0. These equations are indeed uncoupled from each other, so any crossings that arise cannot open into gaps. Choosing Bravais lattice vectors R = (R x , R y ) = (2, 0) and (1 + cos φ, sin φ), we have reciprocal lattice vectors We can seek curves in momentum space such that k and k differ by only a reciprocal lattice vector, kk = G. Enforcing kk = (0, -2 cot φk x -2k y ) = G constrains m = 0, and k y = -nπ sin φ -cot φk x . These define a set of parallel lines separated by a reciprocal lattice vector. Since all curves are equivalent, we may use n = 0 without loss of generality. The result is The eigenvalues are plotted in Fig. The lattices shown in Figure Here we explore the topology of the deformed kagome lattice, which can be constructed such that the only non-localized zero energy mode is a uniformly collapsing mode We note this lattice has been found to have interesting topological properties in other mechanical systems with time reversal symmetry. In mechanical frames, topological modes have been experimentally proposed and demonstrated for kagome and deformed kagome lattices with variation of lattice geometry In order to investigate the topology of the kagome lattice under geometric deformations for the gyroscopic case, we employ the lattice distortion shown in Fig. As in The three bands and two band gaps in the vibrational spectrum of this lattice are shown in green in Fig. Variation of lattice geometry has only a slight effect on the topology of the band structure, as shown in Fig. While lattice topology exhibits only a slight dependence on changes in a single lattice geometry parameter, the upper band gap can additionally be closed via simultaneous adjustment of all three lattice parameters, corresponding to twisting the kagome lattice The width of the upper band gap may be controlled by adjustment of the degree of collapse of the lattice. As shown in Fig. Over-coordinated (z > 4), mechanically stable lattices can also support chiral edge modes. One such exam- ple, shown in the main text, is described in more detail in Fig. 