Using the Eliashberg theory of superconductivity we have examined several properties of a model in which electrons are coupled only to rattling phonon modes represented by a sharp peak in the electron-phonon coupling function. Our choice of parameters was guided by experiments on β-pyrochlore oxide superconductor KOs2Os6. We have calculated the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap edge, the quasiparticle decay rate, the NMR relaxation rate assuming that the coupling between the nuclear spins and the conduction electrons is via a contact hyperfine interaction which would be appropriate for the O-site in KOs2Os6, and the microwave conductivity. We examined the limit of very strong coupling by considering three values of the electron-phonon coupling parameter λ = 2.38, 3, and 5 and did not assume that the rattler frequency Ω0 is temperature dependent in the superconducting state. We obtained a very unusual temperature dependence of the superconducting gap edge ∆(T ), very much like the one extracted from photoemission experiments on KOs2O6. The β-pyrochlore osmium oxide superconductors AOs 2 Os 6 (A=Cs, Rb, K) have been extensively studied experimentally and theoretically since the discovery of superconductivity in these compounds in 2004 (for reviews see The most direct evidence that the low frequency phonon modes play an important role in superconductivity of KOs 2 Os 6 comes from the photoemission spectroscopy measurements by Shimojima et al. shows a peak near Ω 0 + ∆(T ) followed by a dip (see Fig. Several experiments point independently to a very strong electron-phonon coupling in β-pyrochlores, in particular in the case of KOs 2 Os 6 . The ratio of the measured Sommerfeld coefficient γ of the normal state electronic specific heat to the value found in band structure calculations γ band is γ/γ band = 7.3 Thus, for KOs 2 Os 6 λ = 6.3 which is the largest value for any known electron-phonon superconductor. This value is essentially identical with the one obtained from de Haas-van Alphen oscillation measurements and a band structure calculation was measured in a limited temperature range In this work we consider a model system in which superconductivity arises exclusively from the conduction electron coupling to a rattling phonon modeled by a single sharp peak in α 2 (Ω)F (Ω) at rattling frequency Ω 0 We model the α 2 (Ω)F (Ω) of electrons coupled to the rattling phonon with a cut-off Lorentzian centered at energy Ω 0 and having the half-width ε for |Ω-Ω 0 | ≤ Ω c and zero otherwise. We assume that at superconducting temperatures Ω 0 and ε are temperature-independent. Motivated by experiments on KOs 2 Os 6 we take Ω 0 = 2.2 meV and choose ε = 0.01 meV and Ω c = 2.1 meV. The strength g in ( and T c is the highest temperature T at which the largest eigenvalue e(T ) is equal to 1. In ( , where φ(n) is the pairing selfenergy at iω n , and is the renormalization function at iω n . In ( is the electron-phonon kernel at temperature T . Next, the gap function ∆(ω) and the renormalization function Z(ω) are obtained by solving the Eliashberg equations at finite temperature on the real axis and f is the Fermi function. The electron-phonon coupling function α 2 (Ω)F (Ω) enters via the zero temperature kernels Published by NRC Research Press K ± (ω, ω ′ ) and the thermal phonon kernels K± (ω, ω ′ ) defined by These equations can be solved through iterative methods. Alternatively, one can solve a hybrid set of equations, based on solutions already converged on the imaginary axis From the solutions of the real-axis Eliashberg equations at a given temperature T below T c one can compute the ratio of the NMR relaxation rate in the superconducting state R s = 1/(T 1 T ) to its value in the normal state R n assuming that the coupling between the nuclear spins and the conduction electrons is via a contact hyperfine interaction (for derivation see, for example, The frequency dependent conductivity is given by where ω 2 p is the square of the plasma frequency. The quasiparticle energy E(ω) appearing in the denominators in ( where Z(ω) is the total renormalization function which includes the electron-phonon interaction and impurity scattering The computed critical temperatures for our model were T c = 5.06 K, 5.99 K and 8.32 K for λ = 2.38 The gap edge at temperature T, ∆(T ) was obtained from solution of when it existed and the the results are shown in Figs. (1-3) we also show the absolute value of the imaginary part of the gap at the gap edge which rigorously gives the quasiparticle decay rate Γ(T ) = -Im ∆(T ) In Figs. In conclusion, we have examined the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap edge, the quasiparticle decay rate, the NMR relaxation rate assuming that the coupling between the nuclear spins and the conduction electrons is via a contact hyperfine interaction, and the microwave conductivity for a model of electrons coupled only to the rattling phonon. We examined the limit of very strong coupling by considering three values of electron-phonon coupling parameter λ = 2.38, 3, and 5 and did not assume that the rattler frequency Ω 0 is temperature dependent in the superconducting state. We obtained very unusual temperature dependence of the superconducting gap edge ∆(T ), very much like the one extracted from photoemission experiments on KOs 2 O 6 Published by NRC Research Press