We point out that superconducting quantum computers are prospective for the simulation of the dynamics of spin models far from equilibrium, including nonadiabatic phenomena and quenches. The important advantage of these machines is that they are programmable, so that different spin models can be simulated in the same chip, as well as various initial states can be encoded into it in a controllable way. This opens an opportunity to use superconducting quantum computers in studies of fundamental problems of statistical physics such as the absence or presence of thermalization in the free evolution of a closed quantum system depending on the choice of the initial state as well as on the integrability of the model. In the present paper, we per-W. Quantum computers and simulators are prospective for the resolution of problems which are hard to solve using conventional computing systems. In principle, these quantum devices can be constructed on the basis of different physical platforms, see, e.g., Refs. State-of-the-art processors contain tens of superconducting qubits with individual control and readout. Quantum computer of such a size might enable for the first time to demonstrate advantages over modern and most capacitive conventional supercomputers In the present paper, we point out that superconducting quantum computers may provide a new platform to study far-from-equilibrium dynamics of various spin models in one and two dimensions. Spin models are nowadays considered as a playground to study fundamental aspect of statistical physics such as thermalization of closed quantum systems during their free evolution from an initial state differing from the Hamiltonian eigenstate, see, e.g., Refs. We here perform proof-of-principle simulation of the far-from-equilibrium dynamics in two different spin models using 5-qubit and 16-qubits IBM quantum computers, which are available through the internet within IBM Quantum Experience. The models we study are the central spin model and the transverse-field Ising model the latter being both in the one-dimensional and ladder configurations. The choice of these two models is optimal from the viewpoint of the topologies of available chips as well as existing errors of twoqubit gates. Unitary evolution of the system from initial states, which are not exact eigenstates of systems Hamiltonians, is implemented in a digital way using Trotter decomposition of the evolution operator. We demonstrate that modern quantum computers are able to reproduce important aspects of spin dynamics originating from the symmetry of the initial entangled state, such as the excitation blockade due to the quantum interference. For the transverse Ising model it is possible to simulate quenches which end deeply in the disordered phase. However, attempts to go beyond few-steps Trotterrization lead to the strong increase of the total error, which is mainly due to the errors of two-qubit gates as well as the decoherence processes. Our results thus elucidate limitations of current technology in the modeling of unitary evolution of spin models. Nevertheless, we believe that further technological improvements as well as scaling towards computers with many qubits will indeed allow to realize a modeling of the dynamics difficult to study with conventional supercomputers. We also discuss certain heuristic tricks, which can be used to extract some useful information from the imperfect and "noisy" results of the modeling. Note that the unitary dynamics of a spin chain has recently been tackled in Ref. Our paper is organized as follows. In Section II we describe the architecture of 5-qubit IBMqx4 chip and discuss physical systems most suitable for quantum computation with this chip, which belong to the family of the central spin models. We show how degrees of freedom of the modeled system can be mapped on degrees of freedom of the physical device and how various initial conditions, which include both entangled and disentangled states, can be encoded into the device taking into account limitations in its topology. We then perform modeling of unitary evolution, discuss errors as well as the dependence of the dynamics on the initial state. In Section III, we consider the implementation of the unitary dynamics of the transverse-field Ising model in 16-qubit IBMqx5 chip. Both chain and ladder configurations are considered. Section IV summarizes our results and conclusions. The algorithmic simulation of spin dynamics consists of several steps. As a first step, one has to encode the initial conditions to the chip. For state-of-art processors, the results can be improved by taking into account a difference in errors of quantum gates associated with particular physical qubits and by choosing the optimal set of physical qubits of the device to perform the simulation, which also implies that the topology of the device has to be accounted for. At the second stage, the dynamics is implemented using Trotter expansion of the evolution operator. At the third state, measurements of qubits are performed. The whole algorithm is repeated many times, which is 8102 in our case for each point. Let us first utilize this strategy using 5-qubit processor IBMqx4. The structure of the superconducting quantum processor IBMqx4 is shown schematically in Fig. The most evident approach is to associate this topology with a central spin model, which describes an ensemble of spin-1/2 particles, the central particle interacting with all other particles (bath), see, e.g., Ref. The simplest relevant model from the class of central spin models is XX central spin model with the Hamiltonian of the form where σ j,z and σ ± j are Pauli operators associated with particles of the bath, while σ c,z and σ ± c refer to the central spin; j and c are excitation energies of spins of the bath, which do not interact with each other directly, whereas g is the interaction constant between the central spin and each spin of the bath. This Hamiltonian is integrable, which facilitates the analysis of our results. For simplicity, we hereafter assume that all excitation energies are the same and switch to the rotating frame. The Hamiltonian we model reads as In order to bring it to the form conventional in the field of quantum computation we rewrite operators σ + and σ -through operators σ x and σ y . After simple algebra, we ultimately represent (2) in an equivalent form as We are going to address three different realizations of spin systems each being characterized by its own initial condition. Let us first consider the system of two particles of the bath coupled to the central particle. We assume that the initial state of the whole system is an unexcited central spin and entangled particles of the bath. This state is given by which is parameterized by a single tunable parameter φ. We further refer the two-particle entangled state appearing in Eq. ( Particularly, at φ = π the excitation has to be blocked in the environment without being transferred to the central spin. The excitation blockade is caused by quantum interference effect leading to the mutual cancellation of contributions from two different qubits: 1 + e iφ = 0 at φ = π. This means that the evolution operator in the rotating frame does not change Ψ I (0) at φ = π. In contrast, Rabi-like oscillations, i.e., free excitation transfer between the subsystem of periphery spins and the central spin do occur at φ = π. We associate the state of two particles with the quantum states of two physical qubits via one-to-one correspondence, as shown in Fig. We also consider the system of three spin-1/2 particles coupled to the central spin, the initial state of the system being where χ is tunable phase parameter. The entangled state of three particles in Eq. ( The demonstration of the excitation blockade for the three-particle entangled state ( Mapping between the modeled system and elements of the chip are shown in Fig. We are now in the position to implement the dynamics of modeled system in a digital way using Trotterization. The free evolution of the system starting from the initial state |Ψ (0) is given by the standard formula Under the expansion involving Trotter number N , this expression is rewritten in the approximate form as where dimensionless time τ = gt was introduced. σ c and σ j now refer to those physical qubits, which encode states of the central spin and particles of the bath, respectively. Eq. ( Each gate the form exp -i τ 2 σ x,y,z c ⊗ σ x,y,z j can be represented in a usual way thought the CNOT gate entangling two qubits as well as the single-qubit gate R z (τ ) = exp -i τ 2 σ z in the appropriate basis. R z (τ ) is expressed through the standard IBMqx4 gate U 3 and Hadamard gate H as HU Thus, we trace the time evolution of the system starting from three different initial conditions encoded into the real physical device and using the Trotter expansion with different Trotter numbers. In particular, we concentrate on the dynamics of the mean population of the excited state of the central particle by measuring population of qubit n c , which encodes central spin states, at different values of dimensionless time τ . The whole quantum circuits corresponding to three initial conditions are presented in Appendix B (for simplicity, for a single Trotter number, N = 1). Now we compare the experimental and theoretical results for different initial states introduced above and Trotter numbers N . Let us stress that such a comparison is always made by us for approximations of the same level, i.e., for the same N in Eq. ( The sensitivity of the population of the central spin to the phase parameter φ can be understood by adopting quantum optics picture and replacing the central spin by the oscillator, which is exact in the single-excitation regime. Indeed, the value of phase parameter φ equal to π corresponds to the so called non-radiant or dark state. This nonradiant state is an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian and therefore no mean photon occupation is induced upon the free evolution starting from this state (for the exact solution, i.e., infinite Trotter number). The dynamics seen in Fig. Nevertheless, there exist significant deviations of the experimental curves compared to the theoretical ones. The reason is mainly in errors of CNOT gates which are typically several percent in IBMqx4 and thus induce quite large error after nearly ten CNOTs per physical qubit. Decoherence of physical qubits also gives noticeable contribution in the time scale of a single run of the algorithm. Of course, one-step Trotterization is also not exact, so it is accurate only at τ 1. Let us now try to increase Trotter number having in mind a reduction of Trotterization errors in the dynamics. In order to somehow get rid of the nonzero n c (τ = 0), which appears due to the errors of the physical device, we heuristically suggest to address the difference ∆n c (τ ) = n c (τ ) -n c (τ = 0). Note that n c (τ = 0), of course, grows as N is increased. The experimental and theoretical results for N = 2 and N = 3 are presented in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively. There is still a qualitative agreement between the theory and the experiment in the sense that the character of the dependencies both on τ and φ are reproduced correctly. However, the qualitative agreement does not exist. In particular, the maximum of ∆n c (τ ) as a function of time is nearly 3 and 8 times smaller than the correct values at N = 2 and 3, respectively. Notice that the theoretical curves for φ = π become closer and closer to the x-axis as N increases, which reflects the reduction of Trotterization errors and more proper realization of the excitation blockade in the Trotterized dynamics. As a whole, our results demonstrate that despite of large errors, experimental data for several Trotter numbers still contain a lot of valuable information on relative values, so that focusing on differences (perhaps, properly normalized, see the next Section for the illustration) might also has a sense for modeling using "noisy" quantum computers. By using this trick we somehow get rid of the background signal nearly independent on τ . Now we present our results for the initial state (5) involving three entangled particles. Figure 3 Ising model in a transverse field and 16-qubit quantum computer 3.1 Mapping to the quantum chip n this Section we discuss an implementation of the dynamics in transverse Ising model using 16-qubit superconducting quantum computer IBMqx5. This model is generally non-integrable beyond the one-dimensional geometry. The structure of the superconducting quantum processor IBMqx5 is shown schematically in Fig. Nevertheless, it is of interest to consider also a family of Ising models, which represent a special case of the Heisenberg model and include only interactions of σ z σ z type. This is going to require an application of only 6 CNOTs per each "internal" qubit and single Trotter step. The transverse Ising model, as discussed in the Introduction, provides a popular playground to study the far-from-equilibrium dynamics including quenches and explore various fundamental problems of statistical physics such as the phenomena related to the thermalization of closed quantum systems. Individual addressability of qubits allows to create in the chip initial states of a wide class, which include entangled states, while the dependence of thermalization on the initial state is an important issue The Hamiltonian of the transverse Ising model reads as where σ-operators act on the array of sites (qubits), whereas i, j refer to the summation over neighboring sites. Note that the transverse Ising model is non-stochastic in the sense that the sign problem appears in Monte-Carlo simulations of this model due to the presence of the second term in the righthand side of Eq. ( In our proof-of-principles experiments, we consider quenches in the transverse Ising model, which occur under the sudden change of system's param- eters. We concentrate on the situation, when initially α = 0, so that the ground state of the system is ferromagnetic, |↓ . . . ↓ . Then, α is turned nonadiabatically to some finite value. Time evolution of the system is traced for various final values of α ≥ J, which is a free parameter in the modeling. In particular, we focus on the mean occupation n of the qubit excited state defined as n = σ z q , where averaging is performed over the qubits (spins) of the system. Note that α ≥ J corresponds to quenches ending in the disordered phase of the transverse Ising model, where the dynamics is rather sophisticated In Fig. The "shift" of the first qubit of the chain to the second row of the chip is motivated by the lower readout error in this particular qubit. Each Trotter step includes several stages. Initially, we encode a free part of the Hamiltonian by applying the gate exp (-itσ x ) on each physical qubit. Next, we encode the term originating from the spin-spin interaction of the Hamiltonian. At the first stage, qubits with "1" between them are entangled simultaneously (in parallel) through exp -i tJ α σ z ⊗ σ z . At the second stage, qubits with "2" are also entangled in parallel through the same operation. This parallel strategy is utilized in order to decrease the total time needed to perform the whole algorithm in order to reduce errors. Note that IBMqx5 processor is suitable for the modeling of Ising chain of up to 16 spins length, since it is possible to represent such a chain by the unclosed "ring" of physical qubits. Our results for the 8-spin chain are presented in Fig. However, already for N = 2 the accuracy drastically reduces. Apparently, the reason is in the increased number of CNOTs applied to each physical qubit. The correct behavior of n is nevertheless still well reproduced on the qualitative level, in similarity to the results for the central spin model described in the preceding Section. We therefore again apply our heuristic approach and instead of focusing on absolute values, we analyze relative quantities. Moreover, we normalize them and ultimately address the quantity defined as Both experimental and theoretical results for this quantity are presented in Fig. The improved quality of the results for V (τ ) and related quantities as compared to raw data can be linked to the fact that erroneous applications of a particular quantum gate of the algorithm leads to the wrong output dependence on τ . These wrong outputs are all different for errors occurring at different quantum gates of the algorithm. After averaging over all such erroneous events, a randomization is expected, i.e., a flat dependence on τ emerges, provided the number of quantum gates of the algorithm is large. However, there are also runs of algorithms which contain no errors and therefore they produce a correct output against the background. The latter is then eliminated by using Eq. (10). Figure In our simulations, the total error per physical qubit can be estimated as 2p CN OT N neig N ν, where p CN OT is the CNOT error, N neig is the number of spins participating in the interaction with the given spin, and ν is a number, which characterizes the complexity of the spin-spin interaction (ν ranges from 1 for Ising models, which include only zz interaction, to 3 for Heisenberg model, which includes interactions of three types, xx, yy, and zz). In this paper, we pointed out that superconducting quantum computers are perspective for the unitary simulation of far-from-equilibrium dynamics including quenches of various spin models in one and two dimensions. Spin models nowadays are considered as an important playground in studies of fundamental problems of statistical physics from the first principles, such as the phenomena of thermalization of closed quantum systems. The advantage of programmable quantum computers is that different spin models can be simulated algorithmically on the same chip. It is possible to tune the model from the integrable type to nonintegrable type and to study the impact of such a "crossover" on the evolution. Moreover, due to the individual addressability of physical qubits of the chip, one can create various initial conditions (different from Hamiltonian eigenstates) and to study the influence of these conditions on the free evolution of the system. We here used 5-qubit and 16-qubit superconducting quantum computers of the IBM Quantum Experience to show concepts of such a digital modeling. Two different models have been addressed in our proof-of-principles experiments -the integrable central spin model (5-qubit device) and the transversefield Ising model in both the one-dimensional and ladder configurations (16qubit device), which is integrable in the first case and nonintegrable in the second one. The choice of models is linked to the topologies of the quantum chips as well as to gate errors -we have chosen spin models with the arrangement of spins and interactions between them, which are in one-to-one correspondence with the quantum chips and available two-qubit gates between physical qubits of the chips. We have shown that the quantum machines we used are able to reproduce some important aspects of system's dynamics originating from the character of the initial conditions. For instance, it is possible to simulate the effect of the excitation blockade which occurs due to the negative quantum interference of contributions from different spins under the antisymmetric choice of the initial entangled state of the system. However, the practical usability of the devices is limited by errors of two-qubit gates, so that no more than several Trotter steps in the decomposition of the evolution operator can be realized. Nevertheless, we applied some heuristic tricks in order to "reduce" the total error and to extract a valuable information on relative quantities from the experimental data. Although the reported results can be relatively easily found explicitly or using classical computers, scaling towards chips with many physical qubits, improved coherence times and reduced CNOT errors might lead to the resolution of problems which can hardly be solved using more traditional approaches. Indeed, in order to study the dynamics from first principles, one needs to know all eigenstates of a given Hamiltonian. The number of eigenstates, in general, increases exponentially with the increase of the particle number. Therefore, even quantum computers of medium sizes, which can appear in the near future, might be of practical importance for the modeling of dynamics of quantum systems. Even if errors will be still too large to simulate the dynamics untractable on classical computers, an implementation of advanced error correction codes should ultimately allow for such a modeling. A Preparation of three-particle entangled state B Full quantum circuits for the central spin model 