We examine the properties of a gaseous plasma resonator generated by focusing a high-energy laser pulse through a lens and into a gas. An analytical model is presented describing the scattering resonance of these near-ellipsoidal plasmas and its dependence on their eccentricity and intrinsic plasma properties. This dependence is investigated through Ku band transmission experiments of a waveguide with an embedded single plasma element and through optical diagnostics of the laserinduced plasma. The described resonator has the potential to be used as the building block in a new class of metamaterials with fully three-dimensional structural flexibility. The electromagnetic (EM) properties of most natural materials are dictated by the resonances of their constituent atoms, which are typically ∼ 1 angstrom in size. Because of the small spacing between these atoms, many EM wavelengths of engineering interest (vacuum ultraviolet waves or longer) only probe their average or effective properties. A metamaterial (MTM), i.e., an artificial material engineered to exhibit EM properties not readily found in nature, follows the same principle In recent years, a significant portion of research in this field has focused on exploring the tunability of these phenomena. Tunable MTM devices have exploited the electromechanical, electro-optical, liquid-crystal, phasechange, and superconducting response of their constituent elements The majority of past research related to plasma MTMs has focused mainly on the development of composites that integrate plasmas into metallic resonant structures The first step towards understanding the scattering properties of these near-ellipsoidal resonators was to find a relationship between their resonance frequency and intrinsic plasma properties. An exact solution for the scattering fields from an ellipsoid, similar to the solution derived by G. Mie for the scattering fields from a sphere where v is the volume of the ellipsoid, L is a geometrical factor dependent on the eccentricity and orientation of the ellipsoid, and ǫ is the dielectric constant of the plasma ellipsoid, which can be represented by a Drude model, i.e., where ω is the incident radiation frequency, q is the electron charge, m e is the electron mass, and ǫ 0 is the free space permittivity. The absorption and scattering cross sections of such ellipsoids can then be written in terms of the polarizability as where k is the wave number or when ω 0 = ω p √ L for a collision-less (γ = 0) plasma. Equation ( where e is the eccentricity of the prolate spheroid It is important to recognize that for any finite collisionality case, Eq. (4) will have a complex solution. However, provided Im(ω 0 ) ≪ Re(ω 0 ), Re(ω 0 ) provides a good approximation for the resonance frequency of the resonator. In this letter, the conditions necessary for resonance in the Ku band (12-18 GHz) of the microwave spectrum were explored for a LIP with major axis oriented parallel to the incident electric field. Only LIPs with dimensions ≤ 4mm, which are commonly reported in literature, were considered in order to satisfy the long wavelength criteria required by both Eq. ( Optical emission measurements were carried out to determine if values in this range of n e and e could be achieved for a low collisionaliy LIP. A schematic of the experimental setup used for these measurements can be found on Fig. ameter: ∼10 mm) was focused through a plano-convex lens (diameter: 30 mm, focal length: 40 mm) to produce a plasma spheroid. The plasma was generated in a 93%N 2 /7%H 2 gas mixture at a relatively low pressure of 20 Torr to minimize electron-neutral collision losses. The time evolution of n e was determined by measuring the stark broadening of the LIP's Hα emission line and the eccentricity was determined from gated images of its broadband emission. The LIP was imaged at the entrance slit (width = 60 μm) of a Jobin-Yvon U1000 double monochromator where a dual holographic 1800 groove/mm grating dispersed the light, which was then imaged onto a Princeton Instruments PI-MAX intensified CCD camera. A wavelength calibration factor of 0.0568 Å/pixel and height calibration factor of 0.0307 mm/pixel were determined by placing a mercury spectral lamp at the focus of the plasma-generating lens and focusing on two closely spaced Hg lines. Two 1 mm black strips taped onto the mercury lamp 1 mm apart were used to calibrate the vertical spatial resolution. The instrument broadening was determined using a HeNe laser and was used to establish a baseline for deconvolution from broadening due to the plasma. The camera was triggered simultaneously with the laser Q-switch and gated to a 150 ns exposure so as to capture the time evolution of the plasma emission. In order to determine the radial profiles of the Hα line emission from the chordwise integrated emission intensity, the inverse Abel transform was utilized, i.e., where I(y) is the experimentally measured, chordintegrated intensity, R is the radius at which the measured intensity reaches the background level, and ǫ(r) is the calculated radial emissivity. To compute Eq. ( where the integers k and n are the position indices of the radial and vertical intensities, and ∆y is the distance between adjacent experimental data points. For details of the calculation of the weights B k,n , see Ref. where α is the recombination coefficient and τ is the characteristic diffusion time scale. Using a non-linear least squares fit method, an optimal fit was found for α = 9.235 × 10 -17 m 3 /s and τ = 0.606 μs. The resulting fit is plotted on Fig. The time evolution of the eccentricity was measured through gated images of emission from the LIP captured by bypassing the monochromator and focusing the broadband image of the plasma directly on the intensified CCD camera. Given that this image was primarily generated by light emitted through recombination radiation and excitation of neutral species throughout the plasma, the images provided a good estimate for the geometry and eccentricity of the resonators. The resulting time evolution of e measured from these 150 ns exposure images can be found on Fig. The sample image shows that at these times, the plasma size is ∼3 mm, which is below λ/4 for all Ku band wavelengths, satisfying the long wavelength limit required by both Eq. ( Microwave scattering experiments were carried out to confirm the existence of the described resonance in the LIP at the times suggested by the optical diagnostics. A schematic of the measurement setup can be found on Fig. Plots of reflection (|S 11 |) and transmission (|S 21 |) coefficient vs. ω obtained from this two-port waveguide experiment can be found on Fig. The results presented thus far confirm the feasibility of the described gaseous plasmonic resonators. Such resonators could be used to extrapolate the functionality of solid-state Mie-based MTMs In summary, this letter addressed the potential use of LIPs as tunable resonators for MTM applications. An analytical model was presented describing the scattering resonance of these near-ellipsoidal plasmas and its dependence on their eccentricity and intrinsic plasma properties. This dependence was confirmed through Ku band transmission experiments of a waveguide with an embedded single plasma element and through optical diagnostics of the LIP. The described resonator has the potential to be used as the building block in a new class of MTMs with fully three-dimensional structural flexibility in the microwave and THz regime of the EM spectrum. 