We use inelastic neutron scattering to study the fate of the two spin resonance modes in underdoped superconducting NaFe1-xCoxAs (x = 0.0175) under applied magnetic fields. While an applied in-plane magnetic field of B = 12 T only modestly suppresses superconductivity and enhances static antiferromagnetic order, the two spin resonance modes display disparate responses. The spin resonance mode at higher energy is mildly suppressed, consistent with the field effect in other unconventional superconductors. The spin resonance mode at lower energy, on the other hand, is almost completely suppressed. Such dramatically different responses to applied magnetic field indicate distinct origins of the two spin resonance modes, resulting from the strongly orbital-selective nature of spin excitations and Cooper-pairing in iron-based superconductors. Iron-based superconductivity appears in proximity to antiferromagnetic (AF) order The electronic structure of iron-based superconductors is dominated by Fe 3d t 2g orbitals near the Fermi level, with hole-like Fermi surfaces at the zone center Γ and electron-like Fermi surfaces at the zone corner M , and the superconducting order parameter changes sign between these quasi-nested Fermi surfaces The orbital degree of freedom also manifests in spin , although the two SRMs in these materials are not well-separated in energy, and are only revealed through neutron polarization analysis. In addition to orbital-selective pairing, the two modes have also been suggested to arise from the presence of static or slowly fluctuating magnetic order In this work, we present an inelastic neutron scattering study of magnetic order and excitations in underdoped NaFe 1-x Co x As (x = 0.0175) Single crystals of NaFe 1-x Co x As (x = 0.0175) were grown using the self-flux method and have been previously studied using transport , and L = cQz 2π , using a ≈ b ≈ 5.57 Å and c ≈ 6.97 Å appropriate for the orthorhombic magnetically ordered phase of NaFe 1-x Co x As NaFe 1-x Co x As (x = 0.0175) exhibits competing superconductivity and AF order with an ordered moment ∼ 0.03μ B /Fe Magnetic field dependence of spin fluctuations at Q = (1, 0, 0.5) is shown in background-subtracted constant-Q scans in Fig. To verify the dramatically different fate of the SRMs under B = 12 T, temperature dependence of the two modes are compared at B = 0 T and B = 12 T in Figs. , where it is possible to cover the full energy range of the SRM at E r2 . Since the SRM at E r2 is L-independent Having shown that the SRM at E r2 is only modestly suppressed at B = 12 T, similar to the behavior of SRMs under applied magnetic field in other unconventional superconductors To see how the applied magnetic field affects the SRM at different energies, we show detailed scans from Fig. Our results show that the low-energy SRM is strongly suppressed by a magnetic field well below B c2 , while the high-energy mode is only weakly suppressed. The complete suppression of the low-energy SRM when static magnetic order is gradually enhanced with field [Fig. On the other hand, the low-energy SRM is spinanisotropic while the high-energy one is spin-isotropic Finally, we note that suppression of the lowenergy SRM by a field well below B c2 in underdoped NaFe 1-x Co x As is reminiscent of amplitude Higgs mode's behavior under magnetic field in superconducting 2H-NbSe 2 Background for constant-Q scans should be measured at positions with the same |Q| but no magnetic signal. From constant-energy scans shown in Fig. Raw data of constant-energy scans were fit with a Gaussian or a lattice Lorentzian peak plus a linear background, the linear background was constrained to be identical for different temperatures and applied fields. The resulting linear background was subtracted from the raw data, with the results shown in Fig. 