The adsorption of hydrogen on Au nanoparticles (NPs) of size of the order of 10 nm has been investigated by use of localised surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) in the NPs. The samples, formed by Au NPs obtained by oblique angle deposition on glass substrates, display a strong optical dichroism due to two different plasmon resonances dependent on the polarisation of light. This ensured the use of Transmittance Anisotropy Spectroscopy, a sensitive derivative optical technique, which permitted one to measure shifts of the LSPR as small as 0.02 nm upon H adsorption, which is not accessible by conventional plasmonic methods. The measured signal is proportional to the area of the NPs, which shows that H atoms diffuse on their facets. A negative charge transfer from Au to H is clearly demonstrated. Gold can be considered as the "noblest of all metals" and chemisorption of molecules, including dihydrogen, on its surface is not favoured . Nevertheless, the mechanism of H 2 dissociation and the fate of the H atoms are still not completely understood, which are of crucial importance for better understanding the Au-based catalytic hydrogenation reactions. For example, discrepancies exist regarding which atoms of the NPs are specifically the most reactive, whether there is a charge transfer between gold and H, whether the dissociation is spontaneous Indeed, Au NPs display peculiar physical properties related to their small size The TAS technique is derived from the Reflectance Anisotropy Spectroscopy (RAS), which measures the reflectance anisotropy of surfaces The Au samples were prepared by oblique angle deposition on glass substrates under vacuum of 3.10 -6 mbar. Microscope slides were used as substrates. They were cleaned using ethanol and loaded into the evaporating chamber. The evaporation was carried out from a crucible heated by direct current. The sample was positioned at a 10° grazing angle to the crucible and the evaporation rate was 0.02 nm/s. The mass thickness was controlled using a calibrated quartz balance and corrected for taking into account the angle of evaporation. The characterisations of the samples were carried out by optical measurements, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Several samples were elaborated with different mass thicknesses ranging from 0.5 to 3 nm. The SEM apparatus used was a Zeiss Supra 40. The settings were EHT = 3 and 6 kV at a working distance of 4 to 5 mm with an aperture of 7m. The SEM needed to be adusted with a low potential, as the substrate being nonconductive, the samples were prone to charging. The AFM was a Digital Instruments dimension 3100 atomic force microscope, used in tapping mode. The optical transmissions were measured for each sample on a home-made bench uv-vis spectrometer. Both parallel and perpendicular polarisations in relation to the sample's direction of evaporation were recorded. The spectrometer used was a Maya 2000 Pro from Ocean Optics Cie., lit with deuterium and quartz-halogen lamps. The anisotropic measurements were performed on a home-made RAS system, designed following the schematic described by Aspnes The samples were loaded in a gas cell equipped with a silica window enabling the TAS measurements during gas cycles. The samples were exposed at atmospheric pressure to flows of ultra-pure Ar and H 2 at 1000 sccm. These large flows were used to rapidly purge the lines and the gas cell. Prior to the experiments, the whole system was purged with cycles of H 2 and Ar for a full day in order to eliminate any gas contaminants, mainly water and oxygen. Experiments were performed for several days, during which only Ar and H 2 were introduced in the cell. Long cycles of H 2 and Ar were done till a stable behaviour was reached, after which cycles of 100 s of Ar and H 2 were undertaken. Accurate H 2 / Ar gas mixtures were prepared by using an additional bottle in order to expose the sample to different partial pressures of H 2 at atmospheric pressures. The cell was equipped with a heating element and a thermocouple. Several samples with increasing amounts of Au were investigated, which qualitatively display the same behaviour, hence detailed results are only given for one sample, which was prepared with an Au mass thickness of 1.4 nm. Results obtained for the other samples are presented in Fig. The corresponding square transmittance anisotropy spectrum, defined by is measured directly by the TAS apparatus and is drawn in Fig. , and the ultimate sensitivity reached is better than 5.10 -5 , which is equivalent to a wavelength shift ∆λ smaller than 0.05 nm, comparable to the resolution and reproducibility reached by the high end monochromators. This part focuses on the effect that charge transfers between adsorbates and Au NPs have on the LSPR position. The dielectric function of Au is well described with a Drude component accounting for the s-p conduction electrons and an interband component which is mainly due to the electronic transitions involving the electrons of the d bands: where the damping term, Ñτ -1 , and the plasma frequency, ÑΩ p , can be determined from the dielectric function's experimental values obtained at room temperature where e and m are the charge and the mass of the electron, respectively, and N is the conduction electron density. The value of ÑΩ p corresponds to a density N equal to 5.78.10 28 m -3 , hence the effective number of conduction electrons is equal to 0.98 per Au atom. Considering the charge transfer from Au to an adsorbate as a variation ∆N of the conduction electron density in Au, the modified plasma frequency is obtained by replacing N by N + ∆N in Eq. ( where 8 9 is the dielectric function of the embedding medium and L  is the depolarisation factor in direction  Simple algebra shows that the relative shifts in ω ,-./ and in the LSPR wavelength λ ,-./ are given by: As a consequence, an electron transfer from Au to the adsorbate (ΔN < 0) should yield a shift of the plasma frequency and therefore a shift of the LSPR towards lower energies i.e. longer wavelengths, known as a redshift (Δλ ,-./ E 0). Such shift is expected to be small. Typically, for a sphere of diameter 12 nm, the ratio between the numbers of surface and volume atoms is 11%. Hence, for such a particle with a H atom coverage as large as one half and a charge transfer as large as 0.5 electron per H atom, the LSPR redshift would be 8 nm. The exposure to H 2 is due to a redshift of the LSPR. Moreover, the signal is reversible as it can be seen in the periodicity of the measurement. The average TA value has been shifted to a value close to 0, with respect to Fig. In this section, the change in intensity of TA measured at 613 nm, is monitored as a function of the sample's exposure to pure Ar and H 2 after accurate purging of the cell and stabilisation of the signal. The gas flow was shifted between Ar and H 2 every 100 seconds. The result is shown in Fig. The important point here is that the initial exposure to H 2 gives a positive increase of the TA signal of 4.0 H 0.2. 10 J , which corresponds to a redshift of the LSPR, equal to ∆K 0.50 H 0.02 MN. The observation of this redshift upon exposing the Au NPs to H 2 indicates clearly that, at room temperature, H 2 actually adsorbs on Au NPs of lateral sizes ranging from 5 to 20 nm, even supported on a non-reducible substrate as glass. This adsorption is supposedly followed by dissociative chemisorption, as proposed by all theoretical investigations, and as shown from the previous H/D experiments which gives a ratio of ^ ^ ZZ 0.03 with the above binding energies, and of 0.015 with adsorption energies calculated in Ref In the present case, one can consider that the adsorption occurs on the edges of the NPs, where the molecules dissociate, with an H coverage θ _`a_ . Then the H atoms either desorb back to the gas phase or can migrate on the facets. On the (100) facets, they can either stay a finite time and diffuse with coverage V UU , recombine and desorb back to the gas phase, or migrate back to the edges. The diffusion rate on the (100) facets being very fast, the coverage V UU can be taken as homogeneous. Applying the stationary state approximation for the edges and for the facets, the corresponding kinetic equations at equilibrium can be written: `b ZZ `f 0 g 9 a V UU , V _`a_ g i 9 a V UU , V _`a_ g ` V UU g h V _`a_ is the adsorption rate at the edges, g i ` V _`a_ and g ` V UU are the desorption rates from the edges and the (100) facets, g 9 a V UU , V _`a_ and g i 9 a V UU , V _`a_ are the migration rates from the edges to the facets and from the facets to the edges, respectively. The desorption and adsorption rates, for the case of noninteracting adsorbed atoms and without considering precursor state, for simplicity, have the following secondorder Langmuirian expressions, depending on the coverages: 56,57 g ` V UU l ` m V UU (10) where l h m , l `′ m and l ` m are the rate coefficients of dissociative adsorption on the edges and associative desorption from the edges and facets, respectively, which are dependent on the temperature T. Φ is the flow of impinging molecules from the gas phase, given by o 2pNl q m ⁄ ⁄ , where p is the pressure. Calculating the difference between Eqs. 6 and 7 leads to suppress the unknown migration rates, and yields the simple expression: In order to determine the ratio between V UU and V _`a_ , the adsorption energies on the edge and on the facet should be calculated within the same theoretical model. To our knowledge, such comparison has not been performed. Consequently, the ratio was taken in the following as a constant A, which is likely close to or larger than 1. After renormalising the flux by using: r l h m l′ ` m Φ ⁄ , the coverage V UU can be written: This expression, with only one parameters ( ) allows one to reproduce the experimental points of Fig. , each one modifying the right scale of Fig. The effect of temperature on the intensity of the LSPR shift is also informative and has been investigated. The charge transfer ~• induced by H adsorption can now be calculated with Eq.4. This gives, for the results presented in Fig. . In order to relate this value to the charge transfer, the number of adsorbed H atoms in permanent regime has to be estimated. Considering that only the (100) facets are covered by H, the NP shape is needed. Au NPs prepared by vacuum deposition at RT have been observed during epitaxial growth on MgO surface by transmission electron microscopy, and display regular (111) and (100) facets with few defects Consequently, our results showing a decrease of the electron population in the Au NP upon H adsorption, appear in line with these three latter theoretical results. By investigating the shift of the LSPR Au NPs of size around 10 nm upon exposure to di-hydrogen, we confirmed the actual H 2 chemisorption on Au. The non-reactive glass substrate used here indicates that this chemisorption occurs most likely directly on the NPs. The most important information is the observation of an electron transfer from Au to H, which decreases the density of charge in the Au NPs and, consequently, yields a redshift of the LSPR of a fraction of nm. Such small redshift could be determined accurately by use of a differential optical technique, applied to anisotropic samples elaborated in an easy way. Moreover, the proportionality of the intensity of the redshift with the area of NPs with different sizes show that the dissociated H atoms migrate on the facets of the NPs, most likely the (100) facets, where they eventually recombine and desorb back to the gas phase. At atmospheric pressure of H 2 , the average negative charge transfer from every surface Au atoms to H is about -0.06 e, and the charge back-bonded localised on every Au-H bonding is estimated to be around -0.2 e. This deeper understanding of the H 2 chemisorption mechanism onto Au NPs is hoped to help improving the elaboration and use of catalytic Au NPs for hydrogenation reactions. 