One of the most profound aspects of the standard model of particle physics, the mechanism of confinement binding quarks into hadrons, is not sufficiently understood. The only known semiclassical mechanism of confinement, mediated by chromo-electric strings in a condensate of magnetic monopoles still lacks experimental evidence. Here we show that the infinite resistance superinsulating state, which emerges on the insulating side of the superconductor-insulator transition in superconducting films offers a realization of confinement that allows for a direct experimental access. We find that superinsulators realize a single-color version of quantum chromodynamics and establish the mapping of quarks onto Cooper pairs. We reveal that the mechanism of superinsulation is the linear binding of Cooper pairs into neutral "mesons" by electric strings. Our findings offer a powerful laboratory for exploring and testing the fundamental implications of confinement, asymptotic freedom, and related quantum chromodynamics phenomena via the desktop experiments on superconductors. The standard model of particle physics is extraordinarily successful at explaining many facets of the physical realm. Yet, one of its profound aspects, the mechanism of confinement binding quarks into hadrons, is not sufficiently understood. The only known semiclassical mechanism of confinement is mediated by chromo-electric strings in a condensate of magnetic monopoles Originally, the idea of superinsulation Since linear confinement by strings is not restricted to 2D, we establish that superinsulation is a distinct genuine state of matter that appears in both 2D or 3D realizations and calculate the deconfinement temperature that marks the phase transition of superinsulators into conventional insulators and which, in 2D, coincides with the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition temperature. Finally we also unearth a Cooper pair analogue of the asymptotic freedom effect We start by showing how dual superconducting and superinsulating states can be understood from the uncertainty principle, ∆N∆φ 1 between the number of charges, N = 2|Ψ| 2 , and the phase φ of the Cooper pairs quantum field Ψ = N exp(iφ), bound by the commutation relation [N, φ] = i We turn now to the construction of the action of the Cooper pair-vortex system near the SIT, where both degrees of freedom are to be included on an equal footing. The key contribution is the infinite-range (i.e. non-decaying with distance) Aharonov-Bohm-Casher (ABC) Cooper pair-vortex topological interaction, embodying the quantum phase acquired either by a charge encircling a vortex or by a vortex encircling a charge. To ensure a local formulation of the action, we must introduce two emergent gauge fields, a μ and b μ mediating these ABC interactions. Then the topological part of the action assumes the form where μαν is the completely antisymmetric tensor, and are the world-lines of elementary charges and vortices labeled by the index i, parametrized by the coordinates x (i) q and x (i) m , respectively, n is the dimensionless charge, and Greek subscripts run over the Euclidean three dimensional space encompassing the 2D space coordinates and the Wick rotated time coordinate. Equation (1) defines the mixed Chern-Simons (CS) action ) μαν ∂ α a ν are the continuous charge and vortex number current fluctuations, while Q μ and M μ stand for integer point charges and vortices. We use natural units c = 1, = 1 but restore physical units when necessary. Also, from now on we set the charge unit n = 2 for Cooper pairs. The next-order terms in the effective action of the SIT contain two field derivatives. Gauge invariance requires that they be constructed in terms of the "electric" and "magnetic" fields corresponding to the two gauge fields. Introducing the dual field strengths f μ = μαν ∂ α b ν and g μ = μαν ∂ α a ν one identifies the magnetic fields as f 0 and g 0 and the electric fields as f i and g i , where "0" denotes the Wick rotated time and Latin indices denote purely spatial components. We thus arrive at the full action Here μ P is the magnetic permeability and ε P is the electric permittivity We are now equipped to discuss the nature of the superinsulating state. To that end, we couple the charge current j μ to the physical electromagnetic gauge field A μ by adding to the action the minimal coupling term 2eA μ j μ . Setting Q μ = 0, since charges are dilute, integrating out the gauge fields a μ and b μ , and summing over the condensed vortices M μ , we arrive at the effective action S eff (A μ ) describing the electromagnetic response of an ensemble of charges in a superinsulator. On a discretized lattice with spacing , see Methods, Lattice Chern-Simons action, the effective action takes a form, See Supplementary note 2, Effective action for the superinsulator, in which one immediately recognizes a non-relativistic version of the Polyakov action for the compact QED model Here the summation runs over the lattice grid {x}, F μ = k μν A ν is the dual electromagnetic field strength, k μν is the lattice Chern-Simons operator μαν ∂ α , see Methods, Lattice Chern-Simons operator, and γ 2 = Cηg/v c with C being a numerical constant. The quantity η = (1/α)‫(ל‬κ, v c ) characterizes the strength of quantum fluctuations, see Supplementary note 3, Quantum phase structure. Here κ = λ ⊥ /ξ is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter of the film, ξ is the superconducting coherence length, taking on the role of the ultraviolet cutoff , and, finally, α = e 2 /( c) ≈ 1/137 is the fine structure constant. The physics of a superinsulator is governed by the spontaneous proliferation of instantons Unlike vortices, however, long strings are unstable: it is energetically favorable to break a string into a sequence of segments via the creation of charge-anticharge pairs, see Fig. where K is a numerical constant. Near the SIT, where g ≈ 1/η and v c = 1/ √ μ P ε P c due to the divergence of the electric permittivity ε P Here e i = ∂ 0 a i -∂ i a 0 and b i = i jk ∂ j a k are the usual electric and magnetic fields associated with the gauge field a μ , while f μ = (1/2) μναβ ∂ ν b αβ is the dual field strength associated wiht the antisymmetric gauge field b μν . In addition to the gauge symmetry under transformations a μ → a μ + λ, this action is invariant under gauge symmetries of the second rank, b μν → b μν + ∂ μ χ ν -∂ ν χ μ , in which the gauge function itself is a vector. In 3D, vortices are one-dimensional extended objects and their world-surfaces are described by the two-index antisymmetric tensor M μν . Cooper pairs, Q μ , and the related fluctuation number current j μ = ( √ 2/2π) f μ retain their point charge character. In 3D, e q is a dimensionless parameter, e q = O(e), while e v has the dimension of mass, e v = O(1/λ), with λ being the bulk London length of the material. The topological mass arising from the BF coupling The derivation of the effective action for a superinsulator in 3D follows exactly the same steps as in 2D, Supplementary note 2, Effective action for the superinsulator, with the result where Fμν = k μνα A α is the 3D dual field strength (k μνα being the 3D lattice BF term, see Methods, Lattice BF term). This is again a relativistic version of Polyakov's compact QED model, this time in 3D where K 0 is the McDonald function and z is the monopole fugacity. Equations ( ) μναβ ∂ α a β to the electromagentic field strength F μν . This leads to an axion term Because the factor γ is now in the denominator, the fermionic Cooper pair mesons are large also in the deep superinsulating region, where ηg 1 and v = O(1). Now we turn to the finite temperature behavior and the deconfinement transition at which string confinement of Cooper pairs ceases to exist and the superinsulator transforms to a 'conventional' insulator. This happens at the critical temperature T dc where the linear tension of the string turns to zero. While it is known that, in 2D, T dc ≡ T BKT To explore the far reaching experimental implications of the confining string theory of superinsulation note first that the deconfinement criticality depends on the space dimension The deconfinement transition can be realized as a quantum dynamical phase transition driven by an applied electric field E that would tear the electric strings. The threshold voltage, V t ∝ σL, corresponding to the pair-breaking critical current in superconductors, breaks down the neutral meson chains, and a strip of 'normal' insulator forms along the former string path, carrying the current. This pretty much resembles the conventional dielectric breakdown where the electric field burns a conducting channel in otherwise insulating environment and triggers avalanche-like current jumps. The dielectric breakdown is usually accompanied by current noise. Such a noise has indeed been recently observed in InO films In QCD, the flip side of the string confinement mechanism is asymptotic freedom, i.e. the unconstrained dynamics of quarks at spatial scales smaller than the string size Using the TiN films parameters We conclude by pointing out a close connection of the string confinement mechanism to concepts of many-bodylocalization (MBL) The formulation of a gauge-invariant lattice Chern-Simons term requires particular care. Following Summation by parts on the lattice interchanges both the two derivatives (with a minus sign) and the two shift operators. Gauge transformations are defined by using the forward lattice derivative. In terms of these operators one can then define two lattice Chern-Simons terms where no summation is implied over equal indices. Summation by parts on the lattice interchanges also these two operators (without any minus sign). Gauge invariance is then guaranteed by the relations Note that the product of the two Chern-Simons terms gives the lattice Maxwell operator where ∇ 2 = dμ d μ is the 3D Laplace operator. The discrete version of the mixed Chern-Simons gauge theory can thus be formulated as where the discrete dual field strengths are given by As we show below, this action describes two massive modes with dispersion relation and mass given where v c = 1/ √ μ P ε P is the light velocity in the medium. This is the non-relativistic version of the celebrated Chern-Simons mass The formulation of a discrete 3D lattice BF model where are the forward and backward lattice derivative and shift operators, respectively. Summation by parts on the lattice interchanges both the two derivatives (with a minus sign) and the two shift operators; gauge transformations are defined using the forward lattice derivative. Also the two lattice BF operators are interchanged (no minus sign) upon summation. Moreover they are gauge invariant, in the sense that they obey the following equations: Finally, they satisfy also the equations where ∇ 2 = dμ d μ is the lattice Laplacian. The Euclidean lattice BF model in 3D is then given by the action where the dual field strengths are now defined by and e i = d 0 a id i a 0 and b i = f0i are the usual electric and magnetic fields associated with the gauge field a μ . The dispersion relation and mass remain identical to the 2D formulas. In this case they are the non-relativistic generalizations of the BF mass In the field theory, the finite temperature T is introduced by formulating the action on a Euclidean time of finite length β = 1/T , with periodic boundary conditions (we have reabsorbed the Boltzmann constant into the temperature). If the original field theory model is defined on a Euclidean lattice of spacing , then β is quantized in integer multiples of /v c . This representation of the finite-temperature field theory holds as long as v c β , or, equivalently, if the temperature is much lower than the UV cutoff, T v c / , as expected. Because of the lattice structure, energies are defined only within a Brillouin zone of length 2v c π/ , due to the periodic boundary condition in the Euclidean time direction, however the energy k 0 must be also quantized in the integer multiples of 2π/β. This gives 2πvc 0 where β = b /v c and the factor within the sum represents the density of states. The integers n in the summation are known as Matsubara frequencies. Typically, however momenta integral are defined over the fundamental Brillouin zone [-πv c / , πv c / ], rather then [0, 2πv c / ]. The corresponding finite temperature expression can be readily obtained from where k = 2nb and thus correspondingly, the density of states must be divided by a factor 2. The finite temperature T > 0 affects primarily the parameter η (see Supplementary note 3, Quantum phase structure) via the coefficient G(m v c ). At the zero temperature this is given by At finite temperatures it has to be modified according to where T = v c /b . As we have verified over 3 orders of magnitude (m v c = 0.001 to m v c = 1) the ratio S (T ) = G(m v c , T )/G(m v c ) does not depend on the parameter m v c but is rather a function of the temperature alone. As a consequence, η and the semiaxes of the ellipse determining the phase structure, see Supplementary note 3, Supplementary Equations ( assuming that the quantity on the left-hand side is larger than one (i.e. there is a superinsulator at T = 0). Since the magnetic semiaxis is always longer and thus no electric quantum numbers may appear within the ellipse interior when the magnetic ones have fallen outside, the superinsulator experiences a direct deconfinement transition into a topological insulator at T = T c . Correspondingly, superconductors undergo a phase transition to topological insulators at Tc defined by SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES In this note we demonstrate that the general topological action of the Cooper pairs-vortex system in two dimensions, given by Eq. (3) of the main text, naturally arises for the lateral Josephson junction array (JJA). Our starting point is the coupled Coulomb gas description of where E J is the Josephson coupling, E C = 2e 2 /C (with C the junction capacitance) is the charging energy of the array and we have used and As usual in statistical field theory, this action plays the same role as the Hamiltonian of a 3D statistical mechanics model, with the relevant coupling constant taking the role of temperature. The first two terms in the action represent the two Coulomb gases for charges with density ρ Q and vortices with density ρ V , the third is a kinetic term for the charges and the final term represents the Aharonov-Bohm topological interaction between charges and vortices. The only term which breaks perfect duality between charges and vortices in this expression is the kinetic term for charges, which encodes the Josephson currents. The self-dual approximation, originally introduced in Note that this is a harmless modification, since such a kinetic term for vortices is anyhow radiatively induced by integration over the charge dynamics, as is derived, e.g. in Eq. ( In order to proceed with the gauge theory derivation we consider the action formulated in the Minkowski space, with the only change of missing "i" in the interaction term between the charges and vortices, Now we combine the two independent variables encoded in the charge density and its time derivative in a single dual gauge field strength by introducing for charges and vortices two fictitious gauge fields a μ and b μ , In this representation we take the spatial gauge fields a i and b j as transverse, a i = i j ∂ j η and b i = i j ∂ j χ, since a longitudinal part can be reabsorbed by a redefinition of a 0 and b 0 . Rewriting the action as with and realizing that one obtains the two Coulomb interactions for charges and vortices by eliminating the non-dynamical Lagrange multipliers a 0 and b 0 after having solved the Gauss law constraints We can now pack also the charges into a complete gauge theory formulation by rewriting where f 0 and g 0 are the time components of three-dimensional dual field strengths In the gauge theory formulation these represent the conserved charge and vortex currents The Bianchi identities for ∂ μ f μ and ∂ μ g μ then yield Substituting these expressions in and the identity one can transform the last topological term in (32) into d 3 x (-1/π)b i i j ȧ j which can be recombined with the two Lagrange multipliers into the Chern-Simons term where we have rotated back to the original Euclidean space. To explore the implications of vortex condensation we shall focus on the 3D case and consider the SIT effective action in its lattice formulation. The corresponding superinsulator partition fuction is given by where S a μ , b μν represents the pure gauge part of the action and we have set Q μ = 0 since charges are dilute in this phase. The integers M μν are the lattice representation of the worldsurfaces spanned by the one-dimensional vortices. For closed vortices, we can express these integers as in the form M μν = kμνα n α with n α ∈ Z, Finally, we can turn the sum over n μ into an integral by the usual Poisson formula where the new integer link variables {k μ } must satisfy dμ k μ = 0 in order to guarantee gauge invariance under transformations n μ → n μ + d μ t. In principle, this gauge invariance should be gauge fixed in (46) by introducing, e.g. a quadratic term in n μ . Removing the gauge fixing in the final result gives back the same result obtained by naive integration, (48) The important consequence of this result is that gauge fields 2 b μν become quantized in units of (2π √ 2) so that the original gauge symmetry with gauge group R is broken down to Z, with allowed gauge functions λ μ = (2π √ 2)i μ , with i μ ∈ Z. This means that magnetic monopoles dμ M μν are allowed at the boundaries of magnetic surfaces, since exp(-S ) is invariant under the restricted gauge transformations. The magnetic world-surfaces are actually open, reflecting the fact that the vortex number is not conserved in a condensate. In 3D, the magnetic monopoles are particles, in 2D, they are tunneling events at the end of vortex world-lines, i.e. instantons 2π kμνρ b νρ and by computing the effective action S SI eff (A μ ). Integrating out the gauge fields and retaining only the dominant self-interactions we obtain exp where and Fμν = kμνα A α is the dual electromagentic field strength, g and η are the two parameters governing the phase structure and μ A = O(1) is a numerical parameter related to the entropy of surfaces. Since, as shown above, the condensing magnetic excitations M μν over which we have to sum in the partition function are unconstrained integers, allowing for magnetic monopoles, this is nothing else than a Villain formulation of the non-relativistic version of the famed Polyakov compact QED model In 2D, calculations follow exactly the same lines and give the analogous result with the entropy of surfaces μ A substituted by the entropy of lines μ ≈ ln 5. In this Supplementary Note we derive the structure of the phases in the vicinity of the SIT so that one could posit the superinsulating state with respect to superconducting and Bose metal phases in the phase diagram and introduce the graphic ellipsoid technique for determining the phase that realizes at the given values of the parameters. This technique is used to calculate the temperature of the deconfinement transition in the main text. We start with integrating out the gauge fields in Eq. ( where ∇ 2 2 denotes the 2D Laplacian and Q μ and M μ are the integer link variables describing the charge and vortex worldlines, respectively. In order to proceed we follow the standard arguments of where G(m T v c ) is the diagonal element of the lattice kernel G(m T v c , x -y) representing the inverse of the operator . The kernel G(m T v c , x) is defined by the equation The string entropy, however is also proportional to their length, being given by μN with μ ≈ ln 5 since at each step the non-backtracking strings can choose among 5 possible directions on how to continue. One can thus assign the free energy to a string of length L = N carrying electric and magnetic quantum numbers Q and M, respectively. Here we have introduced the dimensionless parameter which, together with the ratio g = e v /e q fully determines the quantum phase structure, as we now show. The ground state of the quantum model is found by minimizing its free energy as a function of N. When the energy term in (57) dominates, the free energy is positive and consequently minimized by short closed loop configurations. When, instead, the entropy dominates, the free energy is negative and minimized by large strings and long closed loops. The condition for condensation of long strings with integer quantum numbers Q and M is thus given by η e q e v Q 2 + η e v e q M 2 < 1 . If two or more condensations are allowed, one has to choose the one with the lowest free energy. This condition describes the interior of an ellipse with the semiaxes on a square lattice of integer electric and magnetic charges. The phase diagram is consequently found by simply recording which integer charges lie within the ellipse when the semiaxes are varied, This approach immediately shows that the possible intermediate phase opening up for η > 1, typically called a Bose (or quantum) metal where we have reinstated and c, α = e 2 /( c) ≈ 1/137 is the fine structure constant and k = λ ⊥ /ξ is the Landau parameter of the superconducting film.