Beta gallium oxide (β-Ga 2 O 3 ) is an emerging ultrawide band gap (4.5 eV4.9 eV) semiconductor with attractive properties for future power electronics, optoelectronics, and sensors for detecting gases and ultraviolet radiation. β-Ga 2 O 3 thin films made by various methods are being actively studied toward such devices. Here, we report on the experimental demonstration of single-crystal β-Ga 2 O 3 nanomechanical resonators using β-Ga 2 O 3 nanoflakes grown via low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). By investigating β-Ga 2 O 3 circular drumhead structures, we demonstrate multimode nanoresonators up to the 6 th mode in high and very high frequency (HF / VHF) bands, and also realize spatial mapping and visualization of the multimode motion. These measurements reveal a Young's modulus of E Y = 261 GPa and anisotropic biaxial built-in tension of 37.5 MPa and 107.5 MPa. We find that thermal annealing can considerably improve the resonance characteristics, including ~40% upshift in frequency and ~90% enhancement in quality (Q) factor. This study lays a foundation for future exploration and development of mechanically coupled and tunable β-Ga 2 O 3 electronic, optoelectronic, and physical sensing devices. -2-Wide band gap (WBG) semiconductors, such as gallium nitride (GaN) and silicon carbide (SiC) have been widely employed in power electronics, high-temperature and harsh-environment electronics and transducers, as well as ultraviolet (UV) photonics, As an emerging ultra-wide band gap (UWBG) semiconductor, β-Ga2O3 has recently attracted increasing interest due to its UWBG (Eg,β-Ga 2O3  4.54.9 eV) that is significantly wider than those of GaN and SiC. We carefully investigate the multimode resonances of these devices, by conducting thermal annealing at 250 °C for 1.5 hours and calibrating resonance characteristics both before and after annealing. Fundamental mode resonance spectra of a typical device with diameter d~3.2 μm (Figure To quantitatively understand the measured resonances, we first perform analysis on multimode resonances and frequency scaling for these circular -Ga2O3 diaphragms. In any given circular drumhead device, both flexural rigidity (dominated by thickness and elastic modulus) and built-in tension (stress) can be important, thus we have, 42 where m denotes the mode number, 2 is the m th mode angular resonance frequency, (kma) with t being the thickness of the device, ν is the Poisson's ratio, ρ is the volume mass density of -Ga2O3, and γ is the surface pre-tension evenly distributed in the plane. Equation ( with   By applying the measured Young's modulus to the resonator model, we complete the frequency scaling of β-Ga2O3 nanomechanical resonators from the 'membrane' regime to the 'disk' regime (Figure For the resonators with ~5.2 μm diameter, the thicker 2 devices lie in the 'disk' regime while the other 2 resonators lie in the transition regime. To gain comprehensive understanding of the mechanical properties and resonance performance of the β-Ga2O3 diaphragms, we further investigate the multimode resonances and spatial mapping of their mode shapes. Figure We measure up to the 6 th undriven thermomechanical resonance mode, including resonance spectra and mapping of mode shapes, both before and after annealing. By vividly discerning and visualizing the multimode shapes, we can easily compare and match the resonance modes before -9- -11- In another thicker, transition regime device (t  42 nm, d  5.2 μm) with 3 measured resonance modes, multimode resonances with spatial mapping exhibit similar mode splitting features that reveal in-plane anisotropy in elastic behavior (Figure These newly resolved non-uniform, anisotropic components of built-in tension in these devices are very reasonable and intuitively understandable, as they can be likely introduced during the nanoflake dry-transfer process where the axis -along which the polymeric tape is pressed down to make contact to substrate and is then lifted up -is likely to build a higher stress component than along its perpendicular direction. In Not only does this show nanomechanical resonances with multimode spatial mapping are a powerful probe for revealing device properties that are otherwise invisible or unmeasurable, but also it helps pave the way for future nanomechanical engineering of β-Ga2O3 crystals toward electromechanical and opto-electromechanical devices that harness the crystal's unique properties, which will greatly supplement the rapidly emerging β-Ga2O3 electronic devices. -12- The construction of β-Ga2O3 drumhead resonators starts with the synthesis of low-dimensional β-Ga2O3 nanoflakes by using a low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method. Large arrays of microtrenches are lithographically defined and fabricated on a 290 nm-SiO2-on-Si substrate. The SiO2 layer is patterned with circular microtrenches using photolithography, and then etched by reactive ion etching (RIE). The depth of resulting SiO2 microtrenches is 290 nm in this experiment, and the designed nominal values for the microtrench diameters are 3 μm and 5 μm (corresponding to actual diameters of ~3.2 μm and ~5.2 μm measured after the fabrication process). Using the synthesized β-Ga2O3 nanoflakes, we fabricate suspended β-Ga2O3 nanostructures by employing an all-dry transfer technique (Figure AFM measurements are conducted with an Agilent 5500 AFM using tapping mode. Raman measurements are performed using a customized micro-Raman system that is integrated into the scanning laser interferometric resonance measurement system (Figure Resonances of the circular β-Ga2O3 drumhead resonators are characterized using scanning laser interferometry detection techniques (Figure All the interferometry measurements in this work are done at room temperature. We calculate the resonator thermomechanical noise in the displacement domain using 4 1 When the device is on resonance (=m), the expression simplifies to where m are angular resonance frequency, Boltzmann's constant, temperature, quality factor, and effective mass, respectively, and m denotes the m th mode of the -14-resonator. Effective mass can be calculated using where zm(x,y) is the mode shape of the m th mode, zm,max is the maximum displacement, and M is the mass of the resonator. We assume that laser heating is minimal due to the UWBG nature of β-Ga2O3 and therefore the temperature of the sample remains at room temperature (T  300 K). The effective mass of the resonator in the 'disk' regime is Meff = 0.1828M. The effective mass of the transition regime devices are calculated by incorporating FEM simulated mode shapes into Equation (5). Using this analysis, the displacement spectral density of the resonator can be calculated. Hence, we determine the responsivity of the laser interferometry system The construction of β-Ga2O3 drumhead resonators starts with the synthesis of single-crystal β-Ga2O3 nanoflakes by using a low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method. The as-grown nanoflakes have widths of ~230 μm and thicknesses of ~20140 nm. Using the synthesized β-Ga2O3 nanoflakes, we fabricate suspended β-Ga2O3 nanostructures by employing an all-dry transfer technique (Figure To characterize the crystalline properties of the -Ga2O3 nanoflakes after transfer, we examine Raman scattering signatures of suspended β-Ga2O3 flakes using a 532nm laser. We find Raman modes at 143 cm -1 , 168 cm -1 , 199 cm -1 , 346 cm -1 , 416 cm -1 , 476 cm -1 , 653 cm -1 , and 768 cm -1 (Figure show the optical images of the device with the measurement spots of the Raman spectroscopy. Peak Position (cm -1 ) FWHM (cm -1 ) Peak Position (cm -1 ) FWHM (cm -1 ) #1 A g A g A g A g A g A g A g A g We analyze the measured Brownian motion of devices to calibrate the responsivity of the laser interferometry system from mechanical displacement to electrical signal. We calculate the thermomechanical noise in displacement domain using When the device is on resonance (=m), the expression is simplified to where ωm, kB, T, Qm, Mm,eff are angular resonance frequency, Boltzmann's constant, temperature, quality factor, and effective mass, respectively, and m denotes the m th mode of the resonator. To derive the effective mass for a circular diaphragm resonator with clamped edge, we start from calculating the kinetic energy of the system: where um is the velocity distribution of the m th mode of the resonator, which can be given by where zm(x,y) is the mode shape of the m th mode, zm,max is the maximum displacement of the m th mode, and z is the velocity of the device in a lumped-parameter fashion. By substituting Equation (S4) into Equation (S3), we have   4 1 where M is the device mass, a is the radius, and Mm,eff is the effective mass of the m th mode of the resonator. From Equation (S5), effective mass can be calculated by   where J0 is the 0 th -order Bessel function J, I0 is the 0 th -order extended Bessel function I, and (kma) 2 is the eigenvalue (e.g., (k0a) 2 = 10.215 for the fundamental mode of the resonator in the 'disk' limit). By plugging Equation (S7) into Equation (S6), the fundamental mode effective mass of a resonator in the 'disk' regime is M0,eff = 0.1828M. For the devices falling in the transition regime, we calculate the effective masses by incorporating the mode shapes, computed by using finite element method (FEM, in COMSOL Multiphysics) simulations, into Equation (S6). We assume laser heating is minimal because the photon energy of 633nm laser (1.96eV) is much lower than the bandgap of β-Ga2O3 (4.5-4.9eV) and, therefore, device temperature remains at room temperature (T300K). Using aforementioned analysis from Equation (S1) to (S7), displacement domain thermomechanical noise 1/2 ,th x S of the resonator can be calculated. Further, we determine the responsivity We analyze the resonance frequency scaling of the -Ga2O3 circular drumhead resonators. The resonance frequency of a circular drumhead resonator is where a is the radius of circular resonator, D is the flexural rigidity , ρ is the volume mass density of -Ga2O3, and γ is the surface pre-tension evenly distributed in the plane. We analyze the dependency of resonance frequencies in different modes on device thickness for β-Ga2O3 circular drumhead resonators by plotting ω-t plot using Equation (S8) (Figure 