We have performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy of AlB2 which is isostructural to high-temperature superconductor MgB2. Using soft-x-ray photons, we accurately determined the three-dimensional bulk band structure and found a highly anisotropic Dirac-cone band at the K point in the bulk hexagonal Brillouin zone. This band disperses downward on approaching the H point while keeping its degeneracy at the Dirac point, producing a characteristic Dirac nodal line along the KH line. We also found that the band structure of AlB2 is regarded as a heavily electrondoped version of MgB2 and is therefore well suited for fully visualizing the predicted Dirac nodal line. The present results suggest that (Al,Mg)B2 system is a promising platform for studying the interplay among Dirac nodal line, carrier doping, and possible topological superconducting properties. Topological semimetals (TSMs) host a novel quantum state of matter distinct from well-known topological insulators with a finite bulk band gap and metallic Dirac-cone surface states. TSMs are characterized by the band crossing between bulk valence band and conduction band at discrete momentum (k) point(s) in the threedimensional (3D) bulk Brillouin zone (BZ), as realized in 3D Dirac semimetals (DSMs) (e.g. Na 3 Bi and Cd 3 As 2 ) A useful approach to realize such exotic nodal structures is to utilize the band inversion, as demonstrated by the discovery of nodal rings in PbTaSe 2 In this regard, AlB 2 is one of most suitable materials because the energy bands near the Fermi level (E F ) are composed of only s and p orbitals of light elements (Al and B). As shown in Fig. In this Rapid Communication, we report angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of AlB 2 single crystal. By utilizing bulk-sensitive soft-x-ray photons from synchrotron radiation, we experimentally established the bulk valence band structure in the 3D bulk BZ, and found a highly anisotropic Dirac-cone energy band in the k x -k y plane which disperses along the k z direction. This band keeps the degeneracy along the KH line, producing a characteristic DNL. We discuss implications of the present results by comparing with firstprinciples band-structure calculations and other topolog- ical nodal-line materials. High-quality single crystals of AlB 2 were grown by the Al-flux method. ARPES measurements were performed with a Scienta-Omicron SES2002 electron analyzer with energy-tunable synchrotron light at BL02 in Photon Factory, KEK. We used linearly polarized light (horizontal polarization) of 260-550 eV. The energy and angular resolutions were set to be 150 meV and 0.2 • , respectively. Crystals were cleaved in situ in an ultrahigh vacuum better than 1×10 -10 Torr along the (0001) crystal plane. Sample temperature was kept at T = 40 K during ARPES measurements. The Fermi level (E F ) of samples was referenced to that of a gold film evaporated onto the sample holder. First-principles band-structure calculations were carried out by QUANTUM ESPRESSO code with generalized gradient approximation We at first performed ARPES measurements along k cut perpendicular to the crystal surface [ΓA cut; see Fig. ] to elucidate the three-dimensionality of electronic structure. Figure To see the in-plane band dispersions, we plot in Fig. To discuss the spectral feature near E F in more detail, we show in Fig. We have also mapped out the ARPES intensity as a function of in-plane wave vectors at several k z slices. Figure To elucidate how the Dirac-cone band disperses along the k z direction, we show in Fig. It is inferred that the observed DNL in AlB 2 has the same origin as that recently predicted for MgB 2 Finally, we briefly comment on the relationship between the present results and recent studies on isostructural compounds TiB 2 and ZrB 2 . It has been reported by the first-principles band calculations and ARPES that these compounds have three different types of nodal structures (nodal net) originating from the Ti-3d/Zr-4d electrons In summary, we performed ARPES experiments of AlB 2 with bulk-sensitive soft-x-ray photons, and determined the 3D band structure and Fermi surface. We found a triangular-shaped Dirac-cone dispersion at the K point of bulk BZ in the k x -k y plane. The Dirac cone significantly disperses along the k z direction while keeping the band degeneracy at the K point of surface BZ, producing a characteristic DNL associated with the combination of P T symmetry and sub-lattice symmetry of honeycomb B layer. The present result paves a pathway toward investigating the exotic nodal structures in weakly spin-orbit-coupled topological materials.