The delicate balance between hydrogen bonding and van der Waals interactions determine the stability, structure and chirality of many molecular and supramolecular aggregates weakly adsorbed on solid surfaces. Yet the inherent complexity of these systems makes their experimental study at the molecular level very challenging. In this quest, small alcohols adsorbed on metal surfaces have become a useful model system to gain fundamental insight into the interplay of such molecule-surface and molecule-molecule interactions. Here, through a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy and density functional theory, we compare and contrast the adsorption and self-assembly of a range of small alcohols from methanol to butanol on Au(111). We find that that longer chained alcohols prefer to form zigzag chains held together by extended hydrogen bonded networks between adjacent molecules. When alcohols bind to a metal surface datively via one of the two lone electron pairs of the oxygen atom they become chiral. Therefore, the chain structures are formed by a hydrogen-bonded network between adjacent molecules with alternating adsorbed chirality. These chain structures accommodate longer alkyl tails through larger unit cells, while the position of the hydroxyl group within the alcohol molecule can produce denser unit cells that maximize intermolecular interactions. Interestingly, when intrinsic chirality is introduced into the molecule as in the case of 2-butanol the assembly changes completely and square packing structures with chiral pockets are observed. This is rationalized by the fact that the intrinsic chirality of the molecule directs the chirality of the adsorbed hydroxyl group meaning that heterochiral chain structures cannot form. Overall this study provides a general framework for understanding the effect of simple alcohol molecular adstructures on hydrogen bonded aggregates and paves the way for rationalizing 2D chiral supramolecular assembly. The interplay of hydrogen bonding and van der Waals (vdW) interactions is important to DNA base pairing, protein structure and function, as well as an almost endless list of materials properties. All STM experiments were performed on either an Omicron NanoTechnology low temperature (LT) STM or variable-temperature (VT) STM. The base pressure in the LT-STM chamber was 1 x 10 -11 mbar. The Au(111) single crystal sample was cleaned by cycles of Ar + sputtering (14 μA, 1 kV) and annealing (1000 K). The sample was then transferred into the pre-cooled STM stage with a base temperature of 5 K. The base pressure in the VT-STM chamber at 29 K was < 5 x 10 - 11 mbar. The Au(111) single crystal sample was cleaned by cycles of Ar + sputtering (12 μA, 1 kV) and annealing (1000 K). Pure MeOH (99.9+%, ultrapure HPLC grade) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Pure EtOH (99.8%), 1-PrOH (99.9%), 2-PrOH (99.5%), and enantiomers of (R)-and (S)-2-BuOH (99.9%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Several cycles of freeze-pump-thawing were performed to further purify each alcohol. Submonolayer and monolayer (ML) coverages of each alcohol were deposited through a high-precision leak valve onto the sample which was held at 29 K for all MeOH experiments (VT-STM) or at 5 K (LT-STM) for the EtOH, 1-and 2-PrOH, and (R)-and (S)-2-BuOH experiments. For MeOH, following a high dose resulting in multilayer surface coverage, a series of anneals ranging between 139-160 K were performed. Annealing to 139 K desorbs all but monolayer coverage of MeOH on the surface, and after annealing to 157 K hexamers are the dominate structure. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the optB88-vdW functional In order to discuss our data, a brief description of the Au(111) reconstruction is necessary. The reconstruction of a clean Au(111) surface occurs naturally in order to relieve lateral strain due to crowding on the first atomic layer. More specifically, the unit cell of the reconstructed surface consists of 23 atoms sitting on 22 bulk lattice sites, creating a long-range elastic lattice strain in the atomic surface layer. The surface adopts a 22 × √3 arrangement, often referred to as the herringbone (HB) reconstruction, which involves a 4.5% contraction along a close-packed, or [1 1 0 ] , direction forming stacking faults consisting of wider FCC and narrower HCP packed regions. 35 Meanwhile, the low symmetry [1 1 2] , or √3 direction, that lies perpendicular to the compressed [1 1 0 ] axis is completely uncompressed. The two other √3 directions are oriented 30° from the compressed close-packed direction and are partially compressed by 3.9%. High-resolution VT-STM images revealed that MeOH formed at least two types of hydrogen bonded structures (hexamers and zigzag chains), and that the proportion of each hydrogen bonded structure was dependent on MeOH surface coverage. The zigzag chain features preferred the compressed √3 surface symmetry directions, with experimental measurements in agreement with the Au-Au atom spacing in this direction for MeOH molecules within the chain, indicating that growth was epitaxial on the underlying surface. Our high-resolution images show EtOH molecules on the Au(111) surface at varying concentrations. At low surface coverages, STM images feature single (1D) chains adsorbed predominantly on the FCC regions of the HB reconstruction, as shown in Figure Distance measurements performed on high-resolution STM images of EtOH chains composed of 2 or more rows revealed that the average lobe-lobe distance in the √3 direction was 0.51 ± 0.02 nm. This distance corresponds to equivalent oxygen atoms in adjacent EtOH molecules of the same chirality, which agrees well with the theoretical measurement for the Au-Au spacing of 0.50 nm in the uncompressed √3 direction that runs perpendicular to the closedpacked or [1 1 0 ] compressed axes. When identifying equivalent adsorption sites for EtOH chains composed of four or more rows we found that the average lateral distance between equivalent locations on adjacent zigzag chains was 0.83 ± 0.04 nm. This experimental measurement agrees well with the proposed molecular arrangement for which the distance between equivalent oxygens is predicted to be 0.83 nm in the close-packed, or [1 1 0 ] , compressed high symmetry direction, as shown in the unit cell (3 × √3) highlighted in Figure At low EtOH concentrations, the heterochiral chain structures are single zigzag chains; and as the surface coverage increases, larger chain structures begin to emerge as lateral growth is stabilized by the vdW interactions between adjacent hydrocarbon chains. Interestingly, with increased EtOH surface coverage, the chain spacing remained constant, and upon comparison with the surface area per molecule of the MeOH (11 × √3) pairwise chain superstructure, this indicates that EtOH chains do not experience the same degree of repulsive interactions as observed for MeOH. This finding suggests that the attractive vdW interactions between the longer hydrocarbon tail of EtOH as compared with MeOH counteract the effect of repulsion between the adsorbed heterochiral EtOH species. In this section, we present new results from experiment using the LT-STM to study the assembly of slightly larger alcohols, 1-and 2-propanol on Au(111) at 5 K. The high-resolution STM images of 1-PrOH in Figures The average distance between equivalent molecules or lobes in the √3 direction is 0.51 ± 0.01 nm, which is consistent with the Au-Au spacing of 0.50 nm in the uncompressed √3 axes. The distance between equivalent molecules or lobes in the close-packed direction is slightly larger than was measured for EtOH with an average of 1.14 ± 0.03 nm, which is within range for what is predicted for 4 Au-Au distances in the [1 1 0 ] or close-packed symmetry direction (1.10 nm). The slightly larger lobe-lobe distance may indicate that the 1-PrOH molecules are not sitting exactly atop but instead slightly off or near the Au atop site. This slight increase can be rationalized by the additional carbon present in 1-PrOH, requiring more space for each molecule within the unit cell to minimize steric hindrance and/or repulsions between hydrocarbon tails in adjacent rows. Figure To investigate how the hydrogen bonding, vdW interactions, and self-assembly on the surface would be impacted by changing the position of the OH functional group, 2-PrOH was deposited and imaged using the same conditions. High-resolution STM images, shown in Figure The proposed model developed for the 2-PrOH chain structure is shown in Figure Similar to the proposed models for previous C 1 -C 3 alcohols, 2-PrOH molecules are speculated to have surface-bound chirality upon binding on Au atop sites via an oxygen lone pair and that chain structures are heterochiral species. Positioning the hydroxyl group in the center gives the inner 2-PrOH molecules two points of lateral interaction with neighboring molecules. In addition, since each side of the hydroxyl group is only extended by one carbon atom, each point of interaction with neighboring molecules via vdW interactions between hydrocarbons requires a similar amount of spacing as is required for the smaller EtOH molecules. This molecular arrangement allows for hydrogen bonding interactions to still occur and also maximizes vdW interactions. The proposed unit cell is 3 × √3, which is denser than its structural isomer, 1-PrOH, but similar to that of the smaller EtOH molecule. Thus far, from our observations for MeOH, EtOH and PrOH we now have a better understanding of how shifting the balance between hydrogen bonding and vdW interactions by increasing hydrocarbon chain length affects self-assembly on an inert metal support. And, in particular, how this balance impacts molecular packing density. Furthermore, all of the C 1 -C 3 alcohols investigated thus far are achiral in the gas phase, with point chirality expressed only upon adsorption due to the development of a stereogenic center around the oxygen atom. So, the presence of equal amounts of surface-bound enantiomers gives rise to homochiral hexamers and heterochiral zigzag chains of these alcohols. It would also be interesting to investigate the impact of intrinsic chirality of the alcohol molecule on surface-bound chirality, molecular packing, and self-assembled overlayers. To this end we compare the adsorption of the simplest aliphatic chiral alcohol, (R)-and (S)-2-BuOH, on Au(111). 20 High-resolution STM images revealed the formation of a continuous molecular film over the Au surface consisting of a series of connected square pockets, Figure The model for the formation of square 2-BuOH films proposed involves hydrogen bonded, homochiral tetramers interacting with neighboring molecules of like-rotation via vdW interactions between hydrocarbon tails to form extended interconnected square pockets. A combination of VT-STM, LT-STM, and DFT calculations were brought together to better understand the molecular self-assembly of a set of small aliphatic C 1 -C 4 alcohols on the Au(111) surface at cryogenic temperatures. Insights on the adsorbed structures, especially their chirality and into the interplay between hydrogen bonding and vdW interactions were obtained. In all cases, the Au(111) herringbone reconstruction remains unperturbed; indicating that alcohol binding interactions with the Au surface are relatively weak, and structure is dictated through the balance between hydrogen bonding and dispersion forces. The long-range structures arising from these interactions were rigorously studied with STM and we discovered the propensity of alcohols to form long 1-D hydrogen bonded chains when feasible. Structural models and DFT calculated structures predict that alcohol molecules (methanol, ethanol and 2-butanol) bind to the surface through an oxygen lone pair at or near Au atop sites. DFT and STM data on 2-BuOH revealed that the intrinsic molecular chirality was preserved and transferred to the surface-bound chirality, inducing enantiospecific adsorption. As a consequence, heterochiral zigzag chain formation (as seen with the smaller alcohols) is unfeasible whereas homochiral clustering into hydrogen bonded tetramers is energetically preferred. In short, when adding intrinsic chirality in the molecular backbone we observe a transfer of chirality resulting in enantiospecific adsorption, which in turn leads to homochiral long-range ordering. Experimental data revealed that with increasing chain length, an imbalance in the competing hydrogen bonding-vdW intermolecular interactions occurs impacting cluster formation and growth. More specifically, at dilute surface concentrations the energetically preferred structures of the simplest aliphatic alcohol, MeOH, are two chiralities of homochiral MeOH hexamers held together via hydrogen bonding interactions. Meanwhile, at comparable surface concentrations of EtOH, the most stable structures are zigzag heterochiral chains, with hydrogen bonding dominating interactions between the hydrophilic OH---O domains while lateral vdW interactions between parallel outer hydrophobic carbon tails drives the formation of 1D heterochiral chains. At low surface coverages, lengthening the hydrocarbon tail by just one carbon atom, specifically when going from MeOH to EtOH, is enough to shift the balance between intermolecular interactions towards vdW forces enabling heterochiral chain structures to be more energetically stable than small homochiral hydrogen bonded clusters. Interestingly, with increasing MeOH coverage zigzag chains are formed and at ML coverages resemble those of the other straight chain alcohols. For larger alcohols, 1-PrOH and 2-PrOH, heterochiral chain structures continue to be the most stable structures, exclusively, at all coverages explored. As expected, the molecular packing or unit cell for proposed chain structures for increasingly larger alcohols on Au(111) also grow, with a unit cell of 3x√3 for EtOH chains vs. a larger 4x√3 cell for 1-PrOH chains. Surprisingly, when changing the position of the OH functional group the packing becomes denser for 2-PrOH zigzag chains with a smaller unit cell of 3x√3 than 1-PrOH, maximizing intermolecular interactions. There are clear trends seen when comparing all of these alcohols, as compiled in Figure In Figure Taken together, the results of this study provide a framework for understanding the effect of the molecular structures of alcohols on the geometry of their surface-adsorbed structures. We predict linear alcohols with saturated alkyl tails ≥ C2 will adopt chain structures, as seen for ethanol. We also predict that, unlike in 3D liquids or solids, in alcohols ≥ C3, the position of the OH group along the alkyl chain will make a difference in 2D packing density due to the interplay of energies of the zigzag hydrogen bonded backbone with alkyl tail-tail van der Waals interactions. Furthermore, intrinsic chirality in the alkyl backbone is expected to influence the chirality of the surface adsorbed oxygen and preclude the possibility of zigzag chains that are composed of both surface bound chiralities of alcohol. These data and the interpretation offer fundamental insight and prediction of what may be expected for the self-assembly of other alcohols on metal surfaces.