It is shown that the temperature of the resistive transition Tr of a superconducting film can be increased by a thin superconducting or normal overlayer. For instance, deposition of a highly conductive thin overlayer onto a dirty superconducting film can give rise to an "anti-proximity effect" which manifests itself in an initial increase of Tr(d2) with the overlayer thickness d2 followed by a decrease of Tr(d2) at larger d2. Such a nonmonotonic thickness dependence of Tr(d2) results from the interplay of the increase of a net superfluid density mitigating phase fluctuations and the suppression of the critical temperature Tc due to the conventional proximity effect. This behavior of Tr(d2) is obtained by solving the Usadel equations to calculate the temperature of the Berezinskii-Kosterletz-Thouless transition, and the temperature of the resistive transition due to thermallyactivated hopping of single vortices in dirty bilayers. The theory incorporates relevant materials parameters such as thicknesses and conductivities of the layers, interface contact resistance between them and the subgap quasiparticle states which affect both phase fluctuations and the proximity effect suppression of Tc. The transition temperature Tr can be optimized by tuning the overlayer parameters, which can significantly weaken vortex fluctuations and nearly restore the mean-field critical temperature. The calculated behavior of Tr(d2) may explain the nonmonotonic dependence of Tr(d2) observed on (Ag, Au, Mg, Zn)-coated Bi films, Ag-coated Ga and Pb films or NbN and NbTiN films on AlN buffer layers. These results suggest that bilayers can be used as model systems for systematic investigations of optimization of fluctuations in superconductors. Recent discoveries of two-dimensional (2D) materials and interfaces with unique physical properties Pairbreaking fluctuations can be mitigated by enhancing the phase stiffness, which implies increasing the superfluid density or reducing the quasipaticle mass or electronic anisotropy The above mechanism may be relevant to the nonmonotonic dependencies of the resistive transition temperatures of ultra thin films on the thickness of conductive overlayers observed on (Ag, Au, Mg, Zn)-coated Bi films In this work the effect of a thin overlayer on vortex fluctuations in a thin film is addressed, assuming that the overlayer is in contact with the film. Here the effect of the overlayer on T r is associated with an increased energy of a perpendicular vortex. In this case restoring the mean-field T c could be achieved by depositing not only a highly conductive N overlayer but also a S overlayer with higher T c coupled through a Josephson buffer junction, for instance, a Bi-2223 or YBCO overlayer onto the FeSe monolayer. Such high-T c overlayer would be particularly effective to suppress the BKT fluctuations in a lower-T c layer. Overlayers can also be used to reduce the effect of vortex fluctuations in granular films of arrays of Josephson junctions. A model developed here incorporates materials features into a theory of the BKT transition in a proximity coupled bilayer. This model primarilly focuses on the interplay of the phase stiffness and the proximity effect in the framework of a transparent single-vortex picture of the BKT transition, leaving aside a possibility of interface superconductivity and the effect of multi-vortex correlations on T b . The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the BKT transition in a dirty film is discussed, taking into account the effect of subgap states on T b . In Sec. III restoration of the mean-field T c in solid and granular films covered with a high-T c overlayer is considered. Sec. IV is devoted to the calculation of T c of S-N bilayers, taking into account the contact resistance and subgap states. In Sec. V reduction of the Ginzburg number and the effect of fluctuations on the transition temperature in a bilayer is addressed. In Sec. VI a nonmonotonic dependence of the BKT transition temperature T b (d 2 ) on the thickness of a conductive N overlayer is calculated. In Sec. VII finite size effects in the resistive transition caused by thermally-activated hopping of complete and fractional vortices in bilayers are considered. In Sec. VIII broader implications of the obtained results for the reduction of fluctuations in 2D superconductors are discussed. This section gives a brief overview of the BKT transition temperature T b in dirty s-wave superconducting films for which the reduction of T b relative to the mean field critical temperature T c is most pronounced. Hereafter thin films with the Pearl magnetic penetration depth Λ = λ 2 L /d 1 The BKT temperature is determined by the energy of a perpendicular vortex ǫ = ǫ 0 ln(L/ξ) in a thin film Here the factor ζ < 1 takes into account renormalization of the mean-field superfluid density by fluctuations (hereafter T is measured in energy units). For instance, Monte Carlo simulations of vortices in the XY model where Q = ∇χ+2πA/φ 0 is proportional to the superfluid velocity, χ is the phase of the order parameter, A is the vector potential, σ 1 is a normal state conductivity, φ 0 is the flux quantum, e is the electron charge, ǫ c ≃ 0.5ǫ 0 is a vortex core energy Here R = (d 1 σ 1 ) -1 is the sheet film resistance in the normal state, and R 0 = 25.8 kohm. Equations ( Here Γ quantifies a finite lifetime of quasiparticles ∼ /Γ resulting in subgap states at ǫ < ∆, and N 1 is the density of states in the normal state. Many mechanisms of subgap states have been considered in the literature, including inelastic scattering of quasiparticles on phonons where ψ(z) is a digamma function. At Γ = 0 Eq. ( The equation for the pair potential ∆ is given by where n 1 = n + 1/2 and γ = Γ/2πT . The critical temperature is determined by the equation similar to that describes the reduction of T c by magnetic impurities 66 : ln where This equation may describe the reduction of T c in thin films due to the DOS broadening as the film thickness decreases, consistent with tunneling measurements Shown in Fig. Granular films and Josephson junction arrays can be modeled by the energy functional of XY model where the coupling energy E J = I c /2e is proportional to the intergrain Josephson critical current I c , and χ j is the phase in the j-th grain. The energy of a vortex is then ǫ = πE J ln(L/a), where a is a grain size. For SIS junctions, I c = (π∆/2eR i ) tanh(∆/2T ) is inversely proportional to the tunneling contact resistance R i between the grains where ∆(T b ) is determined by Eqs. ( For large R i , the film sheet resistance R = α i Ri is proportional to a mean value Ri , where the geometric constant α i depends on spatial distribution of intergrain contacts, grain shapes, and distribution functions of intergrain areas A i and critical current densities Consider two superconducting layers separated by a planar Josephson junction with the critical current density J c , as shown in Fig. proportional to the area of the bilayer of length L and width w, as shown in Appendix C. For instance, if T c1 and T c2 are not very different, , where R ⊥ is the interface resistance per unit area where R 2 = (d 2 σ 2 ) -1 is the sheet resistance of layer 2. The first term in Eq. ( 2. The complete vortex is more energetically favorable in wide films or long bridges in which ∆W > 0 and Fractional vortices may occur in narrow short bridges with L < L c , particularly at Here we focus on the BKT transition due to proliferation of complete vortices. The energy of a complete vortex is a sum of kinetic energies of currents in the layers 1 and 2 given by Eq. ( As the overlayer thickness d 2 increases, T b increases and exceeds T c1 of the layer 1 if: where ∆ 1 (T b ) = 0. As d 2 approaches d 2c , the fractional vortex becomes more energetically favorable. Yet the high-T c overlayer restores the mean field T c1 in the layer 1 by increasing the sheet superfluid density and suppressing the BKT proliferation of vortices. In this section we follow the well-established theory of T c in a dirty thin film bilayer where D 1 and D 2 are electron diffusivities in the layer 1 and 2, respectively, and Here (λ 1 , Ω 1 ) and (λ 2 , Ω 2 ) are the pairing constant and the Debye frequency in a superconductor 1 and 2, respectively. Equations ( where R B is the sheet contact resistance of the interface. The DOS broadening is taken into account by ω → ω 1 = ω + Γ 1 in Eq. ( In the paper a thin film Cooper limit is considered, in which d 1,2 ≪ ( D 1,2 /2πT c ) 1/2 so that θ 1 (x) and θ 2 (x) are nearly constant across the layers General solutions of Eqs. ( The critical temperature T c0 of the bilayer is obtained by linearizing Eqs. ( where is the critical temperature of the superconductor 1 with λ 1 > λ 2 . The equation for T c in a bilayer with Γ > 0 and R B = 0 reduces to Eq. ( A general equation for T c at arbitrary R B was obtained in Appendix A. For a bilayer comprising a normal overlayer with λ 2 = 0, this equation simplifies to . Here the ad-hoc factor Ω 2 1 /(ω 2 + Ω 2 1 ) provides convergence of the sum for any relation between αβ and Ω 1 , reproducing the BCS results while eliminating artifacts coming from the hard cutoffs in the sums at ω = Ω 1 in realistic cases of not very large Ω 1 /2πT c . If Γ 1 and Γ 2 are negligible, Eq. ( where T c0 = T c1 exp(-α/λ 1 ) is the critical temperature of the bilayer with β ∝ R B = 0. The contact resistance weakens the proximity effect coupling of the S and N layers, ameliorating the decrease of T c with d 2 , as shown in Fig. Figure which has the same form as the equation for the critical concentration of paramagnetic impurities in the Abrikosov-Gorkov theory 66 . For a phase-locked N-S bilayer with R B = 0, the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy functional is given by (see Appendix B): where Ψ = ∆e iχ is the order parameter. The mean field jump in the specific heat ∆C = ν 2 /bT c0 at T c0 is then: The Gaussian fluctuation correction to the sheet specific heat The width of the critical region of strong fluctuations T f -T c0 , where δC(T f ) = ∆C defines the Ginzburg parameter Gi = (T f -T c0 )/T c0 given by: Here Gi, controlled by the ratio of the bilayer normal sheet resistance R = (d 1 σ 1 + d 2 σ 2 ) -1 and the quantum resistance R 0 = h/e 2 , does not depend on superconducting properties thus strongly reduce Gi and mitigate fluctuations without a significant suppression of T c0 due to the proximity effect. The GL coherence length ξ is defined here by the condition a∆ 2 ≃ c∆ 2 /ξ 2 , giving Generally, the global phase coherence is lost at a transition temperature Tc at which the thermal energy T is of the order of the condensation energy πa 2 ξ 2 /2b within a correlated area πξ 2 , that is, μ 1 Tc = a 2 ( Tc )πξ 2 ( Tc )/2b, where μ 1 ∼ 1. Using here Eqs. ( where μ = 56ζ(3)μ 1 /π 3 . For instance, the BKT transition corresponds to μ 1 ≃ 1/2 and μ ≃ 1.1. Fluctuations reduce Tc relative to T c0 , but as the overlayer thickness increases, the effect of fluctuations weakens while T c0 (d 2 ) gets diminished by the proximity effect. If σ 2 ≫ σ 1 , the transition temperature Tc (d 2 ) first increases with d 2 due to decreasing R (d 2 ) in Eq. ( This inequality can be satisfied for a highly conductive N overlayer with q = D 2 /D 1 ≫ 1. Here the maximum Tc defined by Eqs. ( At q = D 2 /D 1 ≪ 1 the optimum overlayer thickness d 2m is much smaller than the thickness of the S film, neither d 2m nor Tc (d 2m ) depending on D 1 . Such N overlayer can nearly restore Tc to the mean-field T c1 of the S film. Equations ( The interplay of the proximity effect and the phase stiffness manifests itself in the BKT transition temperature which shows how T r is affected by a thin overlayer. Here the vortex energy scale ǫ 0 in Eq. ( Calculation of T b (α) in the general case when R B is essential requires numerical solution of coupled Eqs. ( Here γ = Γ/2πT , and S = (∆/4) tanh(∆/2T ) at γ = 0. The vortex core radius ≃ ξ given by Eq. ( Here T b and the composite gap parameter ∆ as functions of the film sheet resistance R = (σ 1 d 1 ) -1 and the overlayer thickness are determined self-consistently by Eqs ( Shown in Fig. The DOS broadening reduces both T c0 and the BKT transition temperature. For a single film, the DOS broadening does not change qualitative the dependence of T b on r except for the overall reduction of T b (r) as shown in Fig. As the contact resistance increases, the proximity effect suppression of T c0 diminishes. At the same time, a significant R B with β 1 tends to decouple the layers 1 and 2, suppressing the increase of the phase stiffness by the overlayer. The effect of these opposite trends on T b can be calculated by solving Eqs. ( Finite size effects can be essential is thin bridges where, in addition to the BKT vortex unbinding, the resistive transition is affected by thermally-activated hopping of single vortices across the bridge and proliferation of fractional vortices in weakly-coupled bilayers. Dynamics of vortex hopping is determined by the local energy U (u) of the vortex as a function of its position u across the bridge. A vortex in a thin film strip of width w < Λ produces circulating superflow with the normal components Q x (0, y) = Q x (w, y) vanishing at the edges, and Q(x, y) decreasesing exponentially over the length w/π along the bridge where ξ = Cξ is an effective coherence length, C ≈ 0.34 accounts for the core energy Here the vortex core size ξ defined by the composite diffusivity D increases as the overlayer thickness increases, but the viscosity η, which takes into account dissipation in the vortex core in both layers, turns out to be independent of σ 1 and σ 2 . The latter results from the fact that the diffusivity D cancels out in the product ξ 2 R in Eq. ( A solution of the Fokker-Planck equation for thermally-activated vortex hopping over the barrier U (x) gives the following votage-current (V-I) characteristics 83 where is the total normal state resistance, z = ǫ 0 /T , s = φ 0 I/2πT , and Γ(x) is the gamma function. At small currents, s ≪ 1, Eq. ( depends strongly on w. As I increases the V-I characteristics at s > 1 becomes nonlinear, V ∝ I z+1 , and independent of the bridge width The resistive transition temperature T r (I, w) calculated from Eqs. ( These calculations of V (I) and T r were based on Eq. ( Pinning centers can facilitate thermally-activated vortex hopping and reduce T r as compared to a uniform bridge. However, a proximity coupled conductive overlayer can nearly restore T r back to T c0 by increasing the vortex energy scale ǫ 0 and by weakening the effect of pinning potential on vortex hopping. Indeed, if pinning centers are in the S layer, deposition of the N overlayer would increase ǫ 0 and vortex energy barriers without affecting the pinning energy. As a result, the nonmonotonic dependence of T r (d 2 ) becomes more pronounced because pinning mostly increases the dip in T r at d 2 = 0 while causing only a small correction to T r at larger d 2 for which the effect of overlayer becomes dominant. As was mentioned in Sect III, partial vortices may occur in a weakly-coupled bilayer with small Josephson current density J c across the interface between the layers 1 and 2. Fractional vortices have been investigated theoretically The energy of a perpendicular vortex in the granular film 1 can be reduced by weak intergranular contacts, but it does not affect Eq. ( A different mechanism of mitigation of vortex fluctuations occurs if a disconnected N overlayer is spaced by a wide gap of width d i from the superconducting layer 1. It was observed that a 30 nm thick Au overlayer separated by 16 nm gap from 3 nm thick MoGe film slightly increases the temperature of the resistive transition where the first term in the right hand side is the Bardeen-Stephen drag coefficient for a vortex in the S film, and the second term is the inductive drag coefficient η 2 due to the metallic overlayer. Here η 2 is consistent up to a numerical factor ∼ 1 with the result of Ref. (39) obtained in the limit of d i = 0. As shown in Appendix D, η 2 turns out to be independent of the gap width d i as long as Although η 2 appears similar to η 1 with the replacement ρ 2 → ρ 1 and ξ → Λ, the inductive heating in the overlayer actually occurs in a small region of radius Here the factor Λ -2 in η 2 does not result from magnetic screening but comes from the magnitude of vortex sheet current in the moving Pearl vortex where κ = λ L /ξ is the GL parameter. For the amorphous MoGe films with κ ∼ 100, ξ ≃ 25(1 -T /T c ) -1/2 nm, ρ 1 ≃ 200μΩcm 88 , d 1 = 3 nm, and the Au overlayer with d 2 = 40 nm and ρ 2 = 22nΩ cm investigated in Ref. 37, Eq. ( The resistive transition temperature in thin superconducting films can be tuned by overlayers which ameliorate pairbreaking fluctuation of vortices and shift T r back to the mean-field T c . Revealing the actual T c of a new 2D superconductor could be done using: 1. S-I-S ′ trilayers in which a known higher-T c superconductor S ′ is deposited onto a new superconductor S separated by a thin dielectric layer, 2. A bilayer in which a lower-T c superconductor or normal overlayer with high carrier density or normal state conductivity is deposited onto a superconducting film. 3. Metallic or superconducting overlayers which are capacitively or inductively coupled with the main superconducting film. The first two approaches rely on static mechanisms which increase energies of vortices. The third approach is based on dynamic mechanisms which affect quantum fluctuations and increase the vortex drag, making vortices less mobile. 1. S-I-S ′ trilayers could be used to reveal T c of new materials (for instance, FeSe single layers) using high-T c overlayers. In this case the current is injected into the S layer and spreads along both layers over the Josephson length L J which determines the scale of current re-distribution. The solution for the phase difference Here J c is the Josephson current density through the interface, and the phase conductivities g 1 and g 2 define the current densities J 1 = g 1 ∇χ 1 and J 2 = g 2 ∇χ 2 in the layer 1 and 2 due to the respective phase gradients ∇χ 1 and ∇χ 2 . For dirty s-wave superconductors, g i = (π∆ i σ i /2e) tanh(∆ i /2T ), i = 1, 2. At I > I b the current injected into the layer 1 generates interlayer phase slips A higher-T c overlayer increases the energy barriers for the BKT proliferation or thermally-activated hopping of perpendicular vortices, depending on the overlayer thickness d 2 , as illustrated in Fig. 2. The resistive transition temperature T r can be increased in a bilayer with a proximity-coupled overlayer which can be either normal or superconducting. Here partial vortices are not energetically favorable, but the overlayer increases the total sheet superfluid density and thus the energy of complete vortices while decreasing the mean-field T c due to the proximity effect. As was shown above, the interplay of these trends yields a nonmonotonic dependence of T r and the BKT transition temperature on the overlayer thickness. The maximum T r close to the mean-field T c could be reached by depositing a thin normal layer with d 2 ≪ d 1 , where the optimum thickness d 2m estimated by Eq. ( 3. Fluctuations in a 2D superconductor can be tuned by its inductive or capacitive coupling with a remote normal or superconducting film. This effect was observed on planar arrays of Al Josephson junctions The approach of this work is based on the conventional Usadel equations assuming that the pairing constants, normal densities of states and phonon frequencies are independent of the layer thicknesses. This model takes into account neither surface scattering nor interface superconductivity caused by localized phonon modes and changes the pairing constants and DOS at the interface. For instance, a highly conductive overlayer can improve electron screening in the S layer, weakening the Coulomb repulsion and enhancing the Cooper pairing Overlayers can be used to tune the BKT transition and reveal the effect of different materials parameters, particularly, inhomogeneities The BKT transition temperature depends on the factor ζ affected by multiple mechanisms contributing to the renormalization of the superfluid density and electron diffusivity by strong electron-phonon coupling where where ν = ν 1 + ν 2 . From Eqs. (B3)-(B5), it follows, Variation of F with respect to δθ and δ∆ results in the mean-field Usadel equations The GL equations are obtained by expanding Eq. (B9) in small gradients and powers of ∆ at T ≈ T c : Substituting this into Eq. (B7) and summing up over ω yields the GL functional ( A fluctuation contribution to the specific heat δC(T ) at T > T c0 is obtained by expanding Eq. (B7) to quadratic terms in the Fourier components Ψ k : where A is the bilayer area. The Gaussian fluctuation correction Here f 0 = H 2 c /8π defines the thermodynamic critical field H c of a bilayer. At T ≈ T c0 the gap ∆ in the denominator of Eq. (B13) can be dropped giving The energy of the vortex core ǫ c may be evaluated by writing the total energy of a vortex in the form: where ǫ 0 = (π 2 /2) νD∆ tanh(∆/2T ) follows from Eq. ( Using here ǫ 0 = π 2 Dν∆ 2 /4T c0 , ∆ 2 (T ) = 8π 2 T c0 (T c0 -T )/7ζ(3) and f 0 from Eq. (B14) at T ≈ T c0 yields For a single film, Eq. (B16) is consistent with ǫ c ≈ 0.497ǫ 0 obtained from numerical simulation of a single vortex 52 , and Eq. (B18) reproduces the GL coherence length ξ = c/|a| with a and c given by Eqs. ( The viscous drag coefficient η of a vortex in a bilayer can be evaluated from the power balance ηv 2 B/φ 0 = E 2 /R F . Here the velocity v of vortices with the areal density B/φ 0 is related to the electric field E in the core by the Faraday law E = vB, R F = R B/B c2 is the flux flow sheet resistance, R = (d 1 σ 1 + d 2 σ 2 ) -1 and B c2 = φ 0 /2πξ 2 . Hence η acquires the conventional Bardeen-Stephen form η = φ 2 0 /2πξ 2 R . Expressing here R and ξ in terms of the bilayer parameters yields Here η is independent of the mean free path in both N and S layers, consistent with the behavior of the Bardeen-Stephen drag coefficient η BS = 8 N (T c0 -T ) per unit vortex length in the dirty limit at T ≈ T c 51 . Appendix C: Current distribution in a partial vortex. A vortex in a thin film strip in which the London screening is negligible (d ≪ λ L ) can be described by the complex potential where z = x + iy, the strip is at 0 < x < w and infinite along y, Λ = λ 2 L /d, and the vortex core is at x = u, y = 0. Both components of the sheet current density J x (x, y) and J y (x, y) circulating around the vortex decrease exponentially over the length w/π along the strip 81 : As follows from Eq. (C6), the vortex causes a nonzero phase χ ∞ (x) at |y| ≫ w/π. If y → ∞ Eq. (C6) yields: χ ∞ (x) = πu/w at u < x < w, χ ∞ (x) = π(u/w -1) at 0 < x < u, and χ(x, ∞) = -χ(x, -∞). This form Here the current densities in the layers 1 and 2 are related to the respective phase gradients as follows: If J 1 (x) varies slowly along the layer 1 over the length ∼ d 1 , the condition of current continuity becomes where J ⊥ = J c sin χ + R -1 i V + C i ∂ t V is the current density flowing through the interface. Hence, where V = ( /2e)∂ t χ is the Josephson voltage, and χ = χ 2χ 1 is the phase difference between the layers. From Eqs (E1) and (E2), it follows that (d 1 g 1 + d 2 g 2 )∇ 2 χ 1 = d 2 g 2 ∇ 2 χ. Substituting this into Eq. (E4) yields the sine-Gordon equation for χ(r, t): where L 2 J = d 1 d 2 g 1 g 2 /(d 1 g 1 + d 2 g 2 )J c , ω 2 J = 4e 2 J c / 2 C i , τ = /2eR i , and R i and C i are the resistance and capacitance per unit area of the interface, respectively. A stationary solution of Eq. (E5) that describes the current I injected in the layer 1 at x = 0 is: where A is obtained from the boundary condition, J 2 (0) = 0, I = -d 1 g 1 χ ′ (0). Then Eq. (E6) yields, The solution of Eq. (E7) for which A = 0 at I = 0 is: Equations ( 