We report on the temperature and electric field driven evolution of the magnetoresistance lineshape at an interface between Ni/AlOx and Nb-doped SrTiO3. This is manifested as a superposition of the Lorentzian lineshape due to spin accumulation and a parabolic background related to tunneling anisotropic magnetoresistance (TAMR). The characteristic Lorentzian line shape of the spin voltage is retrieved only at low temperatures and large positive applied bias. This is caused by the reduction of electric field at large positive applied bias which results in a simultaneous reduction of the background TAMR and a sharp enhancement in spin injection. Such mechanisms to tune magnetoresistance are uncommon in conventional semiconductors. Spin voltage measured at different semiconducting interfaces have been widely studied using different combination of materials as spin contacts and employing different measurement techniques. Such studies are commonly performed using the popular three terminal (3T) and four terminal non-local (NL) geometries In this context SrTiO 3 (STO) is a relevant material. STO single crystals exhibit a large dielectric permittivity ( r ) at room temperature, that is anisotropic in different crystalline directions and increases non-linearly with temperature, electric field and frequency We report on an unconventional magnetoresistance response at the spin injection interface of Ni/AlO x on Nb:STO at room temperature, as observed in the lineshape of the spin voltage. The lineshape is found to be a superposition of different magnetoresistance effects across the Schottky interface between Nb:STO and the spin contact, not reported earlier across such or other semiconducting interfaces. The superimposed signals are predominantly related to spin accumulation either at the semiconductor or due to the localized states and a background Tunneling anisotropic magnetoresistance (TAMR). TAMR arises due to spin orbit coupling (SOC) effects in Nb:STO and is exhibited as a change in the tunneling conductance (spin voltage) when rotating the magnetization of the ferromagnet with respect to the current flow direction ∆V in is the spin voltage due to the spin dephasing effect describing the amplitude of the Lorentzian spin signal. τ in is the spin lifetime that depends on the inverse of the full width half maximum (FWHM) of the Lorentzian signal, θ is the angle between the magnetization of Ni with surface normal and ∆V rot is the spin voltage that arises due to the rotation of the magnetization of the ferromagnet. The solid blue lines in Fig. Figure To understand the influence of the engineered Nb:STO interface on the spin transport further, we analyse the temperature and bias dependence of the lineshapes of the spin voltages. Shown in Fig. Engineering the potential landscape at the Nb:STO interface and thus the interplay between the electric field and temperature dependence of the Rashba SOC results in the evolution of the Lorentzian lineshape of the observed spin voltage. At room temperature the built-in electric field at the dominant Schottky interface enables the observation of a large TAMR effect, whereas reducing the temperature changes the transport regime to that of a dominant tunneling one enabling the observation of a spin voltage related to spin accumulation. Such effects are strongly manifested in Nb:STO due to the additional tunability of the dielectric permittivity in Nb:STO and cannot be observed in conventional semiconductors. This additional flexibility in device design at such material interfaces leads to new understanding on the origin of the different contributions to the spin voltages measured using the 3T electrical transport scheme. See Supplementary Material for the temperature dependence of the spin voltage response at different bias. The authors would like to thank A.M. Kamerbeek for his helpful insight and discussion. AD and TB also thanks J.G. Holstein and H.M. de Roosz for the technical support. This work is supported by the Dieptestrategie grant 2014 from Zernike Institute for Advanced