Dirac states hosted by Sb/Bi square nets are known to exist in the layered antiferromagnetic AMnX2 (A = CaSr/Ba/Eu/Yb, X=Sb/Bi) material family with the space group to be P 4/nmm or I4/mmm. In this paper, we present a comprehensive study of quantum transport behaviors, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and first-principles calculations on SrZnSb2, a nonmagnetic analogue to AMnX2, which crystalizes in the pnma space group with distorted square nets. From the quantum oscillation measurements up to 35 T, three major frequencies including F1 = 103 T, F2 = 127 T and F3 = 160 T, are identified. The effective masses of the quasiparticles associated with these frequencies are extracted, namely, m * 1 = 0.1 me, m * 2 = 0.1 me and m * 3 = 0.09 me, where me is the free electron mass. From the three band Lifshitz-Kosevich fit, the Berry phases accumulated along the cyclotron orbit of the quasiparticles are 0.06π, 1.2π and 0.74π for F1, F2 and F3, respectively. Combined with the ARPES data and the first-principles calculations, we reveal that F2 and F3 are associated with the two nontrivial Fermi pockets at the Brillouin zone edge while F1 is associated with the trivial Fermi pocket at the zone center. In addition, the first-principles calculations further suggest the existence of Dirac nodal line in the band structure of SrZnSb2. Topological semimetals including Dirac semimetals, Weyl semimetals and topological node-line semimetals, representing new quantum states of matter, have attracted enormous attention in condensed matter physics . In these systems, the low energy excitation of quasiparticles are of relativistic nature, i.e. they obey Dirac or Weyl equations Topological bands generated by square nets of main group elements have been reported in many layered materials such as AMnX 2 (A = CaSr/Ba/Eu/Yb, X=Sb/Bi) The magnetotransport properties were measured in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (QD PPMS) up to 9 T, and at the National High Magnetic Field Lab (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, FL, up to 35 T. The ρ xx was measured by a standard four probe method. To obtain ρ zz , the current contacts were made into a ring shape at the top and bottom of the sample surfaces (bc plane) and the voltage contacts were placed at the center of the rings. The torque measurements were done using a piezoresistive cantilever connecting with a homemade Wheatstone bridge at NHMFL. We applied density functional theory (DFT) by using the projector-augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements were conducted at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), BL4.0.3, with horizontally polarized, 98 eV light. The sample was held at 20 K during the measurements. We estimated 44 meV energy resolution from the Fermi edge of the sample. The sample cleave appeared smooth under an optical microscope. Like many other layered materials, the overall crystal quality of the samples was imperfect as evidenced by the lack of good agreement between symmetry equivalent reflections and this disagreement could not be fully ex- plained by twinning. Nevertheless, the best refinements (Table The resistivity has been measured along the in-plane direction (ρ xx ) and out-of-plane direction (ρ zz ), as shown in Fig. We have performed magnetic torque measurements up to 35 T and probed strong dHvA oscillations in SrZnSb 2 , as seen in Fig. To map out the Fermiology of SrZnSb 2 , the evolution of the magnetic torque properties with field orientation has been investigated. As seen in Fig. where the thermal damping term R T is equal to αT μ/ [Bsinh (αT μ/B)] and the Dingle damping factor R D = exp (-αT D μ/B). μ is the ratio of cyclotron effective mass m * to the free electron mass m e and α = 2π 2 k B m e /(he). T D is the Dingle temperature. R S = cos(πgμ/2) is the spin damping factor, where g is the Landau g factor. λ is a dimensional factor, which is 1/2 for the 3D case and 0 for the 2D case. The phase factor γ -δ of the cosine term is linked with the Berry phase Φ B by the relation γ = 1 2 -ΦB 2π . To examine the Berry phase accumulated from the cyclotron motions of the quasiparticles in the system, as the FFT spectra are dominated by F 1 and F 2 , we first fit the SdH oscillations (∆ρ xx ) at T = 2.1 K to the generalized LK formula with two frequencies represents a nontrivial Berry phase for F 2 . We have also tried to include the third minor frequency F 3 for the fitting. The SdH data is fitted by three-band LK formula (Fig. To check the reliability of the phase factors obtained by the two-band LK fit, we attempted to fit the SdH oscillations at T = 2.1 K to the LK formula using fixed phase factors (Fig. To better understand the electronic structure of The Dirac point lying in U -R line is a double Dirac point formed by the crossing of two doubly degenerate bands without SOC, which is protected by nonsymmorphic symmetry. Following the notion of Ref. We determine the Fermi level for the sample by adjusting the DFT energy bands with those from ARPES along Z -Γ -Z line, as shown in Fig. Here we would like to have more discussions on the Berry phase for the three frequencies observed from QO. In theory, F 1 from a trivial fermi surface should correspond to a Berry phase (φ B ) of 0, which is consistent with our experimental value φ α B = 0.06π. And each of the Fermi surfaces that are responsible for F 2 and F 3 includes two equivalent Dirac points. As is mensioned above, these Dirac points are quasi-2D, so every Dirac point should contribute a Berry phase of π similar to the case of graphene. Two Dirac points will lead to a Berry phase of 2π for both F 2 and F 3 . However, the gaps opened at the two Dirac points will alter the Berry phase according to the equation φ B = ±2π(1-∆/2E F C ), where ∆ is the gap size and E F C represents energy difference between fermi energy and the center of energy gap Since the nodal-line and nodal features are about 200 meV above the FL in our SrZnSb 2 sample, our current ARPES experiments only observe linear dispersive bands but not the nodal features, however, our comprehensive study of QO, DFT and ARPES data can unambiguously prove the existence of the non-trivial topology. In the future study, the sample will be electron doped by substituting La into the Sr sites to tune the FL above the nodal features and then ARPES will be performed to investigate the emergent phenomena associated with the topological nodal-line, such as the drumhead states, etc. Finally, to understand the role of magnetism in the AMnX 2 materials, we compare the relativistic fermion transport properties between SrZnSb 2 and its magnetic version Sr 1-y Mn 1-z Sb 2 In conclusion, we have performed a comprehensive study of the quantum transport properties and the electronic structure of SrZnSb 2 with a combination of the magnetotransport measurements, first-principles calculations and ARPES experiment. From the analysis of quantum oscillations, low effective masses and non-trivial Berry phases are revealed. These quantum oscillations are revealed to be associated with the small trivial Fermi pockets in the BZ center and the nontrivial Fermi pockets in the BZ edge. In addition, a node line surrounding the BZ center with tiny SOC gap is suggested by the first-principles calculations.