Optical chirality is central to many industrial photonic technologies including enantiomer identification, ellipsometry-based tomography and spin multiplexing in optical communication. However, a substantial chiral response requires a typical threedimensional (3D) constituent, thereby making the paradigm highly complex. Photonic devices integrated with microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) have shown potential for chiral light control by external stimuli, but the stimuli usually demand a destructive dosage. Here, we report a simple synthetic chiral paradigm that is electrically programmable with self-assembled 3D MEMS cantilevers. This paradigm enables four reconfigurable chiral schemes with dextrorotary, levorotary, racemic and achiral conformations. Optical response of reversible chirality and chiral to achiral switch are electrically encoded following an exclusive OR logical operation with dual-channel bias as low as 10 V. Our device demonstrates a route to electrically actuated synthetic chiral platform and serves as a powerful conformation analysis tool for macromolecules in biology, medicine, chemistry and physics. The prototype delivers a new strategy towards reconfigurable stereoselective photonic applications. Chirality is ubiquitous in nature from human hands to chemical and biological macromolecules, and climbing plants. Intense research efforts have been devoted to the study of chirality to explore pharmacological effects and even unravel the origin of life. ) SEM images of one MEMS microhelix at OFF (cantilever suspended) and ON (cantilever actuated) states, respectively. Geometrical parameters of anchor and cantilever are indicated, and the thickness of metal (aluminum, tAl) in the bimorph cantilever is 0.4 μm. (c) Scheme of the programmable microhelix array. A zoomed-in image of one microhelix pair with opposite handedness is shown that is electrically isolated and separately actuated via dual channels (C1 and C2). Inputs "0" and "1" correspond to "OFF" and "ON" of external bias, respectively. (d) Schematic diagram of operation as a chirality switch. The programmable chirality switch with [10] input offers dextrorotary (D-) conformation that reveals different optical responses for RCP and LCP incidence. (e) Summary of logical operation for the programmable chirality switch in terms of optical chirality output following an "exclusive OR (XOR)" gate. Four different encoding sequences correspond to four chiral states with dextrorotary (D), levorotary (L), racemic (r), and achiral (a) conformations. Here, we utilize an L-shape bimorph cantilever that self-assembles as a 3D microhelix after the release process (see Fig. On the other hand, the left-handed circularly polarized light (LCP) couples weakly due to the absence of L-microhelix, thereby giving rise to a large differential transmission intensity for RCP and LCP light. This difference generates circular dichroism, which is a direct quantitative evidence of intrinsic chirality. The logical operation of the chirality switch is summarized in Fig. by assuming 1 kw  , where CDb is the background CD value of the chiral platform, p is a constant ( ), m  is the intrinsic chirality coefficient of the chiral molecules, and k and w are the wavenumber of light in free space and thickness of the film, respectively. According to Eq. 1, synthetic CDs is more discernible with giant amplitude that is connected to the background CDb and the imaginary part of chirality coefficient of enantiomer. By probing the frequency shift (   ) of synthetic CDs spectrum before and after placing analyte, the properties of the enantiomers could be resolved via CD with respective to k0 (wavevector at resonance wavelength). In the context of electromagnetic understanding, the interaction of electric and magnetic dipoles determines the chiral response. For the MEMS microhelix, the in-plane projection of magnetic dipole ( M ∥ ) depends on the inherent suspension angle of cantilevers (α, see Fig. where Although the pitch of microhelix can also be modulated by changing ambient temperature, Apart from the scalability of optical response for metamaterials, the operating frequency and chirality strength are customizable for on-demand applications with the MEMS technique. inputs. The output polarization plane is rotated by large angles at 0.4 and 0.7 THz, and polarization state is modulated to elliptical states with opposite handedness at 0.63 THz. Solid lines are polarization states calculated from experimental ellipticity and AOP, and dots are measured angular-resolved transmission amplitude by rotating an analyzer. One important application of optical chirality is the polarization modulation of light that is a key technology for optical communication, display, and polarimetric spectroscopy. Here, we also explore the programmable polarization modulation capacity of the MEMS chirality switch. To probe the polarization conversion performance, four elements of Jones matrix (see Methods) are measured and plotted with linearly polarized incidence at four reconfiguration states of the device with tAl = 0.4 μm, as shown in Fig. The output polarization state is preserved ("0" output without polarization modulation) for [11] and [00] inputs. For [10] and [01] inputs, strong polarization modulation ("1" output) occurs in a broadband frequency regime extending from 0.4 to 0.7 THz. The output polarization state is modulated from linear to elliptical with opposite handedness, and the ellipticity reaches to ~±15° for [01] and [10] inputs, respectively. In addition, strong optical activity is observed at 0.4 and 0.7 THz, where linear polarization plane is rotated by up to ±25° with linear polarization state preserved at 0.4 THz for [10] and [01] inputs, respectively. Cotton effect enables reversed rotation angles at 0.4 and 0.7 THz at a specific conformation. shown for [11] Simulations: The numerical simulations (surface current distributions) were carried out using a commercially available software (CST Microwave Studio) by a finite-element frequency-domain solver with unit cell boundary conditions. Floquet ports with 18 modes were defined at the incident and receiving ports. Material parameters were obtained from the software library. Cantilevers were modelled as straight lines with a constant suspending angle which is variable depending on the aluminum thickness. where R and L represent RCP and LCP, respectively. Stokes parameters were introduced to numerically describe the output polarization states with y-polarized incidence as following: 