The diamagnetic response of the free electron gas called the Landau diamagnetism is a complex and elusive effect requiring laborious computations. Here based on the semi-classical treatment of the problem I present a clear picture of the Landau diamagnetism at zero temperature, which offers a simple derivation of this effect and leads to important consequences: 1) the diamagnetic response is due to electron states in a very narrow Fermi surface region in the k-space, 2) small Fermi energy oscillations in an applied magnetic field are caused by redistribution (inflow or outflow) of electrons from the equatorial region of the Fermi surface. The consideration is based on a structure called magnetic tube whose electron states surround a certain Landau level in k-space. A completely filled magnetic tube does not change its energy in an applied magnetic field as if it complied with the Bohr -van Leeuwen theorem. The intersection of tubes with the Fermi surface leads to the appearance of partially occupied tubes in the region of intersection. The reconstruction of electron states in a magnetic field in this very small narrow region gives rise to the Landau diamagnetic response. In addition to the Landau diamagnetism this approach fully describes the oscillatory de Haas -van Alphen contribution to the magnetic susceptibility from the equatorial region of the Fermi sphere. The diamagnetic effect of the free electron gas was first obtained by Landau An alternative picture of the Landau diamagnetism is given in Refs. An important contribution to the understanding of the problem of the diamagnetism of conduction electrons was made in the pioneer work of Peierls where χ 1 is the diamagnetic susceptibility analogous to that of isolated metal atoms, χ 2 is a term which has no simple physical interpretation and the term χ 3 , which at zero temperature is given by Here E( k) is the electron band energy and the integration is taken over the Fermi surface. The term χ 3 was considered as leading in the diamagnetism of conduction electrons Because of this complexity, the Landau diamagnetism is not considered as a Fermi surface effect. This however can be clearly seen in the semi-classical approach presented in this paper. It is based on a partition of the Fermi sphere in two regions. The first big region consists of a set of many tubes of finite width and length covering almost all Fermi sphere, but the energy of all electron states in a tube remains unchanged in an applied magnetic field. Thus, the elementary unit here is a tube of finite width and length, Fig. We should also mention the important question of the Fermi energy (E F ) change in the applied magnetic field. This is a very weak effect, considered first in detail by Kaganov et al. This irregular behavior is closely related with the oscillation effect demonstrated by several physical quantities Interestingly, while the de Haas-van Alphen oscillations have been closely related to the shape of the Fermi surface, the Landau diamagnetism in general has not been perceived as a Fermi surface phenomenon. Here we will show that the Landau diamagnetism of the free electron gas is also directly connected with the Fermi surface electron states. The paper is written as follows: in the section II the concept of the magnetic tube is introduced, which is used in section III for selecting diamagnetically active tubes and electron states and later in section IV for computation of energy and magnetic susceptibility. The de Haas-van Alphen effect is considered in section V. Here the analytical calculations become more difficult because one has to deal with several different cases. Nevertheless, in all these cases the physical picture remains clear and transparent. Our conclusions are summarized in section VI. Simple integrals over infinitesimal (k x , k z )-crosssections in the k-space used in this paper are explicitly given in Appendices of the Supplementary Materials. In an external magnetic field H directing along the z-axis, the energy of the electron is given by [1-3] where n is integer (numbering the Landau levels), k z is the z-component of the wave vector k, and the cyclotron frequency Here m and e are the electron mass and charge; c is the speed of light. In correspondence with Eq. ( Below we will follow the widely used semiclassical representation of electron orbits in momentum space and the energy is given by It is well known that the average density of electron states in the k-space remains the same as without magnetic field. To understand better the reconstruction of the electron structure in the magnetic field H, we select in the k-space a tube, whose number of electron states and the energy of all states do not change in the presence of H. For that we consider auxiliary electron orbits of the area with energies Note the the n-th Landau orbit defined by Eqs. ( For that we calculate the density of electron states N ⊥ in the (k x , k y )-plane, and notice that N ⊥ is independent of the energy E ⊥ . (Here L x , L y and L z are distances of the free electron gas box in x, y and z directions, respectively.) Using ( Here N p is the number of space electron states (without spin polarization) on the n-th Landau level in the applied magnetic field (H = 0), Calculating the total energy of these states without field, we find that it coincides with the energy of all electron tube states condensed on the n-th Landau level in the presence of the field. Thus, we have proven that Our consideration has been limited by the (k x , k y ) plane. However, since the movement along the z axis is unchanged, we can extent it to the three dimensional k-space and define there a tube n, Fig. z , while in the presence of the magnetic field the states condense on the nth Landau level, that is, (2) z boundary of a tube can be taken arbitrary. In practice, they are defined by intersection with the Fermi surface, Fig. Consider the Fermi surface and define necessary magnetic tubes parallel to the z-axis (in the direction of the magnetic field H), Fig. Consider a typical partially occupied tube, whose triangle cross-section in the (k x , k z )-plane is shown in Fig. (Here Θ is the polar angle, Fig. It is remarkable that △k F is independent of Θ. Therefore, the radius k F -△k F determines an auxiliary internal sphere in the k-space, which can be used for drawing the step-wise line shown in Figs. where △N i ≡ △N (Θ i , △Θ i ) is the number of active states in the i-th partially filled tube, and Using the infinitesimal property of the (k x , k y ) crosssection (details are given in Supplementary Materials, Appendix A) we find where ρ = V /(2π) 3 . Notice, that Eq. ( Using ( Therefore, N ∼ △k F ∼ ω ∼ H. Since the perturbation energy for each electron state can be estimated with 2 k F △k F /m = ω ∼ H, the total energy change in the magnetic field ∼ H 2 , which leads to the constant magnetic susceptibility χ. (The rigorous computation of χ is given in the next section.) A remarkable property of partially occupied tubes near the Fermi surface is that application of a magnetic field does not lead to electron transitions between different tubes (with the exception of a small number of electrons in the equatorial region). Therefore, upon applying the field, there is a redistribution of electron states only within each partially filled tube. To demonstrate this, we consider in detail the transformation of electron states in the tube when the magnetic field is switched on. (Without field the number of electron states △N is given by Eq. ( We recall that N p is the in-plane (or transverse) folding of the n-th Landau level, Eq. (10b), while ρ z = L z /2π is the density of electron states along k z . Substituting for N p = 2πρ ⊥ k ⊥ △k ⊥ = 2πρ ⊥ k F △k F , and Eq. ( (The result for the infinitely small triangle cross-section can be foreseen from the geometrical reasons.) Eq. ( Keeping in mind that there are two energy contributions: E ⊥ in the (k x , k y ) plane and E z along the z axis (parallel to the field H), we obtain for the energy change of the partially filled tube in the magnetic field, The notation △ on the right hand side is an indication that the corresponding energy refers to the partially filled tube characterized by the polar angle Θ and the angle △Θ, as shown in Fig. The detailed simple calculations of all components are performed in Appendix A of the Supplementary Materials (in respect to the energy E ref , Fig. for the energy components without magnetic field and in the applied magnetic field. In fact, the right hand sides of Eqs. ( Note that Eq. ( Substituting ( This is the celebrated expression, obtained by Landau for the diamagnetic susceptibility of the free electron gas. Earlier (Sec. IV) we have obtained the diamagnetic effect based of calculations of the energy of active electrons in the partially occupied tube of general form. The (k x , k z ) cross-section of such a tube is shown in Figs. The problem is that the step-wise line shown in Fig. For the first equatorial tube we define △k ⊥,e,1 = k Fk ⊥,e , Fig. determining the irregularity of the first equatorial tube. Clearly, 0 < r < 1. Note, that by varying H we change the structure of all magnetic tubes, and, consecutively the parameter r, which is defined by the geometry of the last tube. Therefore, r implicitly depends on H. In Appendix C1 of the Supplementary Materials we show that in a first approximation r is proportional to 1/H. For △k z,e,1 we obtain Calculating the number of states in the first equatorial tube without magnetic field (see Appendix C1), we find (we recall that △Θ e,1 defines the angular span of the first equatorial triangle in the (k x , k z )-cross-section.) Deviations are also present for the transverse and parallel energy contribution (without field, H = 0), Eqs. (C4a) (C4b) in Appendix C1 of the Supplementary Materials. Now we consider the situation in the magnetic field H = 0, parallel to the z-axis. We start as in Sec. IV with finding the wave vector δk z of the highest occupied electron state along the z-axis under assumption that all electrons belonging to the first equatorial tube do not leave it. By means of ( Now however the energy of the highest occupied state in general differs from E F , and therefore from the energy of highest occupied states in other tubes, Eq. ( In the case a the energy of the Landau level of the first equatorial tube E n -E e,1 ref = ω/2, Fig. The number of the occupied electron states in the tube, , is determined by The condition △N H=0 e,1 other (regular) tubes as it happens in the case a. For 0.529 ≤ r < 1 the opposite happens, that is a small number of electrons from all regular tubes move to the equatorial tube. The change of the number of electrons in the equatorial region is shown in Fig. To single out the irregular contribution from the equatorial region explicitly, we rewrite it in the following form, Here E L is the diamagnetic (regular) contribution, Eq. (25), and △E eq stands for the irregular term from the equatorial region. If only the first equatorial tube is accounted for, then △E eq = △E eq,1 , where first equatorial tube we have f eq (r) = f eq,1 (r), and the function f eq,1 (r) has different dependences for the cases a and b, described earlier. In the case a (0 ≤ r < 1/2) f eq,1 (r) = f a eq,1 (r), in the case b (1/2 ≤ r < 1) f eq,1 (r) = f b eq,1 (r), f b eq,1 (r) = √ r (32r 2 -5) -80 r -1 2 The dependence of △E eq,1 ∼ f eq,1 (r) from r is shown in Fig. In calculating the magnetic susceptibility χ eq one has to keep in mind that △E eq depends on H through ω explicitly and on r implicitly. As shown in Appendix C1, the contribution from the derivative of r(H) with respect to the magnetic field H is dominant. Finally, we obtain ∂r ∂H 2 . (39) The plot of χ eq (r) is reproduced in Fig. Notice that if we limit ourselves to the case of only first equatorial tube, then in correspondence with Eqs. (38a) and (38b), the oscillatory energy contribution at r = 0 and r = 1 is different, namely △E eq,1 (r = 0) = 0 △E eq,1 (r = 1) = 0, Fig. (40) and the function f eq (r) in (37) becomes f eq (r) = f eq,1 (r) + f eq,2 (r). (41)