We report the successful synthesis of single-crystalline cuprate superconductors HgBa2CaCu2O 6+δ and HgBa2Ca2Cu3O 8+δ . These compounds are well-known for their high optimal superconducting critical temperatures of Tc = 128 K and 134 K at ambient pressure, respectively, and for their challenging synthesis. Using a conventional quartz-tube encapsulation method and a two-layer encapsulation method that utilizes custom-built high-pressure furnaces, we are able to grow single crystals with linear dimensions up to several millimeters parallel to the CuO2 planes. Extended post-growth anneals are shown to lead to sharp superconducting transitions, indicative of high macroscopic homogeneity. X-ray diffraction and polarized Raman spectroscopy are identified as viable methods to resolve the seemingly unavoidable inter-growth of the two compounds. Our work helps to remove obstacles toward the study of these model cuprate systems with experimental probes that require sizable high-quality crystals. The high-T c superconducting cuprates (HTSCs) have attracted a tremendous amount of interest for their significance in fundamental science and their potential for applications. Despite enormous research efforts since the original discovery of HTSCs more than three decades ago Among the several hundred cuprates, those compounds with high structural symmetry and higher T c are commonly considered advantageous for experimental study. Low structural symmetry can mask the underlying behavior of the CuO 2 planes 6 and low T c values are often associated with stronger point disorder effects and/or stronger competing phases Key results include the demonstration of universal translational-symmetry-preserving magnetism In the present study, we extend the growth and characterization of sizable single crystals to the multilayered sister compounds HgBa 2 CaCu 2 O 6+δ (Hg1212) and HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8+δ (Hg1223). Part of the motivation is to enable the systematic study of the most desirable, highest-T c cuprates. Comparison with the established properties of single-layer Hg1201 can be expected to be illuminating. Moreover, Hg1212 is of high interest for a direct comparison with YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x , arguably the most studied HTSC, which features CuO chains in addition to the CuO 2 bilayers and lower, orthorhombic symmetry in the superconducting doping range. Finally, Hg1223 offers an opportunity to investigate a cuprate system with of two inequivalent types of CuO 2 layers: the outer layers are adjacent to the "charge reservoir" Hg-O layers, whereas the inner layer is partially "screened" by the outer layers and may hence be less doped The synthesis of Hg-family of HTSCs presents a major challenge, especially for the growth of large single crystals, because mercury is volatile. The existence of gaseous Hg contrasts with the syntheses of many other HTSCs that mainly involve solid-state or solid-liquidstate reactions. In order to ensure a sufficiently high density of gaseous Hg, high-pressure techniques have been applied since the discoveries of the Hg-family HTSCs. Extremely high pressures up to 60 Kbar (1 bar = 10 5 Pa), generated by a belt-type apparatus, were originally used to synthesize polycrystalline samples Early syntheses were mostly performed at temperatures around 800 • C (Refs. 51-57), at which the reactions were of a solid-gas-state nature, which usually resulted in an end product of powder form. Although in some reports crystals up to sub-millimeter size in CuO 2 -planar dimensions were obtained Our first attempt to grow single crystals of doublelayer Hg1212 was performed by modifying the method of Zhao et al. A problem with this method is that the quartz tubes have a relatively high chance of exploding during the growth, because the required vapor pressure generated by the excess amount of HgO at high temperatures approaches the pressure limit that can be sustained even by the best quartz tubes. Moreover, we were unable to reach the required pressures for the synthesis of Hg1223 with this method. In order to overcome this problem, we therefore built a special high-pressure container to serve as a second layer of encapsulation, in order to prevent the sealed quartz tube from exploding. We now describe this new growth procedure in detail. The growth of Hg1212/Hg1223 crystals involved two steps: the initial preparation of precursor and the subsequent synthesis/crystal growth in a high-pressure furnace [Fig. was taken out from the furnace, it was immediately transferred into an argon glovebox, in which it was mixed with a stoichiometric amount of CaO and an excess amount of HgO. The mixture was put into a zirconia crucible, which was then sealed into an evacuated thick-walled (3 mm thickness) quartz tube. By carefully tuning the amount of excess HgO in the mixture, we were able to find the optimal range for the two different phases. For Hg1212, 2.04 g of Ba 2 Cu 2 O y precursor was mixed with stoichiometric amounts of CaO powder (0.25 g) and HgO powder (0.95 g), as well as an additional 0.7-0.75 g of HgO. For Hg1223, besides using its own stoichiometric amounts of precursor, CaO, and HgO, the optimal additional amount of HgO was 0.8-0.85 g. The additional amounts of HgO were 2-3 times of that used for the growth of Hg1201 (0.3 g) The subsequent synthesis and crystal growth took place in a custom-built high-pressure furnace. The sealed quartz tube was surrounded by a protecting open tube of stainless steel (not shown here), and placed into a cylinder made of a nickel-based alloy, as depicted in Fig. Using the two-layer encapsulation method, we were able to obtain high-quality single crystals of Hg1212 and Hg1223. Successful synthesis yields a black final product with single crystals embedded inside, with typical abplane dimensions of several millimeters and a thickness of 0.3 mm, as is shown in Fig. The crystal growth of the multi-layered Hg-family com- pounds inevitably suffers from inter-growth problems, similar to those of other cuprates In addition X-ray diffraction, we used Raman spectroscopy to characterize our samples, by taking advantage of the fact that characteristic Raman-active phonon peaks are distinctly different for the members of the Hgfamily cuprates. Figure Single-crystal X-ray diffraction data for Hg1201, Hg1212 and Hg1223, with momentum transfer along the c axis. The common peaks around 43 degrees originate from the sample plate. The (0 0 6) reflection of Hg1212 and the (0 0 8) reflection of Hg1223 are too weak and/or too close to these peaks to be visible. Inset: Illustration of the diffraction geometry. become sharper at lower temperature, the measurements were performed at low temperatures with the samples installed inside an ultrahigh-vacuum liquid-helium flow cryostat. According to structural analysis, Hg1201, Hg1212, and Hg1223 ought to have a total of 2, 4, and 5 A 1g optical phonons, respectively. However, all spectra displayed in Fig. The assignments in Table To summarize, we have successfully synthesized sizable single crystals of Hg1212 and Hg1223. We have demonstrated by a variety of methods that our samples are of high quality, and the doping level can be controlled to some extent by post-growth anneals. While inter-growth problems appear to be inevitable, we are able to distinguish the different crystals by using single-crystal Xray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy has also allowed us to characterize the lattice dynamics. The data suggest the formation of short-range order at low temperature, along with local lattice deformations. The newly available crystals of the double-and triple-layer Hg-family HTSCs can be expected to enable new directions in the study of the cuprate HTSCs.