In many networks of scientific interest we know that the link between any pair of vertices conforms to a specific probability, such as the link probability in the Barabá si-Albert scale-free networks. Here we demonstrate how the distributions of link probabilities can be utilized to generate various complex networks simply and effectively. We focus in particular on the problem of complex network generation and develop a straightforward paradigm by using the strategy of vertex selecting-andpairing to create complex networks more generic than other relevant approaches. Crucially, our paradigm is capable of generating various complex networks with varied degree distributions by using different probabilities for selecting vertices, while in contrast other relevant approaches can only be used to generate a specific type of complex networks. We demonstrate our paradigm on four synthetic Barabá si-Albert scale-free networks, four synthetic Watts-Strogatz small-world networks, and on a real email network with known degree distributions. Complex networks can be exploited to address complex problems in many research fields, such as the epidemiology, ecology, communication, human behavior, biologic, economics, logistic system, internet of things, transportation system In the network science, one of the most critical issues is to generate various complex networks. And several methods have been proposed to build complex networks. For example, the Barabá si Albert Model (BA) In addition to the models for generating scale-free networks, the Watts-Strogatz model (WS model) and the Newman-Watts model (NW model) are two classical models for generating smallworld networks. The WS model From the above-described models for generating scale-free networks and small-world networks, a generic principle could be achieved, i.e., to link vertices according to a random selecting probability. The random probability is utilized to select the preferential linked neighboring vertices. And different probabilities for selecting neighbors could lead to different complex networks. In this paper, we propose a generic and straightforward paradigm for creating complex networks by using the strategy of vertex selecting-and-pairing on the basis of exploiting different distributions of selecting probabilities. To examine the performance of the proposed paradigm, we create the classical BA scale-free networks, the WS small-world networks, and a scale-free network which is similar to a real email network by exploiting the proposed paradigm. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a detailed introduction to the proposed generic paradigm. Section 3 and Section 4 present and discuss the results of our designed tests, respectively. Section 5 draws several conclusions. The essential idea behind the proposed paradigm for generating complex networks is to select two vertices of an edge according to probability distributions. Moreover, different combinations of the probability distributions can lead to different eventual degree distributions in generated networks. There are three steps in the paradigm, including (1) a procedure for avoiding isolated vertices, (2) a procedure for selecting-and-pairing vertices, and (3) a cleaning procedure for removing selfloops and link duplications. Moreover, there are three input parameters of the proposed paradigm, including (1) the number of vertices, (2) the number of edges, and (3) the expected degree distribution. In this subsection, we propose two schemes for avoiding isolated vertices, including Scheme A and Scheme B. To avoid isolated vertices in the generated networks, we conduct a simple preprocessing before creating complex networks. The essential idea is to link each vertex only once to any vertex of the rest vertices. For example, the vertex indexed with 0 will be linked to the vertex indexed with 1; and this is the same for the two vertices indexed with 2 and 3; see Figure When the number of vertices, i.e., m, is even, then (m / 2) edges could be created. When m is odd, then the last vertex will be linked to the first vertex, and thus (m / 2 + 1) edges could be obtained. And in this case, all the vertices have the degree of 1 except the first vertex has the degree of 2. The essential idea behind the Scheme B is to orderly select the first vertices of all edges and to randomly select the corresponding second vertices of all edges based on probabilities, see Figure After the above preprocessing procedure, we further create the desired complex network by selecting-and-pairing vertices. The essential idea is to select two vertices which linked by an edge according to different distributions of selecting probabilities. That means, the probabilities for selecting two vertices which linked by an edge conform to a specific statistic distribution. For example, when the probabilities for selecting two vertices which are linked by an edge can all conform to the Uniform distributions, then the small-world network will be generated. When the probabilities for selecting two vertices which are linked by an edge can all conform to the Gaussian distributions, then the scale-free network will be generated. Note that the distributions of the selecting probabilities for selecting two vertices can be different. For example, one of the two vertices is selected according to selecting probabilities which conform to a Uniform distribution and the other vertex is selected according to a Gaussian distribution. And the different combinations of the distributions of selecting probabilities also can give rise to different complex networks. Suppose there are m vertices and n edges in the expected complex network, and there are s edges which remain after the first procedure. The procedure for selecting-and-pairing vertices is composed of: (1) randomly selecting two vertices which linked by an edge from the m vertices, respectively, and the random probabilities for selecting two vertices conform to two statistic distributions which can be different or the same, see Figure m Vertices m Vertices Copy All Vertices The selecting probabilities for each vertex conform a statistic distribution Figure After the above two procedures, it needs to further remove self-loops and link duplications in the expected network. The specific procedure is composed of: (1) Copying all edges with the opposite direction; see Figure (2) Sorting all edges first according to the IDs of the vertex A and then according to the IDs of the vertex B in ascending order. (3) Comparing each pair of arbitrarily adjacent edges and removing one of the two edges which have the same two vertices. For instance, in Figure Removing (b) In this section, we give an introduction to the experimental design and test data. And we present three groups of experimental results, including (1) the performance of creating BA scale-free networks, (2) the performance of creating WS small-world networks, and (3) the performance of creating a real email network. To create the scale-free network and small-world network, we select the Uniform distribution and the Gaussian distribution for the selecting probabilities. We could use several combinations of distributions to create the scale-free networks and small-world networks; see Table For the Scheme B of the first procedure, there are two distributions can be configured, i.e., the second vertex of each edge can be selected according to the probabilities conforming to the Uniform or Gaussian distribution. And in the second procedure, there are three combinations of two selecting probability distributions for two vertices which linked by each edge, respectively, i.e., the probabilities for selecting two vertices which are linked by each edge (1) all conform to the Uniform distributions, or (2) all conform to the Gaussian distributions, or (3) one of them conforms to the Uniform distribution and one of them conforms to the Gaussian distribution. Therefore, there are 9 combinations for creating scale-free networks and small-world networks, i.e., the combination P0D1, P0D2, P0D3, P1D1, P1D2, P1D3, P2D1, P2D2, and P2D3; see Table Moreover, there is an input parameter of the Gaussian distribution, i.e., the variance σ. The σ can affect the generated network structure, and we configure the range of σ being from 0.1 to 1.0, and the uniform interval is 0.1. There are 9 benchmark networks, i.e., There are 4 benchmark networks employed for evaluating the performance of creating BA scale-free networks; see Table The degree distribution of BA scale-free networks is the Power-low distribution; see the probability density function in Equation (1) Equation (1) (P(k) expresses the probability that randomly selecting a vertex with k degree from all vertices.) When employing the combinations P0D2, P0D3, P1D1, P1D2, P1D3, P2D1, P2D2, and P2D3, the networks which have the Power-low degree distribution will be generated. It has been observed that all of the above 8 combinations involving the probabilities conforming to Gaussian distribution for selecting vertices. Moreover, we find that the value of b always decreases with the increase of the σ in the Gaussian distribution. It is possibly because that the discrete of the Gaussian distribution increases and the kurtosis of the Gaussian distribution decreases with the increase of the variance σ. In this case, the differences between the selecting probabilities of vertices increase, and the power exponent b decreases. However, the changes of b are varied in different combinations. For example, the decreasing rate of b in the combination P0D2 is more than that in the combination P0D3, see Table The above behavior is probably due to (1) the different combinations of distributions for selecting vertices in the second procedure and (2) the different combinations of the first and the second procedures. For example, in Table For other combinations, i.e., the combinations P0D2, P1D2, and P1D3, the benchmark BA scale-free networks cannot be generated by using those combinations. It is caused by the changes of b with the increase of σ in those combinations. In those combinations, the maximum b while σ = 0.1 is smaller than 2, and the further decreased σ cannot lead to the further increased b. There are four benchmark networks employed for evaluating the performance of creating WS small-world networks; see Table The degree distribution of WS small-world networks is the Poisson distribution, see the probability density function in Equation (2) r k e When employing the combination P0D1, the networks which have the Poisson degree distribution will be generated. The fitted curves of degree distributions in the generated and benchmark WS networks are illustrated in Figure It has been observed that the values of r in the generated networks are close to the values of r in the benchmark networks; and for the Poisson fitted curves, the Goodness of Fit in the generated networks is better than that in the benchmark networks. There is only one benchmark network employed for evaluating the performance of creating a real email network; see Table The degree distribution of the real email network is the Power-law distribution, see the probability density function in Equation (1) With the use of input parameters of the real email network listed in Table Moreover, the Coefficient of Determination (COD) R 2 for the generated networks in Figure The selected range is first scaled to be -0.5 ~ 0.5, then enlarged to be -0.5 * numVert ~ 0.5 * numVert, and finally transformed to be 0 ~ numVert with the offset of 0.5 * numVert. After scaling the selected range from -5 ~ 5 to -0.5 ~ 0.5, we generate a series of random numbers that conforming to the Gaussian distribution. We have found that more than 95% of the generated random numbers fall into the range of -0.5 ~ 0.5; and there also have very small possibility for creating random numbers that are out of the range of -0.5 ~ 0.5. With the increase of σ, the possibility for creating random numbers that are out of the range of -0.5 ~ 0.5 increases. If those random numbers that are out of the range of -0.5 ~ 0.5 are generated, we will ignore and not use them as the indices of vertices. Therefore, with the increase of σ, the R 2 , in general, would decrease, i.e., the Goodness of Fit would get worse. Moreover, it has been observed that the combinations P1D1, P2D1, P0D3, P1D3, and P2D3 can be employed to create complex networks with Power-low degree distributions when the numbers of vertices and numbers of edges in the four benchmark BA scale-free networks are given. However, when employing the above five combinations and when giving the number of vertices and the number of edges in the benchmark email network, it is not able to create complex networks with Power-low degree distributions; instead, those complex networks with Poisson distributions would be created. It has been observed that all of the above 5 combinations involving the probabilities conforming to the Uniform distribution and Gaussian distribution for selecting vertices. The probabilities conforming the Uniform distribution are uniform. And most of the probabilities conforming the Gaussian distribution are close to the expectation of the Gaussian distribution. For the combination of the Uniform distribution and Gaussian distribution, the discrete of Gaussian distribution would increase with the influence of the Uniform distribution on the probabilities. And this can be deemed as a competition between the Uniform distribution and Gaussian distribution. And the competition between the Uniform distribution and Gaussian distribution impact the degree distributions of the expected networks. The number of edges is much larger than the number of vertices in the real email network, in this case, the Uniform distribution is of an advantage over the competition between the Uniform distribution and Gaussian distribution. And the degree distributions in combinations is the Poisson distribution with the possibilities of selecting vertices which conforming the Uniform distribution, such as the degree distribution in the combination P0D1. However, the numbers of vertices are close to the numbers of edges in the benchmark BA scalefree networks, see Table In this section, we will analyze the advantages and shortcomings of the proposed paradigm, and point out our future work. Our paradigm is straightforward. The essential idea behind the proposed paradigm is to select two vertices of each edge according to probability distributions. Different combinations of the probability distributions can lead to different degree distributions in generated networks. Moreover, compared with other relevant approaches for generating complex networks, our paradigm is of low computational complexity. The computational complexity of both the first and the second procedures are nearly O(n), while the computational complexity of the third procedure is O(nlogn). Our paradigm is generic. Different combinations of probability distributions for selecting vertices can lead to different complex networks, such as the BA scale-free network, the WS smallworld network, scale-free networks with different power exponents, or other complex networks when using other combinations of probability distributions for selecting vertices. Our paradigm is of strong applicability. The main difference between our paradigm and other relevant approaches is that: besides the classic BA network and the WS network, the proposed paradigm can also be employed to generate complex networks with expected numbers of vertices, numbers of edges, and types of degree distributions, if appropriate probability distributions for selecting vertices are employed. In the proposed paradigm, it is needed to conduct several tests to determine the optimal parameters of the probability density function. If a real complex network is expected, the optimal parameter of selecting probability distribution needs to be found by tests. In our paradigm, two vertices of each edge are selected according to specific probability distributions. The parameters of the probability density functions are of strong effect on the degree distributions of the generated networks. Therefore, several tests need to be conducted to determine optimal parameters of the probability density functions. For example, we generate the real email scale-free network by adjusting the variance σ of the Gaussian distribution, and the optimal σ is 1.4, 1.45, and 1.4 in the combination P0D2, P1D2, and P2D2, respectively. Currently, our paradigm cannot be used to generated those networks including several vertices with extremely large degrees. However, the occurrence of those vertices with extremely large degrees is of weak influence on the global network structure. For example, there are 15 vertices with extremely large degrees in the benchmark real email network, but there are no such vertices in the generated email network. In this paper, we generate the scale-free networks and small-world networks by using two probability distributions in our paradigm, i.e., the Uniform distribution and Gaussian distribution. Other complex networks can also be generated by using several other appropriate probability distributions. This means our paradigm can be employed and applied to generate unknown network structures. In this paper, we have proposed a simple and generic paradigm for creating various complex networks using the strategy of vertex selecting-and-pairing. The essential idea behind the proposed paradigm is straightforward: first two vertices are randomly selected from a given set of vertices and then paired into an edge. The expected complex network could be generated after forming a given number of edges. The different choices of random selection could be used to create different types of complex networks, including the classical small-world networks and scale-free networks. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed paradigm, several created and real-world complex networks have been used for validation. The most obvious inherent feature of the proposed paradigm is the simplicity and generality, which indicate that the proposed paradigm could be easily and widely used in dealing with the problems in various complex systems.