The discovery of Weyl and Dirac semimetals has produced a number of dramatic physical effects, including the chiral anomaly and topological Fermi arc surface states Scale invariance is a prominent ingredient in many important physical theories, perhaps most notably in the area of phase transitions. These theories contain a field φ (x) that has the property that φ (λx) = λ ∆ φ (x), where λ is a continuous parameter and ∆ is the scaling dimension. More rare is the occurrence of discrete scale invariance (DSI), where a similar equation holds, but only if λ takes on discrete values Weyl and Dirac semimetals. The physical systems in question are in high magnetic field and have low concentrations of mobile electrons such that the ultra quantum limit is reached, defined by the criterion that the Fermi level is in the lowest Landau level: B n -1/3 e where the magnetic length B = c/eB and n e is the density of charge carriers. The electrons scatter from impurities, and the temperature is sufficiently low that the electrical resistivity is entirely due to the impurity contribution. These conditions are readily achieved in modern experiments We shall see below from the experimental phenomenology that the impurities are of the usual types: short-range scatterers and Coulomb scatterers. We focus on the latter typeindeed it is the Coulomb potential that is the physical source of the DSI. This has dramatic consequences for the magnetoconductivity and other properties. It is first necessary to investigate the solutions of the Coulomb problem for massless Dirac fermions. Near any Weyl point in the band structure we can write the electron Hamiltonian as where ψ ( r) is a 2-component spinor. The conclusions hold also for the (only slightly more complicated) Dirac case of a 4-component spinor. Here v is the velocity, A is the vector potential, Ze is the charge on the impurity and κ is the dielectric constant. In the actual system the 1/r potential is cut off at the atomic scale r a and the fact that it does not diverge is important When A = 0 the problem is readily separated Here the y k jm (θ, φ) are the two-component eigenfunctions of the total angular momentum j with z-component m and the index k = if j = -1/2 and k = -- k effectively labels the parity. is the orbital angular momentum. We now make the substitution F (r) = r f k j (r) and G (r) = r g k j (r) and drop the indices for brevity. Then we find the radial equations since v << c. The character of the solutions to the radial equations ( The corresponding problem has been solved in massive 3D systems The quasi-energies and widths form a geometric series. Evidence of the 2D supercritical quasi-bound states in graphene has been seen Equations The main theoretical point of this paper is that an external magnetic field B can serve as an effective cutoff at the large distance l B . Under certain conditions to be given below this renders the states normalizable and suppresses the Klein tunneling, which converts the quasi-bound states to sharp resonances. The binding energy of these resonances depends on the field in such a way that their energy levels cross the Fermi energy at discrete values of the magnetic field that constitute a geometric series. In fact the form of the wavefunction guarantees that bound or quasi-bound states will have energies that are periodic in ln B. As we will show, this leads to log-periodic behavior in B of the magneto-conductivity and other transport and thermodynamic quantities as the quasi-bound state energy levels pass through the Fermi level. This field dependence is reminiscent of the 1/B periodicity that characterizes Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) and all other sorts of quantum oscillations. The SdH oscillations in 3D Dirac materials has been systematically studied recently We first present the exact solution for the quasi-energy spectrum and wavefunctions for B = 0 for the soft boundary condition V (r ≤ r a ) = V 0 = Ze 2 /κr a . The main results, as will be seen, do not depend on the precise form of the boundary condition. The energies and widths are the real and imaginary parts of the poles of the scattering phase shift as a function of the complex variable E. The equation is Γ is the usual gamma function and the definition of the function χ in terms of hypergeometric functions is given in the supplementary information. Fig. It is instructive to compare these to the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) approximation combined with the scattering method. The details are given in the supplementary infor-maiton where it is seen that the agreement of the quasiclassical approximation with the exact solution is very good. A very important consequence of DSI is that the range of validity of the quasiclassical approximation is very broad and we see that it in fact holds for all r >> r a . There is no intrinsic length scale at large distances to limit quasiclassicality. We now apply a field B = B z. The magnetic field introduces a new characteristic length Effectively there is a confining potential with the characteristic length scale B that now breaks the DSI at large r ∼ B . The falloff of the wavefunction with r in the B = 0 case had the form r -1 -this function is normalizable in 1D. As B increases, we therefore expect the quasi-bound states to evolve into true bound states. When B is finite, then the problem is no longer exactly solvable. We consider the case that the expectation vales of the Coulomb attraction is much greater than the Landau level spacing, which means that the radius r n of the n-th quasi-bound state satisfies r n √ 2 2 αl B . In this region the system still satisfies approximate spherical symmetry, and expanding in spinor spherical harmonic function reduce the problem to the radial equation, which can be numerically solved by the WKB method. We show numerical solutions for the energy spectrum as a function of field on a log-log plot in Fig. The main phenomenological point of this paper is that log-periodic oscillations have already been seen in 3 semi-metallic systems: ZrTe 5 , Bi, and TaAs Since α depends on the Fermi velocity and the dielectric constant, this is to be expected. DSI has stronger consequences than simply the ln B periodicity. In fact we expect that the entire curve of a macroscopic property shows DSI, not just the peak and valley positions. To illustrate this, we compute the magneto-conductances σ xx and σ zz , since in experiments at high field it is generally the resistivity tensor derivable from them that are measured; other properties will be discussed at the end. The scattering cross-section for Coulomb impurities at a fixed energy shows modulation as a function of field: as the bound state energies pass through a fixed energy the cross section will have a maximum. This effect is captured by the T-matrix approximation for the Kubo formula for σ xx . We follow the classic treatment of Bastin et al. where n s is the density of short-range scatterers, n C is the density of Coulomb scatters, * the effective length along the magnetic field (which depends on microscopic details), t is the coupling strength between the bound states with the continuum of lowest Landau level states, E F is the Fermi energy, E n are the quasi-bound state state energies as calculated and shown above, and Γ (B) are the widths that are mainly determined by the broadening effect of overlap with the lowest Landau level. The calculations are done at zero temperature. This formula in practice is extremely well approximated by with the fitting parameters are η denoting the effective broadening factor and B 0 denoting a characteristic magnetic field. Equation ( Thus, the longitudinal resistivity also satisfies the DSI property. However, we expect the DSI feature in ρ zz to be harder to observe than ρ xx , since the resistivity becomes smaller under large magnetic field due to the noted negative magnetoresistivity effect Equations ( xy (here we used the property σ xx σ xy from the experimental data previously. This new process is of course what gives rise to oscillations periodic in ln B in the magnetoconductances. This is seen in the theory and the experiments as an additional contribution to the linear in B background of ρ xx . In Fig. In Fig. The theory may be tested in several ways. A simple test would be to vary the density n C of Coulomb impurities. The amplitude of the oscillations in ρ xx is proportional to n C . Varying the valence Z of the impurities would also be of great interest. The ratio of successive peaks in σ xx is proportional to exp (-πs 0 ) and s 0 = √ α 2 -k 2 with α = Ze 2 /κ v. Thus the ratio should decrease as Z increases. Another possible effect of increasing Z is that more than one angular momentum channel becomes important. We have implicitly assumed above that k = ±1. Then the oscillation pattern would become more complicated. The spectrum of hydrogenic impurities in semiconductors has been tested in detail by optical experiments. This should also be possible here. Since the resonances are only sharp when the field is strong, field-dependent spectra would be needed. Our proposal is that the impurities play the central role in creating the DSI, which means that DSI is an extrinsic effect. However, there may also exist the possibility of an intrinsic effect caused by electron-hole interactions, It may be more difficult to get into the supercritical regime since Z is fixed at Z = 1, but the concentrations would be higher and the collisions are particularly effective at degrading electrical current. ZrTe 5 in particular has a temperature-dependent Hall effect that seems to require both electrons and holes. In our theory, we have neglected screening and a possible finite mass, both effects that break DSI by introducing a length scale. The simplest picture of screening is that the Coulomb interaction is cut off at the Thomas-Fermi length L T F = (4πe 2 ∂n/∂μ) -1/2 = 0.32α -1/2 g -1/6 n -1/3 , where μ is the chemical potential and g is the degeneracy including spin and number of nodes in the band structure. This means that B < L T F when the ultra quantum limit is reached and the 1/r form for the potential should be accurate for our purposes. We may also note that screening is expected to weaken as the field increases. We have also assumed zero mass for the electrons. If the mass is not zero, then there is The non-oscillating backgrounds are subtracted to fit the experimental data from ref. 