A stack of coated conductors is a perspective configuration for various applications of high temperature superconductors. We present an efficient fast Fourier transform-based numerical method for magnetization problems for a stack of flat films of the same (arbitrary) shape and compare it with the recently proposed finite element methods. For stacks containing a large number of densely packed films an accurate solution can be obtained as a properly rescaled solution for a stack of only several films. For an infinite stack the problem simplifies and becomes similar to that for a single film. Progress in fabrication and commercial availability of high temperature coated conductors made stacks of such conductors an attractive alternative to bulk superconductors for trapping strong magnetic fields, magnetic levitation, etc. Advantages of coated conductors are their high critical current density, better mechanical and thermal stability due to the metal substrate layers, higher degree of uniformity, and flexibility in adaptation to different configurations (see, e.g., Typically, the width to thickness ratio of the superconducting layer in coated conductors is between 1000 and 10000, which justifies modeling using the infinitely thin film approximation. For stacks of a few infinitely long strips, the two-dimensional (2D) magnetization problems were solved numerically in, e.g., Here we present a new numerical method for 3D magnetization problems for a finite stack of flat films of the same (arbitrary) shape. The method uses the fast Fourier transform (FFT) for approximation in space and the method of lines for integration in time. It is an extension of the numerical method for thin film magnetization problems proposed by Vestgården et al. , where Differentiating  gr 0 ; here and below the dot means differentiation in respect to time. Following . Then we also know the sheet current densities mm g and can find the parallel to films electric field components () in each film using To find the derivative g for a given g , for each film we find mm g and set out out with a sufficiently high constant fictitious resistivity out and set an initial approximation (0) [ ]. ii z    g Φh Our computer implementation of the described iterative method is similar to that in ) to integrate the spatially discretized problem in time. All simulations were performed on a computer with the Intel® CoreTM i7-4770 CPU @ 3.40 GHz processor, 16 GB RAM, 64-bit Windows 10. Employed in applications are often stacks of a large number of densely packed coated conductors with the distance between the superconducting films much less than the film size. In such cases efficient solution of magnetization problems can be obtained using homogenization and transition to the anisotropic bulk model  finite element mesh by the MEMEP method took 6.0 days; COMSOL needed 1.7 days to solve the benchmark problem using a similar mesh inside the superconductor and the h -formulation- based method (see Our attempt to solve the stack benchmark problem using the 3D FFT-based method for bulk superconductors With only 4 films we already have / 0.05 da  and so even the 4-film stack should be a good approximation to the benchmark problem. Since the normal to film component of the magnetic moment can be conveniently expressed via the stream function,  r j r r , the AC loss per period for the film stacks was calculated as   was found sufficient to suppress the stray currents in vicinity of film boundaries. Our simulation results are presented in Table Further numerical experiments showed that increasing the grid resolution, the resistivity out  , and/or the computation domain size does not lead to mh Q variations exceeding 2% but the computation time grows quickly. In figure ; this distribution is very similar to those in Superconducting film stacks of a height several times greater the film size were used, e.g., in , where m takes all integer values. Here  can be an arbitrary finite 2D domain but, for simplicity, we assume again that  is simply connected. All films in an stack are under the same conditions, so for all films , , , , , where () , equations ( (1 ) q Sk kq    at 0 k  is replaced by zero and C chosen using the condition out d0 g    r . The evolutionary problem for g is similar to that for a single film, see [23], with () Sk instead of 2/k . Briefly, the numerical method is as follows. For g given at time t we find We set (0) (0) e, () [ ], are performed, for the spatially discretized problem, on each step of the ordinary differential equation solver until their convergence with a given tolerance. Here  is the relaxation parameter (as in  is set to zero at 0 k  , where also 1 (0) 0 q  . Finally, the magnetic field can be expressed from As an example, we simulated magnetization of the infinite stack of thin disks of radius R characterized by the power law (1) with 50 n  . We used the dimensionless variables We note that if an infinite stack is densely packed (figure An interesting open question is whether solution to this specific infinite stack problem can, for the Bean model, be presented as a d -dependent algebraic transformation of the analytical solution Efficient numerical solution of highly nonlinear 3D eddy current problems in type-II superconductivity is necessary for design of superconducting devices. Several finite element methods have been proposed recently; some of them (see Our work presents a simple but, nevertheless, efficient FFT-based alternative to these methods. Developed first for 2D film magnetization problems in We showed that, to simulate magnetization of a densely packed stack of a large number of films, transition to the anisotropic bulk model is not the only possible approach. As in the 2D case (stacks of infinitely long strips, see The Matlab FFT software employed in our work is intrinsically parallelized; further parallelization of our algorithm is possible but was not implemented. Ran on a personal computer with four processors, our program was faster than those in The distributions of current in films of a high stack are usually similar in all except the films close to the stack ends. Previously, 2D magnetization problem for an infinite stack of long strips was solved analytically in Although for simplicity we assumed that the films are simply connected, the multiply connected film case can be treated exactly as in the single film case (see, e.g., 