We consider the direct detection of dark matter (DM) with polar materials, where single production of optical or acoustic phonons gives excellent reach to scattering of sub-MeV DM for both scalar and vector mediators. Using Density Functional Theory (DFT), we calculate the material-specific matrix elements, focusing on GaAs and sapphire, and show that DM scattering in an anisotropic crystal such as sapphire features a strong directional dependence. For example, for a DM candidate with mass 40 keV and relic abundance set by freeze-in, the daily modulation in the interaction rate can be established at 90% C.L. with a gram-year of exposure. Non-thermal dark photon DM in the meV -eV mass range can also be effectively absorbed in polar materials. Sub-GeV dark matter (DM) has become an important direction in dark matter searches in recent years. While low mass DM models have long been recognized to be viable theoretically, only recently have they come within experimental reach for direct searches. The correct dark matter abundance can be obtained in a variety of models, such as Hidden Valleys Matter There is now a wide range of upcoming experimental probes for DM with mass between 1 MeV and 1 GeV (see Ref. Extending the reach to keV-MeV DM particles presents greater challenges, but also new opportunities. The main challenge is to detect the extremely small energy depositions in ultra pure targets. Superconducting targets Furthermore, a DM particle with mass less than ∼ 1 MeV has a deBroglie wavelength that is longer than the inter-particle spacing in typical materials, implying that the DM effectively couples to the collective excitations of atoms (phonons) in the target. Such DM-phonon scattering processes have different kinematics and allow for a greater amount of energy to be extracted from the DM than for scattering off a single free nucleus. This was the idea of Ref. Ref. In this paper we consider the production of a single excitation -an optical phonon in a polar material -from the interaction of a sub-MeV DM particle. Optical phonons occur in all materials with more than one atom in their primitive cell, including e.g. germanium and diamond crystals. Unlike acoustic phonons, where the atoms (or rather, the ions) in the primitive cell oscillate in phase, optical phonons arise when the inequivalent atoms in the primitive cell oscillate out of phase. The optical phonons are gapped at low momentum with typical energies of 10 -100 meV, which is wellmatched to the total kinetic energy of sub-MeV DM. In a polar material such as GaAs or sapphire (Al 2 O 3 ), the inequivalent atoms in the primitive cell also have different effective charges, such that the coherent, out-of-phase motion of the ions in the optical modes generates a strong oscillating dipole. In Ref. This is in contrast to Dirac and Weyl materials, which show similar theoretical promise for sub-MeV DM In our previous analysis Next, we consider a few specific model benchmarks: in Section III, we present the reach and daily modulation for DM scattering via an ultralight dark photon mediator, or millicharged DM with photonmediated scattering. Section IV considers nucleon scattering mediated by a light scalar, where we find 1 Other proposals with directional sensitivity to low mass DM scattering include using graphene modulation rates as large 30% for m X ∼ 50 keV. We lastly consider absorption of dark photon DM with mass of 10-100 meV into optical phonons and multiphonons in Section V, and conclude in Section VI. More details on the derivation of DM scattering rates are provided in Appendices A-C, while some results on scalar-mediated electron scattering are contained in Appendix D. Finally, some additional details on our method to estimate the statistical discrimination for the daily modulation signal are given in Appendix E. A detailed description of the experimental setup as well as the calculation of the most important backgrounds will be presented in an upcoming paper. In the meanwhile, for a brief description of the experimental setup and estimates of the backgrounds we refer the reader to Ref. In this section we first lay out the qualitative features that make polar materials excellent targets for sub-MeV dark matter. For the purposes of this paper, we focus on the examples of GaAs and sapphire As briefly discussed in the introduction, polar materials have several features that make them attractive as targets for the scattering and absorption of light DM. These properties are: i) Even in the limit of low momentum transfer, a relatively large energy deposition is possible when scattering into optical phonons; ii) Sapphire has an anisotropic crystal structure, allowing for directional detection; iii) The optical response allows for dark photon interactions, but is still sufficiently weak that screening effects do not hinder the sensitivity. We detail each of these features in turn. Polar crystals have a primitive unit cell with more than one type of atom. The total number of phonon modes is given by the number of atoms in the primitive cell multiplied by a factor of three due to three spatial degrees of freedom. Three of the phonon modes are always acoustic modes, where atoms in the primitive cell oscillate exactly in phase in the long-wavelength limit. The rest of the modes are optical phonon modes, where the atoms oscillate out of phase. For GaAs there are three optical modes, two transverse (TO) modes and one longitudinal (LO) mode, as visualized in Fig. For sapphire, there are 10 atoms in the primitive cell and as a result 30 phonon modes, divided into 3 acoustic branches and 27 optical branches. The dispersion of the phonons (energy of the mode as a function of the momentum) for each material is shown in Fig. The acoustic modes (labeled transverse (TA) and longitudinal (LA) acoustic) have the standard gapless, linear dispersion at |q| ≈ 0 ("Γ" point in Fig. wave which stores a finite amount of energy. A priori, the dark matter can excite both the optical and acoustic modes, but the energy deposited in the acoustic modes is much smaller and is only detectable in the most optimistic circumstances. Concretely, for m X MeV, the DM momentum m X v keV is sufficiently small that it is only possible to excite a phonon mode within the first Brillouin zone. Consider a DM scattering with momentum transfer q and energy deposition ω, which excites a single acoustic phonon; the phonon must absorb all of the energy and momentum transferred. This leads to the scaling with v ∼ 10 -3 the DM velocity and assuming the speed of sound for sapphire. The threshold for near future devices will be at best in the 10 -100 meV range, which means that single acoustic phonon excitations from light DM will be difficult or impossible to detect, depending on m X . However, the scaling in (1) does not apply for the optical modes since they have an energy of ω ∼ 30 meV or more as |q| → 0, as is evident from Fig. The gapped dispersion of optical phonons is a particularly appealing feature, as it allows nearly the maximum amount of DM kinetic energy to be extracted in the scattering, even when the momentum transfer is much less than a keV. This is in contrast to recoils off free nuclei, where the energy deposited from light DM is much less than the initial DM kinetic energy. The presence of optical phonons is also advantageous compared to a material such as superfluid helium. Superfluid helium does have gapped quasiparticle excitations (rotons), but they only occur at high q and are much lower energy that the optical phonons in a solid. Since single phonon production in superfluid helium is undetectable in the foreseeable future, one must resort to multi-phonon production to break the relation in The crystal structure of polar materials can be anisotropic. This is the case for sapphire, which has a rhombohedral lattice structure and therefore a primary crystal axis. This anisotropy manifests itself both in the spectrum of the phonons (see Fig. The optical response is particularly important if the DM scattering is mediated by a dark photon that is kinetically mixed with the SM photon. Since the dark photon has a coupling to the electromagnetic current, naively the best target for direct detection would be a population of free charges, such as the conduction electrons in a metal. However, the same free charges screen the dark photon field at the low frequencies that are of interest. The ideal material therefore has few conduction electrons but a large polarizability. Superfluid helium fails the latter criterion, as the polarizability of a He atom is very small, rendering helium transparent to both SM and dark photon fields To compare the characteristics of polar materials with other candidate targets like superconductors and Dirac/Weyl materials, it is useful to express the electromagnetic response in terms of the longitudinal and transverse in-medium polarization tensor Π T,L , which is expressed in terms of the relative permittivity of the material, and where Accounting for the in-medium effects, the matrix element for scattering can be written as where P μν T,L are the projection operators for transverse and longitudinal polarizations, κ is the vacuum mixing parameter between the dark and SM photon, m A is the dark photon mass and g X is the gauge coupling of DM with the dark photon. Thus, as demonstrated by previous work on dark photon mediated interactions Superconductors were the first targets to be considered for direct detection of sub-MeV DM In the limit of |q| ω, the dielectric function in metals and superconductors displays Thomas-Fermi screening: with λ 2 TF = 3e 2 n e /(2E F ) (few keV) 2 . The maximum momentum transfer for sub-MeV DM-electron scattering is |q| = 2m X v X keV, such that metal tends to be very large. This screening severely limits the sensitivity of superconductors to dark photon mediated DM. This screening can be lifted in Dirac and Weyl materials. These have an arbitrarily small gap for excitations of electrons to the conduction band, but a gauge symmetry in the material protects the photon from obtaining a large in-medium polarization where b is the background dielectric constant supplied by the nuclei and bound electrons, and v F is the Fermi velocity, which is typically 10 -3 -10 -2 . The resulting dielectric constant is typically an O(1) number, such that excellent reach to dark photon mediated DM can be obtained. However, Dirac/Weyl materials are still the subject of intense research, and it is not yet known how to fabricate large, ultra pure samples needed for DM detection. In polar materials, there is a gap for electronic excitations on the order of 1-10 eV, so there is no screening by conduction electrons. And while electron excitations are forbidden, dark photon mediated DM can instead couple to the dipole moment of the optical phonons. The interaction is only screened by the valance electrons, an effect which is encoded in the high frequency dielectric constant ( ∞ ). Its value for GaAs and sapphire is in the O(1 -10) range, and we derive the screening of the dipole interaction in detail in Appendix B. Thus polar materials satisfy the criteria of large polarizability with little screening by free charges. Compared to Dirac/Weyl materials, there is some penalty to coupling though a dipole moment but the phase space for the scattering process is larger, such that the projected reach is comparable. Polar materials moreover have the advantage that the technology already exists to fabricate the bulk, ultra pure targets needed for detection. The atoms belonging to a single primitive cell are labeled with a , and for GaAs, the primitive cell is represented by the thick black lines. In the case of GaAs, we have a cubic unit cell with the crystal structure having the same symmetry in all three principal crystallographic directions. For sapphire, the in-plane axes are equivalent, but differ from the out-of-plane (vertical) crystal axis, giving the more anisotropic crystal. GaAs adopts a cubic zincblende crystal structure (space group F-43m) with two atoms (Ga and As) in the primitive unit cell (left panel of Fig. Sapphire with the chemical formula Al 2 O 3 has a more complex rhombohedral crystal structure (space group R-3c) with four Al and six O atoms in the primitive unit cell (right panel Fig. Tab. I lists some useful quantities for both materials from the point of view of DM-phonon scattering. While the quantities are all temperature-dependent, the differences between room-temperature and liquid helium temperatures are typically percent-level or less With advances in first-principles modeling of materials and in high-performance computing, it is routine to calculate the electronic and vibrational properties of crystals from first principles. For DM direct detection in particular we need the phonon spectrum over the whole Brillouin zone, since this is an input for the DM scattering (or absorption) rate calculation. Here we briefly discuss how these calculations are performed and establish the notation for the remainder of the paper. Readers familiar with the subject or only interested in the results can choose to skip the remainder of this section. The positions of the atoms (or ions) in the crystal are denoted by u j,l + r 0 j + l, where u j,l is displacement of the atom relative to its equilibrium position, r 0 j is the equilibrium position of the atom relative to the origin of the primitive cell and l is a lattice vector labeling the primitive cell. The index j therefore runs over the atoms in the primitive cell. In what follows, a boldface symbol always refers to a tensor or vector in position or reciprocal space. The potential energy V is a function of the displacements and can be expanded as where the V l,l ,j,j etc are the force constants. The force constants can be calculated from ab initio density functional theory methods. For this work we use density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the VASP package The second method, the linear response method, uses density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) to calculate the forces. In this work, we will use the former method, known as the 'frozen-phonon' method, to calculate the full phonon spectrum as it is computationally less expensive. For the Born effective charges, we will use DFPT. In the harmonic approximation, one only considers the leading non-vanishing order, keeping only l,j,l ,j . The displacement operator is then quantized in terms of phonon modes: e ν,j,q âν,q e iq•(l+r 0 j )-iων,qt + e * ν,j,q â † ν,q e -iq•(l+r 0 j )+iων,qt where the âν,q (â † ν,q ) are the creation (annihilation) operators of a phonon mode in branch ν with momentum q. The total number of branches is 3n, where n is the number of atoms in the primitive cell. ω ν,q is the energy of phonon branch ν with momentum q, and e ν,j,q is the unit vector indicating the direction of oscillation of atom j for phonon branch ν. Finally, m j is the mass of atom j, and N is the number of cells in the lattice. The q form an N -point discretization of the Brillouin zone, such that the variance of the displacement u j,l • u j ,l is an intrinsic quantity under N → ∞. In Fourier space, the equations of motion for the displacements then reduce to a standard eigenvalue problem for a given momentum vector, j D q,j,j • e ν,j ,q = ω 2 ν,q e ν,j,q , where the eigenvectors are normalized such that j e * ν,j,q • e ν,j,q = 1. The dynamical matrix D q,j,j is given by For a rigorous derivation, see e.g. The dynamical matrix receives an additional non-analytic contribution from the Born effective charges, which modifies the frequencies of the LO phonons. The Born effective charge is the electric charge that effectively contributes to the polarization induced during an atomic displacement, and is used to quantify the coupling between optical phonons and electric fields. Formally, the Born effective charge tensor Z * is defined as the change in polarization P resulting from a displacement u: where Ω is the unit cell volume, and e is the electric charge. It can also be written in terms of the change in the force F in a direction i with respect to a homogeneous electric field E in direction j. The Born effective charge tensor Z * can be calculated using DFPT. This uses density functional theory to calculate the response of the system to a finite electric field as detailed in The calculated Born effective charges for GaAs and Al 2 O 3 are and We note that due to the high symmetry of the GaAs crystal, the Born effective charges are a scalar quantity. For Al The LO phonon modes correspond to ions with opposite effective charges moving in opposing directions along q, causing long-range macroscopic electric fields in a polar crystal. In contrast, TO phonons correspond to oppositely-charged ions moving in adjacent planes parallel to each other, resulting in no long-range Coulomb interaction (see Fig. The lifting of the degeneracy between the LO and TO phonon modes at the Brillouin zone centerthe so-called LO-TO splitting -can be calculated by including the non-analytic contribution to the dynamical matrix, given by in Lorentz-Heaviside units. Hence calculating the Z * allows one to determine the corrected LO modes. Here we use diagonal ∞ tensors, as given in Table Before turning to the scattering rate computation, we first establish our assumptions and conventions regarding the DM velocity distribution and the orientation of the DM wind in the frame of the crystal, which will determine the directional signal. The incoming DM velocity in the lab frame is modeled in a standard way, with a boosted Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution: with v 0 = 220 km/s, and truncated by the escape velocity v esc = 500 km/s. The velocity of the Earth with respect to the DM wind is indicated with v e , with |v e | ≈ 240 km/s on average. The orientation of v e relative to the crystal changes as the Earth rotates around its axis. Combined with the anisotropic crystal structure, this sources a daily modulation of the scattering rate. We neglect the yearly modulation due to the Earth's orbit around the Sun. The orientation is illustrated in Fig. Since we explicitly orient the crystal relative to the dark matter wind, there is no dependence of the DM flux or scattering rate on the latitude at which the experiment is located. As a function of time, the unit vector of v e in the crystal coordinate frame is sin θ e sin φ sin θ e cos θ e (cos φ -1) with φ = 2π × t/24h the angle parametrizing the rotation of the Earth around its axis. We begin by considering Dirac fermion DM that interacts with the SM via a kinetically mixed dark photon. The model is defined by the vacuum Lagrangian where κ 1 is the kinetic mixing parameter, and g X and m A are respectively the gauge coupling and mass of the A μ field. For finite m A , one can perform a diagonalization to the mass basis, where the electron picks up a small charge (in vacuum) of κe under the dark photon. On the other hand, in the limit where m A → 0, we can perform a field redefinition A → A -κA to write the Lagrangian as where the dark matter X has a small charge e ≡ κg X under the photon. In either of these cases, there is a coupling of the DM current to the electromagnetic current that is proportional to κg X e. For sub-MeV dark matter, the relic abundance can be explained by freeze-in eV For interactions mediated by an ultralight dark photon, the long-range coupling of DM with a phonon in the crystal is then similar to that of electrons with phonons, but with an amplitude suppressed by e /e. Here, we specifically mean the interaction associated with a 1/r 2 Coulomb field. (There are also short-range electron-phonon interactions in a material, but in a polar material these interactions are typically much smaller.) The long-range interaction between electrons and phonons in semiconductors and insulators is described by the Fröhlich Hamiltonian Since the DM scattering in polar materials behaves similarly to millicharged dark matter, we can directly use the Fröhlich Hamiltonian as a description for this process. The main difference with the electron case is that the DM is a free particle, while for electrons the appropriate in-medium wavefunctions must be included. On a practical level, this is a simplification of the computation since the plane wave approximation is sufficient to describe the DM. In the following section we will summarize the most important formulas and numerical results, and provide the relevant derivations in Appendix B. 5 There have been claims in the literature that millicharged particles are effectively ejected from the disk by SN shocks, and that they cannot re-enter the disk due to the Milky Way's magnetic fields Adapted for the DM case, the Fröhlich matrix element This result is derived in Appendix B. Here ν, j and G are the phonon branches, the atoms in the primitive cell and the reciprocal lattice vectors, respectively. The momentum transfer is given by q + G, while q is the momentum of the phonon restricted to the first Brillouin zone. e is the electron charge The expression above can be understood more intuitively by taking the isotropic and longwavelength approximation. In this limit, and assuming a single phonon branch ν contributes, the matrix element simplifies to where we have dropped the reciprocal lattice vector (since the result is dominated by G = 0). For a given phonon eigenmode, the physical displacements of atom j are proportional to e * j,ν,q / 2m j ω LO ; weighted by eZ * j , this is simply the dipole moment corresponding to the lattice displacements. The eigenvector is dotted into q, selecting for the longitudinal mode, while the overall 1/|q| scaling is that expected for a dipole-charge coupling. Finally, the field generated by the dipole is screened by the valence electrons, which accounts for the 1/ ∞ factor. The above expression can be further simplified for certain crystals. In Ref. with μ the reduced mass of the Ga and As atoms. In the second equality, we expressed the Born effective charge Z * in terms of the measured quantities ω LO (the frequency of the LO phonon as q → 0), ∞ , and 0 . The derivation for this identity is given in Appendix B. None of these simplifications apply for sapphire, however, and there we must numerically sum over all phonon eigenmodes. The scattering rate for an incoming DM particle with velocity v i is obtained from Fermi's golden rule, where the momentum integral is over the first Brillouin zone. For scattering for sub-MeV dark matter, we simplify the matrix element in Eq. ( (We expect that the reach does extend to higher masses via such processes, but will not consider this regime further here.) The integral above can be performed analytically if we take the isotropic limit for the matrix element in Eq. ( where v i is the initial velocity of the DM and the Heaviside Θ-function enforces energy conservation. For the full numerical result as well as for the analytic approximation, the scattering rate for the target is obtained by integrating over the initial DM velocities: with f (v i ) the dark matter velocity distribution in Eq. ( To estimate the reach, we compute the expected 90% exclusion on e assuming zero events observed with no expected background. 8 To compare with existing constraints and other proposed experiments, 8 Backgrounds from coherent photon and coherent neutrino scattering are estimated to be no higher than a few events / kg year exposure as indicated by the dashed purple lines. Existing constraints and other proposed experiments are described further in the text. we express the result in terms of σe = 4e 2 αμ 2 (αm e ) 4 . ( which corresponds to the typical cross section of dark matter with a bound electron, e.g. in a semiconductor-based experiment. μ Xe is the DM-electron reduced mass, α is the fine-structure constant and m e is the electron mass. The result is shown in Fig. FIG. The anisotropy in the crystal structure induces a dependence of the scattering rate on the crystal orientation, which translates to a modulation over the sidereal day. Here there are two effects that lead to modulation: the directional dependence in the phonon couplings to the DM model, and in the phonon energies. For GaAs, which has a high degree of symmetry, we find that this modulation is negligible. Instead, for sapphire, there is a sizable anisotropy in the DM scattering rate. In the rest of this section, we discuss the dominant effects and present results on the modulation. The daily modulation in sapphire for several DM masses is shown in Fig. To understand the origin of the modulation in Fig. For m X 50 keV, mode 30 is kinematically forbidden, and the modulation pattern therefore changes. In this case, the lower-lying mode 16 (ω ≈ 60 meV) takes over, as shown in Fig. amplitude along the crystal axis as compared to mode 30. As such it is subdominant, unless mode 30 is kinematically inaccessible. It is worthwhile to inspect the modulation patterns of the contributions from mode 16 and mode 30 separately, which we present in Fig. The amplitude of the modulation decreases for higher m X , where larger q values are sampled in the Brillouin zone. We expect that in this limit, scattering starts to transition towards scattering with a single nucleus, which is isotropic. In other words, at high momentum transfer the DM is blind to the long-range crystal structure. In practice, this effect manifests itself in a gradual randomization of the eigenvectors as q is increased on a particular phonon branch. To illustrate this effect, the animation in Fig. Finally, we comment on the theoretical uncertainties of our first principles calculation. As a proxy for the uncertainty, we have also calculated total scattering rates and modulation patterns using inequivalent rather than averaged Born effective charges for each of the different Al and O atoms in the primitive cell (see discussion in App. A 2). We find small differences in the total rate at the level of a few percent for m X 75 keV, though the difference grows for lighter DM, up to a factor of ∼ 4 for m X ≈ 25 keV. The modulation amplitude differs by roughly a factor of two between the two assumptions for m X ≈ 25 keV, but this difference reduces to roughly 50% for m X 50 keV. We find that the overall modulation pattern remains unchanged. In this section, we consider the benchmark where DM couples primarily to nuclei through a light scalar mediator. The underlying interactions are where we assume a scalar DM particle, X, and an identical coupling y n to both neutrons and protons. We further take m φ small compared to the typical momentum transfer; the so-called light-mediator regime. Similarly to the dark photon mediator, this model is already subject to a number of astrophysical and terrestrial constraints, and we refer the reader to Ref. The scattering of DM off the nuclei of a lattice is similar to the scattering of cold neutrons, except for an additional form factor associated with the light mediator. There is extensive literature on the scattering of cold neutrons (for a review, see for example Ref. 2 N , where b N is the average neutronnucleus scattering length. Accounting for the lattice structure requires summing over nuclei, weighted appropriately by the phonon wavefunctions. For DM scattering via a light scalar, the techniques for cold neutron scattering in the lattice can then be directly applied. For a nearly massless mediator, the differential cross section diverges as 1/|q| 4 , though the divergence is cut off by the experimental threshold. Since this threshold varies for different experiments, it is conventional to introduce an effective DM-nucleon cross section, where q 0 ≡ v 0 m X is a reference momentum and μ Xn is the DM-nucleon reduced mass. (The choice for q 0 is merely a convention, and drops out in the scattering rate.) We can similarly define an effective DM-nucleon scattering length from the relation σ n = 4πb 2 X . The primary quantity for describing the response of a crystal to an incident neutron or DM particle is the dynamic structure factor S(q, ω). Here we provide only the final expressions for S(q, ω); we summarize their derivation in Appendix C. In particular, if the momentum transfer is below the size of the Brillouin zone, S(q, ω) can be written as: where the sum runs over the phonon modes (ν). The phonon form factor F ν (q) is given by where the sum runs over the atoms j in the primitive cell, and A j is the atomic mass number. Here we have used that for our benchmark model, the DM-nucleus scattering length is given by b j = A j b X , since we have a coherent sum over all nucleons in the long-wavelength limit. The Debye-Waller function, W j , measures the average motions of the atoms Note the quantity is finite, since the 1/N factor is compensated by the sum over all phonon modes k. For all our results, it is a good approximation to take W j ≈ 0, as the spread on the motions of the atoms is small compared to the inverse momentum transfer. Taking m j > 16 GeV since the lightest nucleus is O and ω ν,k > meV for the most optimistic experimental threshold, we still find √ m j ω ν,k = 4 keV, which is larger than the typical momentum transfer for scattering of sub-MeV DM. As derived in Appendix C, the integrated scattering rate per unit of target mass is given in terms of the dynamical structure factor, where ρ T is the mass density of the target and Ω is the volume of the primitive unit cell. The (q 0 /|q|) 4 form factor is the result of the light mediator. The expressions for the massive mediator limit can be obtained by dropping this form factor and substituting q 4 0 with m 4 φ in equation ( Contrary to the case with a dark photon mediator, all atoms in the primitive cell contribute with the same sign to the form factor in where the + sign applies for the LA mode and thesign for the LO mode. We have included relative phases for the motion of the Ga and As, to account for the fact that the motion will not be perfectly in phase away from the long-wavelength limit (see also Since Ga and As have similar mass numbers, we see from the equation above that there is destructive interference for the optical mode, which leads to a suppression of the rate by several orders of magnitude compared to the acoustic mode. For sapphire, the mass hierarchy between the two elements is slightly larger, but since there six O atoms as compared to four Al atoms in the primitive cell, both elements end up contributing a similar amount to the scattering rate. To fully remove the suppression due to the destructive interference, it would be interesting to consider a polar material with a large mass difference between the elements, such as PbS. Here we use the numerically computed phonon eigenmodes to calculate the scattering rate, while we previously applied the analytic approximation of analytic approximation for GaAs matches the numerical result very well for the acoustic branch (dark purple), and for the optical branch (light purple) it reproduces the numerical result to within a factor of ∼ 3. As expected, the reach dramatically improves if the threshold is low enough to pick up the acoustic modes, and in this case substantially outperforms a superfluid helium detector in multiphonon mode If only the optical modes are accessible, the reach is comparable or somewhat weaker than that of superfluid helium. In this case only one LO mode contributes for GaAs, and it is imperative that the threshold is lower than 30 meV. For sapphire, there are several modes in the spectrum which contribute comparably to the total rate. The cross section and the reach therefore differ for different experimental thresholds in Fig. Similar to the case of dark photon mediated scattering, the rate modulates with sidereal day due to anisotropies in the phonon spectrum and the phonon form factor. Here the directional dependence of the form factor is encoded in the eigenvectors e ν,j,k in Eq. ( keV. As for the dark photon mediated scattering, the modulation decreases for larger DM masses, as the e ν,j,k tend to be more randomized for higher q. However, the modulation amplitude drops more slowly compared to dark photon mediated scattering, and even for m X ≈ 200 keV the modulation can still be as large as ∼ 20%. To understand the dependence of the modulation on the threshold, we first observe the lack of a substantial modulation for the lowest (1 meV) threshold. The reason is that the acoustic modes dominate in this case. Since all atoms move in phase on the acoustic branches, the primary modulation comes from the anisotropy of the sound speed, which is fairly small. For a higher threshold (>25 meV), we instead rely primarily on the optical modes. As explained in the previous section, in the q → 0 limit, the contributions from the different atoms tend to destructively interfere for the optical branches. The effect of finite q corrections is then to partially remove these cancellations; this effect will vary along different crystal directions, leading to a sizable directional dependence of the scattering rate. (One way of seeing this is to consider the effect of the phase factors in The presence of optical phonons in polar materials also makes it an excellent target for absorption of dark photon DM. In the sub-keV regime, dark photons are a viable DM candidate, and can be detected by an optical absorption signal if there is a small mixing with the SM photon. Similar to Section III, we consider the Lagrangian with kinetic mixing κ and Stuckelberg mass m A . Polar materials are sensitive to dark photons in the mass range of ∼ meV up to a few hundred meV, due to the wide range of phonons coupling to EM fields and the possibility of multiphonon absorption. Electronic excitations also allow sensitivity to DM with eV or greater mass, although a number of existing experiments are already making progress in this regime. We begin with a review of the absorption of dark photons in optically isotropic materials, such as GaAs. The mixing present in Eq. ( Note that the above result holds for both longitudinal and transverse polarizations, and we have taken the limit of |q| → 0, appropriate for absorption processes, such that we can write Π γγ (q, ω) ≡ Π(ω). n = n + ik is the frequency-dependent complex index of refraction, and is related to the permittivity ˆ and to the optical conductivity σ of the material: Note that the real part of σ, σ 1 , appears in the imaginary part of the polarization tensor Π(ω). It can thus be seen that σ 1 is the absorption rate of SM photons. For energies near the LO and TO phonon frequencies, the permittivity of a polar material can be described analytically as where we have included a product over all optical branches ν. Each branch is split into longitudinal and transverse modes with energies ω TO,LO , while γ TO,LO are the damping parameters. ∞ is the contribution of the electrons for energies below the electronic band gap. It is at the LO phonon frequencies where (ω) becomes suppressed. For GaAs, there is one active branch and data on the parameters at low temperatures can be found in Ref. Including the in-medium polarization from Eq. ( where we took ω = m A in the second step. The dark photon absorption rate per unit target mass is then determined in terms of the photon absorption, and can be written as where ρ T is the target density. In Ref. For the absorption into phonons (m A <eV), we used calculations of the zero-temperature absorption coefficient α into single and multiple phonons from Ref. The absorption of dark photons in sapphire differs from that of GaAs because sapphire is a birefringent material, meaning that the complex index of refraction depends on the polarization of the vector field relative to the optical axis (the crystal axis or c-axis in sapphire). In the optical phonon regime, this should not be too surprising: as discussed in the previous sections, there is significant anisotropy in the phonon dipole moments and energies for modes parallel or perpendicular to the c-axis. Data on the index of refraction is typically quoted separately for ordinary rays ( E ⊥ c-axis) and for extraordinary Effective rate of absorption rays ( E||c-axis), with substantially different resonance structures for the two polarizations. Sapphire exhibits uniaxial birefringence, such that all polarizations perpendicular to the c-axis have the same index of refraction. For dark photons as the DM, we expect the field to have a random polarization with respect to its k-vector and to the orientation of the c-axis. In particular, the coherence time for the dark photon field is ∼ 1/(m A v 2 ) 1μs for the masses considered here and with v ∼ 10 -3 , and so the polarization will change randomly on a time scale much faster than the rotation of the crystal, for instance. As such, we simply take the average of the absorption rate for polarizations perpendicular and parallel to the c-axis, where the subscripts indicate the ordinary (o) and extraordinary (e) directions, respectively. In the left panel of Fig. In the right panel of Fig. Frequencies are from Ref. Tab. II. It can be seen that the bulk of the absorption is described by the broad resonances in single optical phonon production, and there is good agreement in the two approximations. Ideally, one would obtain data at even lower temperatures, but we did not find any in the literature. We expect that reducing the temperature further would lead to reduced phonon widths by an O(1) factor, and thus somewhat narrower peaks. Depending on the details of the eventual experimental setup, it may be possible to measure the low temperature absorption rate during a calibration run. Fig. Except for the simplest of crystals, most materials have gapped lattice vibrations (optical phonons) with energies between 10 meV and 100 meV. This matches the typical kinetic energy of DM in the Galaxy for masses between the ∼ 10 keV warm DM limit and up to 1 MeV, allowing for single optical phonons to be excited in DM collisions with the crystal. We used Density Functional Theory (DFT) methods to compute the rate for DM to create an optical phonon in GaAs or sapphire in the zero temperature limit. Both crystals are examples of polar materials, where the optical phonon modes give rise to long range electric fields in the crystal. This implies a coupling to any DM candidate that scatters through an ultralight dark photon mediator, which is a challenging scenario for other direct detection proposals targeting sub-MeV DM such as superconductors In previous work experiment, and the crystal anisotropy leads to a sizable directional dependence, which is manifest as a modulation in rate over a sidereal day. This directional dependence is much smaller in GaAs due to the more isotropic nature of the crystal. The dependence of the modulation pattern and amplitude on the target material suggests that if a signal were to be observed, one could employ a number of different polar material targets to extract details on the DM model and further confirm its cosmic origin. We analyzed sub-MeV DM scattering via both a dark photon (vector) mediator and a scalar mediator. For the dark photon mediator, the scattering occurs dominantly into optical phonon modes, and the resulting reach and daily modulation are shown in Fig. 1. Computational Details for DFT Our density functional theory calculations were performed with the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method where N × Ω is the volume of the entire lattice. The q form a regular, N -point discretization of the first Brillouin zone, the G are the reciprocal lattice vectors, and we have dropped any constant contributions. We now allow for a dipole p for every atomic displacement in the cell. For each cell, let us denote the equilibrium position for an ion relative to the origin of the primitive cell as r 0 j , where j labels atoms in the cell. The potential induced by the displacement of a single ion is defined as φ dip (r) = lim u→0 φ(r, r 0 j + u j )φ(r, r 0 j ). Placing the dipoles in each cell of the lattice, we find where p l,j is the dipole moment for atom j in the cell specified by the lattice vector l. The dipole is given by the displacement of each ion from its equilibrium position in the cell, multiplied by its Born effective charge, where we used the displacement operator in To obtain the Hamiltonian for DM with effective charge e , we multiply the potential in (B3) with e . Using the completeness relation l e i(q-q )•l = N δ q ,q , we find that for emission of a single phonon, The incoming and outgoing DM states can be modeled by plane waves p i -(q + G)| and |p i , such that the transition matrix element p iq -G|H|p i is The expression for electronic transitions is identical, except that the appropriate in-medium wave functions must be used instead of plane waves. Since N is formally infinite, the matrix element in (B7) appears to go to zero. However, in Fermi's golden rule the squared matrix element is always be evaluated as a sum over q, which diverges as well for N → ∞. We can thus go to continuum limit by where the integral runs over the Brillouin zone. Since we work in the continuum limit for the calculations in Sec. III, it is convenient to absorb the √ N Ω factor directly into the matrix element, which then becomes which manifestly independent of the number of cells in the lattice. In the isotropic, long-wavelength limit we can drop the dependence on the reciprocal lattice vectors G. Taking a 2-atom unit cell such as for GaAs, the expression reduces to where ω LO is the frequency of the optical phonon and μ ≡ (1/m 1 + 1/m 2 ) -1 is the reduced mass. Here we used that the eigenvectors are normalized within the unit cell (see condition above Eq. 9), so |e j | = 1/ √ 2 for a 2-atom unit cell, and that 1 With the identity B10) then reproduces Eq. It now only remains to derive (B11). Following Ref. We then define the structure function by with λ i,f the initial and final states, and p(λ i ) is the thermal distribution over the initial states. Since we envision a very cold target, we only consider the ground state in the sum of the initial states, setting λ i = λ 0 . We have normalized S(q, ω) such that it is an intrinsic quantity under N → ∞. With this definition, the rate from Fermi's golden rule is where we treated the incoming and outgoing DM particle as plane waves. The integral is over the Brillouin zone and Ω is the volume of the primitive unit cell. To compute the structure function, first we note that the squared matrix element in (C3) can be rewritten as a single correlation function as follows: dt λ 0 |e -iq•r J |λ f λ f |e iE λ f t e iq•r J e -iE λ 0 t |λ 0 e -iωt (C7) Since λ 0,f are eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, we can replace the E λ 0 ,λ f with the operator H: dt λ 0 |e -iq•r J |λ f λ f |e iHt e iq•r J e -iHt |λ 0 e -iωt (C8) dt λ 0 |e -iq•r J (0) |λ f λ f |e iq•r J (t) |λ 0 e -iωt (C9) In the last step we used the quantum evolution operator on the phase factor, and made the time dependence of the r J explicit. By applying the sum over the final states from (C3), we can use the completeness of the |λ f states to obtain S(q, ω) = 1 2πN J,J A J A J +∞ -∞ dt λ 0 |e -iq•r J (0) e iq•r J (t) |λ 0 e -iωt . In what follows we will drop the |λ 0 to facilitate the notation and all expectation values are understood to be with respect to the ground state. where in the second line we expand the exponential to leading order and drop the constant piece that does not contribute to scattering. The two exponentials in front are the Debye-Waller factors, defined by where we dropped the l index due to translation invariance over the lattice vectors. From (C20), we see that the Debye-Waller factor measures the average motion of atom j relative to the momentum transfer. Putting the above results together, the structure function is then S(q, ω) = 1 2πN j,j ,l,l A j A j e iq•(r 0 j -r 0 j ) e iq•(l-l ) e -W j (q) e -W j (q) +∞ -∞ dt q • u j ,l (0)q • u j,l (t) e -iωt . (C21) To further simplify the sums, one can use the invariance of the two point function under lattice translations, which permits the replacement l,l e iq•(l-l ) → N l e iq•l : S(q, ω) = 1 2π j,j ,l A j A j e iq•(r 0 j -r 0 j ) e iq•l e -W j (q) e -W j (q) +∞ -∞ dt q • u j ,0 (0)q • u j,l (t) e -iωt . where the index ν runs over all 3n phonon modes and k is a regular, N -point discretization of the first Brillouin zone. The 1/ √ N factor implies that S(q, ω) is an intrinsic quantity, as mentioned below (C3). Inserting this in the two-point function, we can trivially perform the Wick contractions, at least in the zero temperature limit. (For the finite temperature result we refer to section 9.12 of √ m j m j ν,k 1 ω ν,k (q • e ν,j ,k )(q • e * ν,j,k )e iω ν,k t e -ik•l e ik•(r 0 j -r 0 j ) . (C24) The Debye-Waller function is just the special case where j = j , l = 0 and t = 0: Putting everything back together, we find S(q, ω) = 1 2N j,j ,l A j A j e iq•(r 0 j -r 0 j ) e iq•l e -W j (q) e -W j (q) 1 √ m j m j (C26) 1 ω ν,k (q • e ν,j ,k )(q • e * ν,j,k )e -ik•l e ik•(r 0 j -r 0 j ) δ(ω ν,kω) (C27) Also shown are projections for Dirac materials the atom are constant for |q| 1 keV The results are shown in Fig. in Sec. III. For each dataset, we then perform a fit to the modulation, allowing for both a constant component and a modulating component with amplitude A, fixing the template for that m X . Denote the modulation amplitude as A non-mod for the datasets that are purely background, and A mod for the datasets that are purely signal. Repeating this procedure for many datasets, we generate the expected distribution in the modulation amplitude, shown in Fig. For each N ev , we then compute the 2σ upper value (95% quantile) on A for the non-modulating data (A non-mod 2σ , indicated by the green arrow in Fig. Similarly, we can obtain ±σ quantiles about the mean expectation for the modulating signal (A mod ±σ , indicated by the blue arrows in Fig. Note that we will use sapphire or Al2O3 here interchangeably to mean crystalline aluminum oxide (Al2O3); this is also sometimes called corundum (α -Al2O3) in the literature. Notably, the CRESST collaboration recently published results on ∼GeV DM with a sapphire target There are no Goldstone modes associated with the spontaneous breaking of the rotation invariance: in the presence of a broken translational symmetry, rotations do not give rise to a linearly independent set of Goldstone modes (see e.g. Note that We adopt Lorentz-Heaviside units where the vacuum permittivity ε0 = 1 and e = √ 4παem, while In particular, this model is most motivated for sub-component DM. In our figures we will however assume that X is 100% of the DM, as the reach is easily rescaled to a particular subcomponent fraction. Here we use 'atom' and ''nucleus' interchangeably to refer to the scattering center.