Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP) has enabled enormous gains in magnetic resonance signals and led to vastly accelerated NMR/MRI imaging and spectroscopy. Unlike conventional cw-techniques, DNP methods that exploit the full electron spectrum are appealing since they allow direct participation of all electrons in the hyperpolarization process. Such methods typically entail sweeps of microwave radiation over the broad electron linewidth to excite DNP, but are often inefficient because the sweeps, constrained by adiabaticity requirements, are slow. In this paper we develop a technique to overcome the DNP bottlenecks set by the slow sweeps, employing a swept microwave frequency comb that increases the effective number of polarization transfer events while respecting adiabaticity constraints. This allows a multiplicative gain in DNP enhancement, scaling with the number of comb frequencies and limited only by the hyperfine-mediated electron linewidth. We demonstrate the technique for the optical hyperpolarization of 13 C nuclei in powdered microdiamonds at low fields, increasing the DNP enhancement from 30 to 100 measured with respect to the thermal signal at 7T. For low concentrations of broad linewidth electron radicals, e.g. TEMPO, these multiplicative gains could exceed an order of magnitude. Introduction: -Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) -the process of polarizing (cooling) nuclear spins to a spin temperature far lower than the lattice temperature In its simplest manifestation DNP involves the use of electrons whose polarization is transferred to the nuclear spins via microwave irradiation In principle however, significant gains in polarization enhancements can be achieved by exploiting the full broad electron linewidth for DNP via more sophisticated quantum control on the electron spins, wherein every electron "packet" directly contributes to the DNP process Principle: -The DNP process underlying these techniques can be simplistically described as traversals of a level anticrossing (LAC) in an electron-nuclear dressed basis (Fig. While more generally employable, in this paper we demonstrate its application to 13 C hyperpolarization in diamond particles via optically polarized electron spins associated with Nitrogen Vacancy (NV) center defects. We have recently developed a method for optical 13 C DNP in powdered diamond at room temperature Low-field 13 C DNP in diamond powder: -To be more concrete, Fig. To intuitively understand the main features of the DNP mechanism, let us first consider the energy level structure of an NV center coupled to a single 13 C nuclear spin (Fig. Crucially, the large separation between the nuclear eigenstates in the m s = ±1 manifolds and the low MW powers employed ensure that the swept MWs sequentially excite a set of transitions that drive the polarization transfer. This manifests as a pair of LZ crossings in the rotating frame. Fig. Under the condition that one is adiabatic with respect to the larger energy gap and positive A zz (see Fig. While considering the more realistic scenario of multiple 13 C nuclei coupled to the NV center, one obtains a continuum of levels stemming from the hierarchy of the hyperfine interactions Even with this brief description, it is already apparent why the hyperpolarization is inefficient with a single sweeper. The electron resonance frequencies ∆ ± γ e B cos θ are orientation dependent and in a randomly oriented powder the ESR spectrum is broadened to B = 2γ e B ≈ 1.12GHz at 20mT. This is shown in Fig. ) NV center orientations are still rather large (614MHz at 20mT). Due to fixed sweep rates ω constrained by adiabaticity, the large B leads to a long MW sweep time T = B/ ω ≈16ms> t repol that far exceeds the repolarization time and bottlenecks the DNP enhancement. Given the laser power employed in our experiments ≈80mW/mm 2 , we estimate t repol ∼1ms, on the same order as T 1e Swept frequency combs for multiplicative DNP gain: -Frequency combs provide an elegant means to overcome these bottlenecks, decoupling the rate at which the NV centers are swept over, and the effective rates at which the LZ anti-crossings are traversed for polarization transfer to the 13 C nuclei. Indeed, a swept microwave frequency comb can maintain the adiabaticity constraints for a single sweep while increasing the cumulative number of sweeps in the total DNP period bounded by nuclear relaxation time T 1n . Moreover, in experiments where the NV repolarization rate t repol ∼ T 1e , the swept frequency comb can ensure that the NV electrons are swept over sufficiently slowly so as to maximize the NV electron polarization at every sweep event. Microwave frequency combs can be constructed by semiconductor lasers under negative optoelectronic feedback The cascaded sweeps entail an increase of the total microwave power seen by the sample. For DNP mechanisms (eg. ISE) where the energy gap (see Fig. Limits of multiplicative DNP gains: -Let us finally evaluate the factors affecting the ultimate limits to the multiplicative enhancement gain. In Fig. Similar experiments allow us to quantify the optimal spacing between successive comb teeth. In Fig. To make this more concrete, in Fig. The fact that hyperfine couplings dominate the ESR linewidths (Fig. Applications to conventional DNP: -Let us now describe how the current method can be applied in the context of DNP with electron radicals. The most direct applications are for DNP in systems with endogenous radicals (eg. Si, diamond surfaces Conclusions and outlook: -We have proposed and experimentally demonstrated a simple and scalable technique to obtain multiplicative enhancement gains in dynamic nuclear polarization. The method entails a swept frequency comb to excite the entire inhomogenously broadened electron bandwidth for polarization transfer. It can be implemented by cascading N sweeps from individual low-power sources/amplifiers to obtain a DNP enhancement boost ∝ N , with ultimate limits set by the hyperfine-mediated electron linewidth and lifetime T 1e . As such the technique affirms the notion the electron spin control can significantly enhance DNP by harnessing the full power of the electron spectrum. We demonstrated its utility for the hyperpolarization of 13 C nuclei in diamond microparticles via optically pumped NV centers at room temperature, obtaining a 300% boost in DNP efficiency. When employed for conventional polarizing radicals at high fields, the technique promises to yield DNP enhancement boosts in excess of one order of magnitude, with a relatively simple implementation employing existing technology and only modest cost overheads. VII. Data Analysis 13 In order to highlight the linewidth limitations when employing multiple cascaded sweepers, we performed detailed experiments mapping the NV center ESR spectrum via 13 C DNP in a narrow 12.5MHz sweep window for samples of different 13 C enrichments (see Fig. It is evident that the two cascaded sweepers provide a gain over a single one (right panels in Fig. Fig. Fig. The polarization within the diamond particles builds up to ≈0.1% polarization level in about 40s of optical pumping (Fig. In our experiments, the sign of the polarization only depends on the direction of the microwave sweeps (Fig. We now briefly describe the low field DNP mechanism that governs the polarization transfer in our experiments. For more details, and experimental characterization of the mechanism, we point the reader to Ref. where S and I respectively denote the NV and 13 C vector spin operators, and B is the magnetic field (10-30 mT) at angle θ (φ) to the NV axis. Within the m s = ±1 states, the hyperfine coupling produces a 13 C splitting, For the m s = 0 manifold, second-order perturbation theory leads to the approximate formula (3) From Eqs. 2 and 3 we conclude that each manifold (including the m s = 0 manifold) has its own, distinct quantization axis which might be different from the direction of the applied magnetic field. In particular, the second term in Eq. 3 can be dominant for hyperfine couplings as low as 1 MHz (corresponding to nuclei beyond the first two shells around the NV) if θ is sufficiently large, implying that, in general, 13 C spins coupled to NVs misaligned with the external magnetic field experience a large frequency mismatch with bulk carbons, even if optical excitation makes m s = 0 the preferred NV spin state. Assuming fields in the range 10-30 mT, it follows that 13 C spins moderately coupled to the NV (300 kHz |A zz | 1 MHz) are dominant in the hyperpolarization process because they more easily spin diffuse into the bulk and contribute most strongly to the observed NMR signal at 7T. For sweep rates near the optimum (∼ 40 MHz/ms), the time necessary to traverse the set of transitions connecting m s = 0 with either the m s = -1 or m s = +1 manifolds is relatively short 30 μs for weakly coupled carbons meaning that optical repolarization of the NV preferentially takes place during the longer intervals separating two consecutive sweeps, as modeled in Fig. Nuclear spin polarization can be understood as arising from the Landau-Zener crossings in Fig. For completeness, here we review the principles of Integrated Solid Effect (ISE) (see The first two terms are electron and nuclear Zeeman term respectively, and the the last term is hyperfine coupling between the electron and nuclei. In the rotating frame, where ∆ω = ω e -ω, I ± = I x ±I y , A z± = A zx ±A zy . Moving to a tilted reference frame via a rotation about y-axis, exp(iθS y ) so that the effective frequency vector (Ω e , 0 , ∆ω) is along the new z t -axis gives, where , assuming that the components of the hyperfine tensors are small. In this tilted rotating frame set by basis |m t s |m I , V † sin θ contributes to non-diagonal term and induces states transitions. There are then effectively two level anti-crossings (LACs) at which polarization polarization transfer from the electron to nuclei can be affected, given by (∆ω Assuming the rate for frequency sweep is ω, the probability of electron spin staying at the same state equals is exp(- During our DNP process, 1W laser (520nm LasterTack) light is applied continuously for a fixed time (∼60s) to polarize the NV centers. Simultaneously applied swept microwave (MW) irradiation (MiniCircuits ZHL16W-43S+ 16W) across the NV center spectrum at 1-30mT transfers the polarization to 13 C nuclei (see Fig. Microwave (MW) sweeps are applied across the NV center powder pattern to drive the DNP process (see Fig. Cascaded sweeps utilizing multiple VCOs (N VCO ) are generated by using input voltage ramps that are phase shifted by 2π/N VCO . The VCO output frequency f (V ) and input voltage V has a approximate linear relationship, f (V ) = b • V + F , where b is a constant coefficient and F ≈1.9GHz is the frequency when V = 0. However, the VCOs have slightly differing f-V characteristics, even when of the same family, due to interdevice variation and temperature dependence (see Fig. Let us define the DC and AC voltage inputs to the VCOs for the ith iteration (i=1, 2, 3...) to be V i pp and V i dc . We define center of the spectrum f i for the ith iteration, and bandwidth of the spectrum f i , while the target spectrum center and width are f 0 , f 0 respectively. Given the linearity of the VCO response, V dc and V pp are predominantly related to f and f respectively. The following equations are applied to update V pp and V dc level for each iteration: . Schematic circuit for DNP excitation. Low field DNP from NV centers to 13 C is excited by microwave sweeps produced by employing voltage controlled oscillators (VCOs) with ramp generator inputs (see Fig. During each the feedback loop, V pp is adjusted based on the assumption that bandwidth f is approximately proportional to V dc , and V dc shifted to approach the target band center. To ensure VCO receiving reasonable input, initial values are set to be V pp =2V and V dc =6V. based on empirical b and F . The pre-set deviation we typically use is 2MHz, which is approximately the VCO output linewidth when input is a single constant voltage. The efficiency of the algorithm is highlighted in Fig. The multiplicative DNP gains of our microwave frequency comb technique will be limited by hyperfine mediated electron broadening, and also practical constraints such as non-linear distortions set by amplifier intermodulation distortion (IMD). Here we highlight the latter and discuss its effect on our hyperpolarization technique. IMD appears in a wide range of RF and microwave systems, and particularly affects our experiments in the power amplifier stage Fig. This technical obstacle can be overcome by employing multiple cascaded amplifiers, each amplifying a component of the frequency comb, which are then subsequently combined. This exploits the fact that power splitters have significantly lower nonlinearity, are not prone to IMD, and can yield a distortion-free combination of frequency tones. While the overall MW power increases linearly with the number of comb teeth, the ability to combine several low-power amplifiers to obtain multiplicative gains in DNP enhancements also has serious advantages in overall cost of the electronic infrastructure required. Let us now describe how the swept frequency combs can be constructed in the context of high field DNP with radicals. The availability of arbitrary waveform generators with bandwidths that reach into the microwave range, combined with solid-state millimeter wave mixers, now permits arbitrary pulse shaping up to Terahertz frequencies. There are two approaches possible. At frequencies below about 100GHz, it is possible to directly mix a high frequency carrier with a modulated microwave signal, filter it, and feed the resulting modulated millimeter waves into an amplifier. Solid-state amplifiers with up to 1W of power are commercially available below 100GHz. At even higher millimeter wave frequencies, an active multiplier chain (AMC-Virginia Diodes) is used to generate the millimeter wave signal, with a microwave input to the AMC in the 10-20GHz range. These AMCs are available with up to about 100mW of power at 270GHz, dropping to about 10mW at 500GHz and 1mW at 1THz. By modulating the input to the AMC, it is possible to create arbitrarily modulated millimeter waves. Note that in this case it is necessary to scale the desired modulation down by the multiplication factor of the AMC. The use of solid-sources at higher frequencies is typically constrained by the available power and the significant increase in cost with increased power output. At liquid helium temperatures, the electron spin relaxation times become much longer, and it is possible to excite DNP at lower millimeter wave power. At liquid nitrogen temperatures typically used for DNP-MAS experiments, the electron spin relaxation times are short, and high millimeter wave powers are needed to ensure good DNP. Gyrotrons are used to generate sufficient millimeter wave power for DNP in this regime. While gyrotrons have typically been narrow band (resonant devices), voltage-tunable gyrotrons that enable frequency modulation are being developed The DNP enhancement in our experiments is quantified by scaling the hyperpolarized 13 C signal to the corresponding thermal signal at 7T for each sample. The spectra are all phased, baseline corrected, and scaled to have an average noise of 1. This allows comparison between signals taken with a different number of averages. The areas of each peak area was calculated, and the ratio between them determines the enhancement factor. Zero-order phase correction is applied by multiplying the spectrum by a phase value that maximizes peak height. A fitted absorptive Lorentzian curve identifies the peak in each spectra with the real portion of the data. Standard Lorentzian formulas were used to calculate the area under the fitted curve, and peak limits were designated such that the area between the limits encompassed 90 percent of the entire spectrum area. The portion outside of the peak limits was defined as noise. To flatten the baseline, a 12th order polynomial was fitted through these parts, and subtracted from the spectrum. For com-parison between DNP and thermal spectra, the average noise of both spectra was scaled to 1 by dividing the noise section by its standard deviation. The area of each peak was then obtained through a Riemann sum across the peak limits, and the DNP enhancement factor given by the equation: N DNP N Thermal 