Pumping fluids without an aid of an external power source are desirable in a number of applications ranging from a cooling of microelectronic circuits to Micro Total Analysis Systems (μ-TAS). Although, several microfluidic pumps exist, yet passive micropumps demonstrate better energy efficiency while providing a better control over a pumping rate and its operation. The fluid pumping rate and their easy maneuverability are critical in some applications; therefore, in the current work, we have developed a leaf-mimicking micropump that demonstrated ~6 fold increase in a volumetric pumping rate as compared to the micropumps having a single capillary fluid delivery system. We have discussed a simple, scalable, yet inexpensive method to design and fabricate these leaf mimicking micopump. The microstructure of the micropumps were characterised through scanning electron microscopy and its pumping performance (volumetric pumping rate and pressure head sustainence) were assessed experimentally. The working principle of the proposed micropump is attributed to its structural elements; where branched-shaped microchannels deliver the fluid acting like veins of leaves while the connected microporous support resembles mesophyll cells matrix that instantaneously transfers the delivered fluid by a capillary action to multiple pores mimicking the stomata for evaporation. Such design of micropumps will enable an efficient delivery of the desired volume of a fluid to any 2D/3D micro/nanofluidic devices used in an engineering and biological applications. The precise control over the volume of fluid at a given flow rate is advantageous in a number of applications like advanced drug delivery, cooling circuits in electronic devices, chromatographic column in chemistry and many more The pioneering work on artificial trees, based on hydrogel systems, proposed by Wheedle et. al. reported a fluid pumping rate of 0.014 mg/sec. The proposed artificial tree comprised of two hydrogels; one representing the root and other the leaves, connected by microchannels that acted as the trunk of a tree. Their study was primarily directed towards the formation and effect of cavitation on the negative pressure that prevented further pumping of fluid in trees. Thus, hardly any attention was given to enhance the fluid pumping rate through modification in the design or the parameters affecting the fluid pumping behaviour in such artificial systems These micropumps could emulate the embolism effect as observed in the xylem of natural plants under an extreme condition in addition to achieving the fluid pumping rate of 1.12ul/min. They also estimated the maximum water potential developed in their proposed micropump could be 72.5KPa, a pressure substantial to lift a water column to a height of 7m but they haven't experimentally verified it The above efforts were primarily driven towards creating a better mimic of leaves or trees by tailoring the design or material to emulate the pumping functions as observed in trees. These authors used hydrogels as materials to pump the fluids from a reservoir through a single capillary tube, to the microporous substrate for evaporation. The hydrogels were used due to their highly hydrophilic nature, high swelling capacity and good interconnected microporous network. However, application of hydrogels may not be an optimal strategy to deliver fluid to microporous substrate to support evaporative pumping due to several reasons. First, hydrogels are structurally weak materials, primarily used in soft tissue engineering applications. The above limitations of hydrogels led Jingmin li et al to explore microporous membrane on a planner substrate connected to a microchannel as one of the simplistic models of micropump for mimicking transpiration-assisted capillary pumping. The microporous membranes overcome majority of limitations of hydrogels listed above while developing passive micropumps. The reported micropump achieved the controlled flow rate within 0.13-3.74ul/min through changes in intrinsic and ambient parameters. The parameters they considered were temperature, humidity, size and number of micropores in silicon membranes participating in transpiration. Later, the few intrinsic parameters were studied in detail by Robert Crawford et al. They suggested that the length and diameter of a channel irrigating the microporous membrane and area of the membrane participating in fluid pumping as an essential design criteria for leafinspired micropumps. They could neither observe any appreciable change in fluid pumping rate nor in the attained suction head due to changes in the diameter of the microchannel irrigating the microporous membrane. However, the area of porous membrane and pore size was found to have profound impact on the pumping rate of leaf-inspired micropumps. They further commented that single capillary delivering fluid to microporous substrate may not be sufficient to irrigate its entire surface. Hence, this may have led to under-utilization of the available surface during evaporation pumping at a given temperature, humidity and permeability of the microporous membrane Thus, inspired from the design of leaves, we hypothesize that developing a leaf-mimicking micropump having a branching channel network with multiple fluid delivery points for irrigating microporous substrate will lead to an enhanced fluid pumping through evaporation. In the present work, we proposed a simple design of leaf-mimicking micropump (LMM) that is capable of achieving high fluid pumping rate and suction head maintenance. The LMM was fabricated through a simple, inexpensive and scalable method. The proposed LMM comprises of radially arranged, branch shaped, multi-scale microchannels in Polydimethysiloxane (PDMS) (representing venation system of leaves) and a non-swelling, microporous substrate (resembling stomata and spongy mesophyll cells of leaves). The microstructure of LMM were characterised through SEM and was evaluated for pumping performance. Thus, our work is expected to enable the fabrication of efficient LMMs with tailored geometric properties suited for different fluid pumping applications. Microporous cellulose filter paper (Whattman, 90mm Diameter) and Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (Sylgard® 184 silicone elastomer kit -Dow Corning) was used for the fabrication of leaf-mimicking micropump device. The photo-resist ceramic suspension was prepared from a monomer HDDA The fabrication process of leaf-mimicking micropump (LMM) is shown in the Figure The mold of branch-shaped microstructures was produced by controlled Hele-Shaw apparatus, and branched shaped microchannels in PDMS block were taken for structural characterization after imaging by a camera (Sony). The structural parameters of the samples were analysed and reported after image processing in MATLAB® 2009a. Further, cross-section of micropump's structures and microporous support were taken for morphological characterization by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The samples were mounted onto copper stubs and prepared with a gold coating using a sputter coater for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI QUANTA 200, FEI, USA,), operated at 20 kV and 10 kV, respectively. The images were taken at different magnifications for a complete morphological analysis. Further, white light interferometry module of Polytec MSA 500 (Micro System analyzer) was used for surface profilometry to estimate the height of the features of branched shaped microstructures. The microporous substrate was evaluated for volume of water absorbed when saturated to determine its absorption capacity. Further, the porosity of microporous substrate was evaluated by gravimetric method where ρ s is the density of microporous substrate and ρ m is the density of material of microporous substrate. The LMM fabricated above were connected at an entrance of parent channel to one end of a PTFE tube (length 79cm and internal diameter 2mm) while the other end of the tube was connected to a reservoir as shown in figure The process of raising the LMM was ceased when there was no appreciable change in the position of air bubble was observed in the tube. Control experiments were carried out with the microporous paper connected to the reservoir via a tube without any intermediate branched-shaped microchannel networks between porous support and tube. The volumetric flow rate under different pressure head was calculated from the above recorded data. The current paper elucidated a process of design and fabrication of biological leaf-mimicking micropumps. These micropumps emulated the structural design of natural leaves at a different length scale to achieve fluid pumping capabilities. It comprised of multi-scale, branched-shaped microchannel networks in PDMS, mimicking venation system of leaves, to irrigate microporous paper (resembling mesophyll spongy cells having stomata) with a fluid (Figure Therefore, the proposed micropump comprises of a radial array of branched-shaped microchannel network to irrigate the microporous paper. Such arrangement increases the fluid volume delivered to the microporous paper per unit time to maintain wetting of its entire surface, leading to an enhanced fluid pumping rate. Moreover, the branching pattern network of channels is known for providing an energy efficient fluid flow Moreover, the PDMS material being hydrophobic in nature prevented the rapid evaporation of water from its surface analogues to the waxy cuticle present in natural leaves (Figure The method of fabrication of micropumps presented here is a quite simple, scalable and inexpensive process, involving commonly available materials like PDMS and microporous cellulose paper. The microfabrication technique, indigenously developed in our lab, enabled the formation of branched-shaped micro-mold on a glass substrate (18). In this technique, the phenomena of Saffman-Taylor instability in Helle-Shaw cell were controlled to form a stable, repeatable branched-shaped mold of ceramic suspension (Figure Moreover, its availability and wide applicability in microfluidic devices deemed it to be perfect material for the choice of fabrication of micropump. The open channel surfaces are sealed by the PDMS membrane already adhered to the microporous filter paper such that only terminal branches were connected to microporous filter paper. The differences in the swelling behavior of hydrogels and bonded PDMS might produce strain at their interface, causing delamination, during micropump operation. Therefore, microporous filter paper was adopted for our micropump development. In addition, microporous filter paper, being inexpensive and readily available material, is made up of cellulose that has a high affinity for water. This supported better wicking by capillary action. The critical step in the development of the proposed micropump is an effective bonding of microporous material (here; Whattman filter paper) with non-porous material mold (PDMS) having radial arrangement of branch-shaped microchannels. Thus method of fabrication can be extended to any other type of material systems that satisfy the above conditions. The image processing of the branched-shaped structures revealed the structural parameters of branched shaped microchannels. The depth of the microchannels showed variation across different branching generations (Figure Moreover, multiple fluid delivery point due to branching channel might assist in keeping the microporous paper in saturated state and lead to utilization of its maximum area for evaporation. The LMMs connected to the reservoir were slowly raised with respect to the reservoir to quantify the pressure head it could sustain before the cavitation occurs. It was observed that the fluid pumping rates of LMMs were declining at ~10 times faster than the rate of decline of the fluid pumping rate of the control microporous substrate (Figure The Figure These factors are responsible for volumetric flow rate through these microporous substrate while the micropump in operation at a steady state condition. However, it was found that average pore-size of the substrate used for micropumps recorded in literatures were found to be around 10um with variation from 7um to 32um. In addition, the degree of hydrophobicity of materials varied from each other but primarily all the materials were hydrophilic only. Thus, the capillary pressure responsible for driving fluid through porous substrate, being the function of pore size and material property, was comparable. Further, the ambient temperature and humidity under consideration was also similar range which governs the evaporative flux of water from the surface of porous substrate. Hence, we speculate that the differences in the pumping capacity may be due differences in participation of surface area available for evaporation. Such variances over the participation of surface area for evaporation may be due to the differences in the porosity of the substrate and the diameter of the channels irrigating the surface. The hydrogels used by Wheedle et al and ling Lu et al were highly porous, hydrophilic material which accounted for their highest pumping capacity per unit area Finally, we have proposed the development of a simple passive micropump inspired from the leaves of plants using scalable, inexpensive fabrication method. The leaf mimicking micropump performance is dependent on its design, intrinsic and ambient parameters. Therefore, the design of the micropump should be developed considering the ambient conditions in which it would be employed. Our future work involves the investigation on the role of ambient parameters like temperature, humidity and air flow in defining the fluid pumping capacity. Nevertheless, the above micropump can still find application in number of fields from electronics to bioengineering. The capillary pumping of fluid for micro/nanofluidic applications is one of most coveted areas of research. Our approaches to achieve meaningful pumping rates rest on the principle of bio-mimicking the leaves of the plants. We have designed and fabricated LMMs by a simple, scalable and inexpensive method of fabrication. Our single leaf mimicking micropump was capable of pumping fluid at the rate 388.8mg/hr and could pump the fluid to the height of 80 mm before the occurrence of cavitation. Such pumping capabilities are better than or comparable to the ones reported in the literature. We have successfully demonstrated that branched-shaped microchannel network is responsible for high pumping rate and microporous substrate for sustaining the suction head. The dependence of the pumping behaviour on the ambient temperature, humidity, number of channels irrigating the porous substrate, pore-size and permeability of the membrane need to be explored in future for further optimizing the performance of leaf inspired micropumps. Such pumping rate and suction head is demanded in micro/nanofluidic devices used for energy applications, cooling in microelectronic circuits, flow through chromatographic column etc. This study is expected to enable the development of micropumps with enhanced pumping rate without consumption of energy. 