With the creation of NV in 1b diamond it is common to find that the absorption and emission is predominantly of negatively charged NV centres. This occurs because electrons tunnel from the substitutional nitrogen atoms to NV to form NV --N + pairs. There can be a small percentage of neutral charge NV 0 centres and a linear increase of this percentage can be obtained with optical intensity. Subsequent to excitation it is found that the line width of the NV -zero-phonon has been altered. The alteration arises from a change of the distribution of N + ions and a modification of the average electric field at the NV -sites. The consequence is a change to the Stark shifts and splittings giving the change of the zero-phonon line width. Exciting the NV -centres enhance the density of close N + ions and there is a broadening of the zero-phonon line. Alternatively exciting and ionizing N 0 in the lattice results in more distant distribution of N + ions and a narrowing of the zero-phonon line. The competition between NV -and N 0 excitation results in a significant dependence on excitation wavelength and there is also a dependence on the concentration of the NV -and N 0 in the samples. The present investigation involve extensive use of low temperature optical spectroscopy to monitor changes to the absorption and emission spectra particularly the widths of the zero-phonon lines. The studies lead to a good understanding of the properties of the NV --N + pairs in diamond. There is a critical dependence on pair separation. When the NV --N + pair separation is large the properties are as for single sites and a high degree of optically induced spin polarization is attainable. When the separation decreases the emission is reduced, the lifetime shortened and the spin polarization downgraded. With separations of <12A 0 there is even no emission. The deterioration occurs as a consequence of electron tunneling in the excited state from NV-to N+ and an optical cycle that involves NV 0 . The number of pairs with the smaller separations and poorer properties will increase with the number of nitrogen impurities and it follows that the degree of spin polarization that can be achieved for an ensemble of NV -3in 1b diamond will be determined and limited by the concentration of single substitutional nitrogen. The information will be invaluable for obtaining optimal conditions when ensembles of NV -are required. As well as extensive measurements of the NV -optical zero-phonon line observations of Stark effects associated with the infrared line at 1042 nm and the ODMR at 2.87 GHz are also reported. A vacancy adjacent to a substitutional nitrogen (NV) in diamond can be detected at the single site level. The negatively charged centre NV-has a spin (S=1) ground state that can be optically pumped into one spin projection with near 100 per cent efficiency and the spin projection read optically, all under ambient conditions. These capabilities have lead to a phenomenal array of single NV -applications in life sciences, magnetic sensing, quantum information processing and nanodetection. (see reviews: The negative charge state requires an electron from a donor in the diamond lattice, usually from a substitutional nitrogen and in this case forms an NV --N + pair. The donor is essential but if well separated from the NV -it has little influence on the properties of the NV -centre and this is the preferred situation for using a single NV -centre for applications. With NV -in 1b diamond there is a density of substitutional nitrogen atoms and for a given NV centre any one of the substitutional nitrogen atoms can provide the electron to form the NV --N + pair. In this work it is shown that the properties of the NV --N + pair centre vary with separation of the pair and it is the average properties that are observed, measured and utilized in any application. Optical excitation that is used to initialize and measure the centre can also change the NV --N + separation and in the process modify the properties. The focus of this paper is to explain how this occurs and give details of the dependence on nitrogen concentration and excitation wavelength. The investigation relies on low temperature optical spectroscopy and an overview of optical characteristics and spectra of the NV system is included by way of an introduction. In 1b diamond nitrogen atoms substitute for carbon atoms at lattice sites. Such single substitutional nitrogen can act as an electron donor and the donor enables the creation of the negatively charged NV centre that is of primary interest in this study. 1b is the normal diamond type for synthetic diamond when prepared using high temperature and high pressure (HTHP) and nitrogen concentrations are frequently reported to be of order of 100's parts per million (ppm). Such crystals are available commercially, for example, from Element-6 or Sumitomo. This study focuses on three such samples available from previous studies The nitrogen-vacancy centre in diamond is formed with irradiation that create vacancies (here 2 MeV electrons at 1 x 10 17 to 1 x 10 18 /cm 2 using procedures similar to that in reference The experiments involved low temperature optical spectroscopy with the samples within a cryostat at temperatures between 300 K and 4K. The absorption and emission spectra were analyzed using a 1/3 meter monochromator with a possible resolution of 0.12 nm. In the visible the detection involved a GaAs-photomultiplier with response from 400 nm to 900 nm and in the infra-red by a liquid-N 2 cooled Ge detector with response from 800 nm to 2000 nm. Emission is in arbitrary units given by the output of the detector not corrected (with one exception) for spectral response. Absorption response was obtained from the measurement of transmission of white light from a current-stabilized tungsten light source. The lasers available were a 5 Watt Ar + ion laser with wavelengths 514 nm, 501 nm, 496 nm, 488 nm, 476 nm and 458 nm, two tunable dye lasers with wavelengths fixed or swept within the range 670 nm to 570 nm and intensities from 10 mW to 500 mW depending on wavelength, and fixed frequency lasers at 532 nm (to 5 W) and 445 nm (to 400 mW). The sample inhomogeneities give rise to inconsistencies when focusing to small spot sizes and so no focusing was used and excitation was over a 2 mm diameter spot. It follows that it is convenient to give intensities over mm 2 . For example a 3 mW beam has an energy density of order of 1mW/mm 2 . It is found that laser excitation can modify the properties of the diamond samples but at the wavelengths generally used of 532 nm or 620 nm this does not occur for intensities < 1mW/mm 2 and such intensities are termed "low intensity". These intensities are used when sample modifications are to be avoided. Higher intensities are used in other cases and will be given in mW/mm 2 . Population occurs in the excited and metastable states but intensities are never sufficiently for these populations to be significant fraction of total population and < 1%. Figure 3 Properties of NV Centre The NV -and NV 0 centres have been studied extensively and the electronic structures are well established Figure The neutral centre, NV 0 has the zero-phonon line at 575 nm and the optical transition has been shown to be between a 2 E ground state and 2 A 2 excited state In the case of the negatively charged NV -centre the transition at 637 nm involves a transition between an orbital A 2 ground state and excited E orbital doublet Figure Figure With excitation in the visible the NV -centre is excited from the 3 A 2 ground state to the 3 E excited state. Part of the decay from 3 E gives the visible emission and part of the decay is via the singlets. The decay path via the singlets including the infrared emission gives rise to spin polarization. There is considerable variation in the strength of the infrared emission between samples and this indicates that the spin polarization is not constant. Accounting for the variation in spin polarization is one of the aims of this work. The inter-system crossing from the 3 E to the upper singlet level 1 A 1 is small for the m s = 0 spin state and large for m s = ± 1 ( values of 0.1 and 1, respectively, are adopted in Figure Contrary to the single-site situation, with NV -ensembles the 1 A 1 -1 E infrared emission is readily detectable The increase in the percentage decay via the singlets from the nominal 1% to ≈ 23% is due to vastly different spin polarization. The difference in the degree of spin-polarization between ensembles and single-sites has been recognized previously. For single centres population in the m s = 0 state has been reported to be in the mid to high 90% Figure 4.1 NV 0 ->N 0 ↔ NV -->N + tunneling The 1b diamonds will have a random distribution of single substitutional nitrogen atoms. After radiation and annealing they will provide the environment for individual NV centres as in the upper schematic in Figure As pointed out by Collins (a) Spectra shown for increasing powers: 6 mW, 36 mW, 60 mW, 100 mW at 532 nm ( intensities 2mW/mm 2 , 12mW/mm 2 , 20mW/mm 2 , 30mW/mm 2 ). With increasing excitation the traces show an increase in the NV 0 emission when normalized to peak of the NV -vibronic band. The sample has 115 ppm nitrogen and 0.8 ppm NV -. The responses over a larger range of excitation intensities have been shown for the same sample in reference (b) Upper (linear in red) trace indicates the intensity of NV 0 emission as a function red excitation at 620 nm. The NV 0 emission is monitored using a weak 3 mW laser at 532nm that by itself does not increase intensity of NV 0 . In the lower trace the intensity of the NV 0 emission induced and read by the 532nm as in figure With low light levels (< 1mW /mm 2 ) as used in the above measurements, the fraction of NV 0 is not changed and with the 115 ppm case only the few percent of the NV centres are in the NV 0 charge state. However, if the optical power is increased the proportion of NV 0 is also increased as shown in Figure The linear tunneling NV --N + to attain NV 0 can be observed at intensities orders of magnitude less than that required to detect the two-photon ionization frequently reported in the case of single centres The NV --> N + tunneling occurs in the excited state of NV -. As it is only in this state for 13 ns the rates must be fast to have a reasonable probability of tunneling within this time. Also as the rates will decrease exponentially with increasing separation of the NV --N + pair the tunneling within the closer pairs will be favored. At low intensities it will mainly involve the very close pairs but with higher intensities the average time in the excited state can be increased to obtain contributions from more distant pairs. With continuous excitation a NV 0 population can be maintained dynamically and it is this population that is observed for example in Figure10b. The population attained following a step increase in excitation intensity has been measured previously The tunneling will be a one photon process and in the molecular model as given in Figure The NV 0 -> N 0 tunneling in the ground state will favor the faster rates and tunneling from the closest N 0 . Hence the optical cycle will create NV -centres with close N + donors. Should this be the only process optical excitation will always generate crystals with a predominance of NV -centres with close N + . However, this is not the only process. Optical excitation can also excites N 0 centres throughout the crystal. The excitation can ionize N 0 to give N + centres with an electron in the conduction band. The conduction electron will be trapped elsewhere in the lattice and although not the dominant process It is worthwhile mentioning an alternative process that is possible is where there is ionization of N 0 to create N + and the electron released is captured by a NV 0 centre to increase the concentration of NV -and N + . There is no evidence of this although the present samples have very low NV 0 concentrations and do not present optimal conditions for detecting such a process. With the samples investigated here this process is not considered further. . 5 Visible 637 nm absorption zero-phonon line width The competition between the two processes that alter the distribution of N + ions result in observable changes of the line width of the low temperature 637 nm zero-phonon line. The processes themselves are not temperature dependent and low temperatures are only necessary as the changes in line width are not observable at higher temperature due to phonon broadening of the zero phonon line. When the N + is close to the NV -the charge gives a Stark shift of the optical transition that varies from site to site and the combined effect is a broadening of the optical line distinguishable at temperatures < 77 K. On the other hand when the single-substitutional nitrogen are ionized Figure The differences are due to the changes within the sample caused by the illumination prior to the measurement. The sample is totally absorbing at 637.5nm. and cause the redistribution of more distant N + ions the average Stark shift is reduced and the zero-phonon line width becomes narrower. Equilibrium is established between the two processes and for a given sample the balance only depends on the wavelength of excitation. One process varies with the absorption of NV -and one with absorption of substitutional nitrogen The above assumes no other possibility for the variation in line width has been considered. Within the optical cycle where the optically induced population of NV 0 decays to the ground state and immediately afterwards there is a recovery of NV - There is only one previous report of broadening of 637 nm ZPL in single crystal diamond. This is by Nishikoriet.al. The transmission measurements in Figure As well as Stark broadening of the zero-phonon line as in Figure The observation of moguls requires low temperature. They are distinguishable at 125 K and reach a minimum width by 50 K. This is shown in a series of traces in Figures A sample with high N 0 and NV -concentrations was found to give prominent mogul structure that showed little modification with blue light (Figure 6 Visible 637 nm emission and excitation zero-phonon line width The above analysis of the 3 A 2 -3 E ZPL in absorption has established the dynamics within the crystal that occur with optical illumination and this information is invaluable for the interpretation of emission spectra. Just as the 637 nm absorption line width varies with illumination wavelength, one might expect the emission line width to vary with excitation wavelength. Emission for various wavelengths of excitation is shown in Figure Absorption is also included normalized to same peak height. Sample temperature is 10 K. The non-zero signal to high energy side of 636 nm is due to exciting/absorbing within vibrational sideband. (b) Upper traces give lifetime measurement of sample with 0.8 ppm NV -and 115 ppm nitrogen and lower traces that of sample with 0.5 ppm NV -and 212 ppm nitrogen using 639 nm (red) and 532 nm (green) excitation. The decay is not strictly exponential but it is noted that the lifetimes are shorter with red excitation (4.2 ns and 7.7 ns) than for 532 nm excitation (4.8 ns and 8 ns) Figure As well as a difference between red and blue excitation what is more significant is that in all cases the zero-phonon line in emission does not have the extremes of the zero-phonon line measured in absorption. Compare for example spectra given in Figures In the above discussion the properties of NV -in 1b diamond have focused on one nitrogen concentration (115 ppm). It is anticipated that there will be variation of properties with nitrogen concentrations and it will be shown in this section that there are differences that arise as a consequence of changes of the average NV --N + separations and the associated tunneling rates. Differences between samples with varying nitrogen concentrations can be observed in the emission spectra when using low excitation intensities, <1mW/mm 2 . This is illustrated in Figure A density of NV 0 (without being optically induced) implies that for some centres in the sample that the tunneling N 0 ->NV 0 in the ground state is too slow to create NV -centres and will be a consequence of large NV -nitrogen separations. This is likely to be an indication of large separations in general in the sample and tunneling in the excited state NV --> N + will also be inhibited. If this is the situation and there will only be minimal increase in NV 0 concentration with optical excitation. This the situation for the 40 ppm sample as seen in Figure The significant changes in behavior for the 40 ppm, 115 ppm and 212 ppm N 0 samples with average NV -N 0 separations varying from 5 nm to 3.7 nm to 3 nm is due to the exponential dependence on tunneling rates. As the extent of wave functions drop very rapidly with distance the rates can change by many orders (3 -4) of magnitude per nm of NV -N 0 separation. The NV --> N + tunneling in excited state requires rates that are comparable to the 10 ns lifetime (maybe 1 ns) and yet NV 0 -> N 0 tunneling have to be slow enough in the ground state to allow cycling to enable optical detection of NV 0 emission (maybe μ s). There is then a restricted range of tunneling rates that enable the observation of NV 0 with excitation intensity. Although modeling of the situation is desirable the indication is that the fraction of centres matching the condition is optimal for a 100 ppm N 0 sample and less when concentration of nitrogen is either higher or lower. In case of the red trace (broad) there is only red excitation at 620 nm. This is chopped and the in-phase emission detected. For the blue trace (narrower) this is repeated but the blue illumination at 445 nm added but not chopped; both intensities 30mW/mm 2 . The lower traces give absorbance with peak normalized to unity. Prior to these measurement (red traces) the samples have been illuminated red laser at 620 nm with intensity of 30mW/mm 2 for approximately 1 minute. This is repeated (blue trace) but with prior illumination with similar intensites at 445 nm likewise for approximately 1 minute. All samples at 10K. In absorption there are differences between the samples with nitrogen concentration. However, the difference in emission with nitrogen concentration is not obvious. This is because the emission of the largest shifted optical frequencies are quenched and so there are frequencies for which there are absorption responses but no emission. The effect is a 'normalizing' of the emission line width and the variation of emission line width with concentration is only just observable. The emission line width of all three samples are similar. (Compare upper traces in Figures 8 Infrared 1042 nm zero-phonon line width The infrared emission arises from inter-system crossing from the 3 E state and when there is visible emission from this state there is also inter-system crossing and infrared emission within the singlets (although weak). It is found that some of the characteristics of the visible emission are also exhibited by the infrared emission. For example, the zero-phonon line at 1042 nm is broader when the excitation is in the red close to the 637 nm zero-phonon line and narrower when there is simultaneous illumination with blue light at 445 nm. Remembering that there is a 'normalizing' of the visible emission with nitrogen concentration and this results in only small variation of the infrared line width with nitrogen concentration. The infrared emission is from an orbital singlet and there is no Boltzmann factor favoring one side of the zero-phonon line as occurs for the visible emission The broadening in Figure Where the excitation is resonant with the peak of the visible ZPL (0 cm -1 in Figure The 1042 nm line width has been reported previously Another spectrum that gives a double peak for NV -in 1b diamond is the optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) at zero magnetic field. Optical excitation preferentially populates the ground m s = 0 spin state and this is separated from m s = ±1 by 2.87 MHz. Applying microwaves at this frequency reduces the emission due to the reduction of the spin polarization and the ODMR spectrum is the measure of emission as a function of microwave frequency. For such measurements the samples are within a loop-gap resonator and microwaves are swept through the m s = 0 to m s =±1 transitions from 2.86 MHz to 2.88 MHz. The emission is detected at the peak of the vibrational sideband at 680 nm. With excitation of 30mW/mm 2 in the red at 620 nm corresponding to the situation of close N + ions the ODMR response gives a line width of 30 MHz and double peak with separation of 12 MHz as shown in the upper traces in Figure It is found that the ODMR spectrum varies with detection wave length within the ZPL. For example, the separation of the double peak is slightly larger when detection is in the side (high or low) of the zero-phonon line and smaller when the detection is central. Similar observations are obtained using selective excitation at wavelengths within the ZPL and detect emission in the vibrational sideband at 680 nm. A well separated double peak is obtained when the excitation (or detection) is resonant with the wings of zero-phonon line and the double peak is less separated when excitation is central to the zero-phonon line as shown in the traces in Figure excitation and selective emission it is known from the study of the visible ZPL that subgroups of centres experiencing different Stark fields are involved and the observations indicate that the electric fields are indeed playing a role in determining the ODMR spectra. The visible emission widths can be 30 cm-1 (900 GHz) (Figures From the earlier analysis it is recognized that NV -in the excited state can tunnel to NV 0 and subsequent tunneling in the ground state returns the system to NV -. This optical cycle involving the charge conversion will not maintain spin polarization and the tunneling will reduce spin polarization attained in a sample. The tunneling is most significant when the NV -and N + ions are close and as such pairs are more common with the higher nitrogen concentrations it is clear there will be a decrease of spin polarization with increasing nitrogen concentration. At very high nitrogen concentrations there are the centres that do not emit, cannot polarize and their presence in samples will further reduce the average spin polarization. This could be the situation with (a) Infrared emission of five samples with various nitrogen concentrations including ones from 20 ppm to 350 ppm. For these latter two samples nitrogen concentrations were obtained from FTIR measurements but the spectra indicated that there were other impurities. Therefore they are not simple 1b diamond and were not included in the more extensive experiments. Excitation involved 10mW/mm 2 at 532 nm. The emission traces are normalized to the 3 E -3 A2 at 930 nm. Contrast C is the ratio of unpolarized emission to polarized emission as described in section ??. (b) The traces illustrated the change of emission with the application of a 500 gauss magnetic field and equivalent to figure 8b but at room temperature not low temperature.The responses indicate the loss of population for the 3 A2 -3 E transition and a gain of the infrared 1 A1 -1 E transition. The traces are for samples as in figure The reduction of ensemble spin polarization with nitrogen concentration can be conveniently monitored using infrared emission. The fraction of population that decay via the singlet levels and gives rise to the infrared emission increases as the spin polarization is reduced and such a trend is illustrated by Figure The shortcomings of the techniques are recognized. For example to make comparisons requires identical inensities and temperatures. Another experimental issue is that when totally unpolarized as with a magnetic field applied all the samples should give the same ratio between infrared and visible emission as it should only depend on NV -parameters. However, it is found that there are small differences between samples. The reason is attributed to a small change of the strength of the infrared emission compared to non-radiative decay as illustrated by the traces in Figure 12 Discussion The range of samples studied is limited. This is as a consequence of the samples not being prepared specifically for this study but rather the study relied on samples available from earlier investigations. The samples of interest are ones containing a concentration of nitrogen but focus on nitrogen that can act as a donor. Only substitutional nitrogen N 0 act as donors, the impurities that formally define 1b diamonds. Hence, the focus is on NV in 1b diamond with only substitutional nitrogen and there was only the few samples available. Other samples included impurities that were not clearly identified and made any interpretation unsatisfactory. Other impurities may be studied at a later date to establish whether any new physics processes become relevant. There is one exception in that a sample that included A-centres (two nearest neighbor nitrogen atoms) in addition to single substitutional nitrogen was undertaken and reported in the next Section ??. A concentrations of NV -centres can affect properties such as spin polarization but this has not been studied in any detail. No variation of NV -concentration was available for the samples with substitutional nitrogen. The samples studied had NV -concentrations of only a few ppm very small compared to nitrogen concentrations of up to several hundred ppm. The present studies can be considered as investigations of NV interacting with an ensemble of nitrogen atoms and not to first order ensembles of NV centres. Consistent with this the only aspect where the NV -concentration is shown to influence the properties is that associated with optical line width included within the calculation given in Figure A concentration n of NV -will necessitate crystals with a density of nitrogen and owing to this bath of nitrogen the NV -centres in the sample will have a range of emission strengths and spin polarizations as indicated in the present studies. Consequently signal strengths will not increase with n and signal-to-noise will not increase as √ n. It will require samples with a range of NV -and N 0 to establish which of the process dominate and how signals do vary with NV -concentration. Another aspect not treated concerns the spacial factor. This can be very important when detection is of a very small focused spot such as μ 3 as shown by Jayakumar et.al. From FTIR measurements (Figure The presence of the A-centres introduces strain, non-local to the NV -and this is found to give significant broadening to the electronic transitions in the visible and infrared as shown in Figures 31. The broadening from the 192 ppm A-centres is larger than that associated with 212 ppm concentrations of substitutional nitrogen N 0 (C-centres). Indeed the broadening associated with the N 0 (C-centres) is found to be remarkably small as there is little additional width of the optical transition associated with the 212 ppm N 0 sample or the 115 ppm N 0 sample compared to that for the 40 ppm N 0 sample other than that attributed to N + Stark broadening. Such an observation suggests that the inclusion of the N 0 nitrogen introduces little non-local strain broadening. The best estimate is obtained from the width of the moguls lines where the widths must arise from non-local strain. In the 212 ppm N 0 sample the mogul widths are 4 cm -1 ( the Stark broadening is 24 cm -1 ) and this contrasts with 40 cm -1 line width for the sample incorporating 192 ppm A-centre nitrogen. It is concluded that the A-centre introduces more strain than the N 0 . This is not what was anticipated as the single nitrogen substitutes for carbon but undergoes a distortion and the distortion is thought to introduce strain. The normal consideration of strain as treated by Stoneham Photo-conversion between charge states of defects in diamond has been reported many times and long before this or our earlier work There are many investigations of the spin properties of the NV -centres including ones associated with ensembles that have relevance to the present optical study. For example Choi et.al. In a study of NV -in nano-diamonds created from 1b diamonds Wolters et.al. The conclusions are: 1. The spin polarization that can be attained with NV -centres in 1b diamond is limited by the concentration of substitutional nitrogen. • The process that limits the spin polarization is tunneling in the NV -excited state to NV 0 : linear in optical excitation 2. The properties of the separate centres in 1b diamond depend on NV --N + separations. • When the separation is large the NV --N + pair centre has properties as reported for NV -single sites • When the separation is reduced the emission is weaker and spin polarization is reduced. • When separation is less than 12 A 0 the pair centre does not emit and clearly there is no spin polarization. 3. Optical excitation alters the NV --N + separations and with this the properties of the sample. • Every observation depends on the excitation wavelength. 4. The N + donor gives an electric field at the NV -site that causes a Stark shift of the spectral transitions within the NV -system; optical, infrared and spin. • The Stark effect in itself is of no particular significance for applications and the details are largely of academic interest. However, it is the study of the Stark effects that provides the vital insight into the properties and changing properties of the NV --N + pair centre within 1b diamond. • The vast majority of the study focuses on the variation of Stark effect on the electronic and spin transitions. Study involves nitrogen concentrations from 320 ppm to 20 ppm. Processes will occur at lower concentrations but could be harder to prove. 5. No significant attention has been given to nano-diamonds, shallow implants or single sites but the knowledge of processes not previously considered may have implications in this wider area. It has to be realized that what are termed as 'NV -single sites' are in fact NV --N + pairs where extremely low concentration nitrogen samples have to be adopted to ensure the N + are at large distances to avoid the deteriorating factors illustrated in this work. 6. Most significantly the insight into the properties and processes associated with NV -in 1b diamond will enable better optimization of samples for applications.