Optical modulators are at the heart of optical communication links. Ideally, they should feature low insertion loss, low drive voltage, large modulation bandwidth, high linearity, compact footprint and low manufacturing cost. Unfortunately, these criteria have only been achieved on separate occasions. Based on a Silicon and Lithium Niobate hybrid integration platform, we demonstrate Mach-Zehnder modulators that simultaneously fulfill these criteria. The presented device exhibits an insertion loss of 2.5 dB, voltage-length product of 2.2 V•cm, high linearity, electro-optic bandwidth of at least 70 GHz and modulation rates up to 112 Gbit/s. The high-performance modulator is realized by seamless integration of highcontrast waveguide based on Lithium Niobate -the most mature modulator material -with compact, low-loss silicon circuits. The hybrid platform demonstrated here allows for the combination of "best-in-breed" active and passive components, opening up new avenues for enabling future high-speed, energy efficient and cost-effective optical communication networks. Global data traffic has witnessed continuous growth over the past three decades due to the insatiable demand of modern society Optical modulators are key components serving as the information encoding engines from the electrical domain to the optical domain Tremendous efforts have been made towards realizing high-performance optical modulators in various material platforms An alternative approach, i.e., hybrid integration of LN membranes onto SOI PICs, has also attracted considerable interests Here, we demonstrate hybrid Si/LN Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZMs) that employ two layers of hybrid integrated waveguides and vertical adiabatic couplers (VACs). The VACs transfer the optical power fully, rather than partially, between the silicon waveguide and LN membrane waveguide. This approach efficiently utilizes the LN membrane and overcomes the trade-off in the previous approaches. The proposed devices show a large EO bandwidth, high modulation efficiency, low on-chip insertion loss and high linearity. On-off keying (OOK) modulation up to 100 Gbit/s and four-level pulse amplitude modulation (PAM-4) up to 112 Gbit/s are successfully demonstrated. The devices were fabricated based on benzocyclobuten (BCB) adhesive die-to-wafer bonding and LN dry etching techniques. Fig. The VAC is another important part of the device (Fig. To characterize the linearity of the present device, we further examine the third order intermodulation (IMD3) spurious free dynamic range (SFDR) performance of the 3-mm device using the setup shown in Fig. Testing. Next, we evaluated the performance of the 3-mm device for high-speed digital data transmission, as depicted in Fig. As presented above, the hybrid Si/LN MZMs demonstrated here can achieve excellent optical modulation characteristics, while maintaining key advantages of SOI photonic circuits. LN active waveguides can be bonded and fabricated with lithographic precision and alignment accuracy in a back-end process after the SOI fabrication. This manufacturing procedure is highly scalable and fully CMOS-compatible. Therefore, our approach potentially provides a new generation of compact, high performance optical modulators for telecommunications and data-interconnects. It should be noted that approaches of combining silicon with other materials exhibiting Pockels effects, such as organic materials and barium titanate (BTO), have also been reported. In Tab. 1, we compare the performance of the present device with state-of-the-art, including silicon-organic-hybrid (SOH) MZMs, SOH plasmonic MZMs, and BTO/Si plasmonic MZMs. Here, we focus on MZMs with either large EO bandwidth or high operation speed, and results of pure silicon modulators operating in carrier depletion mode are also included as a benchmark. As shown in Tab. 1, the present device in this work is the only one, on which low V π and low insertion loss are achieved simultaneously. In particular, the insertion loss of the present device is much lower than that of all others, and to the best of our knowledge, this is the lowest insertion loss ever achieved in optical modulators operating above 40Gbit/s on silicon. The demonstrated V π of the present device is also promising, which is only surpassed by the SOH modulator with a much higher insertion loss. As discussed above, the V π can be further engineered to be about 1 V while keeping an insertion loss of less than 4 dB. A low V π is critical for a travelling-wave type of modulator, since the energy consumption per bit is proportional to the square of the driving voltage. For the data transmission experiments in Fig. The underlying silicon waveguides not only route light with low losses across the chip, but also allow integration of the present modulator with the complete suite of silicon photonic components. This makes the proposed Si/LN platform highly desirable for new emerging applications. For instance, future integrated microwave photonic (MWP) systems would require on-chip linear modulators featuring high-fidelity electronic-to-optical conversion. The present device is ideal for this scenario and can be envisaged to be co-integrated with passive SOI structures, such as Bragg gratings or micro-resonators, to form sophisticated integrated MWP circuits. Another possible application area could be linear optical quantum computing (LOQC) **** The value is calculated from propagation loss of 44 dB/cm with 0.75 mm length. Fabrication: A standard SOI processing including e-beam lithography (EBL) and dry etching processes was used to fabricate the grating coupler, 3dB MMIs, and silicon inverse tapers. An LNOI sample with silicon substrate was flip-bonded to the SOI wafer using BCB adhesive bonding process. The substrate of the LNOI was removed by mechanical grinding and dry etching. Afterwards, Hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ, FOX-16 by Dow Corning) was spincoated on the LN thin film for EBL. The waveguide patterns were transferred into LN with optimized argon plasma etching in inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching system. The physical etching by argon plasma results in a sidewall angle of ~60°. Finally, the travelling wave electrodes were patterned through a liftoff process. The setup for EO bandwidth, linearity, and data transmission measurements are shown in Fig. It is essential that an LN phase modulator should have a low and optical loss. The optical loss comes from two parts: the metal-induced absorption and sidewall scattering loss. In general, there is an inherent compromise between optical confinement and scattering loss from side-wall roughness. To maximize the modulation efficiency, a strong optical confinement, i.e., a deeply etched waveguide, is desired, because strong optical confinement facilitates a small electrode gap and low operation voltage. On the other hand, a waveguide that is too deeply etched will result in strong scattering from sidewall roughness, and the optical loss will also increase. In this section, we show how to optimize waveguide parameters for a low , and discuss the design considerations. In order to calculate the , firstly, the electric field distribution (E z ) are computed in a commercial software (COMSOL Multiphysics). The distribution of the electric field of the present device (w=1μm and etch depth h=180nm) with an applied voltage of 1 V is shown in Fig. Next, we calculate the distribution of the refractive index of the LN waveguide and use it in an optical mode solver (Lumerical Mode Solution) to find the fundamental TE mode at a wavelength of λ 0 =1550nm. We define the effective refractive index change as the difference between the effective refractive index of the fundamental TE mode with and without the applied voltage. is the length at which the phase change reaches π/2 with an applied voltage of 1 V. Here, the phase change of π/2, instead of π, is used in the calculation, because the push-pull configuration in our device allows producing a πphase shift between the two arms with only π/2 with opposite polarity in each arm. Therefore, can be expressed as: ( the metal absorption at difference h and g. Intuitively, as the metal electrodes are put closer to the waveguide, the metal absorption would increase and would decrease. On the other hand, as the etching depth becomes deeper, the absorption loss would decrease due to a better lateral confinement for the optical mode, while would increase since the field residing in the LN material becomes less in this case. The above analyses are confirmed by the simulation data shown in Fig. For the optical mode, the group index n o of the hybrid LN waveguide is about 2.21, which is also marked in Fig. , where,  is the angular frequency of the RF signal, The energy consumption of a travelling wave modulator can be estimated as (V pp /2) 2 /(B×50) Two grating couplers with 400-μm long linear tapers are used for off-chip coupling. Tapered waveguides are used to connect the grating couplers and singlemode silicon waveguides (500-nm wide). The loss of the grating couplers and the associated tapers are calibrated by the reference structures co-fabricated with the meandering waveguide patterns. Each meandering pattern is of the same number of U-shaped bends and VACs but with different lengths for LN waveguides for cutback measurements. The number of the VACs is 62, and the lengths of LN waveguides are designed to be 0.62 cm, 1.86 cm, and 4.34 cm, respectively. The Ushaped bends are Euler bends with a minimum radius of 15 m * 