We present a time-dependent formulation of coupled cluster theory. This theory allows for direct computation of the free energy of quantum systems at finite temperature by imaginary time integration and is closely related to the thermal cluster cumulant theory of Mukherjee and co-workers. Our derivation highlights the connection to perturbation theory and zero-temperature coupled cluster theory. We show explicitly how the finite-temperature coupled cluster singles and doubles amplitude equations can be derived in analogy with the zero-temperature theory and how response properties can be efficiently computed using a variational Lagrangian. We discuss the implementation for realistic systems and showcase the potential utility of the method with calculations of the exchange correlation energy of the uniform electron gas at warm dense matter conditions. In calculations of the electronic structure of molecules and materials, the effects of a finite electronic temperature are usually not considered. This is sufficient for nearly all molecular systems and for many systems in the condensed phase, because only a small number of electronic states are thermally populated at typical temperatures. However, there are cases where the electronic temperature plays a crucial role. In correlated electron materials, interactions lead to low-energy electronic excitations and electronic phase transitions The simplest treatment of many-body systems is mean field theory, and mean field theory at finite temperature, in the form of Hartree-Fock The coupled cluster method, widely used for its accuracy at zero temperature In this paper we present an explicitly time-dependent formulation of coupled cluster theory applicable to calculations at zero or finite temperature. Imaginary time integration generates a coupled cluster approximation to the thermodynamic potential in the grand canonical ensemble. This theory, which we will call finite-temperature coupled cluster (FT-CC), represents the finite temperature analogue of traditional coupled cluster in that it has the same diagrammatic content. We highlight this fact by showing how the theory may be derived directly from many-body perturbation theory. This theory is also equivalent to a particular realization of the TCC method. In addition to the theory, we discuss the implementation including analytic derivatives for response properties. Some benchmark calculations are presented as a means of validating the implementation and evaluating the accuracy of the method. Finally, we present calculations of the exchange-correlation energy of the uniform electron gas (UEG) at conditions in the warm dense matter regime. Before discussing the details of the derivation of the FT-CC equations, it is instructive to state the result and discuss the analogy with the zero-temperature theory. Conventional, zero-temperature, coupled cluster theory is described in detail in a variety of reviews and monographs where |Φ 0 is a single determinant reference. The Toperator is defined in some space of configurations, {Φ μ }, such that where t μ is an amplitude and a μ is an excitation operator such that Generally, the T -operator is truncated at some finite excitation level. For example, letting T = T 1 + T 2 yields the coupled cluster singles and doubles (CCSD) approximation. The coupled cluster energy and amplitudes are then determined from a projected Schrodinger equation: These equations can be written explicitly in terms of the T -amplitude and molecular integral tensors using diagrammatic methods Though this wavefunction-based derivation is usually favored, the resulting energy has a well-understood connection to perturbation theory (See for example Chapters 9.4 and 10.4 of Ref. 53). In finite-temperature coupled cluster theory, we use an explicitly time-dependent formulation. The time dependent analogues of the T -amplitudes are functions of an imaginary time, τ , and will be denoted by s μ (τ ). At finite temperature and chemical potential, we denote the coupled cluster contribution to the grand potential as Ω CC such that, given a particular reference, Ω = Ω (0) + Ω The coupled cluster contribution is given by with β the inverse temperature. In the limit β → ∞ Equation 8 reduces to In this limit, Ω → E -μN . For an insulator, the correlation contribution to N will vanish at zero temperature assuming that μ can be chosen such that the noninteracting and correlated system have the same number of particles. This requires the non-interacting and correlated energy gaps to have non-vanishing overlap which is typically the case, from which it follows that lim β→∞ Comparing Equation This is true as long as both amplitudes correspond to the same solution of the non-linear amplitude equations. This correspondence also implies that the β → ∞ limit of these time-dependent amplitudes is related to the imaginary-time version of the amplitudes that appear in time-dependent, wavefunction-based formulations of coupled cluster • replace t μ with s μ (τ ) • for each contraction, sum over all orbitals instead of just occupied or virtual orbitals • include an occupation number from the Fermi-Dirac distribution (n i or 1 -n a ) with each index not associated with an amplitude • multiply each term by -1 • for each term contributing to s μ (τ ), multiply by an exponential factor exp[∆ μ (τ -τ )] and integrate τ from 0 to τ . As an example we compare the zero-temperature and finite-temperature versions of a term linear in T 1 (or S 1 (τ ) at finite temperature) which contributes to T 2 (or S 2 (τ ) at finite temperature): The full FT-CCSD amplitude equations are given in Appendix A. We discuss the origin of these specific rules in Sections II C and II D. Perturbation theory for the many-body problem has a long history in chemistry and physics. Timeindependent Rayleigh-Schrodinger perturbation theory, time-dependent (or frequency-dependent) many-body perturbation theory at zero temperature, and imaginary time-dependent (or imaginary frequency-dependent) many-body perturbation theory at finite temperature are discussed in a variety of monographs In this expression, all sums run over all orbital indices. We use f pq and pq||rs to indicate the one-particle and anti-symmetrized, two-particle elements of the interaction. We have analytically performed the time integrals to obtain the final, time-independent expressions. The terms containing exponential factors vanish when summed. However, one must be careful when evaluating the terms where the energy denominators appear to vanish. Such cases were called "anomalous" by Kohn and Luttinger In light of this discussion, it is clear that the distinction between the two quantities in Equation The interpretation of coupled cluster theory in the context of many-body perturbation theory can be used to directly define FT-CC theory. The essential point is to require that the energy and amplitude equations reproduce exactly the diagrammatic content of the zerotemperature theory. However, the time-dependent perturbation theory will in general necessitate the consideration of different time orderings. Consider the open diagrams shown in Figure where we have omitted the summation and the factors of occupation numbers which will be common in both terms. We have used v pq rs (τ ) and f pq (τ ) to represent the one and two-electron matrix elements in the interaction picture: v pq rs (τ ) ≡ pq||rs e (εp+εq-εr-εs)τ f pq (τ ) ≡ f pq e (εp-εq)τ . These nested integrals can be simplified in a manner analogous to the factorization of perturbation theory denominators in coupled cluster at zero temperature (See Chapters 5-6 of Ref. 53). By defining the reverse of the product rule can be applied to the sum of the two time orderings to yield an expression where all quantities are evaluated at a single time which we represent as diagram C of Figure where we use the subscript I to emphasize that we are using the interaction picture. The superscript indicates that they are first order in the interaction. The finite temperature coupled cluster equations at some truncated order (usually singles and doubles) then follow directly from their diagrammatic representation. This guarantees by construction that the FT-CC amplitude equations reproduce exactly the diagrammatic content of the corresponding zero temperature theory. For the purposes of this derivation, we have used the interaction picture. However, there is a numerical difficulty associated with the time-dependent exponential factors which, at long times, will be become exponentially large or small. This leads to problems of overflow or underflow when storing the amplitudes as floating point numbers. This difficulty can be largely overcome by moving to the Schrodinger picture: At first order, the Schrodinger-picture singles and doubles amplitudes are proportional to the Schrodingerpicture matrix elements which are time-independent in the usual case. Furthermore, these amplitudes are wellbehaved in the limit as τ → ∞ in that they reduce to the zero temperature coupled cluster amplitudes. The FT-CCSD amplitude equations for the Schrodinger-picture amplitudes are given in Appendix A. The finite temperature coupled cluster method that we have presented here can also be viewed as a particular realization of the thermal cluster cumulant (TCC) theory developed by Mukherjee and others Here, S(τ ) is an operator and X(τ ) is a number. The imaginary time propagator obeys a Bloch equation, from which differential equations for S(τ ) and X(τ ) may be determined. The expression for the thermodynamic potential follows directly from the ansatz of Equation As shown in Ref. 45, Equation V N I (τ ) is the thermally normal-ordered component of the interaction, and the first order contribution to the free energy, Ω The primary utility of the thermodynamic potential is that differentiation will generate ensemble averages. In practice we most often require the average energy, entropy, and number of particles: The partial derivatives in Equation 32 are partial thermodynamic derivatives but still require the inclusion of the response of any parameters which determine the form of Ω. In general, an observable corresponding to an operator O can be computed by defining a new Hamiltonian and taking the derivative of the thermodynamic potential Just like the coupled cluster energy at zero temperature, Ω CC is not a variational function of the amplitudes. This complicates the implementation of analytic derivatives, but this difficulty can be largely mitigated by using a variational Lagrangian as in the zero temperature theory The precise forms of E and S are given in Appendix A. The computation of properties can be simplified by defining a Lagrangian, L, with Lagrange multipliers λ μ (τ ) such that variational optimization of L with respect to the λ-amplitudes yields the FT-CC amplitude equations. Variational optimization with respect to the Samplitudes yields equations for λ μ . The solution of the FT-CC λ-equations is discussed in Appendix C. Once the λ-amplitudes have been determined, any first order property may be computed from the partial derivative of the Lagrangian. In practice, the specifics of the numerical evaluation of the time integrals must be considered. Some details of the implementation of analytic derivatives are discussed in Appendix C. We have developed a simple pilot implementation of FT-CCSD interfaced to the PySCF electronic structure package and this information can be used to develop much more efficient quadrature schemes at low temperatures. However, we have not pursued this in this work. In our implementation, the integrals are contracted with the occupation numbers once before the start of the iterations. A guess for the S-amplitudes is obtained from the MP2 amplitudes or from a previous calculation. Using the modified integrals and the guess, the coupled cluster iterations proceed in two steps. First, S1 a i (τ ) and S2 ab ij (τ ) of Equations A5 and A6 are evaluated at each time point. Second, these quantities are integrated as described in Appendix D to obtain new amplitudes. In our implementation we compute the amplitudes for all times at each iteration. It is possible to invert this algorithm so that the amplitudes are converged in a point-bypoint manner starting with τ = 0. The number of iterations needed to achieve convergence is strongly temperature dependent: more iterations are generally required at lower temperatures. In practice it is also sometimes necessary to damp the iterations to achieve convergence at lower temperatures. Direct inversion of the iterative subspace (DIIS) convergence acceleration In order to validate the implementation of the method and test its accuracy, we report calculations on an exactly solvable system: Be atom in a minimal basis. It does not make physical sense to consider a vacuum system in the grand canonical ensemble, but the model is nonetheless well-defined in a finite basis. This model system involves 5 spatial orbitals and thus can be solved exactly. In the grand canonical ensemble an exact solution requires, at least in principle, tracing over all possible particle number and spin sectors. In all calculations we use the orbitals computed at zero temperature. For this particular system, FT-CCSD performs very well. Figure We have also used this model system to study the convergence with respect to the grid used for numerical integration. The relative error in the computed value Ω CC due to numerical integration is shown in Figure The regime of "warm dense matter" has been the subject of much recent theoretical and experimental interest In Figure Note that the QMC and FT-CCSD calculations compute different quantities, as canonical and grandcanonical ensemble results will only agree in the thermodynamic limit, and finite size effects in both cases are large. In addition, the FT-CC works within a (small) orbital basis, while both QMC simulations have no basis set error. Nonetheless, the comparison between the two shows that the equation of state is remarkably similar. Thus we expect FT-CCSD to become a promising tool for the study of warm dense matter. In this work we have shown how an explicitly timedependent formulation of coupled cluster can be used to develop a finite temperature coupled cluster theory. The resulting FT-CC theory can be derived directly from many-body perturbation theory and is formally equivalent to the normal-ordered ansatz of the TCC method. In addition to the derivation of the FT-CCSD amplitude equations, we have also shown how first-order properties may be computed as analytic derivatives using a variational Lagrangian. Preliminary calculations on the uniform electron gas show that FT-CC methods are promising candidates for non-perturbative, non-stochastic computation of the properties of quantum systems at finite temperature. For large-scale application, a variety of practical improvements are still necessary: • Specialization to restricted reference • Use of disk to lower memory footprint • More stable iteration of the amplitude/λ equations These improvements mimic the algorithmic advances that have made efficient, black-box implementation of modern coupled cluster methods feasible. There is also further room for improvement in the low temperature regime where the simple structure of the S-amplitudes should allow for a reduction of the computational cost. Finally, it should be noted that the time-dependent formulation of coupled cluster presented here is remarkably general. We have shown how it can be used to unify Exchange-correlation energies per electron of the uniform electron gas computed with FT-CCSD. The RPIMC results are those of Brown et al coupled cluster, thermal cluster cumulant, and manybody perturbation theories into a computational method well-suited to practical implementation. However, further generalizations including the extension to systems out of equilibrium, are possible and are the subject of current investigation. where the integrands, S1 and S2, are precisely the equations of a zero-temperature CCSD iteration except that each open line that connects to a Hamiltonian fragment carries with it an occupation number: The contributions to the free energy at some finite order, n, in perturbation theory can be enumerated in the time domain by a diagrammatic procedure. There are many different methods for this purpose, but we will use diagrams which mimic the anti-symmetrized Goldstone diagrams common in quantum chemistry. We will imagine a time axis going from bottom to top and the basic diagrammatic components are the same as those described in Chapter 4 of Ref. 53. The nth order contribution to the shift in the grand potential can be obtained by the following procedure: 1. Draw all topologically distinct diagrams with n interactions. Diagrams differing by the time-order of non-equivalent interactions are considered distinct as with other types of Goldstone diagrams. 2. Associate a unique orbital index with each directed line. 3. Associate a unique imaginary time (τ 1 , τ 2 , . . .) with each interaction. 5. With each 2-electron interaction, associate a factor like pq||rs e (εp+εq-εr-εs)τ where p, q, r, s are the indices of the left out-going, right outgoing, left incoming, and right incoming lines respectively. τ is the time associated with the interaction. These rules can be used, at least in theory, to derive explicit expressions for the shift in the grand potential at any finite order in perturbation theory. In practice, performing the time integrals becomes increasingly cumbersome at higher order. This method can be viewed as an alternative to the frequency space method which will involve the evaluation of Matsubara sums. The implementation of the FT-CCSD λ-equations mirrors that of the zero-temperature theory, but we must explicitly take into account the numerical integration scheme in order to faithfully reproduce finite difference differentiation (see Appendix D for the notation and details pertaining to the numerical integration). Using a vector notation, the Lagrangian can be written as L = 1 β g y E y [s y ] -1 β g y λ y • s y + G y x e ∆(τ x -τ y ) S x [s x ] (C1) where we have used the fact that all terms in the amplitude equations are evaluated at the same time. Taking the derivative with respect to a particular amplitude at a specific time point (s x μ ) yields an equation for the λamplitudes we can write the λ equations in a form closely resembling the zero temperature analogue: Since the amplitude equations are diagrammatically identical to the zero temperature amplitude equations, the λ equations will also involve the same diagrams. The only difference is that we must in each iteration first compute λ from λ and then compute the new λ amplitudes at each time point. Properties can then be evaluated by evaluating L with the appropriate derivative integrals. For E, S and N , we require derivatives of the occupation numbers with respect to μ and β: As in the zero temperature formulation, this final step can be accomplished by contraction with responsedensity tensors. A slight complication arises when derivatives with respect to β (or T ) are required. In this case we must also consider the terms which are proportional to the derivatives of g and G which will in general depend on β. The specific form of these derivatives will depend on the particular quadrature scheme. In this study, we have used Simpson's rule on a uniform grid which makes these terms simple to compute. Finally, there will some contributions from the locations of the grid points which will depend on β. These contributions will vanish in the limit of a dense grid, but are necessary to faithfully reproduce the finite difference derivatives when using a small number of grid points. Our implementation is general enough to use a generic numerical quadrature. A function, I(τ ), evaluated at the grid points will be indicated as I x ≡ I(τ x ); the n roots are labeled by x, y, . . .. Integrals are then approximated as where g and G are the tensors of weights. In this study we have employed a uniform grid for the sake of simplicity. For n grid points, the first grid point is at τ = 0, the last is at τ = β, and the spacing between the points is given by δ = β/(n -1). Simpson's rule is used for all integrations: This defines the weights, g and G. The uniform grid means we only need to perform integrals from 0 to a where a is a grid point, and no interpolation is required. To compute thermodynamic quantities, we furthermore require the derivatives of the weight tensors with respect to β. Since the elements of these tensors are all linear in β, the derivative is trivial. kcd With each 1-electron interaction associate a factor like f pq e (εp-εq)τ where p is the index of the outgoing line, q is the index of in-going line, and τ is the time associated with the particular interaction.