Using the exact Bethe Ansatz solution, we investigate methods for calculating the ground-state energy for the p + ip-pairing Hamiltonian. We first consider the Hamiltonian isolated from its environment (closed model) through two forms of Bethe Ansatz solutions, which generally have complex-valued Bethe roots. A continuum limit approximation, leading to an integral equation, is applied to compute the ground-state energy. We discuss the evolution of the root distribution curve with respect to a range of parameters, and the limitations of this method. We then consider an alternative approach that transforms the Bethe Ansatz equations to an equivalent form, but in terms of the real-valued conserved operator eigenvalues. An integral equation is established for the transformed solution. This equation is shown to admit an exact solution associated with the ground state. Next we discuss results for a recently derived Bethe Ansatz solution of the open model. With the aforementioned alternative approach based on real-valued roots, combined with mean-field analysis, we are able to establish an integral equation with an exact solution that corresponds to the ground-state for this case. The p + ip-pairing Hamiltonian is an example of a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) model which admits an exact Bethe Ansatz solution. This result was initially established for the closed system which conserves particle number Like its better known ancestor the Richardson model Following this approach, the continuum limit approximation has also been adopted in The origins of the new approach that will be followed trace back to the work of Babelon and Talalaev The second primary objective is to apply this methodology for the calculation of the ground-state energy in the case of the open p + ip Hamiltonian. Here it will be shown how the alternative method developed to compute the ground-state energy in the closed case easily extends to the open case. It will also be shown that the result is again in complete agreement with mean-field calculations. The general form of the integrable Hamiltonian is introduced in Sect. 2. The closed model, for which the coupling constant of the environment interaction is set to zero, is then described in detail in Sect. 3. Two forms of Bethe Ansatz solution are presented, and the continuum limit approximation for calculating the ground-state energy is formulated. Following from this an analysis exposing the limitations of the continuum limit approximation is conducted. In Sect. 4, attention turns towards formulating an alternative approach, based on the set of transformed Bethe Ansatz equations which result in coupled quadratic equations. Then in Sect. 5 the process is extended to accommodate the open model. Concluding remarks and discussion are offered in Sect. 6. The annihilation and creation operators for two-dimensional fermions of mass m with momentum We consider the following Hamiltonian of the pairing model interacting with its environment where G, Γ are positive real constants. The sum of momenta is taken over an index set K with the properties (i where ω is called the cut-off. The cardinality of K is denoted as 2L. The following equality is satisfied on this Hilbert subspace we then introduce the following notation: These operators satisfy the su(2) algebra commutation relations From now on, we use integers to enumerate the pairs of momentum states k and -k. Setting the mass to be m = 1 and z k = |k|, we rewrite (1) as Defining the following operators it can be shown that and {T j } is a set of mutually commuting conserved operators. These operators have been shown Hence the eigenvalues {t j } corresponding to {T j } give the energy expression and due to (5) {t j } satisfy The p + ip Hamiltonian is isolated from the environment (closed model) when Γ = 0. In this case, we adopt the letters G, E and T instead of G, E and T . The Hamiltonian reads where The quadratic identity The eigenvalues {t j } of {T j } in (9) then according to (10) satisfy Also note that in this case we have The Bethe Ansatz solution for (8) was obtained in where M is the quantum number of particle-pairs, for each solution {y k } known as the Bethe roots, there exists a correspondence between {y k } and {t j } given by the following The techniques involved in achieving this connection (13) first appeared in Each eigenstate has the form where |0 denotes the vacuum state and Alternatively, a second form of Bethe Ansatz solution can be derived from the hole-pair perspective there exists a correspondence between {v k } and {t j } given by the following The corresponding energy is given by Each eigenstate has the form where |χ denotes the completely filled state of L particle-pairs and is known as the weak coupling BCS phase. The boundary between I and II, i.e. x = 1g -1 , is known as the Moore-Read line. Region II with (1g -1 )/2 < x < 1g -1 and g -1 > 0 is known as the weak pairing phase. The boundary between II and III, i.e. x = (1g -1 )/2 is known as the Read-Green line. Region III with x < (1g -1 )/2 and g -1 > 0 is known as the strong pairing phase. The properties of the model for g < 0 have attracted little attention. Introduce the following parameters, such that x takes values in [0, 1] and g in (-∞, ∞) as shown in Fig. Note that under inversion, {z l } is no longer preserved. In other words, knowing a solution {v k } to l }. When we combine the rotational symmetry and inversion, we achieve a correspondence between solution sets to ( Numerical solution for the ground-state Bethe roots {y j } in ( First we formally define the discrete density for each single particle energy level z 2 k . Since all the z 2 k are real and positive it is natural to relabel them as z 2 k with z 2 k < z 2 j whenever k < j such that z 2 1 is the smallest and z 2 L is the largest. The discrete root density ρ is defined as such that In the continuum limit, we introduce ρ to be the continuum density for z 2 k with connected support being a subset of (0, ω) and replace all z 2 k with a continuous variable . the continuum approximation for summation over any given function f is undertaken by replacing sum with integral according to Setting f = 1 in ( We also introduce a continuous curve Ω, which is invariant under complex conjugation, to approximate the distribution of the ground-state Bethe roots {y k } in gives rise to a singularity, we adopt the Cauchy principal value to approximate the summation where -denotes the Cauchy principal value of an integral. The continuum limit approximation for the Bethe Ansatz solution {y k } for (12) reads as where equation ( The solution curve Ω and r(y) have been solved in Following the approach as discussed in previous Sect. 3.4, the continuum limit approximation for the ground-state Bethe Ansatz solution {v k } of ( The ground-state energy is given by Now we need to solve for Ω and density r(v) for the ground state. The solution curve Ω is proposed to be classified under the four phases as of the approximation for the first form Bethe Ansatz solution 3.6. Limitations of the continuum limit approximation for the Bethe Ansatz solutions The Moore-Read line is an example of a ground-state phase boundary line associated with changes in the topology of the root distribution. In previous Sect. 3.4 and 3.5, as we send parameters (g -1 , x) from the weak coupling BCS phase to the Moore-Read line, the complex part of the solution curve Ω C evolves until it closes and forms a loop. However in the discrete case, all the Bethe roots condense at the origin Due to the aforementioned discrepancy in the closed model, we perform a closer inspection of the integral approximation The arc Ω C is obtained by solving the following integral equation where y 0 is any point of Ω C . We first consider the limiting case where G → 0. In this case the Bethe roots {y k } are all real and lie within the interval (0, ω f ] where ω f is the upper bound for {y k } and ω f < ω. Hence in the integral approximation the solution curve Ω reduces to Ω A = (0, ω f ) and A = ω f . According to which determines the value of ω f . As G increases, the complex part Ω C starts to form and A decreases away from ω f . Consequently the allowable bound for A is (0, ω f ). Now we consider the special case of an inverse-square density This is a limiting case for the density ρ( ) as we let it vanish on (0, ω 0 ) while sending ω → +∞. When G → 0, substituting the inverse-square density into The equation for Ω C is then derived from Since Choosing y 0 to be a, Ω C is given by Re 1 - (25) The remaining constraint s(a) = 0 from Alternatively, if we choose a constant density ρ( ) = L/(ω -ω 0 ) with support on (ω 0 , ω) for ( The difficulties in the integral approximation for the Bethe roots {y k } arise from the task to find a suitable solution curve Ω and solve for its density r(y) in we have Since each solution {y k } to (12) consists of complex-conjugate pairs or real numbers, Λ j and t j are all real. Substituting into where 2q = G -1 + 2M -L -1. A continuum limit approximation applied to (28) leads to the following integral equation, The objective now is to derive a solution to (29). We will establish several useful results before the solution is stated. Let Note that a, b are determined by G and q. We require them to be a complexconjugate pair, or both negative real numbers, i.e. As a result a + b ∈ R and ab ≥ 0. The function R( ) is the elementary real-valued square-root with ∈ (0, ω). In the limit where q = 0, we require b to vanish also. In this case (30) becomes where a is real and determined by G. All the following results and proofs leading to the expression for the ground-state energy for the closed model assume q = 0 = b. In the special case where q = b = 0, simply replace (2|q|/ √ ab) with the finite value C in (32), the proof of which follows a similar calculation and is omitted. Lemma 1. For all γ, δ, ∈ (0, ω), the following identity holds Proof: Let the proof of which is straightforward and omitted here. It can be shown that This representation of θ L (γ, δ, ) has no singularities for all γ, δ, ∈ (0, ω). The same expression can be found for θ R (γ, δ, ). Therefore θ L (γ, δ, )θ R (γ, δ, ) continuously extends to vanish for all γ, δ, ∈ (0, ω). Corollary 2. Let Proof: Exchanging the variables δ and γ in the integrand, and then performing a change of order of integration yields where the second step is due to Lemma 1. Now we add up two distinct expressions for I/2, we conclude that again by adding up two distinct expressions for K/2, we have Finally, following a similar calculation as that for K, Now we prove the following: is a solution to the integral equation (29) with a, b subject to (30) and (31). Proof: and On the RHS of (29), we first use Lemma 1 and simplify the following term Since we have Finally, The integral approximation for (27) corresponding to the solution Λ( ) given in (34) is As a direct consequence of Proposition 4, we have the following result, Corollary 5. The function t( ) defined in (35) is a solution to the integral approximation of (11), This particular solution t( ) corresponds to the ground state since from (6) in the continuum limit, the last step is due to expression P in Lemma 3. The energy expression (37) coincides with the ground-state energy derived by mean-field analysis Consider the open model ( The Bethe Ansatz solution for (2) was derived in where α = 1 + G -1 , β = Γ/G and j = 1, . . . , L, there is a correspondence between {t j } in ( This translates to the fact that ( The corresponding eigenstate reads as We perform some numerical analysis to study the behaviour of the Bethe roots {v j }. We consider a small-sized case where L = 5. As we send Γ from 0 to a large number, numerical results (see Tab. 1) show that one of {v j } in (38) diverges around parameters (G = 1, Γ 2 = 10.213). Also at certain values of (G, Γ), we have two real roots meeting to form a complex-conjugate pair and vice versa, see Fig. The numerical analysis of the distribution of the Bethe roots gives no clear indications of a solution curve for a large particle number. However, since (38) is invariant under complex conjugation, again assuming the absence of degeneracy in the spectrum of the set of conserved operators, each solution set {v j } consists of complex-conjugate pairs or real numbers. Hence from (39), it is clear to see that all solution sets of {t j } are real. We now consider the integral approximation for where F = -2Γ. Our task is to find a solution to (41) that corresponds to the ground state. We resort to mean-field analysis for suggestions of a possible solution. The mean-field analysis for the open model and its results are included in Appendix A. We consider the operators T j defined in where The integral approximation for (42) is We will establish that (43) is in fact a solution to (41), i.e. In addition, this solution t( ) corresponds to the ground state. We again establish some useful results to assist our proof. Lemma 6. Given equation (44), let and then from (45) we are able to simplify equation (41) as and we use the special case of q = b = 0 for expression O in Lemma 3, where (2|q|/ √ ab), (a+b) and G -1 are replaced by C, -(∆+F ) 2 and ∆G -1 (∆+F ) -1 respectively, consequently we have Now the LHS of (49) is reduced to the following We derive the energy expression using t( ) from ( Again from the special case for expression P in Lemma 3, where b, a and G -1 are replaced by 0, -(∆ + F ) 2 and ∆G -1 (∆ + F ) -1 respectively, we have This energy expression is consistent with (50) (see Appendix A) for the ground state, which is derived from mean-field analysis. The continuum limit approximation for calculating the ground-state energy of the p+ip model, via the Bethe Ansatz solution, was studied. Starting with the closed model, we revisited the formulations of The conserved operator eigenvalue approach was then extended to accommodate the open case based on results from For future work it would be natural to extend this analysis to calculate the leading order finite-size correction to the ground-state energy, for both open and closed models. For the closed s-wave pairing systems there are results obtained by series expansions Then let ∆ = 2G Q , ∆ † = 2G Q † and ∆ = | ∆|. The extended Hamiltonian (2) can be rewritten as Note that in the mean-field approximation for this extended model, the Lagrange multiplier is μ = 0. The matrix form is derived from the representation of H acting on (C 2 ) ⊗L . Consider the following eigenvalue problem, by minimizing each eigenvalue, we derive the ground-state energy where χ = | χ|, χ = ∆ + F . Then we calculate the following Apply Hellmann-Feynman theorem, since and the "gap" equation