Two-dimensional (2D) materials are highly promising for tunnel field effect transistors (TFETs) with low subthreshold swing and high drive current because the shorter tunnel distance and strong gate controllability can be expected from the van der Waals gap distance and the atomically sharp heterointerface formed independently of lattice matching. However, the common problem for 2D-2D TFETs is the lack of highly doped 2D materials with the high process stability as the sources. In this study, we have found that p + -WSe2 doped by charge transfer from a WOx surface oxide layer can be stabilized by transferring it onto a h-BN substrate. Using this p + -WSe2 as a source, we fabricate all-solid-state 2D-2D heterostructure TFETs with an Al2O3 top gate insulator, i.e., type-II p + -WSe2/MoS2 and type-III p + -WSe2/WSe2. The band-to-band tunneling and negative differential resistance trends are clearly demonstrated at low temperatures. This work suggests that high doped 2D crystal of the charge transfer type is an excellent choice as sources for TFETs. Tunnel field effect transistors (TFETs) In these regards, the recent simulations In terms of the source in TFET, the multilayer p + -WSe2 (more than 10 layers) is more suitable than the monolayer because of the larger density of states (DOS) and small energy gap (EG) of ~1 eV. WOx on WSe2 takes electrons from WSe2 because of the high electron affinity of WOx and results in p + -WSe2. However, in the device fabrication process, p + -WSe2 becomes p-WSe2. This is not due to the contact issue related with the WOx layer at the metal/WSe2 interface, because the WOx layer is reported to reduce the contact resistance by reducing the Schottky barrier. The p + -WSe2/n-MoS2 heterostructure on the h-BN substrate was fabricated using the dry transfer method with PDMS in the alignment system. The heterostructure is more easily fabricated on the h-BN substrate than on the SiO2/Si substrate because the hydrophobic surfaces of the 2D crystals strongly adhere to each other in addition to the atomically flat surface of h-BN. Figure Therefore, first, the diode properties in the p + -WSe2/n-MoS2 heterostructure at 20 K are shown as a function of the top-gate voltage (VTG) without the back-gate voltage (VBG = 0 V) in Figure For the forward bias, the ideality factor  for the diode is 1.72 at RT, which is superior to 3.46 for the WSe2/SnSe2 heterostructure diode. Figure In the p + -WSe2/n-MoS2 diode, the band alignment under the maximum gate bias without the drain bias does not change from the staggered type II to the broken type III. Here, WSe2 is used as a channel as well as p + -source. The advantage of 2D crystals is the band gap tuning by selecting the layer number. First, the transfer characteristics of the multilayer WSe2 FET with the ~30-mm-thick ALD-Al2O3 top-gate insulator are investigated, as shown in Figure Figure Finally, let us discuss the advantage of the present charge-transfer-type p + -WSe2 source. Some 2D crystals such as SnSe2, BP and SnS naturally exhibit the defect-originated p + behavior. Although we have fabricated a p + -SnS/n-SnS2 heterostructure, the top-gate fabrication process degrades the diode properties. The prominent NDR has been reported in the BP/SnSe2 heterostructure. However, an amorphous layer was observed at the heterointerface. The key finding in this study is the formation of the charge-transfer-type p + -WSe2 on h-BN substrates, which shows excellent process stability and negligible temperature dependence on the transfer characteristics. Using this p + -WSe2 as the source, two types of all solid-state 2D-2D heterostructure TFETs were fabricated: p + -WSe2/n-MoS2 and p + -WSe2/n-WSe2. The temperature dependence of the diode properties reveals that the band alignments for the former and latter are the staggered type II and broken type III under the gate bias condition, respectively. Therefore, the BTBT is demonstrated for both heterostructures, whereas the NDR trend is clearly observed for the p + -WSe2/n-WSe2 heterostructure. This work suggests that high doped 2D crystal of the charge transfer type is an excellent choice as sources for TFETs. MoS2 natural bulk crystal is purchased from SPI Supplies, whereas WSe2 bulk crystal is grown using a physical vapor transport technique without the I2 transport agent. The layer number of 2D flakes was determined using Raman microscopy with a 488 nm Ar laser and photoluminescence spectroscopy. The thickness of the 2D flakes was determined by correlating the AFM thickness and the optical contrast on the substrate. All electrical measurements were performed in a vacuum prober with a cryogenic system. 