Exciton spin and related optical polarization in self-assembled InAs/In 0.53 Ga 0.23 Al 0.24 As/InP(001) quantum dashes emitting at 1.55 lm are investigated by means of polarization-and time-resolved photoluminescence, as well as photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy, at cryogenic temperature. We investigate the influence of highly non-resonant and quasi-resonant optical spin pumping conditions on spin polarization and spin memory of the quantum dash ground state. We show that a spin pumping scheme, utilizing the longitudinal-optical-phonon-mediated coherent scattering process, can lead to the polarization degree above 50%. We discuss the role of intrinsic asymmetries in the quantum dash that influence values of the degree of polarization and its time evolution. Self-assembled InAs quantum dashes (QDashes), epitaxially grown on an InP(001) substrate, resemble quantum dots (QDs), however, strongly elongated in one of the in-plane dimensions. The effects concerning spin excitation and spin-related phenomena in self-assembled quasi-0D quantum systems capable of generating photons at 1.55 lm wavelength have not been investigated very extensively so far. Existing reports address only the problem of either exciton or electron/hole g-factors in InAs/InP QDs. In this letter, we investigate properties of polarized emission and spin states of excitons confined in an ensemble of InAs/In 0.53 Ga 0.23 Al 0.24 As/InP(001) QDashes by means of polarization-and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), as well as photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy (PLE). We demonstrate various schemes of spin injection and their impact on the spin memory effect in QDashes emitting near 1.55 lm. The investigated sample was grown in an EIKO gas source molecular-beam epitaxy system on a sulfur-doped InP(001) substrate. The structure consists of QDashes formed in the Stranski-Krastanov growth process by a deposition of InAs layer of nominal thickness of 1.3 nm at 470 C onto a 200 nm-thick In 0.53 Ga 0.23 Al 0.24 As barrier. QDashes were covered by 100 nm of In 0.53 Ga 0.23 Al 0.24 As and the layer sequence was finalized by a 10 nm-thick InP cap layer. Both barriers are lattice-matched to InP and were grown at 500 C. Structural data reveal that QDashes are triangular in a crosssection, with 20 nm in base width and 3.5 nm in height. The length varies between 50 and hundreds of nanometers. The areal density of QDashes is $5 Â 10 10 cm À2 . QDashes are nominally undoped, however, a small residual electron doping may be present. For time-integrated photoluminescence (PL) and TRPL experiments, the structure was held in a continuous flow liquid helium cryostat at T 1⁄4 4.2 K and was illuminated through a microscope objective (NA 1⁄4 0.4) by a train of laser pulses, with a pulse duration of $2 ps and 76 MHz repetition frequency. In the case of resonant excitation conditions, the pulse train was generated by an optical parametric oscillator, synchronously pumped by a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser. This system provides a tunability of the photon energy in the range of 0.82-1.24 eV (1-1.51 lm). In highly non-resonant excitation conditions, only the Ti:Sapphire laser operating at 1.49 eV (0.83 lm) photon energy was used. Photons emitted from the structure were collected by a microscope objective and directed to a spectral analyzer consisting of a 0.3 m-focal length monochromator and an InGaAs-based multichannel detector or a state-of-the-art nitrogen-cooled streak camera system from Hamamatsu, operating in a photon counting mode. The streak camera system covers a spectral range of 1.0-1.7 lm and provides a temporal resolution on the level of $20 ps. The linear polarization of excitation was controlled by a calcite polarizer with the extinction ratio of 10 5 :1 and a multi-order half-wave plate. The polarization of emission was analyzed in front of the monochromator, where the incident light passes through a multi-order half-wave plate first, and then through a calcite polarizer set in a fixed position. This allowed us to eliminate a possible impact of the internal elements of the monochromator on the light analysis process. A low temperature PL spectrum obtained from the ensemble of studied InAs/In 0.53 Ga 0.23 Al 0.24 As/InP(001) QDashes is shown in Fig. In order to examine the optical anisotropy, the structure was excited in the barrier by linearly polarized pulses with two directions of polarization axis: V ([1 10])-along the QDash, and H ([110])-in a perpendicular direction (see the inset in Fig. It is important to note that the intrinsic DOP is not a result of the process of building-up a certain exciton spin population of the GS in the QDash ensemble. The non-resonant excitation results in energy dissipation accompanied by efficient spin relaxation that in turn erases the memory of an initial exciton spin state acquired from the polarization of excitation. In these conditions, a substantial DOP appears due to intrinsic properties of the e-h confinement that pins the polarization state of emission. This can be explained in terms of the QDash shape, anisotropic confinement for carriers, a non-uniform strain field and piezoelectricity induced by it, atomistic disorder at interfaces, and finally the local asymmetry of the InAs zinc-blende crystal lattice. Since the intrinsic DOP is known, one can measure an excess DOP that may result from a certain optical spin pumping scheme. In the following case, the excitation is tuned in energy to the wetting layer (WL) of the structure to decrease the role of spin scattering events leading to a collapse of the desired spin state. Excitons are expected to be created in one of the earlier defined states (jHi or jVi) by setting up certain polarization of excitation. Trion states are also partially addressed, however, as their emission is polarized independently of the excitation, it should not contribute to the excess DOP, but act as a background which weakens the observed effect. The emission was analyzed in a similar way as in the highly non-resonant excitation case, however, the PL spectrum was filtered out around 0.80 eV, which allowed for elimination of the scattered laser light. The DOP VðHÞ is plotted with open points in Fig. Further, we verified an even more reliable spin pumping procedure, in which the excitation is quasi-resonant with the QDash GS, namely, the pumping via a longitudinal optical (LO) phonon was used to assure the minimal excess energy and nearly immediate injection of a spin state to the QDash GS. Fig. Although the spin memory effect is clearly present, the DOP value is expected to be much higher, up to the limit of 100%. A more unexpected issue which needs to be addressed here is the asymmetry between V-V and H-H configurations, manifested in a significantly lower values of DOP H . This phenomenon has not been fully understood yet, however, we propose an initial explanation. Based on the preliminary discussion of excitonic states, polarization injection might be expected to be equally effective for V and H cases as interband dipole moments of the two bright states are collinear with respective axes. The interband contribution to the dipole moment is commonly regarded as dominant, Let us shift the discussion towards dynamic properties of the spin excitation in QDashes. In Figure 193108-2 Syperek et al. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 193108 (2016)