This chapter deals with the fundamental properties of polymer nanocomposites (PNC) and their characteristics that play a significant role in deciding their capability for the advanced energy storage device. The various synthesization methods used for the preparation of the polymer electrolytes are described followed by the characterization techniques used for the analysis. The properties of the polymer host, salt, nanofiller, ionic liquid, plasticizer and nanoclay/nanorod/nanowire are described. Various ion transport mechanism with different nanoparticle dispersion in polymer electrolytes are highlighted. The various important results are summarized and a pathway is built to fulfill the dream of the future renewable source of energy that is economical and environmental benign. Chapter motivation is focused on the investigation of the role of polymer host, aspect ratio, surface area, nanoparticle shape and size in terms of boosting the electrolytic/electrochemical properties of PNC. It will certainly help in order to open new doors toward the development of the advanced polymeric materials with overall balancing property for enhancement of the fast solid state ionic conductor which would be revolutionized the energy storage/conversion device technology. In the world, the most of the energy demand (~75 %) of human beings is till now fulfilled by the non-renewable energy resources that include oils, coal, natural gas etc. They are sufficient to provide us energy for a long period but two major drawbacks are associated with them are lack of time and pollution. The combustion of these non-renewable sources of energy has fired the much increase in the CO2 emission (32190 Metric Ton per year) and one day that will cross the global point above which it would become difficult to sustain life on earth. Further, the natural disasters such as storms, floods lead to collapsing of the buildings and public as well government property and it leads to the energy blackout. So, it becomes important to resolve this issue and best alternative is focused. It can be summarized in one line that the environmental change lead by it is affecting our lives and become a necessity to look at some other efficient alternative energy resources. The best appropriate alternative which seems to be feasible is the use of renewable energy such as solar energy, wind energy, hydro energy, electrochemical energy and nuclear energy. In last three decades, SONY commercialized its lithium-ion battery in 1991 and a lot of research is being done till 2016 (25 th anniversary of LIB introduction) to replace this non-renewable sources with a renewable one. First time Prof. Michel Armand in 1970 formulated the idea of the intercalation compounds and highlighted the ion migration in between electrodes (rocking chair battery. The battery is now the crucial part of the portable consumer electronics and its demand is supposed to rise in the coming future. Beside this, the lithium-ion-batteries will also be replaced in electric vehicles such as cars, buses, and trains to fight against the pollution. So, the many companies are in frontrunner in boosting the e-mobility and plug-in vehicles (Figure A battery is a very catchy system where, separator/electrolyte is sandwiched between the two different counter electrodes (i) cathode (positive electrode), (ii) anode (negative electrode). The separator/electrolyte provide the path for shuttling of the ion between the electrodes while electrons move via the external circuit. The cathode is generally made of the metal oxide (LiCoO2, LiCoMnO2) and the anode of graphite. During discharge, the ions flow from the anode to the cathode (oxidation at the anode; loss of electrons) through the electrolyte and separator; while during the charging process, charge reverses the direction and the ions flow from the cathode to the anode (reduction of the cathode; a gain of electrons) The electrolyte is the heart of the battery and plays a key role in the operation of a battery. Now, a day's most of the battery systems are based on the liquid electrolyte. Although the battery possesses high ionic conductivity but, poor mechanical strength and the stability prevents its use in the commercial applications. Another critical drawback is the dendrite growth formation that leads to short-circuiting of the battery. Another issue is the capacity fading and the narrow safety window due to the liquid electrolyte. So, to overcome all issues faced by the liquid electrolyte based storage system, the most attractive approach which is adopted now days is the use of solid polymer electrolyte (SPE). It prevents the use of separate casing for the electrolyte and it plays a dual role that automatically reduces both cost and weight. Another fundamental advantage with the SPE is that the dendrite growth formation could be minimized at practical level due to good interface contact with the electrodes Nowadays, due to increased demand for the Li-ion batteries globally, it becomes important to develop new technologies which can provide the safe and advanced energy storage system. As the nanoparticles (nanofiller, nanorod, nanowire) attractive candidate for developing all components of the battery. One important point to be noticed here that the nanomaterial have possibilities to fulfill the dream of the energy storage system with high energy density and the power density. As it is well known that the shape of the nanoparticle influence strongly all properties. Figure In this Chapter, a brief summary of polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) with nanoparticles of various shape are summarized in detail. First, the status of the LIB technology in the current practical applications is described and followed by the working principle of the battery. Then we discussed the characteristics of the polymer electrolytes and the properties of the constituents used, i.e. polymer host, salt, ionic liquid, plasticizer, nanoclay, nanofiller, nanorod, and nanowire. Then the preparation methods and the common characterization techniques used to identify the suitability of the polymer nanocomposites are discussed followed by the factors influenced by the addition of different nanoparticle. Finally, we have summarized the recent key developments done till now in the field of the solid polymer electrolytes. In energy storage devices polymer electrolyte plays the dual role of both electrolytes as well separator and is sandwiched between the electrodes. So, the polymer host which is to be used have some special characteristics that make its candidature stronger as compared to other. The polymer electrolytes are classified into three type, (i) gel polymer electrolytes: an organic solvent is added in the polymer matrix, (ii) solid polymer electrolyte: polymer matrix acts as host matrix and provides coordinating sites for cation migration, no organic solvent required, and (iii) composite polymer electrolyte: here nanoparticle is dispersed in the polymer salt matrix, also known as polymer nanocomposites. Figure These properties are linked with one another. The ionic conductivity is linked to the glass transition temperature and hence the flexibility. As ion transport in the polymer, electrolytes is supposed via the amorphous phase so crystallinity associated with the polymer matrix is minimized by altering the polymer chain rearrangement. The cation transference number and ion transference number are crucial for getting insights of applicability of any system for the battery. As during fabrication battery's system is under the stress so, it needs to be focused along with the electrical properties Although there was a desirable enhancement in the electrical parameters, poor mechanical strength limits their use in commercial applications. So, their alternative was developed and incorporation of nanoparticle was adopted as the most fascinating approach to develop the advanced polymer electrolytes. The suitable nanoparticle adopted were nanofiller, nanoclay and reported enhancement in the electrical as well as thermal/mechanical properties. As nanoparticle shape plays an effective role due to the interconnection of the electrical properties of the nanoparticle shape and surface group. Recently research is focused toward the development of nanoparticle with the high specific surface area. The two approaches were adopted one is the addition of nanorod and another is the addition of nanowire. Both are effective nanoparticle as a long continues continuous path is created that is beneficial for achieving fast ion transport. Figure The various approaches used for enhancement of the properties to fulfill the criteria of a solid state ionic conductor are displayed in Figure Polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) are the recently adopted composite polymer electrolyte in the electrolyte community due to various advantages such as high safety, inflammable nature, high reliability and broad thermal/voltage stability. The synthesization of the composite polymer electrolyte include the addition of a salt in the host polymer matrix and a nanoparticle. The most critical requirement with the PNC is the formation of the amorphous content that will improve the electrode/electrolyte interface The preparation of the polymer nanocomposites is done by various methods, such as, Solution Cast Technique, In Situ Polymerization Technique Melt Intercalation Technique, Spin Coating Technique, Hot Press Technique, and Dip Coating Technique. It is the traditional method due to its ease of fabrication and produces polymer film from various thicknesses Then the appropriate salt content is added to the homogenous polymer matrix and again stirred till a homogenous and transparent solution is obtained. Now, to prepare the polymer nanocomposite, firstly the nanoparticle is added in a solvent and ultra-sonication is performed for better dispersion. Then the obtained solution is added to the polymer salt solution and stirred till a homogenous solution is obtained. Finally, the viscous solution is cast in the petri dish and kept at room temperature for evaporation of the solvent. Then kept in a vacuum oven to completely remove the residual solvent and film is peeled off from petri-dish This method is almost identical to the solution cast technique. The key advantages of spin coating technique are simplicity and relative ease of preparation and produce uniform films from a few nanometers to a few microns in thickness. In this technique, a small amount of solution is dropped on a substrate and kept on the spin coater which can be rotated at desired sped. The centripetal acceleration spreads the mixture on a substrate and followed by heating to evaporate the solvent. One point that must be taken care of is that the substrate spinning axis must be perpendicular to the substrate which is to be coated. The thickness of the film is influenced by, (i) viscosity of mixture, (ii) concentration of mixture, (iii) speed of rotation, and (iv) spin time. However, this method is advantageous only for low viscosity mixture not for too high viscosity mixture. For a gel mixture, the spin coater rotation is not enough to spread the mixture droplet to form thin film Hot press technique is a unique technique with features: low cost, solvent-free, a good film with dense materials and is a fast method. The set-up consists of weighing cylinder, heating chamber, basement, (d) temperature controller. Firstly, the polymer, salt, nanoparticle are grounded in the agate pestle for the required time. Then the obtained mixture is heated (close to melting temperature of polymer) and the obtained slurry is sandwiched between the stainless steel (SS blocks. Then pressure controlled system presses the slurry and obtained film is used for further characterizations The Dip Coating unique feature is that it enables us to obtain high-quality film on both side of the substrate and is low-cost technique. First of all the chosen substrate is dipped in the solvent This is an important technique due to advantages such as; environment-friendly, cost-effective and no need of solvent. One point to be noted is that for better dispersion of nanoparticle, the optimization of thermal properties need to be performed as, the high temperature may alter the surface properties of the nanoparticle and may degrade it. First of all, the annealing of the polymer matrix is done at high temperatures, then nanoparticle is added, followed by kneading the composite to achieve uniform distribution. In conclusion, the surface modification of clay/nanofiller, compatibility of filler with host polymer and processing conditions affects the dispersion of nanoparticle A battery assembly consists of three components, cathode, anode and electrolyte/separator. The solid polymer electrolyte (polymer nanocomposite) is sandwiched between the two electrodes and plays the dual role of both electrolytes (for ion migration) as well as a separator (for physical separation of electrodes to prevent short-circuit). So, the electrolyte plays a key role during operation of the battery. So, keeping in mind the desirable device for practical application there are some requirements or performance parameters that need to be measured experimentally in any polymer electrolyte cum separator The salt dissociation capability of the polymer host plays an important role in deciding the suitable polymer electrolyte with balanced properties. The polymer host must have the high dissolution capability to boost the salt dissociation into cation and anion and to fulfill the purpose of the fast ionic conductor. The dissociation capability of the host polymer is indicated by the presence of the polar group of polymer (-O-, C ≡ N-, C = O, ) and how strongly it gets coordinated with the cation. Another important point is the less tendency of the chain reorganization so that complete polymer chain can effectively participate in separating the cation and anion. Further the supportive role is played by the salt in deciding the overall solvation ability. The salt must have bulky anion as they have low lattice energy and supports in overcoming the coulombic interaction between ions. The mutual dissolution ability of the polymer and salt lead to the cation migration via the segmental motion of the polymer chains. Beside the polymer chain and the salt solvent also influence the dissolution ability of the all participating species. The solvent must have the high dielectric constant and the high dipole moment so that the ion association can be hindered. The overall effect of the three key players is the effective number of free ion carriers for transport and elimination of the ion pair as they do not participate in the conduction. So, to achieve the balanced properties the suitable combination of the polymer, salt and the solvent is a vital requirement for the fast ionic conductor. The properties of the individual polymer, salt and the solvent are discussed in the forthcoming section. As ionic conduction decides the performance of an energy storage system. The ionic conductivity depends on the molecular weight of the polymer, cation/anion size, and viscosity of polymer chains. The polymer electrolyte, therefore, must possess high ionic conductivity and prevent the flow of the electrons hence the negligible electronic conductivity. As the migration of anions may affect the battery performance so its migration is avoided during the design of any polymer electrolyte system. The main strategy is to immobilize the anion and the only cation dominates in the conduction. The ionic conductivity of any polymer electrolyte system (σ) is linked with two parameters; a number of free charge carriers and ion mobility (equation 1). Here, Here, ni represents the effective number of charge carriers of type i; qi is the charge of the charge carriers, and μ i is the mobility. An important factor that influences the ionic conductivity is the activation energy. This is the minimum energy that is required for ion migration and is obtained from the conductivity vs. temperature plot Here, Ea is the activation energy, which can be calculated from the nonlinear least-squares fitting of the data from plots of log σ vs. T -1 . For polymer electrolytes, plots of σ vs. T -1 are typically nonlinear, indicating that the conductivity mechanism involves an ionic hopping motion coupled with the relaxation and/or segmental motion of the polymeric chains. The VTF equation can be derived from the quasi-thermodynamic models with the free volume and configurational entropy, and its behavior can be related coupled motion with the segmental motion. This can be expressed by equation Here, σ o is the pre-exponential factor, which is related to the number of charge carriers ni, B is the pseudo activation energy of the conductivity, and To is the reference temperature associated with the ideal glass transition temperature (Zero mobility temperature). For practical aspects, the high ionic conductivity of the order of 10 -2 -10 -3 S cm -1 is required and electronic conductivity of the order of 10 -6 -10 -10 S cm -1 . This enhances the charging/discharging rate and cyclic stability. Table It is one of essential parameters that must be close to the unity (~1) for a good ionic conductor and function of the ionic conductivity. One main drawback associated with the polymer electrolytes is concentration polarization (CP) on the electrode interface which hinders the ion migration during cell operation. This affects the overall performance of the device and observed in terms of the low energy density and power density. So, the main strategy to reduce the CP is to immobilize the anion and keep only the active species as the main hero of the charge transport scenario. This fulfills the idea of the single state ionic conductor. So, the large value of the cation transference number also plays an effective role in the enhancement of the fundamental property that is ionic conductivity. Two approaches are adopted for immobilizing the anion. One approach suggests the anion interaction with the hydrogen of the polymer backbone (hydrogen bond formation) another is the introduction of the anon receptors. Generally, there are two terms here, cation transference number and ion transference number. Typical Values -σ o = 0.4 S cm-1, B=2.210 -3 K-1, To=210, KTg-50 Scaling factor a T for relaxation: Glass transition temperature (Tg) is one of the most fundamental properties of the polymer electrolytes that is directly linked to the electrochemical properties. It is influenced by the polymer chain arrangement, crystallinity, viscosity, polymer interactions or polarity and molecular weight of the polymers. As most of the polymers are crystalline in nature. The ionic conduction in case of the polymers is supposed to occur via the amorphous phase and segmental motion of the polymer chains which is further linked with the flexibility of chains. This flexibility criterion is specified by the glass transition temperature (Tg) value. It is defined as a transition temperature at which any system goes from rigid to rubbery/viscous phase. Below Tg, there is no ion migration or chain are not moving. While above the Tg there is a drastic change in the intrinsic properties (density, specific heat, mechanical modulus, mechanical energy absorption, their dielectric and acoustical equivalents) of the polymer that supports the fast segmental motion or less viscosity The ordering of the polymer chain (long range and short range) affects the ion migration in a polymer electrolyte. As, long range order is associated with the crystallinity which in case of the polymer electrolyte's must be lower for faster ion migration. So, the crystallinity of any system provides sufficient information regarding the material and how it will play its role during the ion transport. The crystallinity of any polymer material is obtained by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the Differentials scanning calorimetry (DSC). It needs to be mentioned here that the amorphous content supports the fast ion migration in case of the polymer electrolytes. The amorphous content is achieved by disrupting the crystalline arrangement of the polymer chains. The best approach is the addition of the nanofiller and alters the arrangement by the Lewis acid-base interaction with polymer chains. The intercalation of the polymer chains in the clay gallery also lowers the crystallinity. This increases the free volume available for the ion migration as now segmental motion of the polymer chains becomes faster and ion jump faster from one coordinating site to another. The amorphous content can be visualized by the Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), Transmissions electron microscope (TEM) and atomic force microscope (AFM). For fulfilling the requirement of polymer electrolyte for the application aspects it must have a broad electrochemical stability window (ESW) and depends on the stability of individual cation/anion. It is defined as the difference between the potentials of the oxidation reaction and reduction reaction. As one characteristic a polymer electrolyte must possess is that it must be inert toward both electrodes. For this, the oxidation potential must be higher than the embedding potential of cation (Li + ) in the cathode and the reduction potential must be lower than that of lithium metal in the anode. The desirable range of the ESW is ~4-5 V and is enough for the commercialized systems. Thermal stability of a battery device is important to avoid the material decomposition and explosion during cell operation. So, the thermal stability is investigated by TGA to check the safety window of a polymer electrolyte. As, different material have different decomposition temperature range and for long-term cycle stability all material must lie beyond the decomposition range. So, for the safe working of the battery system, the thermal stability must be large. The approaches for the enhancement of the thermals stability is the addition of nanoparticles in the polymer matrix. During the commercialization of the battery or any energy storage device, one important property is the mechanical stability. So, the along with high cation transference number and the ionic conductivity it must have mechanical property sufficient enough for long term cycle stability. The mechanical stability is measured by the stress-strain curve in terms of the modulus, stress, and strain. As during the cell packaging the polymer electrolyte is sandwiched between the two electrodes so, it must have the capability to sustain the pressure applied. The polymer electrolyte having poor mechanical strength may short-circuit the electrodes during cell operation. So, the material must be flexible by nature and brittleness is avoided. It must have inherent characteristics that may absorb the small internal shocks and does not affect the electrodes. There are various strategies that are adopted for the enhancement of the modulus, stress, and strain. The most suitable and the attractive approaches are the dispersion of the nanofiller, nanoclay and nanoparticle it high aspect ratio such as nanorod, nanowire, nanotube. Here these nanoparticles may play the role of the crosslinking center and overall enhancement in the mechanical property of the complete polymer matrix is achieved. There are various reports toward the addition of the different nanofiller in the polymer matrix for improving the electrical, thermal and mechanical properties. Generally, all nanofiller addition suppresses the crystallinity and crosslinking alters the polymer chain arrangement. Another effective point is that nanofiller supports salt dissociation via Lewis acid-base interactions and provides additional conducting sites for ion transport. But still, there is lack of availability of a polymer matrix with enhanced amorphous content and weak polymer-nanofiller interaction results in nanofiller agglomeration. So, Lin et al., TEM image evidence that the higher polymer density was for the in situ prepared composites as compared to ex-situ and indicates the presence of strong interaction between the polymers a nanofiller (Figure Another remarkable evidence is increased number of free ion charge carriers (left to right) in figure 6 k-n. The degree of dissociation of salt was higher for the sample synthesized by in situ synthesis following the relation in situ (98.1 %) > ex situ (92.8 %) > PEO-fumed SiO2 CPE (87.4%) > ceramic-free SPE (85.0%). This was attributed to the simultaneous achievement of two parameters, uniform distribution of SiO2 and increased the segmental motion of polymer chains. The ionic conductivity also shows enhancement for polymer electrolyte synthesized by in situ and is in the range 10 -4 -10 -5 S cm -1 (at ambient temperature) and 1.2×10 -3 S cm -1 (at 60 o C). Further, the electrochemical stability window was improved for in situ synthesis (> 5.5 V) as compared to ex-situ synthesis (~4.7 V) and may be due to the strong adsorption effect on anion for in situ synthesis Pal et al., Further TEM analysis evidences the non-uniform distribution and clustering, with no effect on particle size with nanofiller loading. with addition of the salt and nanofiller in FTIR spectra confirms the presence of polymer-ion, ion-ion interactions. Also, the number of free charge carriers were more for low clay content and attributed to the cation interaction with electron rich group of PMMA. DSC analysis shows a decrease of the Tg with the addition of nanofiller while at high nanofiller content increase is due to nanofiller cluster formation. TGA analysis shows thermal stability up to 250 o C and is in the desirable range for application purpose. The solid-state battery configuration with PMMA-LiClO4-1 wt% TiO2 as electrolyte shows the discharge capacity of 123 mAh/g for the 1st cycle and 136 mAh/g for 1st charging cycle with coulombic efficiency 100 % (Figure As a lot of reports are available by addition of nonporous inorganic nanofiller but mesoporous nanoparticle may be vital alternative and may fulfill the dream of single ion conductor. So, the suppression of crystallinity along with immobilization of anion are simultaneously resolved by introducing the bulky imide group. Liang et al., Kim et al., Fillers also plays the role of the crosslinking network and increase the cation transference number by providing additional conducting pathways. The voltage stability window was 5.3 V for 20 wt. % LAGP-I. The electrochemical analysis of the LiFePO4/PEO-20% LAGP-I/Li cell demonstrates capacities of 166, 155, 143 and 108 mAh g -1 at current rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 and 1C, respectively with capacity retention of cell 44% (after 50 cycles). Zhu et al., The ionic conductivity was 10 wt. % MIL-53 (Al) content for EO:Li ratio of 15 : 1 with value 1.62×10 -5 S cm -1 (at 30 o C) and 9.71×10 -4 S cm -1 (at 80 o C). This was also further supported by the lowering of phase transition temperature from 56.9 o C to 50. Vignabooran et al., The purpose of this research was to study the combined effect of the plasticizer and the nanofiller, as both plays influence the polymer matrix in a different manner. The highest ionic conductivity was 4.9×10 -5 S cm -1 for the 10 wt. % TiO2 (at 30 o C, Ea=78.8 kJ/mol) and was attributed to the Lewis acid base character of the nanofiller surface. The nano filler surface affects in two ways, one is a reduction of the polymer recrystallization tendency and another is an increase of salt dissociation or lowering in ion pairing. Both simultaneously supports the fast ion migration. Further addition of the EC increases the conductivity upto 1.6×10 -4 S cm -1 for the 50 wt. % EC (at 30 o C, Ea=57.5 kJ/mol). Further DSC analysis supports the enhancement in the conductivity as both glass transition temperature (-46 o C to - wt.%Al2O3). The decrease in crystallinity on the addition of salt was due to the cation coordination with the PEO and it alters the polymer chain arrangement, hence the increased segmental mobility. Addition of nanofiller increases slightly the Tg and Tm and that may be due to the crosslinking of the polymer chain while crystallinity reduction is observed Another report using the hybrid nanofiller was by Polu et al., Arya et al., Figure As studied earlier that the nanofiller enhances the possibility of interaction between polymer-ion via the Lewis-Acid-Base interactions. It alters the polymer chain arrangement and the more free volume is available for the ion transport. Another important role is played by the surface group of the nanofiller and it leads to the formation of the conductive continuous network. The overall enhancement is of the amorphous content that is beneficial for a fast solid state ionic conductor. But with nanofiller one issue is still there that is of dual ion conduction. So, an alternative is the use of nanoclay instead of the nanofiller. One important step before using the clay is its modification in which the covalent bonding between the clay layers is disrupted by the introduction of the surfactants or hydrophobic functional moieties. This increases the dispersion of nanoclay and overall aim is to increase the basal spacing so that polymer chain can be intercalated easily (Figure Nanoclay has two advantages, one it blocks the anion migration inside clay galleries (the only cation is available for conduction) and another is that as polymer chain is intercalated inside the clay galleries so the polymer recrystallization tendency or crystallinity is reduced. Both the above properties lead to enhancement of the ion transport and hence the ionic conductivity. The high cation exchange capacity of the clay supports the intercalation and swelling of the polymer chains. (ii) If the basal spacing increases with nanoclay and clay layers are stacked with polymer chain intercalated between layers then it is called intercalated PNC. This type of the PNC leads to building up of the nanometric channels for cation transport and disrupts the recrystallization tendency of the polymer chains. (iii) If the clay layers are completely in the disordered state as well as the polymer chains then the PNC is exfoliated PNC. This type of PNC lowers the ion-pairing effect. (iv) If the long molecular chains get intercalated inside the two or more clay galleries then it is called Beside this, the nanoclay such as halloysite nanotube (HN), montmorillonite (MMT) clay are gaining more intention in the formation of the polymer nanocomposites and main influence is on the thermal, electrical and the mechanical properties. The interaction mechanism behind the nanoclay is the formation of the electrostatic interactions between the charges present on the nanoclay surface and the electron rich group of the host polymer. This interaction disrupts the weak dipolar and van der Waals forces between clay sheets. As, now polymer get intercalated between the clay sheets and prevents the direct impact on the polymer on heating and hence the improved properties are achieved In the formation of the PNC preparation method plays an effective role in altering the chain arrangement. So, Dhatarwal et al., Erceg et al., Sengwa et al., Kim et al., The Li/CSPE/LiFePO4 cells show pretty high specific discharge capacity above 123 mAh/g -1 along with a coulombic efficiency of 97.1% after 100 cycles. Mohapatra et al., It was concluded from the XRD that the prepared PNCE films have a multiphase combination of crystalline and amorphous PS phases, an amorphous phase boundary, crystalline clay and amorphous PS inside the clay galleries at the interface of the clay layers and PS matrix. Further TEM analysis provides strong evidence of the intercalation along with exfoliation at low clay content. At very high clay content (>20 wt. %) clay cluster formation was reported. DSC analysis displayed the lowering of the glass transition temperature (Tg) owing to the enhanced flexibility assisted by intercalation on nanocomposite formation. The highest ionic conductivity was 6.48×10 -5 S/cm for 10 wt. % clay content (at 30 o C). TGA analysis shows the thermal stability of the composite polymer electrolyte up to 300 oC and is sufficient for the application purpose (Figure And voltage stability window was about 3 V. The thermal stability was improved after the polymer chain intercalation inside clay galleries. This may be attributed to the barrier role played by clay layers which prevent the decomposition of the polymer salt complex. Another reason may be the catalytic effect in which the clay layers accumulated all heat and prevents the decomposition of the polymer slats system. Sharma et al., Moreno et al., Figure Zhang et al., As a lot of reports are available on the dispersion of nanofiller in the polymer electrolyte matrix which provides in hand the superior properties as compared to the micro fillers. There are three fundamental mechanisms which dominate here, (i) creation of percolation pathways, (ii) reduction of polymer reorganization tendency and (iii) aspect ratio or shape of the nanoparticle. As nanofiller surface have acidic and basic sites which play an effective role in the ion transport or mobility in case of polymer electrolytes. These sites support the formation of conducting pathways for the ion transport. These paths are termed as percolation pathways. As the nanofiller surface groups alter the existing interaction between the polymer chains and the polymer ion. This lowers the chain reorganization tendency and provides smoother in transport. Another key role is played by the aspect ratio of the nanoparticle. As it is well known that the nanofiller have a high aspect ratio as compared to the micro fillers and the aspect ratio is in inverse relation with the percolation threshold. Also, the optimum or critical concentration is lower for the nanoparticles with high aspect ratio due to increased size distribution The mechanism behind the improved conductivity on the addition of nanofiller highlights the interaction electron rich group of host polymer with the surface group of nanofiller. This supports the salt dissociation and more free charge carriers are available for conduction. Another important role played by nanofiller is the disruption of the recrystallization tendency of the polymer chain arrangement and hence the amorphous content is increase which favors the smoother and faster ion migration. So, the percolation pathways created by the nanofiller are beneficial for the faster ion transport. It can be concluded from here that the larger the percolation path, faster will be the ion migration due to the long continuous path. This will depend on the coordinating sites (acidic/basic) available to favor the ion mobility and sufficient salt dissociation. Another remarkable point here is that the suitable control over the acidic/basic sites of nanofiller can lead to the improved electrical properties. Also, the alignment of the nanorod and nanowire is important as aligned nanoparticle parallel to the electrodes limit the perpendicular ion migration. The nanoparticles with the different aspect ratio and shape also alter the mechanical properties that are further altered by the alignment of nanorod/nanowire/nanotube. Beyond the active/passive nanoparticle, one another attractive approach is the use of 1 D nanofiller for enhancing the electrical properties. So, regarding this Liu et al., It was concluded that the recrystallization tendency is more for the NR (1 wt. %) due to more inter-particle interaction as compared to the NP. This leads to more aggregation of NR as compared to NP. So, here it was explained on the basis of the length of conducting pathways of NR. Another effective approach is to create the positively charged oxygen vacancies on the 1 D nanofiller surface which acts as Lewis acid sites in the composite polymer electrolyte matrix. Liu et al., The voltage stability window was increased as compared to the polymer salt matrix. The positive-charged oxygen vacancies on the surfaces of the fillers act as Lewis acid sites that can interact strongly with anions and release Li-ions. A continuous fast conduction pathway can be seen for nanowires rather than nanoparticles. With permission from Ref. Although the ionic conductivity was enhanced after the dispersion of the nanowire compared to nanoparticle but, one possibility still arise there that may affect the ion migration or restrict the effective role of nanowire/nanorod in the polymer matrix. As in the previous reports, the random distribution of the nanowire is investigated, but here if the nanowire is aligned parallel to the electrodes then they may show the negative effect by blocking the perpendicular ion migration. So, the alignment of the nanorod/nanowire may play and elective role in enhancing the conductivity further (Figure So, a recent report by Liu wt al., Another report by the Zhang et al., FESEM analysis of the composite matrix suggests the effective role in modifying the surface morphology of pure polymer which are favorable for cation transport. Also, the presence of pores suggests the absorption of more electrolyte and hence the more ionic conductivity. FTIR spectrum confirms the interaction between the Si atoms of SiO2 and F atoms of P(VDF-HFP) chain which helps in ion migration. TGA plot reveals the improved thermal stability (427 o C) as compared to the pure polymer (384 o C) and is due to the interaction between the host polymer matrix and the Si nanowire. Further DSC analysis shows the reduction in the crystallinity on the addition of nanowire and may be due to the lowering of polymer chain reorganization tendency and enhanced amorphous content. The stress-strain curve shows increased tensile strength from 18.3 MPa (zero % nanowire) to 27.3 MPa for composite polymer electrolyte with 10 wt. % nanowire and is owing to the interaction between the polymer matrix and SiO2 nanowire. This may be due to the increased chain flexibility on addition of nanowire which makes it capable of bear high stress and is in agreement with the FTIR. The ionic conductivity was increased by one order and is 1.08×10 -3 S cm -1 (at 30 o C) and may be due to the weakening of the interaction of cation with the fluorine of host polymer matrix. Also, the porous structure as evidenced in FESEM provides some additional conducting pathways in same volume favorable for ion transport and space charge region build up occurs due to the more free charge carriers availability. At, high content the interpenetrating networks are formed due to the overlapped space charge regions and hence the ion conducting pathways. Also, the transference number of Li + was increased from 0.23 to 0.70 on the addition of nanowire and may be due to the increased number of free ions via the dual interaction of acidic sites with fluorine of polymer host as well as an anion (PF6 -). The electrochemical stability window of the synthesized composite polymer electrolyte was 4.8 V and no effect of a surface group of the nanofiller was observed on the stability window. Another report based on Mg2B2O5 nanowires (Av. diameter ~270 nm) with PEO-LiTFSI was reported by Sheng et al., 