A design for a large-scale surface code quantum processor based on a node/network approach is introduced for semiconductor quantum dot spin qubits. The minimal node contains only seven quantum dots, and nodes are separated on the micron scale, creating useful space for wiring interconnects and integration of conventional transistor circuits. Entanglement is distributed between neighbouring nodes by loading spin singlets locally and then shuttling one member of the pair through a linear array of empty dots. A node contains one data qubit, two ancilla qubits, and additional dots to facilitate electron shuttling and measurement of the ancillas. A four-node GHZ state is realized by sharing three internode singlets followed by local gate operations and ancilla measurements. Further local operations produce an X or Z stabilizer on the four data qubits, which is the fundamental operation of the surface code. Electron shuttling is simulated in the single-valley case using a simple gate electrode geometry without explicit barrier gates, and demonstrates that adiabatic transport is possible on timescales that do not present a speed bottleneck to the processor. An important shuttling error in a clean system is uncontrolled phase rotation of the spin due to modulation of the electronic g-factor during transport, owing to the Stark effect. This error can be reduced by appropriate electrostatic tuning of the stationary electron's g-factor. Building a large-scale, universal quantum computer would enable major technological advances, yet presents a significant challenge. Solid-state qubits based on superconducting circuits While much early progress in quantum dot spin qubits was achieved in GaAs 2D electron gas devices, silicon offers the possibility of a nuclear spin free lattice, which has been demonstrated to yield electron spin coherence times of order seconds for donor electrons While for MOS quantum dots the microscopic roughness of the SiO 2 interface leads to an unavoidable degree of intrinsic variation in electrostatic and qubit parameters, the large scale uniformity of the Si/SiO 2 material system is remarkable and has been critically important to the scaling of classical CMOS. Many engineering challenges, however, can be foreseen with developing large scale QMOS: (i) qubit sensitivity to charge noise, (ii) control line cross-talk, (iii) variability in device tuning parameters, (iv) need for high density 3D wiring interconnects, (v) need for multiplexing and parallel operations, (vi) ultra-low power dissipation, (vii) high precision / high bandwidth / low noise voltage controls, etc. Existing proposals make use of 2D quantum dot arrays as a basis for a surface code quantum computer. Veldhorst et al It is well understood that a universal quantum computer could be constructed by networking together many simple processor cells, rather than building a Step 2: a singlet created at A is shared between ancilla 2 qubits on nodes A/C. Step 3: ancilla 2 qubits on nodes A/C are measured, which projects the four ancilla 1 qubits into the shared GHZ state with probability 1/2, or with equal probability into a state that is transformed to the GHZ state by local gate operations. Step 4: conditional quantum gates (control-NOT or control-Z) are performed between ancilla 1 and data qubits, followed by measurement of the ancilla 1 qubits, realizing a stabilizer operation on the data qubits. Step numbers are color-coded to match circuit segments in figure single complex device For simplicity, we will assume that spatial separation of the singlet states can be done with high fidelity, so that entanglement purification is not needed. This allows for a minimal node consisting of one data and two ancilla qubits. Additional ancillae and entanglement distribution operations could be used for entanglement purification if needed, as described in ref. The four-node stabilizer sequence shown in figure √ SW AP gates. Subsequent Z-basis measurement of ancilla 2 qubits on nodes A and C projects the four ancilla 1 qubits into a maximally entangled GHZ state with probability 50%, i.e. if the A and C measurements return even parity. If the parity is odd, then Pauli X gates applied to the ancilla 1 qubits of nodes A and B will produce the GHZ state (see Appendix 6.1 for mathematical details). Thus, the protocol is deterministic subject to this feedback. The GHZ state provides the shared entanglement resource that allows the data qubits to be stabilized. A control-NOT (or control-Z) between the local ancilla 1 and data qubits, followed by measurement of the ancilla 1 qubits, performs a 4-qubit X (or Z) stabilizer on the data qubits. The ancilla dots can then be emptied of electrons (via shuttling to the reservoir) to prepare for the next stabilizer operation. A full surface code cycle requires 4 separate stabilizer operations in sequence, since any two neighbouring 4-node plaquettes cannot be stabilized simultaneously. Both the Z and X plaquettes are split into two non-adjoining subsets, and each of the 4 subsets are stabilized sequentially (see Appendix 6.2). As pointed out in ref Measuring ancilla qubits quickly and with high fidelity is a critical requirement for any surface code processor, including the network approach proposed here. One method for projectively measuring the electron spin is to use spindependent tunneling together with a local charge sensor A proposed layout of the nodes forming a network is presented in figure Spatial separation of the spin singlet pairs is fundamental to the proposed network approach, and occurs in parallel across the device at the beginning of every stabilizer cycle. To coherently translate an electron spin across a distance requires confinement of the wavefunction be maintained. Single electron transport via 'moving quantum dots' has been realized with surface acoustic waves in piezoelectric materials Figure The total sequence time is T , and the normalized time t/T is given on the horizontal axis. The corresponding gate voltages are shown in the panel above, sharing the same time axis. The process is adiabatic for T = 4.1 ns, but non-adiabatic for T ≤ 1 ns. For a final state fidelity F > 0.99, the threshold for these simulations is T th ≈ 3 ns, or roughly 1.5 ns per shuttle step. Figure Figure A consequence of the weak (but non-zero) spin-orbit interaction in silicon together with a gate-induced local electric field is the Stark shift of the electronic g-factor |S is the ideal singlet state and ψ(t) is the actual spin state, a superposition of the singlet and m z = 0 triplet states. The blue curve is for the case when the static electron has resonance frequency ν 0 . The red curve is the result of tuning the static dot so that its electron resonance frequency is ν avg , in which case the net phase error cancels out. , where the Stark coefficient η contains microscopic information and is normally determined experimentally From these simulations, we find that the modulation amplitude for g scales roughly linearly with the range over which the gate voltages are swept, i.e. about 1 MHz/V. The voltage sweep range should thus be kept as low as possible to reduce the potential for Stark dephasing error. Fast noise in the electrostatic potential due to fluctuating charge defects or gate voltage noise from external sources should also be considered, as it would lead to irreversible dephasing of the singlet state. For an experimentally viable level of rms gate voltage noise of several μeV, the noise-induced fluctuation range for g would be negligibly small, only ∼ 10 Hz. Direct spin-orbit effects, on the other hand, are expected to produce larger errors. Spin-orbit coupling in a silicon 2DEG has been estimated to be of order ∼ 2 μeV•nm The time required to distribute a singlet between neighbouring nodes is ∼ L D τ , where L is the internode distance, D is the dot dimension and τ is the time for a single shuttle operation. For a dot size of 50 nm and internode distance of 1.5 μm, the shuttling path consists of ∼ 30 dots. The shuttling parameters in figures 8 and 9 yield τ = 2 ns, for a total time of 60 ns. Single-qubit ESR rotations typically require tens of nanoseconds at least, and with the equivalent of 16.5 π rotations per subcycle, internode shuttling is not necessarily a bottleneck for the processor speed. With the inclusion of valley states and spin-orbit coupling, we expect the adiabaticity condition to be more stringent, reducing the attainable shuttling velocity. However, even if internode shuttling is an order of magnitude slower than our estimate above, the timescales of shuttling and intra-node operations would still be comparable. Reducing τ further should be possible with optimization of voltage sweep and dot parameters. Elongating the dots along the shuttling direction would reduce the number of dots required and could improve the operation fidelity. Since the orbital energy spacing decreases as D -2 , however, the adiabaticity condition will require slower operations as D increases. Finding the optimal dot dimensions to maximize shuttling velocity while remaining adiabatic is worthy of investigation, along with designing optimal, smooth voltage sweep functions and optimizing tunnel rates. We emphasize that internode shuttling operations are global in that they proceed in parallel across the entire network for each stabilizer sequence (note, however, each subcycle of the surface code involves a distinct set of shuttle lines). Therefore, the electrodes controlling the shuttle path dots can be wired to common lines, assuming sufficiently high device uniformity. We expect that shuttling will be more tolerant of variations in dot parameters than qubit operations (i.e. as long as potential disorder is smaller than the minimum ground/excited state gap), although this should be investigated with numerical simulations. With common lines for shuttling, the number of external control wires can therefore remain manageable, of the order required for several plaquettes. We also emphasize that tuning the interdot tunnelling without explicit barrier gates relies only on the geometry of the dot gates and the voltage sequence, simplifying the device to a bare minimum of electrodes/wires. The timescale for a full surface code cycle can be estimated by assuming realistic values for all operations in the subcycle of figure Although we have so far assumed a global ESR field (e.g. placing the device chip inside a macroscopic microwave cavity), the highest Rabi frequencies are typically achieved with micromagnets In quantum error correction, if the error rate of the physical components is below a certain threshold, the error rate of the logical qubits can be reduced by scaling up the code. The error threshold of surface codes is highly dependent on the way the stabilizer check circuit is implemented and the error models of the physical components. Its exact value can be obtained via simulations of the error correction circuit using the Gottesman-Knill theorem • Single-qubit gates, initialization and measurement: depolarizing errors with probability • Shuttling process: dephasing errors (due to g-factor modulation) with probability p sh ρ → (1 -p sh )ρ + p sh ZρZ In particular, SWAP errors and the fact that √ SWAP is non-Clifford will give rise to non-Pauli noise in the circuit (see Appendix 6.5.2). To efficiently simulate the error correction circuit using the Gottesman-Knill theorem, non-Pauli error operators must be converted into Pauli noise by twirling. Twirling is used for converting arbitrary error channels into Pauli channels by conjugating the noise with Pauli gates randomly chosen from the twirling gate set , where denotes a super-operator * . Twirling is proven to be effective in error threshold simulations To run error threshold simulations, we must first obtain the error distribution for each round of the stabilizer check. This can be obtained via a full quantum simulation of the stabilizer check circuit, which is shown in figure are always followed by an X measurement whose results are forgotten at the end; we only record the parity of the X measurements in both the preparation * For example, A + B ρ = AρA † + BρB † and the stabilizer check stage. Using the method proposed in Figure If we assume no dephasing error during shuttling (p sh = 0), and fix the error ratio between single-qubit errors (p 1q ) and SWAP errors (p swap ), we obtain the threshold plots for p swap as shown in figure Finally, we note that demonstrated electron spin coherence times in MOS dots (with isotopic enhancement to remove 29 Si nuclear spins) are compatible with fault tolerance in our architecture. Ref. In summary, we have proposed a surface code realization for quantum dot spin qubits in silicon based on a network of nodes. The spatial separation of the nodes allows data qubits to be better isolated and will ease constraints on wiring density and integration of classical circuit elements to support control and readout functions. As each node contains fewer than 10 quantum dots, demonstrating a fully functional node is nearly within the grasp of current technology. Connecting nodes relies on shuttling of electrons over medium-range distances (∼ 1 μm) and maintaining the fidelity of the distributed spin singlet states. We find value in separating the scaling problem into these two streams -local operations and entanglement distribution -that can be developed in parallel. Realistic simulations with the simplest possible gate electrode geometry show that adiabatic shuttling can be realized on timescales that do not necessarily present a speed bottleneck to the processor. Simulations suggest that the dominant error in a clean system is uncontrolled phase rotation due to the modulation of the electronic g-factor during shuttling, owing to the Stark effect. While this error ∼ 0.1% may be tolerable by a scaled-up surface code, we show how it can be much further reduced by appropriate tuning of the stationary electron's g-factor. These shuttling results, however, do not tell the whole story because we have not included multiple valleys, direct spin-orbit coupling or charge state decoherence in the simulations. The combined effects of these factors could indeed make coherent spin transport over many dots difficult or impossible, and it is critical that simulations based on realistic gate geometries like ours be extended to take these into account. While we have chosen to focus on spin shuttling in this paper, of course, any viable method for internode entanglement distribution can be used in its place. Achieving fault tolerance is a critical goal for a scalable processor. Using reasonable noise models, we estimate error thresholds with respect to single and two-qubit gate fidelities as well as dephasing errors due to shuttling. A twirling protocol allows us to transform the non-Pauli noise associated with exchange gate operations into Pauli noise, making it possible to use the Gottesman-Knill theorem to efficiently simulate large codes. Not surprisingly, the surface code is found to be more robust to singlet dephasing errors than to errors in √ SWAP operations. A √ SWAP error threshold of 0.31% was found when the probability of single-qubit error is 0.1 times that of the two-qubit exchange gate. A dephasing (shuttling) threshold of 0.79% was found when √ SWAP and single-qubit error probabilities are 0.2% and 0.02%, respectively. Thus, compared to the current state of the art in silicon spin qubits Here we outline the mathematical details underlying the circuit of figure 4. In our notation, commas separate nodes from each other as |A, B, C, D . Within a particular node, the first qubit represents the A1 qubit and the second (if written) indicates the A2 qubit. A blank space in the A2 location means that qubit is not present. The initial state after the singlet distributions between A1 in both node pairs A-B and C-D (segment 1 in figure Next, the singlet distribution between A2 in the nodes A-C (segment 2 in figure 2) gives the state -|01, 1, 00, 1 + |01, 1, 10, 0 + |11, 0, 00, 1 -|11, 0, 10, 0 The first step of segment 3 in figure + |10, 1, 10, 1 + |10, 1, 00, 0 + |00, 0, 10, 1 + |00, 0, 00, 0 Next, we perform a control-Z operation between the A1 and A2 qubits in nodes A and C, + |10, 1, 10, 1 + |10, 1, 00, 0 + |00, 0, 10, 1 + |00, 0, 00, 0 To create the GHZ state distributed across all four A1 qubits, we perform an X basis measurement on the A2 qubits in nodes A and C. Rewriting the state above in the X basis, it is easy to find the state of the A1 qubits conditional on the four measurement outcomes: Since the four outcomes above occur with equal probability, the even parity outcomes give the GHZ state with probability 1/2, while the odd parity outcomes give a state with equal probability that is transformed into the GHZ state by applying an X π rotation on the A1 qubits in two of the nodes. The four-qubit GHZ state preparation is therefore deterministic. See figure 6.3 Adiabaticity of the electronic wavefunction during shuttling The gate voltage sequence for shuttling, e.g. the example in figure where ψg is the time derivative of the instantaneous ground state ψ g (t) and ψ m is the m th excited state orbital. As the resonant tunnelling point V 2 V 1 is approached, the relevant energy gap for adiabaticity is given by 2 t where t is the tunnelling energy. V 1 is then swept slowly in the negative direction with V 2 fixed, until the tunnel coupling is sufficiently 'off' that V 1 can be swept quickly without affecting the wavefunction now localized in dot 2. In a linear dot array, cross-capacitances between gates affect the dot potentials so that the exact resonant tunnelling points differ slightly from the points V j = V k for adjacent dots j and k. The correct resonant tunnelling points are identified by the electron having equal probability to be in both dots, and this is taken into account in the construction of the gate voltage sequences. Figure See figure 16. 6.5 Fault tolerance threshold calculations: non-Pauli errors i.e. we have either perfect √ SWAP or 2 probability of having a SWAP error on top of √ SWAP. Similar arguments can be applied to other symmetric over/under-rotation distributions that center on the correct rotation angles. The control-Z gates are implemented as There are three types of non-Pauli noise that can occur: • SWAP error after second √ SWAP ⇒ SWAP error after the control-Z • SWAP error after first √ SWAP ⇒ (Z 1 Z 2 )•SWAP error after the control-Z √ SWAP † error after the control-Z. Pauli noise can be composed with any of these three errors to yield a general non-Pauli noise model for the control-Z gates.