Transition metal dichalcogenides XTe 2 (X=Mo,W) have been shown to be second-order topological insulators based on firstprinciples calculations, while topological hinge states have been shown to emerge based on the associated tight-binding model. The model is equivalent to the one constructed from a loop-nodal semimetal by adding mass terms and spin-orbit interactions. We propose to study a chiral-symmetric model obtained from the original Hamiltonian by simplifying it but keeping almost identical band structures and topological hinge states. A merit is that we are able to derive various analytic formulas because of chiral symmetry, which enables us to reveal basic topological properties of transition metal dichalcogenides. We find a linked loop structure where a higher linking number (even 8) is realized. We construct second-order topological semimetals and two-dimensional second-order topological insulators based on this model. It is interesting that topological phase transitions occur without gap closing between a topological insulator, a topological crystalline insulator and a second-order topological insulator. We propose to characterize them by symmetry detectors discriminating whether the symmetry is preserved or not. They differentiate topological phases although the symmetry indicators yield identical values to them. We also show that topological hinge states are controllable by the direction of magnetization. When the magnetization points the z direction, the hinges states shift, while they are gapped when it points the in-plane direction. Accordingly, the quantized conductance is switched by controlling the magnetization direction. Our results will be a basis of future topological devices based on transition metal dichalcogenides. Higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) are generalization of topological insulators (TIs). In the second-order topological insulators (SOTIs), for instance, topological corner states emerge though edge states do not in two dimensions, while topological hinge states emerge though surface states do not in three dimensions The tight-binding model for transition metal dichalcogenides has already been proposed, which is closely related to a type of loop-nodal semimetals It is intriguing that topological boundary states can be controllable externally. Magnetization is an efficient way to do so. Famous examples are surface states of 3D magnetic TIs In this paper, we investigate a chiral-symmetric limit of the original model Hamiltonians. Motivated by the model Hamiltonian with where σ, τ and μ are Pauli matrices representing spin and two orbital degrees of freedom. It contains three mass parameters, m, m Loop and m SOTSM . The role of the term m Loop is to make the system a loop-nodal semimetal, and that of the term m SOTSM is to make the system a SOTSM. The Brillouin zone and high symmetry points are shown in Fig. The original Hamiltonian contains two extra mass parameters and given by with The simplified model H SOTI captures essential band structures of the original model H SOTI . Indeed, the bulk band structures are almost identical, as seen in Fig. A merit of the simplified model is the chiral symmetry, {H SOTI (k x , k y , k z ), C} = 0, which is absent in the original model, {H SOTI (k x , k y , k z ), C} = 0. Accordingly, the band structure of H is symmetric with respect to the Fermi level. Moreover, the bulk band structure is analytically solved. Here, the chiral symmetry operator is C = τ y μ z σ x or C = τ y μ z σ y . Let us call the original model a chiral-nonsymmetric model and the simplified model a chiral-symmetric model. The common properties of the two Hamiltonians H SOTI and H SOTI read as follows. First, they have inversion symmetry P = τ z and time-reversal symmetry T = iτ z σ y K with K the complex conjugation operator. Inversion symmetry P acts on H SOTI as P -1 H SOTI (k)P = H SOTI (-k), while time-reversal symmetry T acts as T -1 H SOTI (k)T = H SOTI (-k). Accordingly, the Hamiltonian has the P T symmetry (P T ) -1 H SOTI (k)P T = H SOTI (k), which implies that H * = H. Second, the z-component of the spin is a good quantum number σ z = s z . Since we may decompose the Hamiltonian into two sectors, it is enough to diagonalize the 4 × 4 Hamiltonians. All these relations hold also for H SOTI . The relation (8) resembles the one that the Kane-Mele model is decomposed into the up-spin and down-spin Haldane models on the honeycomb lattice A convenient way to reveal topological boundary states is to plot the local density of states (LDOS) at zero energy. First, we show the LDOS for the Hamiltonian H 0 in Fig. in Fig. in Fig. with and The topological phase diagram is determined by the energy spectra at the eight high-symmetry points Γ = (0, 0, 0), S = (π, π, 0), X = (π, 0, 0), Y = (0, π, 0), Z = (0, 0, π), R = (π, π, π), U = (π, 0, π) and T = (0, π, π) with respect to time-reversal inversion symmetry. The energies at these high-symmetry points (k x , k y , k z ) are analytically given by where η a = ±1 and η b = ±1. The phase boundaries are given by solving the zero-energy condition (E = 0), where η x = ±1, η y = ±1 and η z = ±1. There are 16 critical points apart from degeneracy. When t x = t y , the critical points are reduced to be 12 since E (X) = E (Y ) and E (U ) = E (T ). Hence, solving E = 0 for t z , there are 6 solutions for t z > 0, which we set as Loop-nodal semimetals. We first study the loop nodal phase described by the Hamiltonian H Loop . The energy spectrum is simply given by The loop-nodal Fermi surface is obtained by solving E (k) = 0. It follows that k x = 0 and where σ is the Pauli matrix for the reduced two bands. In addition, there are loop nodes on the k y = 0 plane at E = -m Loop , which are determined by We find the two loops determined by Eq.( The system is a trivial insulator for 0 ≤ t z < t 1 . One loop emerges for t 1 < t z < t 2 [Fig. The emergence of the loop-nodal Fermi surface is understood in terms of the band inversion Along the S-R line, the band crossing occurs also at ±m Loop with As a result, it is enough to plot the Fermi surfaces at E = 0 and E = -m Loop . The linking number N increases as t z increases, where even the linking number N = 8 is realized as in Fig. 2D TI, TCI and SOTI. At this stage it is convenient to study the 2D models by setting t z = λ z = 0. It follows from ( where η x = ±1 and η y = ±1. Depending on the way to introduce the mass parameters there are three phases, i.e., TIs, TCIs and SOTIs. The topological number is known to be the Z 4 index protected by the inversion symmetry in three dimensions where n ± K is the number of occupied band with the parity ±. There is a relation where ν is the Z 2 index characterizing the time-reversal invariant TIs. We find from Fig. (ii) When m Loop = 0 and m SOTSM = 0, the system is a TCI, where topological edge states appear only for two edges [See Fig. The Z 4 index takes the same value for the TI, TCI and SOTI phases, and hence it cannot differentiate them. Indeed, because there is no band gap closing between them The TI and TCI are differentiated whether the symmetry P T is present or not. The band is two-fold degenerate due to the symmetry P T in the TI phase, where we can define a topological index by with where i and j are the two-fold degenerated band index. It is only defined for the TI phase, where it gives the same result as κ 1 . On the other hand, it is ill-defined for the TCI and SOTI phases since there is no band degeneracy. The TCI and SOTI are differentiated by the mirror-symmetry detector defined by where is the mirror symmetry indicator It is χ = 1 when there is the mirror symmetry. On the other hand, it is χ = 1 when there is no mirror symmetry since |ψ is not the eigenstate of the mirror operator. In addition, it is χ = 1 when the system is metallic since ψ| M x |ψ changes its value at band gap closing points. See Figs.5(a3)-(c3). In Fig. SOTSM. A 3D SOTSM is constructed by considering k z dependent mass term in the 2D SOTI model On the other hand, there emerge hinge-arc states connecting the two gap closing points. Accordingly, the topological corner states in the 2D SOTI model evolves into hinge-states, whose dispersion forms flat bands as shown in Fig. With the inclusion of the H SO , the system turns into a SOTI, which has topological hinge states. We study the effects of the Zeeman term, where the Hamiltonian is described by H SOTI together with the Zeeman term which will be introduced by magnetic impurities, magnetic proximity effects or applying magnetic field. We show the hinge states in the absence and the presence of magnetization in Fig. In the presence of the external magnetic field, it is modified as which is easily diagonalized to be It well reproduces the results based on the tight binding model shown in Fig. where Γ R(L) (E) = i[Σ R(L) (E) -Σ † R(L) (E)] with the self-energies Σ L (E) and Σ R (E), and with the Hamiltonian H D for the device region. The self energies Σ L (E) and Σ R (E) are numerically obtained by using the recursive method We have studied chiral-symmetric models to describe SOTIs and loop-nodal semimetals in transition metal dichalcogenides. The Hamiltonian is analytically diagonalized due to the chiral symmetry. We have obtained analytic formulas for various phases including loop-nodal semimetals, 2D SOTIs, 3D SOTSMs and 3D SOTIs. We have proposed the symmetry detector discriminating whether the symmetry is present or not. It can differentiate topological phases to which the symmetry indicator yields an identical value. Furthermore, we have proposed a topological device, where the conductance is switched by the direction of magnetization. Our results will open a way to topological devices based on transition metal dichalcogenides.