Oxide passive films are a key for the durability of metals and alloys components as well as a central issue in corrosion science and engineering. Herein, we discuss current developments of the nanometer and sub-nanometer scale knowledge of the barrier properties and adsorption properties of passive oxide films brought by recent model experimental and theoretical investigations. The discussed aspects include (i) the chromium enrichment and its homogeneity at the nanoscale in passive films formed on Cr-bearing alloys such as stainless steel, (ii) the corrosion properties of grain boundaries in early intergranular corrosion before penetration and propagation in the grain boundary network, and (iii) the interaction of organic inhibitor molecules with incompletely passivated metallic surfaces. In all three cases, key issues are highlighted and future developments that we consider as most relevant are identified. Passive films provide the best of all means for corrosion protection of metallic materials. Thus passivity is a key for the durability of metals and alloys components, and a central issue in corrosion science and engineering. Passive films are oxides of the metal substrate, self-forming at the surface in aqueous environment and hydroxylated mostly in their outer part. The surface oxides are either thermodynamically stable or dissolve so slowly that they form an effective and well adherent barrier, most commonly only a few nanometers thick, between a corrosive environment and the substrate. Passive films are self-healing and may reform when locally degraded or removed by breakdown Our current nanometer and sub-nanometer scale knowledge of the barrier properties of passive oxide films has been brought by combining a surface science approach employing single-crystal substrates with the application of surface analytical methods such as Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Grazing Incidence Xray Diffraction (GIXD) for characterizing the nanoscale morphology and the atomic structure of passive films produced under electrochemical control. Even when grown on single-crystal substrates, passive films are polycrystalline at the nanoscale, as a result of a high density of sites for oxide nucleation in their initial stages of formation, and textured with grains of nanometric lateral dimensions adopting a preferential crystallographic orientation. Ex situ as well as in situ measurements have demonstrated a crystalline atomic structure of the grains for passive films on metals such as copper Progress in our understanding of the atomic scale mechanisms by which the interaction of passive films with aggressive chlorides may lead to passivity breakdown has been brought by combining STM experiments with atomistic modeling using quantum chemical calculations. Density Functional Theory (DFT) modeling In this article, we discuss current developments of the nanometer and sub-nanometer scale knowledge of the barrier properties and adsorption properties of passive oxide films brought by model experimental and theoretical investigations. Selected aspects that we think of paramount importance and insufficiently addressed until now are covered. Firstly, we discuss the deviation from homogeneity at the nanoscale of the chromium enrichment in passive films formed on Cr-bearing alloys such as stainless steel, a key issue for the durability of the self-protection of stainless metallic alloys in general. Secondly, we address the passivation property of grain boundaries of a metal emerging at the surface, also a key issue since most technical materials are polycrystals that expose a grain boundary network to the environment and primarily degrade by intergranular corrosion initiated at the nanoscale. Thirdly, we comment on recent data on the interaction of passivated metallic surfaces with organic inhibitor molecules, a high relevant issue in corrosion protection since inhibitors can be a major mean of protection in environmental conditions in which self-protection by passivation is incomplete and partially effective. Organic coatings and their adhesive interaction with oxide surfaces are beyond the scope of this paper since in this case corrosion protection is provided by the deposition of fully covering coatings and not by the selfprotection behaviour of the metallic material by a passive film. Stainless steels and stainless alloys (e.g. nickel base alloys) are highly important technological materials owing their widespread use to the formation of markedly Cr(III)enriched passive oxide layers, 1 to 3 nm thick at room temperature depending on passivation conditions and providing the high resistance to corrosion [INSERT The most recent nanoscale STM [INSERT Hence dissolution as observed locally by STM can be concluded to be a marker of the surface regions of the passivated surface where the surface oxide was initially the least Cr-enriched. The surface topography obtained after passivation also reveals that transient dissolution is not homogeneous at the nanoscale since it preferentially occurs on the terraces rather than at the step edges of the substrate. This is confirmed in Figure The conductive AFM data presented in Figure [INSERT In our opinion, future developments on these aspects should include the detailed characterization by in situ spectroscopic and microscopic methods of the mechanisms of early oxidation of model stainless steel surfaces initially oxide-free in conditions simulating the formation of air-formed native oxides. The alterations of oxide films of well-controlled Cr enrichment prepared by oxidation under UHV (ultra high vacuum) environment by electrochemical polarization in varying overpotential conditions should also be studied. This requires to combine UHV facilities for surface preparation and characterization with in situ electrochemical testing of the corrosion properties and characterization of the corrosioninduced alterations and to ensure minimum or no alteration during transfer between UHV and liquid. Such studies would provide new comprehensive nanoscale knowledge that would serve as basis for designing surface treatments of stainless steels and stainless alloys for improved resistance to initiation of localized corrosion. Most technical metallic materials are polycrystals that expose to the environment a grain boundary network joining grains of different crystallographic orientations. Being microstructural defects that can have high energy depending on their structure, grain boundaries impact many properties of polycrystalline materials including their corrosion resistance Recent studies performed by EC-STM on high purity microcrystalline copper have demonstrated the possibility to investigate in situ at the nanoscale the initial stages of intergranular corrosion before penetration in the sub-surface region and propagation in the GB network [INSERT These results obtained on microcrystalline copper in the active state of dissolution show that the initiation of intergranular corrosion measured at the nanoscale at grain boundaries emerging at the surface is dependent on the grain boundary character like observed in the subsurface penetrating and propagation stages Concerning the passive state, the passivation properties of grain boundaries emerging at the surface could be studied also on microcrystalline copper to get new insight onto grain boundary effects on the competition between irreversible consumption of the metal by dissolution and reversible consumption to form the passive film [INSERT A model of variation of the surface and interface levels at grains and grain boundaries in the studied metallic, passivated and reduced surface states was developed to exploit such local STM data together with the macroscopic electrochemical data obtained by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in terms of equivalent thickness of copper reversibly and irreversibly consumed at grains and grain boundaries ) is also larger at grain boundaries than on grains. Concerning the equivalent thickness of metallic copper irreversibly consumed ( Cu(IR)  ), i.e. dissolved, during passivation, the average value of 0.14 nm corresponding to a fraction of a monolayer of metallic copper was obtained for grains, from the macroscopic CV data.. For grain boundaries, the calculated values do not exceed that on grains. The slightly negative values obtained for some of the measured sites suggests that not all metallic copper reversibly consumed and entering the passive film was taken into account by the model. It could be concluded from these data that no copper is preferentially dissolved in the intergranular regions for Cu(I) passivation. In the case of Cu(I)/Cu(II) passivation (Figure These studies reveal how insightful the application of in situ EC-STM can be to investigate at the nanoscale and locally the initial stages of intergranular corrosion before subsurface penetration and propagation in the GB network. Further developments should include combined EC-STM/EBSD characterization of the local passivation behavior of emerging grains boundaries in order to refine the characterization of the relationship between local passivation properties and grain boundary structure. Future work should include the effect of corrosive species (e.g. chloride) on the local passivation properties of different types of grain boundaries as well as the effect of corrosion inhibitor molecules (e.g. BTAH for copper) on the intergranular corrosion initiation in the active state and in the passive state. Molecular additives, inorganic or organic, are commonly introduced as inhibitors in the environment for decreasing the rate of the corrosion processes of materials in conditions in which passivation is dysfunctional. In order to be efficient, the inhibitor molecule must adsorb on the material surface, the adsorption must be strong, stronger than that of the corroding species, and ideally a barrier layer should form isolating the metal substrate from the environment and it should not be displaced by solvent molecules and/or aggressive species. On the macroscopic scale, organic corrosion inhibitors are mostly studied experimentally with information gathered during sample immersion and/or after immersion to bring insight into the effectiveness of different chemicals. However, the relevant scale to understand the inhibiting effect and to seek details for a better design of new and environmental-friendly inhibition systems is the molecular scale that requires a realistic model approach. Experimental studies of corrosion inhibition are numerous The role played by the surface oxide film formed on passivated copper on the adsorption of benzotriazole (BTAH) has been recently studied by atomistic DFT modeling on (111)-oriented Cu2O surfaces without Cu unsaturated termination) (Figure [INSERT The effects of surface hydroxylation, relevant of the oxide/liquid water interface, were also modelled Benzotriazole forms more stable hydrogen bonds with the surface hydroxyls than with the O ions of the anhydrous surface which was assigned to the higher configurational flexibility of the surface OH groups. The deprotonation of the BTAH molecule leads to the formation of a water molecule on the hydroxylated surface in contrast to a hydroxyl group on the anhydrous surface. Based on these results, we rationalize the efficiency of the BTAH inhibitor depending on pH of the aqueous solution and on the potential at the interface as follows. Protonated BTAH is the major form of benzotriazole at neutral and acidic pH since the molecule has a pKa constant of 8.2 Another approach to the DFT modeling of the effect of inhibitor organic molecules on the corrosion properties of metallic surface is to consider their role on the residual reactivity of passivated surfaces in open circuit potential (OCP) conditions. Indeed, in the absence of any applied potential, the anodic oxidation reactions at the origin of the corrosion processes are electrically balanced by cathodic reduction reactions. In neutral aqueous environment, the dominant cathodic reaction is the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Controlling this reaction is also a mean of corrosion protection, including for passivated surfaces. Atomistic DFT modeling has recently been applied to study this reaction in the presence of a model passive oxide film In the absence of adsorbed organic molecule [INSERT The dense adsorbed organic layer was confirmed to form an efficient barrier against electron transfer to dioxygen, as shown by the analysis of the O-O distance in the O2 molecule and of electronic transfer. In the absence of adsorbed gallic acid, the O-O bond length spontaneously increased when the dioxygen molecule was at the vicinity of the surface, due to the transfer of one electron from the metal layers underneath the oxide film to the molecule. The charged OO -molecule then attracted a proton from the surface to form a OOH adduct. With the dense adsorbed layer of gallic acid, the O-O distance in the dioxygen molecule was found unchanged (0.127 nm) and the charge transfer was only 0.32 electron per O2 molecule. No OOH adduct was formed. This altered behavior of the adsorbed system suggests good inhibition of the cathodic reaction by the adsorbed layer. These studies show how powerful the application of DFT modeling can be to rationalize the mechanisms by which adsorbed organic molecules can inhibit the corrosion of incompletely passivated metal surfaces. The data simulating the adsorption of benzotriazole on copper show the capability of the molecule to efficiently comply with oxidized as well as metallic states of the surface and to provide strong bonding in the protonated BTAH and deprotonated BTA form, respectively, with stronger bonding to unsaturated (i.e. defect) Cu sites both on Cu2O oxide surfaces and on Cu metal. Still, one lacks similar studies on surfaces partially oxidized and exposing oxide/metal interfaces The data simulating the adsorption of gallic acid on passivated aluminium show that it is essential to take into account the presence of a surface oxide of finite thickness, and not only the surface of the bulk oxide, to properly describe inhibition on passivated surfaces. It comes out of these studies that adhesion of the organic molecule and stabilization of the electronic levels of the passivated surface can result at least partly from strong anchoring of the adsorbed organic molecule to the surface due to covalent bonding. In the presence of the dense layer of adsorbed molecules, the electronic states of the ultrathin oxide can become similar to those of the thicker oxide, inhibiting electronic transfer and thus cathodic corrosion processes. It is our opinion that future developments of DFT simulation for the detailed understanding of corrosion inhibition brought by organic molecules should consider surfaces exposing oxide/metal interfaces as well as oxide films of varying thickness in order to better account for the effects of incomplete passivation. Three aspects that are, in our opinion, of paramount importance for the development of This approach will provide new comprehensive knowledge that can be used for the desihn of novel surface treatments for improved resistance to initiation of localized corrosion of stainless steel. The discussed data on early intergranular corrosion of microcrystalline copper show that nanoscale insight into the relationship between grain boundary crystallographic character and local corrosion properties in the active or passive state can by seek by combining surface in situ analysis and microstructural analysis. The data show that 3 coherent twins also resist the initiation of intergranular corrosion, the initiation being here the stage that precedes subsurface penetration and propagation in the grain boundary network. Future work, aiming at improving the design of corrosion resistant grain boundary engineered materials, should include the effect of corrosive species such as chlorides on the local passivation properties of different types of grain boundaries as well as the effect of corrosion inhibitor molecules on the intergranular corrosion initiation in both the active state and the passive state. The discussed data on the DFT modeling of corrosion inhibition by adsorbed organic molecules of the corrosion of incompletely passivated metal surfaces show the necessity for the molecule to efficiently comply with and strongly bond to surfaces in the oxidized as well as metallic states. They also show that it is essential to take into account the presence of a surface oxide of finite thickness, and not only the surface of the bulk oxide, to properly describe corrosion inhibition of passivated surfaces. In addition to oxide films of varying thickness or a thick oxide layer, future work by DFT modeling should also include partially oxidized metal interfaces in order to better account for the effects of incomplete passivation. Adapted from 