We perform Raman spectroscopy studies on α-RuCl3 at room temperature to explore its phase transitions of magnetism and chemical bonding under pressures. The Raman measurements resolve two critical pressures, about p1 = 1.1 GPa and p2 = 1.7 GPa, involving very different intertwining behaviors between the structural and magnetic excitations. With increasing pressures, a stacking order phase transition of α-RuCl3 layers develops at p1 = 1.1 GPa, indicated by the new Raman phonon modes and the modest Raman magnetic susceptibility adjustment. The abnormal softening and splitting of the Ru in-plane Raman mode provide direct evidence of the in-plane dimerization of the Ru-Ru bonds at p2 = 1.7 GPa. The Raman susceptibility is greatly enhanced with pressure increasing and sharply suppressed after the dimerization. We propose that the system undergoes Mott collapse at p2 = 1.7 GPa and turns into a dimerized correlated band insulator. Our studies demonstrate competitions between Kitaev physics, magnetism, and chemical bondings in Kitaev compounds. Introduction-The spin-orbit coupling always invigorates new vitality to the intertwines of magnetism and chemical bonds Pressure also promotes the breakdown of magnetic order in α-RuCl 3 In this Letter, we perform Raman scattering measurements on α-RuCl 3 to study the nature of the phase transitions under pressures. Measurements are carried out at room temperature if the temperature is not specified. From the evolution of the Raman spectra, we identify two characteristic pressures p 1 = 1.1 GPa and p 2 = 1.7 GPa for structural phase transitions. The inversion symmetry of the monoclinic C2/m breaks at p 1 = 1.1 GPa and the system turns out to be trigonal P 3 1 12 owing to the stacking pattern changes of the α-RuCl 3 layers. At p 2 = 1.7 GPa, the Ru in-plane Raman mode (161 cm -1 at ambient pressure) softens and splits, indicating the dimerization of the Ru-Ru bonds. The Raman suscepti- bility is greatly enhanced with pressure increasing, mildly adjusts at p 1 = 1.1 GPa, and sharply suppressed after the dimerization at p 2 = 1.7 GPa. We conclude that the system undergoes the Mott collapse and turns out to be dimerized correlated band insulator with the pressure larger than p 2 = 1.7 GPa. Experimental setup-High-quality single crystals of α-RuCl 3 are grown from commercial RuCl 3 powder by chemical vapor transport method. We use the diamond anvil cell to apply hydrostatic pressures on the samples, and calibrate the value of pressures by the shift of the photoluminescence of Ruby. Raman spectrum measurement is conducted in the backscattering configuration with the light polarized in the basal plane. Light from a 633 nm and 488 nm laser is focused down to 3 μm with the power below 1 mW. Two ultra-narrow band notch filters are used to suppress the Rayleigh scattering light. The scattering light is dispersed by a Horiba iHR550 spectrometer and detected by a liquid nitrogen cooled CCD detector. Raman spectral evolution -Figure . 1 displays the evolution of the Raman spectra of α-RuCl 3 with the pressure from ambient pressure to 9.4 GPa. The highest measured pressure is up to 24 GPa and the pressure process is reversible Raman phonon mode assignment -At ambient pressure, we perform Raman and IR measurements on exfoliated α-RuCl 3 samples down to three atomic layers and no significant difference is observed [55]. Hence we can assign the Raman modes at ambient pressure according to the D 3d point group of the single α-RuCl 3 layer. From group theory, the irreducible representa- tion of atomic displacement at the Γ point is Γ opt = 2A 1g + 2A 2g + 4E g + A 1u + 2A 2u + 3E u . Among them, Raman active modes are Γ R = 2A 1g + 4E g . From the polarization measurement [55] and previous Raman studies We assign the Raman mode eigenvectors with the help of first-principle calculations [55] and the atomic displacement of 5 Raman active modes are displayed in Fig. Inversion symmetry breaking at p 1 = 1.1 GPa -The main feature at p 1 = 1.1 GPa is the appearance of three new Raman modes at 201, 290 and 363 cm -1 . The original five Raman modes at ambient pressure change slightly at p 1 . According the group theory and the first-principle calculations of the single α-RuCl 3 layer, we assign the mode at 201 cm -1 as an IR-active E u mode, 290 cm -1 as an inactive A 2g mode, and 363 cm -1 as an IR-active A 2u mode which has the highest frequency and is related to the asymmetrical layer breathing Dimerization transition at p 2 = 1.7 GPa -As shown in Fig. The Ru-Ru dimerization in the α-RuCl 3 layers splits all degenerated E modes into A + B modes. We do observe such a splitting for the twist mode at 116 cm -1 , shearing mode at 268 cm -1 (it splits at lower pressure probably due to the interlayer interaction). We don't detect the splitting for the ring breathing mode at 294 cm -1 probably due to its low intensity and the adjacent intensive layer breathing mode. By considering the normal modes of the split Ru in-pane mode, we can assign the high frequency one as A g and the low frequency one as B g . As shown in Fig. Magnetic breakdown from Raman susceptibility -Raman spectroscopy also measures the magnetic response in the strong spin-orbit coupling system Here χ (ω) is the imaginary part of the correlation functions of Raman tensor, χ(ω) = ∞ 0 dt dr {τ (0, 0), τ (r, t)} e -iωt . In general, we can expand the Raman tensor τ (r) in powers of spin-1/2 operators, τ αβ (r) = τ αβ 0 (r) + μ K αβ μ S μ (r) + δ μν M αβ μν (r, δ)S μ r S ν r+δ + .... The first term corresponds to Rayleigh scattering, the second and third term are linear and quadratic in the spin operators S α r and correspond to the one magnon To extract the Raman susceptibility, we first get Raman tensor conductivity χ (ω)/ω for frequencies down to 15 cm -1 , as shown in Fig. ω dω in Fig. The Raman spectra of the phonon modes at 116 cm -1 and 161 cm -1 display significant Fano asymmetry before p 2 = 1.7 GPa as shown in Fig. Discussions and conclusions-α-RuCl 3 has a monoclinic C2/m structure at room temperature at ambient pressure. At p 1 = 1.1 GPa, the inversion symmetry is breaking and the system probably turns into the trigonal P 3 1 12 structure where the inter-layer interaction distorts the inversion symmetry. The structural transition at p 1 = 1.1 GPa is first-order type since the space group changes. The softening and big splitting of the Ru inplane mode at p 2 = 1.7 GPa provide a direct evidence of dimerization. However, the softening is not complete, but a little. According the "little phonon softening" theory More remarks on the Mott collapse are needed here. At ambient pressure, α-RuCl 3 is a spin-orbit Mott insulator with the Kitaev magnetism. Comparing to the iridates, α-RuCl 3 has a larger electron correlation, but the effective j eff = 1/2 and 3/2 bands near the Fermi surface are not well separated due to a smaller spin-orbit coupling. The mixing between the effective j eff = 1/2 and 3/2 bands brings α-RuCl 3 closer to a Mott transition. According to the first-principle calculations In conclusions, we perform Raman studies on the relation between Kitaev magnetism and chemical bondings in α-RuCl 3 under pressures. At the critical pressure p 1 = 1.1 GPa, α-RuCl 3 undergoes the structural transition with the inversion symmetry breaking from the monoclinic C2/m to the trigonal P 3 1 12. due to differ-ent layer stacking. At the critical p 2 = 1.7 GPa, Ru-Ru bonds in the α-RuCl 3 dimerizes, and the system turns out to a correlated band insulator due to the Mott collapse. Note added -During the preparation of our manuscript, similar results about the structural phase transition studied by XRD and infrared spectroscopy were reported by other researchers 