Spin-resolved band structures of L-gap surface states on Ag(111) and Cu(111) are investigated by spin-and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (SARPES) with a vacuum-ultra-violet laser. The observed spin textures of the Ag(111) and Cu(111) surface states agree with that expected by the conventional Rashba effect. The Rashba parameter of the Ag(111) surface state is estimated quantitatively and is 80% of that of Cu( Spin-polarized metallic systems including nonmagnetic elements have attracted much attention for decades because novel spin transports and their applications to information technology can be expected by using these systems. The spin splitting of a two-dimensional electron system due to the Rashba effect 1? at crystal surfaces, where a potential gradient is naturally built, has been studied intensively as one of the controllable spin-polarized systems. The L-gap surface states of the noble metal (111) surfaces behave as prototypical twodimensional free electron gas (2DEG) systems, as shown by The surface Rashba effect was first reported on the clean Au(111) surface Experimentally, splitting of the L-gap surface state of the Cu(111) surface was studied by high-resolution angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) using a vacuum-ultra-violet laser In a conventional model of the Rashba spin splitting, the spin orientation of an electron is locked to the momentum. In contrast to this, spin-orbital entanglement in spin-orbit-coupled surface states has been recently revealed; it describes a spin texture coupled to orbital symmetries In this Rapid Communication, we report first experimental demonstration of the Rashba-type spin splitting of the Ag(111) surface state investigated by SARPES using a vacuum-ultra-violet laser (laser-SARPES). We also show the spin splitting of the Cu(111) surface state by laser-SARPES. The Rashba parameters of the Ag(111) and Cu(111) surface states are experimentally determined from these results. Furthermore, we elucidate that the wave function of the Cu(111) surface state predominantly consists of the symmetric orbital components. Clean Ag(111) and Cu(111) surfaces were in situ prepared by repeated cycles of 0.5 keV Ar + bombardment and subsequent annealing up to 770 K for Ag(111) and 850 K for Cu(111). The surface lattice order was checked by the sharpness of a low energy electron diffraction pattern as a first step. Eventually, we judged the effect of any electron scatterings due to the surface impurities and defects from spectral widths of momentum distribution curves observed by ARPES. In the ARPES and SARPES measurements, photoelectrons were excited by a quasicontinuous-wave laser with the photon energy of 6.994 eV and were analyzed with a combination of a hemispherical electron energy analyzer (ScientaOmicron DA30L) and twin very-low-energy-electron-diffraction type spin detectors orthogonally placed Figures Figures The spin splitting of the Ag(111) surface state is quantitatively analyzed with the spin-resolved EDCs shown in Fig. Recently, Dil et al. reported the spin interference in the photoemission process between the spin-lifted branches in the systems of Cu(111) and Sb/Ag(111), where the spin interference rotates the spin vector of the photoelectron such that the measured spin polarization of the photoelectron is not the same as the spin polarization of the Bloch state Table We examine the spin-orbital entanglement of the Cu(111) surface state. The spin-orbital entanglement is elucidated by employing the dipole selection rule of a linearly-polarized light in photoemission. Figures To understand the non-reversal of the spin polarization, we have calculated the projection of the surfacestate wave function in the Γ M mirror plane at E F [Fig. Here, a 100% s-polarized (p-polarized) light excites only the anti-symmetric (symmetric) orbitals. Our laser system provides 97% linearly polarized photons 48 , and thus the photoelectron intensity from the symmetric orbitals by the s-polarized light is about 2% of the intensity by the p-polarized light in the experiment. It is also noted that the 7-eV photon in the present experiments mostly excites Cu 4p orbitals, where the photoionization cross sections of 4p orbitals are a few times larger than those of 3d and are more than two orders of magnitude larger than that of a 4s orbital The above discussion is based on the dipole approximation. Here, one may consider that the dipole approximation is not valid at these low energies The total spin polarization of the surface states of Cu(111) should be nearly 1 since the anti-symmetric part is a little in the eigenstate. Here we note that the origin of the L-gap surface states of Ag(111) and Au(111) is quite similar to that of Cu(111); the symmetric (antisymmetric) orbitals are dominant (minor). Therefore, the nature of the spin polarization and the spin-orbital entanglement of Ag(111) and Au(111) would be the same as that of Cu(111). In summary, we have studied the L-gap surface states of Ag(111) and Cu(111) by laser-(S)ARPES. The spin splitting of the Ag(111) surface state is experimentally demonstrated for the first time. By using the threedimensional spin detection, we have elucidated that the spin orientations of the Ag(111) and Cu(111) surface states agree with the conventional Rashba-type spin texture. In addition, we have experimentally revealed that the Rashba parameter of the Ag(111) surface state is 10% and 80% of those of Au(111) and Cu (111), respectively, being in good agreement with the theoretical predictions. Furthermore, we clarified that the symmetric orbitals are predominant in the surface-state wave functions. The authors thank Sogen Toyohisa for his support during the experiments. The authors also appreciate Ryo Noguchi for providing an Igor macro to draw the spinresolved band images. The present work was financially supported by the JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) Grant No. 15K17675, and for Scientific Research (B) Grant No. 26287061.