Local and long range structure, optical and photoluminescence properties of sol-gel synthesized Ce1-xNixO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.1) nanostructures have been studied. The crystal structure, lattice strain and crystallite size have been analyzed. A decrease in lattice parameter may be attributed to substitution of Ce with smaller Ni ion. UV-Vis measurement is used for studying the effect of Ni substitution on bandgap and disorder. The bandgap decreases with Ni substitution and disorder increases. The PL spectra show five major peaks attributed to various defect states. The PL emission decreases with Ni substitution owing to increase in defects which acts as emission quenching centers. The lattice disorder and defects have been studied using Raman spectroscopy. Raman measurement shows that oxygen vacancies related defects are increasing with Ni substitution which causes changes in optical and PL properties. Local structure measurements show that Ni substitution leads to oxygen vacancies which does change host lattice structure notably. Ce 4+  Ce 3+ conversion increases with Ni substitution. Energy crisis in the time of rapid development and increasing population is a major issue to be addressed. Sustainable energy sources needs be deployed for meeting present and future demands. Solar energy is one of the most important sources of sustainable energy. Photocatalysis, hydrogen production, dye-sensitized solar cells etc. are the different means to utilize solar energy A detailed analysis of defect mediated changes on structural, optical and photoluminescence properties of Ni substituted CeO2 is being reported in this work for the first time. Samples were synthesized using sol-gel technique to ensure proper homogeneity of the samples. A detailed correlation between structural, optical and photoluminescence studies is established in this work. Pure and Ni-substituted CeO2, Ce1-xNixO2, nanoparticles were synthesized by sol-gel technique using cerium nitrate and nickel nitrate as precursors. Cerium nitrate and Ni nitrate (Alfa Aesar, purity 99.99%) were used as precursors. The Ce1-xNixO2 nanoparticles (x=0, 0.025, 0.05 and 0.1) were synthesized and referred as CNO0, CNO2, CNO5 and CNO10 respectively. Detailed synthesis procedure is already reported High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) images, Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) and Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) were performed with HRTEM JEOL JEM-2100 LaB6, operated at voltage of 200kV. For XRD, a Bruker D2-Phaser x-ray Diffractometer is used for structure analysis. UV-vis spectroscopy was performed using a Shimadzu UV-2600 spectrophotometer. Raman spectra were taken with a HORIBA-Scientific spectrometer with excitation wavelength 632.8nm. X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS) measurement have been carried out on Ni doped CeO2 at Ni K-edges and Ce LIII edge to probe the local structure of the samples. XAS comprises of both X-ray Near Edge Structure (XANES) and Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy. The XAS measurements have been carried out at the Energy-Scanning EXAFS beamline (BL-9) at the Indus-2 Synchrotron Source (2.5 GeV, 200 mA) at Raja Raman Centre for Advanced Technology (RRCAT), Indore, India. This beamline operates in the energy range of 4 KeV to 25 KeV. The details and mechanism has been reported earlier To further confirm the microstructure and particle size, HRTEM study is performed on the samples. Aggregation of crystallites is observed which is common in nanoparticles synthesized by wet chemical method. Nanoparticles achieve more stable energy state by agglomeration. Also the presence of hydroxyl ions facilitates agglomeration XANES analysis reveals a major Ce 4+ state (~84-80%) in pure and modified CeO2 samples. However, Ce 3+ states are not negligible (~16-20%). Concentration of Ce 3+ increases in Nisubstituted samples from ~16% to ~20% for pure and Ni doped samples respectively [Figure The local structure of the absorbing atom is obtained from quantitative analysis of Ce LIII edge and Ni K edge EXAFS spectra [Figure where, E0 is absorption edge energy, μ0 (E0) is the bare atom background and ∆μ0 (E0) is the step size of (E) at the absorption edge. The wave number dependent absorption coefficient χ (k) was obtained from energy dependent absorption coefficient χ(E) as follows, where, m is the mass of electron, for amplification of oscillation at high k, χ (k) is weighted by k 2 and the χ (R) versus R spectra are generated by Fourier transform of χ(k) k 2 functions in R-space, in terms of the real distances from the center of the absorbing atom. The EXAFS data analysis have been performed using set of EXAFS data analysis program available within Demeter software package Bandgap of the materials was estimated from UV-vis spectroscopy [Figure Single phase, homogeneous, nanocrystalline, sol-gel synthesized Ni substituted CeO2 have the same cubic fluorite structure as that of pure CeO2. XRD and HRTEM analysis confirm each other with the same crystal structure and crystallite size. Strain seems to increase while crystallite size decreases with substitution. On the other hand, the bandgap reduces a lot due to Ni substitution. As Ni 2+ substitute Ce 4+ to maintain charge neutrality Vo increases in the lattice to maintain charge neutrality. The increasing VO concentration has two electrons which further leads to reduction of Ce 4+ to Ce 3+ [Figure . In the Ce LIII data, the first peak at 1.75 Å represents Ce-O coordination at 2.27 Å. The coordination peak between 3-4 Å is fitted with contribution of Ce and O atoms at 3.78 Å and 4.40 Å respectively. It can be observed from the fitting results in table 2 that the bond length is relatively larger compared to other Ni-O bond distances. This agrees with the XANES results.