What determines precipitate morphologies in co-precipitating alloy systems? We focus on alloys of two precipitating phases, with the fast-precipitating phase acting as heterogeneous nucleation sites for a second phase manifesting slower kinetics. Kinetic lattice Monte Carlo simulations show that the interplay between interfacial and ordering energies, plus active diffusion paths, strongly affect the selection of core-shell verses appendage morphologies. We study a FeCuMnNiSi alloy using the combination of atom probe tomography and simulations, and show that the ordering energy reduction of the MnNiSi phase heterogeneously nucleated on a pre-existing copper-rich precipitate exceeds the energy penalty of a predominantly Fe/Cu interface, leading to initial appendage, rather than core-shell, formation. Diffusion of Mn, Ni and Si around and through the Cu core towards the ordered phase results in subsequent appendage growth. We further show that in cases with higher primary precipitate interface energies and/or suppressed ordering, the coreshell morphology is favored. Modern multiconstituent precipitation hardened alloys are designed to achieve the best combination of mechanical properties, thermal stability, corrosion resistance, etc. Controlling the detailed morphologies and structures of the precipitates is key to achieving optimized alloys. Very different precipitate morphologies have been observed in systems with two distinct precipitating phases By coupling recent advances in near-atomic resolution characterization techniques in three dimensions, such as atom probe tomography (APT) Precipitation in Cu-bearing low-alloy steels has been intensely investigated for over 30 years, especially for the application to irradiation embrittlement of nuclear reactor pressure vessels steels. Since Cu is highly insoluble and diffuses rapidly, the initial precipitates are copper-rich, and often alloyed with Mn, Ni and Si. These precipitates form very rapidly, at concentrations above > 0.1 at.% around 300C, due to radiation enhanced diffusion The alloy employed in the experiments is a Ni, Mn, Si, Cu-bearing steel with (in units of at.%) 0.25% Cu, 1.18% Ni, 1.08% Mn, 0.54% Si initially in solution. Note that the total Mn, Ni, Si content of 2.8 at.% is more than 10 times that of the Cu. The alloy was neutron irradiated to a fluence (E > 1 MeV) of 6.3×10 19 n cm -2 at a flux of 1.0×10 14 at ≈ 300 ̊C, and to a fluence of 1.4×10 20 n cm -2 at a flux of 3.6×10 12 n cm -2 s -1 at ≈ 290°C, in the Belgian Reactor 2 (BR2) and the US Advanced Test Reactor (ATR), respectively APT samples were analyzed in a LEAP 3000X HR at the University of California, Santa Barbara. The APT measurements were performed in the voltage mode at 50K with a pulse fraction of 20% of the standing voltage, a 0.3-0.5% ion detection rate and a pulse repetition rate of 200 kHz More details regarding the reconstruction method and parameters can be found in Refs. The KLMC model was developed based on the model by Bellon and coworkers The evolution of the precipitate structure is then a direct result of the vacancy exchanging its position with solute atoms, at an exchange frequency, , between the vacancy and an atom on a nearest-neighbor lattice site. The exchange frequency is calculated using transition-state theory as , where is the attempt frequency ( ) and is the activation energy of the exchange. The simulation time is incremented using a standard residence-time algorithm In the KLMC simulations, the frequency of the thermal jumps was determined using standard rate theory. The activation energy was calculated using the final-to-initial-system-energy (FISE) model where is the energy difference between the energies of the final and initial configurations for a certain vacancy-atom exchange, is the reference activation energy, assumed to be dependent only on the chemical species of the migrating atom, and was taken from Ref. The homo-atomic pair interactions were determined from measured cohesive energies the much lower Cu vacancy formation energy compared to that of the Fe matrix, it is expected that the vacancy would spend most of the time jumping inside the Cu precipitate. As a result, to achieve significant diffusion outside the Cu precipitate, very long simulations are required. mixing is not considered. Ballistic mixing is expected to be negligible at the relatively low ATR dose rate Examples of atom maps from the APT reconstructions are shown in Figure The precipitates are predominantly Cu, enriched with some Mn, Ni and Si in the lower-fluence BR2 condition, with likely a core-shell structure. A magnified precipitate is shown in Figure Closer examination of the precipitates shows that the MnNiSi shell does not fully cover the Cu precipitate. Considering the APT detection efficiency of 37% one cannot meaningfully distinguish a significant fraction partial monolayer from a full monolayer, but the results are fully consistent with the LKMC simulations (see Sec. 3.2). A 1-D elemental concentration profile through the precipitate is shown in Figure However, as thoroughly discussed in the literature, this high Fe concentration is mainly caused by trajectory aberration in the APT measurement Remarkably, the KLMC simulations show essentially the same co-precipitate morphologies that are observed experimentally. Specifically, the Cu cores and MnNiSi phase form co-precipitates, with Cu cores on opposite sides of each other. The magnified precipitate in Figure The MnNiSi phase forms an ordered B2 structure in the simulation, where Ni and Mn occupy the two sublattices, with Si randomly replacing some Mn atoms. The resulting Mn-Si trade-off is consistent with experimental observations that the number of Mn plus Si is approximately equal to the number of Ni atoms Although our rigid lattice simulation cannot reproduce this structural transformation, it does capture the ordering in the MnNiSi phase. Specifically, ordered Mn0.5Ni0.5 is more stable than the corresponding disordered alloy by 0.11 eV/atom. Si has a modest impact on this ordering energy, as randomly substituting Si for Mn in the ordered phase changes the energy by only 0.12× c Si eV/atom for dilute Si (here c Si is the concentration of Si in the whole precipitate, e.g., c Si = 0.5 for Mn0.5Si0.5). KLMC simulations can track a particular precipitate and identify its evolution in the nucleation, growth and coarsening stages. Figure At this stage, the small copper-rich precipitate is very mobile as a result of the very low vacancy formation energy in Cu  side of the 2 nm Cu core. Note that, considering the APT trajectory aberrations, this apparent thickness should be viewed as an upper limit According to the calculated interfacial energies, faceted precipitates are expected to form, with <110> facets dominating, which are indeed observed in the LKMC simulations. Table Interfacial energies for specific crystallographic orientations (mJ/m From classical wetting theory determines how the MnNiSi phase wets the Cu core (total wetting, partial wetting, or complete drying for S > 0, -1 < S < 0, and S < -1, respectively). The interfacial energies listed in Table Since the original MnNiSi coating layer on Cu core is taken to be disordered (and thus provides no nucleation template for ordering), uniform nucleation and growth of an ordered thick MnNiSi shell is unlikely, as uniform nucleation requires the ordering of the shell be "in phase" on the whole surface to avoid the creation of anti-phase boundaries. Thus, it is more likely for an ordered nucleus to form locally on one facet of the Cu core (preferentially <110> facets, which are expected to be the dominating facets, according to the Wulff constructions of the crystals). In this situation, there are three distinct environments for the Mn, Ni, Si solute atoms: (1) dissolved in the matrix as monomers; (2) in the loose, disordered coating layer (which still lowers the interface energy by some extent); and (3) in the ordered MnNiSi nucleus. The solute atoms dissolved in the matrix and ordered phase have the highest and lowest energies, respectively. Thus, the latter would be expected to grow. However, if the Mn, Ni and Si solute atoms completely leave the disordered coating layer, a high-energy Cu-Fe interface is exposed, thus increasing the total free energy of the system. On the other hand, solute atoms leaving the disordered coating layer to join the ordered MnNiSi nucleus lower the total free energy of the system if the coating solutes are simply replaced. It can be shown (see supplementary information) that there is a significant free energy penalty if all the Mn, Ni, Si atoms in the coating layer join the ordered nucleus, completely exposing the Cu/Fe interface. Thus, a loose Mn, Si, Ni coated Cu/Fe interface is maintained on the Cu side. The ordered phase can then grow by a flux of atoms (that are essentially immediately replaced) from the thin steady-state MnNiSi coating layer, as well as by diffusional fluxes directly to the MnNiSi appendage from the matrix. That is, as additional solutes diffuse from the matrix and the coating layer, prior to solute depletion from the matrix, a steady-state MnNiSi coating layer on the Cu side of the co-precipitate feeding a growing appendage is established. While this scenario can explain why the appendage structure first forms, it does not explain why the ordered MnNiSi phase does not grow around the Cu core and eliminate the partially coated Cu/Fe interface. Another important observation in the LKMC simulations provides insights on this point. As shown in Figure To further confirm the identified mechanisms, we use KLMC simulations to study the dependence of the precipitate structure on two key parameters. First, we note that our model predicts that if the Cu-Fe interface energy is higher, the Mn, Ni, Si coating layer could be more stable, and the energetic penalty of (at least partially) exposing the Cu-Fe interface may dominate over the energy gain by forming the ordered appendage phase. In this case, a core, and ultimately ordered, thick shell may be favored. To test this hypothesis, the KLMC simulation was rerun with an increased Cu-Fe interfacial energy by increasing the Cu-Fe interaction parameter ΩCu-Fe from 0.458eV to 0.758eV; this leads to a > 60% increase in Cu-Fe interfacial energy, according to the NNBB model. The snapshot of the simulations in Figure Figure Similar precipitate structures have been observed in other multicomponent alloy systems, such as nanocrystalline FINEMET alloy In this study, we use KLMC simulations to elucidate the mechanisms that govern co-precipitate morphologies in multi-constituent alloy systems that have two distinct co-precipitating phases. Here, we simulate an informative example for an FeCuMnNiSi alloy. It is shown that the interplay between interfacial energies, ordering energies, and active diffusion paths determines the coprecipitate morphologies. In this case, the ordering energy of nucleating a discrete associated MnNiSi phase is larger than the energetic penalty of partially exposing the interface of a previously formed Cu core-dilute shell precipitate. The active Mn, Ni, and Si diffusion paths through and around the Cu core enable further steady growth of the MnNiSi appendage. We also demonstrated by KLMC simulations that the favored co-precipitate morphology can be altered from an appendage to a core-shell structure by increasing the interfacial energy between the matrix and the fast-precipitating Cu-rich phase. The kinetic pathway that we discovered provides both a general guidance in understanding coprecipitation process and insights in designing the co-precipitation microstructures in multicomponent alloy systems. . Vacancy formation energy in different elements (all values are eV). The interaction parameters used in the simulation (all values are eV).