A model for two-dimensional electronic, photonic, and mechanical metamaterial systems is presented, which has flat one-dimensional zero-mode energy bands and stable localized states of a topological origin confined within twin boundaries, antiphase boundaries, and at open edges. Topological origins of these flat bands are analyzed for an electronic system as a specific example, using a two-dimensional extension of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger Hamiltonian with alternating shift of the chains. It is demonstrated that the slow group velocities of the localized flat band states are sensitively controlled by the distance between the boundaries and the propagation can be guided through designed paths of these boundaries. We also discuss how to realize this model in metamaterials. Flat dispersionless energy bands with infinite effective mass, either in electronic, photonic, or mechanical materials, give unique properties to these materials, and have attracted great attention in the recent past In this Letter, we propose a two-dimensional (2D) model system, for which topologically protected flat energy bands arise within the twin boundaries (TB) or the antiphase boundaries (APB), or at the open edges (OE). The flat bands are located in the energy gap between bulk bands, which allows the formation of stable localized states, different from the dispersive edge state bands for the Haldane model One of the earliest models of the topological insulators is the 1D Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model As shown in Fig. where and the linear coefficient of the hopping amplitude versus the interatomic distance are chosen as 1 and -1, respectively. In various configurations with TB/APB/OE, the coefficients in Eq. ( Either with or without TB/APB/OE, the Hamiltonians possess the chiral symmetry, (σ 3 ⊗I)H(σ 3 ⊗I) = -H. For the spinless electron system, the time-reversal symmetry and the particle-hole symmetry are also present with each symmetry squaring to +1, which places the system in the BDI class The Fourier transformation of the Hamiltonian for the configurations without TB/APB/OE to k-space leads to where Winding numbers ν(135 • ) and ν(0 • ) for boundaries in 135 • and 0 • directions, respectively. The parameters e, dx, and dy characterize the lattice distortions, as shown in Fig. opens between the two bands and the system becomes an insulator for the half-filling. Topology of the system is characterized by the winding number ν where k ⊥ = k 1 and k 2 for boundaries in 135 First, we analyze electronic properties of TB. It is well known that only TB along either 45 • or 135 • direction with respect to the direction of rectangular distortion are stable due to compatibility conditions The results for APB are shown in Fig. As mentioned at the beginning, the flat bands found for the system could be useful to create stable or slowly moving localized states. While the 2D Lieb lattice provides bands that are flat in the 2D Brillouin zone, our 2D lattice provides bands that are flat in the 1D subspace of the 2D k-space zone for states localized within TB/APB/OE. Such difference gives a unique possibility to our lattice, that is, the tunability of the band dispersion or the group velocity of the localized states by the distance between TB/APB/OE. As a demonstration, we consider a pair of 135 • APB, similar to Fig. is the largest among the four zero-mode APB state energies. The result of c g versus δ is shown in Fig. To examine whether the propagation of such localized zero-mode states could change their directions without current loss, a pair of zig-zag APB schematically shown in Fig. Although we have used electronic Hamiltonian as a specific example, our model can be applied to other systems, such as photonic In summary, using a 2D model in the weak AIII/BDI topology class with topology-structure coupling, we have demonstrated the presence of flat zero-mode energy bands in the entire 1D Brillouin zone for states localized within TB/APB/OE. It has been found that the flatnesses of these bands and the slow group velocities for the localized zero-mode states could be controlled by the distance between the boundaries and the slow motion of the localized excitations can be guided through a zig-zag path. We propose our model can be realized in various metamaterials, which would open possibilities for unique device applications. Flat Energy Bands within Antiphase and Twin Boundaries and at Open Edge in Topological Materials SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL Linghua Zhu, 1 Emil Prodan, 2 and Keun Hyuk Ahn Lattice distortion field should satisfy the compatibility conditions, that is, the bonds between atoms should not be broken or overlap with each other. Further, abrupt changes in lattice distortions usually cost a lot of lattice energy, and gradual changes of the lattice distortions would be favored energetically. To take both effects into account at the atomic scale, structural textures are obtained by relaxing an energy expression E lattice written in terms of the atomic scale modes that represent the lattice distortions. Specifically, the distortion of a square lattice with a monatomic basis can be expressed in terms of five distortion modes, e 1 , e 2 , e 3 , s x , and s y , shown in Fig. ) where E s is the energy for the short-wavelength modes including all symmertry-allowed terms up to the fourth order, E l the energy for the long-wavelength modes in the harmonic order, E c the coupling between the long-and short-wavelength modes, and i = [i x , i y ] designates coordinates before distortion. For uniform phase, the energy minimization of E lattice leads to e 1 = e 2 = 0 and e 3 = -C 3 (s 2 xs 2 y )/A 3 , and the minimized total energy per site is With B < 0, G 1 -2C 2 3 /A 3 > 0, G 2 + 2C 2 3 /A 3 > 0, and G 2 + 2C 2 3 /A 3 > G 1 -2C 2 3 /A 3 , the global energy minimum occurs for s x = ±s min , s y = 0 and equivalently for s x = 0, s y = ±s min , where s min = BA 3 / (2C • and 0 • directions, respectively. The calculated winding number ν(135 • ) and ν(0 • ) are shown in Table