The force-level Elastically Collective Nonlinear Langevin Equation (ECNLE) theory of activated relaxation in glass-forming free standing thin films is re-visited to improve its treatment of collective elasticity effects. The naive cut off of the isotropic bulk displacement field approximation is improved to explicitly include some aspects of spatial anisotropy with a modified boundary condition consistent with a step function liquid-vapor interface. The consequences of this improvement on dynamical predictions are quantitative but of significant magnitude, and in the direction of further speeding up dynamics and further suppressing T g . The theory is applied to thin films and also (for the first time) semi-infinite thick films to address qualitatively new questions for three different polymers of different dynamic fragility. Variation of the vitrification time scale criterion over many orders of magnitude is found to have a surprisingly minor effect on changes of the film-averaged T g relative to its bulk value. The mobile layer length scale grows strongly with cooling, and correlates in a nearly linear manner with the effective barrier deduced from the corresponding bulk isotropic liquid alpha relaxation time. The theory predicts a new type of spatially inhomogeneous "dynamic decoupling" corresponding to an effective factorization of the total barrier into its bulk temperature-dependent value multiplied by a function that only depends on location in the film. The effective decoupling exponent grows monotonically as the vapor surface is approached. Larger reductions of the absolute value of Tg shifts in thin polymer films are predicted for longer time vitrification criteria and more fragile polymers. Quantitative no-fit-parameter comparisons with experiment and simulation for film-thickness-dependent T g shifts of polystyrene and polycarbonate (PC) are in reasonable accord with the theory, including a nearly 100 Kelvin suppression of T g in 4 nm PC films. Predictions are made for polyisobutylene thin films. Activated glassy dynamics, mechanical properties and vitrification in thin polymer films with diverse boundary conditions are problems of great scientific interest Free standing thin films with two vapor interfaces, or semi-infinite thick films with one vapor interface, are perhaps the simplest realization of confined films. They would seem to be the most likely candidates for realizing some (perhaps limited) universality of behavior. Extensive experimental Recently, Mirigian and Schweizer proposed a theory for free standing films built on a quantitative, force-level statistical mechanical theory of alpha relaxation in isotropic bulk supercooled molecular The extension of ECNLE theory to free-standing films predicts the spatial gradient of the alpha relaxation time as a function of temperature, film thickness and location in the film, and from this Tg gradients, film-averaged Tg shifts, and other properties can be deduced After briefly reviewing the prior version of bulk and thin film ECNLE theory in section II, the improved treatment is derived in section III. Representative calculations of the elastic displacement field and its consequences on barrier gradients are presented. This improved formulation is then used to examine dynamical effects in thin films and also (for the first time within the ECNLE approach) one-interface semi-infinite thick films. Qualitatively new questions not previously addressed are studied. Section IV focuses on the simpler case of thick films, and examines three fundamental issues. (i) Spatial gradients of the alpha time and local T g of polystyrene over a wide range of temperature and for different vitrification criteria. (ii) Mobile layer length scale, its evolution with temperature, and whether it is related to the bulk alpha relaxation time. (iii) Does a unique form of spatially inhomogeneous "dynamic decoupling" occurs in films? Section V considers free standing thin films and analyzes how the total barrier as a function of spatial location and film thickness is modified by our new treatment of the elastic displacement field. These results are applied to compute pseudo-thermodynamic and dynamic measures of the film-averaged T g shifts, the influence of vitrification timescale criterion, and polymer chemistry effects with an emphasis on the influence of variable bulk fragility. Several theoretical results are quantitatively compared to simulations and experiments on polystyrene and polycarbonate, and predictions are made for polyisobutylene. The article concludes in Section VI with a discussion. As relevant background we briefly review the present state of ECNLE theory for bulk liquids and free standing thin films, along with the mapping of chemical complexity to effective hard sphere fluids. All aspects have been discussed in great detail in prior papers Consider a one-component liquid of spherical particles (diameter, d) of packing fraction Φ. ECNLE theory describes the activated relaxation of a tagged particle as a mixed local-nonlocal rare hopping event where k B is Boltzmanns constant, T is temperature, ρ is the number density, r is the displacement of the particle from its initial position, S(q) is the static structure factor, q is wavevector, and C(q) = 1 -S -1 (q) /ρ is the direct correlation function where K and G are the bulk and dynamic shear modulus, respectively. The radially-symmetric solution is a scalefree displacement field which decays as an inverse square power law The amplitude is set by the small orientationallyaveraged mean cage expansion length, ∆r ef f The prefactor 3/32 follows from assuming each spherical particle in the cage independently hops in a random direction by ∆r, which is in the spirit of the dynamic mean field nature of NLE theory Since in ECNLE theory the local and long range elastic aspects are intimately related, the elastic barrier is determined in a "molecular Einstein-like" manner by summing over all harmonic particle displacements outside the cage region thereby yielding where r is relative to the cage center and is the curvature (harmonic stiffness) of the dynamic free energy at its minimum. We note the long range nature of the integrand in Eq.( The elastic barrier increases much more strongly with increasing density or cooling than its cage analog, and dominates alpha relaxation time growth as the laboratory glass transition is approached.33,34 A generic measure of the structural relaxation time follows from a Kramers calculation of the mean first passage time over the barrier. For barriers in excess of a few thermal energy units one has: where K B is the absolute magnitude of the barrier curvature. The alpha time is expressed in units of a "short time/length scale" relaxation process (cage-renormalized Enskog theory), τ s , the explicit formula for which is given elsewhere The above theory can be applied to any fluid of spherical particles. It is rendered predictive for molecular liquids via a mapping The first equality follows from adopting the Percus-Yevick (PY) integral equation theory In practice, four known chemically-specific parameters enter Polymers have additional complexities associated with connectivity and conformational isomerism. As a minimalist model the liquid is replaced by a fluid of disconnected Kuhn segments modeled as non-interpenetrating hard spheres (2) and (3), this results in F elastic → λ 4 F elastic . The relative importance of the local versus collective elastic barrier thus acquires a polymer-specificity. In this article, we present results for polystyrene (PS), polycarbonate (PC) and polyisobutlyene (PIB). All required parameters and mapping details are identical to those reported previously Films with interfaces exhibit broken symmetry resulting in every material property (thermodynamic, structural, dynamic) becoming spatially heterogeneous and anisotropic. Treating all of this complexity theoretically is intractable, and hopefully not necessary. Thus, in the past There remains the challenge of formulating a description of how a vapor interface modifies the alpha relaxation process. In the context of ECNLE theory, this involves two distinct aspects. How does the interface and confinement modify: (i) the local hopping part of the problem as encoded in the dynamic free energy, and (ii) the long range displacement field and associated elastic barrier. Aspects (i) and (ii) are coupled, and formulating a theory for either one is a major challenge. Within the ECNLE theoretical framework, Mirigian and Schweizer For z = 0, γ(z) = 0.5 corresponding to losing one half of the nearest neighbors. For z = r cage , the full cage is recovered and γ(z) = 1. This is a highly local approximation, where surface-induced mobility is not propagated beyond the cage radius into the bulk. The dynamic free energy is modified as: Thus, near the surface all properties of the dynamic free energy (barrier, hopping time, localization length, local shear modulus) behave as a liquid with weaker dynamical constraints. To address point (ii), the most naive (but no adjustable parameter) isotropic "cut off" assumption was adopted: the displacement field remains isotropic and of identical form as in the bulk, but it is set to zero at the vapor interface. Hence, u(r) inside the film is unchanged. Surely the basic cutoff idea is physically sensible, but the quantitative treatment is oversimplified. Within a cage radius of the surface, the single particle spring constant, K 0 , of the dynamic free energy will be reduced. Hence, the elastic barrier is reduced, in a manner that depends on the location in the film (variable z) and determined by both the cut off effect and softening of K 0 = 3k B T /r 2 L within a cage radius of the interface. Prior studies Rigorous solution of the problem of what the anisotropic facilitating collective elastic displacement field at the particle level is in thin films (generalization of Eq.( where A s (r, θ, z) and B s (r, θ, z) are chosen to enforce the boundary condition u(r, θ, z = 0) = 0. The quantity A s must be zero in the bulk since the displacement field decays to zero at large distances, but is nonzero under finite confinement conditions. The field in the film exterior is zero. For a hopping event with a cage centered at position z in the film, we must enforce u(r, θ, z = 0) = 0 and u(r cage , θ, z = 0) = ∆r ef f . Straightforward analytic analysis gives in the lower space: where the variable "s" is defined in Figure Figure anisotropic spatial dependence of the collective elastic field, and decreases its amplitude compared to the prior naive treatment. As θ decreases at fixed z, the displacement field more rapidly decays in space. For z ≤ 3.5d, u(r, θ, z) is approximately independent of θ since it is dominated by the second term on the right hand side of Eqs.( Figure We apply the modified ECNLE theory to study spatial gradients of various properties for thick films. We then consider two new questions: (i) does z-dependent "dynamic decoupling" exist, and (ii) is there a connection between the bulk alpha time growth with cooling and a mobile layer length scale. Figure From knowledge of how the alpha time grows with cooling as a function of location in the film, the spatial gradient of T g can be calculated. Results are shown in Figure Results are also shown in Figure From our results for the alpha time gradient, we define a mobile layer thickness based on a chosen criterion. Following recent simulation studies Motivated by simulation This behavior is identical to what we recently found for isotropic liquids based on a growing bulk cooperativity length scale defined as when the alpha time achieves its nearly full value In bulk glass-forming molecular liquids, due to spacetime dynamic heterogeneity the phenomenon of "decoupling" is observed in the deeply supercooled regime where the decoupling exponent ∆ varies from ∼ 0.5 to nearly zero depending on chemistry On the other hand, in films there is explicit spatial heterogeneity of relaxation and mass transport due to the presence of interfaces. This raises the question, first clearly expressed by Simmons where here the "decoupling exponent" varies with location in the film. If applicable, Eq.( Why such a factorization could be true is not at all obvious to us. It surely is not a trivial generic consequence of the existence of a large mobility gradient. Since experiments have not been able to measure with fine spatial resolution the alpha relaxation time as a function of location in a film over a wide range of temperatures, direct experimental testing of such a decoupling phenomenon does not seem feasible at present. However, simulations can examine this question, at least in the lightly supercooled regime they can be performed. Moreover, if such decoupling exists it should have some distinctive consequences for the more averaged quantities that are experimentally measurable, although discussion of this point is beyond the scope of the present article. In the context of ECNLE theory, given there are two barriers that determine the alpha relaxation time, with different temperatures dependences and different variations with location in the film, it is a priori very unclear whether Eq.( Figure However, closer to the surface (smaller z) there are strong deviation from an inverse power law behavior since here reduction of the local barrier via the loss of cage neighbors effect becomes very important and varies with film location in a very different manner than z -1 . Overall, the predicted decoupling-related trends appear to be similar to recent simulations in the dynamic crossover regime We now study free-standing films of thickness, h. This system has been analyzed in prior ECNLE theory articles Figure This T g is thought to be probed in thermodynamic measurements such as heat capacity and ellipsometry. We also compute the corresponding dynamic glass transition temperature as when the film-averaged alpha time reaches the chosen vitrification criterion (specified by the exponent y below): This T g value is believed to be relevant to dynamic measurements such as dielectric spectroscopy. Figure The pseudo-thermodynamic results in Figure Figure Overall, we think Figure lations. An empirical analytical expression used by many to fit experiments and simulations of thickness-dependent T g shifts motivated by a "2-layer" model of film dynamics is where Γ is an adjustable fit parameter. Fits of Eq.( Figure FIG. The absolute T g suppression in degrees Kelvin is much smaller for PIB, but similar for PS and PC, for both methods of determining a film-averaged glass transition temperature. Consider first the results in the main frame of Figure Overall, given the noise in the experimental data, the approximate nature of the theory, the lack of any fitting parameters, and the fact we do not compute the precise observable measured experimentally, we find the agreement between theory and experiment encouraging. The inset of Figure Finally, we mention some experimental puzzles concerning T g shifts, the role of fragility, and mobility gradients of free standing polymer thin films that seem germane to our work. First, creep experiments A second puzzle is that although many experiments (and all simulations) find strong evidence for large mobility gradients, some calorimetric and creep experiments have been interpreted as not consistent with this deduction. For example, although the creep measurements discussed above do show large thin film T g shifts for both PS and PC We have re-visited the ECNLE theory of glassy dynamics in free standing polymer thin films to improve the treatment of the collective elastic displacement field. Specifically, we go beyond the naive cut off of the isotropic bulk displacement field model employed previously The role of vitrification time scale was examined over a range of 9 decades of variability. Rather surprisingly, for the question of T g film-averaged shift normalized to its bulk value, the timescale criterion is found to have a relatively minor effect. This is good news for molecular dynamics (MD) computer simulation studies. As the vitrification criterion becomes shorter, absolute T g shifts do modestly decrease mainly because of the decreased importance of the longer range elastic barrier at the effectively higher temperatures. The mobile layer size was determined, and shown to grow strongly in the deeply supercooled regime. Moreover, the logarithm of the bulk isotropic liquid alpha time is predicted to be directly related to this film-defined length scale raised to a power modestly smaller than unity. We also showed that the theory predicts a new type of spatially inhomogeneous "dynamic decoupling" in films, corresponding to an effective factorization of the total barrier into its bulk temperature-dependent value multiplied by a function that depends only on location in the film. The corresponding decoupling exponent grows monotonically as the surface is approached, and bulk behavior (no decoupling) is not recovered until ∼ 15 -20 nm from the surface. Average thin film T g shifts were also studied as a function of film thickness and polymer chemistry. Larger shifts are predicted for psuedo-thermodynamic versus dynamic probes, for longer time scale vitrification criteria, and for more fragile polymers. Quantitative, no adjustable parameter comparisons with experiment and simulation for the thickness dependent shift are in reasonable agreement with the theory, including a nearly 100 K suppression of T g in 4 nm PC films. Predictions were made for PIB, and to a lesser extent, PC films. Much remains to be done. First, it appears the theory does not make accurate predictions for the precise functional form of the barrier gradient in free standing thin and thick films, and hence by association the detailed spatial form of the alpha time and T g gradients. MD simulations performed in the dynamic crossover or lightly supercooled regime 