At zero temperature, coupled cluster theory is widely used to predict total energies, ground state expectation values and even excited states for molecules and extended systems. However, for systems with a small band gap, such as metals, the zero-temperature approximation not necessarily holds. Thermal effects may even give rise to interesting chemistry on metal surfaces. Most approaches to temperature dependent electronic properties employ finite temperature perturbation theory in the Matsubara frequency formulation. Computations require a large number of Matsubara frequencies to yield sufficiently accurate results, especially at low temperatures. This work, and independently the work of White and Chan, 1 proposes a coupled cluster implementation directly in the imaginary time domain on the compact interval [0, β], closely related to the thermal cluster cumulant approach of Mukherjee and coworkers. 2-4 Here, the arising imaginary time dependent coupled cluster amplitude integral equations are solved in the linearized direct ring doubles approximation, also referred to as Tamm-Dancoff approximation with second order (linearized) screened exchange. In this framework, the transition from finite to zero temperature is uniform and comes at no extra costs, allowing to go to temperatures as low as room temperature. In this approximation, correlation grand potentials are calculated over a wide range of temperatures for solid lithium, a metallic system, and for solid silicon, a semiconductor. The many-body Schrödinger equation for the electrons in matter can only be solved approximately for systems having more than one electron. Many approximation methods exist, ranging from fast methods providing low accuracy, such as orbital-free density functional theory, to slow methods providing high accuracy, such as full configuration interaction quantum Monte Carlo. Coupled cluster methods provide relatively high accuracy at computational costs that scale only polynomially with the size of the system to be calculated. At zero temperature the electrons of matter assume the state of lowest possible energy. At finite temperature the many-body quantum system of electrons can be found in any of its states. At thermal equilibrium the probability of finding it in an eigenstate with energy E n is proportional to the Boltzmann factor e -βEn , where β = 1/k B T denotes the inverse temperature of the system. For large systems, and particularly for metals, the number of relevant excited states quickly becomes unmanageable for practical purposes. Furthermore, conducting the zero temperature coupled cluster calculations is difficult at best for metallic systems due to (quasi) degeneracies of the uncorrelated mean-field description, such as Hartree-Fock (HF) or density functional theory (DFT), serving as the starting point of coupled cluster theories. Alternatively, one can already start from a thermal mean-field description, where each single-body level p forms an independent fermionic system occupied with a probability f p , and add correlation by means of a finite temperature many-body theory. It is the scope of this work to translate zero temperature coupled cluster theories CC(T = 0) to a finite-temperature starting point, circumventing the difficulties of the first approach arising in large and metallic systems. For systems, where zero temperature coupled cluster can be readily applied, such as insulating systems, thermalizing and adding correlation should commute in the limit of exact correlation theories, as laid out in FIG. Figure The framework employed by finite temperature many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) provides the means of adding correlation to a thermalized starting point. In Appendix A it is briefly outlined and according to Eq. ( The generalization of Wick's theorem to mixtures, rather than pure Slater determinants, is the key to finite temperature many-body perturbation theory. It was brought forward by The above methods are formulated in the Matsubara frequency domain, which requires knowledge of the symmetry factors of the included diagrams to avoid multiple counting. Mukherjee and coworkers have rigorously generalized the coupled cluster ansatz by working within particularly contracted terms as a chosen ansatz, termed thermal cluster cumulant method. Finally, fractional occupancy formulations of coupled cluster theories 2 Imaginary time dependent zero temperature coupled cluster This section applies the coupled cluster ansatz first to the stationary, then to the (imaginary) time dependent Schrödinger equation. Both formulations yield equivalent results at zero temperature, however, the latter can be used in a finite-temperature framework where one needs to find the imaginary time propagator exp{-β Ĥ} to the point β in imaginary time. Coupled cluster theories start from a mean-field Hartree-Fock or DFT calculation. Let ψ p (x) be the spin orbitals of the mean-field Hamiltonian Ĥ0 and let |Φ denote the Slater determinant of the ground state, where the lowest N orbitals are occupied by the N electrons present in the system. At zero temperature we will use the letters i, j, k, . . . to label occupied orbitals, a, b, c, . . . to label virtual orbitals and p, q, r, . . . to label general spin orbitals. Coupled cluster chooses an exponential ansatz acting on the mean-field Slater determinant for the approximation of the many-body wave function The cluster operator T is expanded in excitation levels with the excitation operators ta . . , and with the scalar arrays T a i , T ab ij , . . . to be determined, which are referred to as singles, doubles, . . . amplitudes, respectively. This choice ensures multiplicative separability of the approximate many-body wave function for non-interacting subsystems by construction. In the projection coupled cluster method the amplitudes are determined by inserting Eq. ( In practice, the excitation level is truncated at a given level, say at the doubles level, and the first and the second equations are used to solve for the singles and doubles amplitudes, respectively. The truncation level determines the quality of the approximation. Having found the amplitudes, the above equation is projected onto the ground state Slater determinant Φ| to yield the coupled cluster ground state energy E in the respective approximation The expectation values of Eqs. (3, 4) are evaluated by summing over all fully contracted terms occurring in the expansions according to Wick's theorem. It turns out that only terms of the positive exponential remain where all occurring operators are connected by the contractions, denoted by an apostrophe on the expectation value brackets • . The operator equation for determining the doubles amplitudes reads for instance and the expansion of the remaining exponential now terminates since the number of the contractions which can be connected to Ĥ and t is finite for a given excitation level of the amplitudes. The energy expression is also simplified by regarding only connected terms to In the finite temperature many-body formalism one is required to compute a density operator ρ ∝ exp{-β Ĥ}. This is equivalent to the time evolution operator from zero to the finite point β in imaginary time. We start by obtaining equations for the amplitudes of the zero-temperature cluster operator T (τ ) = T a i (τ )τ a i + T ab ij (τ )τ ab ij which are valid for arbitrary imaginary times τ , rather than just for the stationary case. We insert the coupled cluster approximation for the wave function exp{ T (τ )}|Φ into the imaginary time dependent Schrödinger equation, giving since all excitation operators τ a i , τ ab ij , . . . commute with each other. Left-multiplying the above equation with exp{-T (τ )} and projecting onto excited Slater determinants yields differential equations for the amplitudes, reading for the doubles for instance where only the remaining connected terms are given, as in the case of Eq. ( Eq. ( In order to give concrete working equations, the amplitudes can be truncated at a certain excitation level. Truncating already at the level of doubles still results in cumbersome equations. We further restrict the considered contractions to those contractions, where all fermionic loops have length 2. The resulting theory is termed direct ring coupled cluster doubles theory (drCCD) or, alternatively, random phase approximation (RPA) with second order screened exchange (SOSEX). The Hamiltonian is written in the form Ĥ = Ĥ0 -Veff + V with the electron-electron and the effective interaction of the reference given by respectively. Hartree-Fock-type terms will only be considered at first order, in accordance with RPA+SOSEX calculations in the literature. ∀abij and implying a sum over all other indices. In this formulation the electron-electron interaction V ab ij and the amplitudes T ab ij are not antisymmetrized. The eigenenergy difference is denoted by The drCCD amplitude equations can also be stated in terms of (non-antisymmetrized) Goldstone diagrams depicting the contractions and the time-ordered unperturbed propagations from τ to τ . The imaginary time dependent formulation of the amplitude equations is not the standard formulation, it is, however, readily generalized to finite temperature. Inserting the steadystate ansatz T ab ij (τ ) = T ab ij (τ ) = T ab ij into Eq. (10) and integrating over all time differences 0 < ττ < ∞ yields the standard form of the drCCD amplitude equations for nondegenerate systems The equations are non-linear and contain the left-hand-side quantity T in contracted forms on the right-hand-side, which can be solved by iteration until convergence is reached. Once the steady-state amplitudes T ab ij are found, the drCCD energy E can be computed by considering all non-vanishing contractions in Eq. ( implying a sum over all indices. The term involving the amplitudes is referred to as drCCD correlation energy, the remaining term is the Hartree-exchange energy E HX . 3 Finite temperature coupled cluster The connected and fully contracted expectation value giving the zero temperature coupled cluster energy in Eq. ( At finite temperature the imaginary times of each occurring perturbation are integrated over the finite domain [0, β], rather than over the infinite domain of the zero-temperature case. The last perturbation at τ n also needs to be integrated, rather than being kept fixed. Furthermore, the contractions within quantum mechanical expectation values of the Hartree-Fock or DFT Slater determinant Φ| . . . ĉa ĉ † b . . . |Φ 0 are superseded by contractions within the ensemble average of the respective finite-temperature mixture. Each single-particle level of the Hartree-Fock or DFT calculation must be allowed to exchange its electron with the bath if the occupation probabilities are to be independent of each other, enforcing the grand canonical ensemble. In the canonical basis the (non-normalized) density operator factorizes into ρ0 = e -β( Ĥ0 -μ N ) = p e -β(εp-μ)np (14) with np = ĉ † p ĉp and the fixed chemical potential of the environment μ. The probability of occupation f p of a single level p is then given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution and the probability of vacancy of the level p is denoted by Wick's theorem to mixtures Products of occupation or vacancy probabilities are denoted by f ab... ij... = f a f i f b f j . . ., where lower and upper indices are referred to as thermal hole and thermal particle levels, although all indices i, a, . . . are to be summed, in principle, over all single-body levels p. In practice, however, the sum over thermal holes i and thermal particles a can be restricted to levels where f i and f a is non-negligible, respectively. The fact that thermal hole indices i and thermal particle indices a can refer to the same level p spawns contractions which are not present in the usual zero-temperature formalism, in which hole and particle states are disjoint. This lays the fundament for finite temperature many-body perturbation theory, in fact, including Hartree-Fock itself, defining the exchange free energy. Appendix A lists a brief derivation of finite temperature many-body perturbation theory. Finite temperature Hartree-Fock and DFT are discussed in. Translating the MBPT terms means working with the fully contracted operators, rather than with the operators itself. Rather than defining a cluster operator T , we define how operators must occur within the fully contracted expectation values of an MBPT term. They are required to have both contractions going upwards, towards positive times: Some contractions may no longer vanish at finite temperature, so all of them have to be reconsidered. The algebra of contractions is, however, identical, most importantly Thus, the differential equations for the amplitude scalars, as for instance Eq. ( where no contractions among the T s are allowed according to the requirement stated in Eq. ( Having solved the imaginary time dependent amplitudes for all times τ between 0 and β, the coupled cluster grand potential can be computed from the grand potential of the reference Ω 0 and a reference thermal expectation value of all connected and fully contracted coupled cluster terms with the perturbation part Ĥ1 according to Eq. (45). Also here, contractions of Ĥ1 with itself are allowed, contractions among T s are not. Note that in the grand canonical ensemble the expectation value of the number operator N will be affected by correlation. In principle, the chemical potential μ needs to be scanned for the value μ N , such that N is fixed to the desired number of electrons N : The differences μ N -μ N -1 and μ N +1 -μ N correspond to the finite-temperature generalization of the ionization potential (IP) and the electron affinity (AE), respectively. The concrete working equations of a zero temperature coupled cluster theory, formulated in imaginary time as in Eq. ( • extending hole and particle states to overlapping thermal hole and particle states, • convolving with the time evolution operator e -(τ -τ )∆ ab... ij... over the finite domain [0, τ ], and • multiplying with the thermal occupancies f c... k... for each contracted thermal particle/hole index. Applied to the direct ring coupled cluster doubles theory, we obtain for the doubles amplitudes, implying a sum over all indices occurring only on the right-handside. Having solved for the imaginary time dependent amplitudes, the direct ring coupled cluster doubles grand potential is evaluated by Ω HX denotes the DFT Hartree-Exchange grand potential 4 Solving the finite temperature amplitude equations At zero temperature only the steady-state solution of the amplitudes is required, while in the finite-temperature case the free energy is determined from averaging over all imaginary times [0, β]. In the finite-temperature case one indeed needs to solve the system of coupled integral equations ( Which choice of the grid points provides sufficient accuracy depends on the system and on the temperature 1/β of the calculation. The amplitude integral equations can be solved on the grid one-by-one, starting at T ab ij (τ 0 = 0) = 0 and with a guess for T ab ij (τ 1 ) at the end of the first interval. From amplitudes at the beginning and at the end of the current interval a continuous interpolation to arbitrary imaginary times T (τ ) can be constructed and inserted into the right-hand-side of the amplitude equations to be solved, e.g. Eq. ( Integrating the amplitude equations from the beginning to the end of the interval, employing the interpolation on the r.h.s., gives an updated guess for the amplitudes at the end of the interval T (τ 1 ), which should agree with the initial amplitudes T (τ 1 ). From the deviation of T (τ 1 ) from T (τ 1 ) new amplitudes are estimated at τ 1 . Once convergence is reached the next interval can be solved. This procedure only requires storing the amplitudes at the beginning and the end of the current interval and convergence accelerating techniques, such as direct inversion of iterative subspace (DIIS) can be employed. Neglecting quadratic and higher order terms of the coupled cluster amplitude equations leaves a linear, though inhomogeneous system of equations, which can be solved by diagonalization. Once obtained, the imaginary time dependence of the amplitudes can be evaluated and integrated analytically. In the particular case of the linearized direct ring approximation the matrix is small enough such that diagonalization is computationally feasible. We will therefore employ this approximation to study temperatures as low as room temperature. The linearized direct ring coupled cluster amplitude equations are given by Inserting the amplitudes into Eq. ( It can be given by the following Dyson-like equation where g bd jl = (f bd jl ) 1/2 denotes the square roots of the Wick contraction weights. The square roots of the contraction weights are assigned to each leg of the electron-electron interaction in order to retain a symmetric form of the propagator, satisfying Identifying the left two indices of G in Eq. ( with the effective particle/hole interaction This corresponds to a generalization of the Casida equation in the Tamm-Dancoff approximation to finite temperature. implying a sum over the eigenvalue index F . The particle/hole imaginary time evolution operator is then given by Finding the eigenvalue decomposition scales as O(N 3 v N 3 o ) with the number of thermal holes N o and particles N v , which is of the same order as zero temperature coupled cluster doubles. Having found the eigenvalue decomposition, one can evaluate the linearized direct ring coupled cluster doubles amplitudes at the time τ by propagating the left and the right particle/hole pairs from the initial electron-electron interaction V cd kl at τ to the time τ The correlation contribution to the grand potential in the linearized direct ring coupled cluster doubles approximation is then found to be with Λ F G = Λ F F + Λ G G and where W and X denote the direct and the exchange electronelectron interaction in the eigenmodes of the particle/hole propagator, respectively A sum over all repeated indices on the right-hand-side is implied and W F G = W F G . Note that the initial and the final interaction also need to carry the square root of the contraction weights. Computing other observables than the grand potential requires derivatives of the log-partition function with respect to β or μ, according to Appendix A.6. They have to be computed numerically, as the square roots of the Fermi weights occur in the effective particle/hole interaction A to be diagonalized. For finite β the above expression will be finite, also for terms with vanishing eigenvalues. However, degenerate states having non-vanishing probability of both, occupancy as well as of vacancy, need to be treated specially. For such states p, q, r, s (being not necessarily all distinct) the effective particle/hole interaction A pq sr of Eq. ( For p = s, two distinct rows (p, s) = (s, p) in the matrix A will be identical in the case of real-valued orbitals: This will render N d (N d -1)/2 eigenvalues of A zero for a group of N d degenerate states serving equally as particles and as holes. This means that the amplitudes have more degrees of freedom than there is information taken into account for their propagation. However, in the case of real-valued orbitals the matrix of the initial electron-electron interaction g V sq qr in Eq. ( The limit of vanishing temperature or infinite β requires to distinguish between cases where the unperturbed reference is non-degenerate and where it is degenerate. In the non-degenerate case, the matrix A will be positive definite, having only positive eigenvalues Λ F F . The correlation grand potential in the linearized drCCD of Eq. ( In the presence of a finite gap of the occupied and the virtual states there will be no correlation contribution to the expectation value of the number operator since μ can be varied without affecting the correlation contribution to the log-partition function. Thus, the above equation will also be the correlation energy of the zero temperature linearized direct ring coupled cluster doubles approximation. In the case of N d degenerate states at the Fermi level in the limit of T → 0, the matrix A of the effective particle/hole interaction exhibits N d (N d -1)/2 eigenmodes with an eigenvalue of zero. As discussed in the previous section, the initial electron-electron interaction does not couple to these modes and the ldrCCD correlation grand potential also yields a finite value in the degenerate case for β → ∞. However, μ cannot be varied without changing the correlation contribution to the log-partition function. Thus, the zero-temperature limit of the correlation grand potential at the given μ will not yield a zero-temperature correlation energy. In this section the presented finite temperature coupled cluster framework is applied to solid lithium, a metallic system, and to solid silicon as an insulating system, to demonstrate its practical applicability. All calculations were conducted with the Coupled Cluster for Solids cc4s code, developed at TU Wien, based on a density functional theory reference, provided by the Vienna ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP). For most system sizes the lithium system is truly degenerate at all temperatures considered. The silicon system provides an underestimated but finite band gap and can therefore also be calculated with the conventional zero temperature linearized direct ring coupled cluster doubles methods, also known as TDA+SOSEX. The considered lithium super-cells comprise 16, 24, 36, and 54 electrons in approximately 5 restricted orbitals per atom at the Γ-point. The silicon super-cells contain 8, 16, and 32 atoms in approximately 16 restricted orbitals per atom at the Γ-point. Only the valence electrons were contained in the calculations, freezing the He and the Ne core of Li and Si, respectively. All super-cells were relaxed at the k-point-converged DFT level with the Perdew-Burke-Enzerhof (PBE) functional optimized for solids. The kinetic cutoff energy for the calculation of the electron-electron interaction was set to 250 eV. For large systems the diagonalization of the particle/hole effective interaction, given in Eq. ( This work presents a framework for finite temperature coupled cluster theories, including a practical algorithm to apply it to extended systems. In this framework, coupled cluster theories are viewed as rules to generate an (infinite) subset of the finite temperature manybody perturbation expansion. When increasing the truncation level of the cluster operator the subset becomes more and more complete. For demonstration purposes linearized direct ring coupled cluster doubles correlation grand potentials are calculated for two solids, metallic lithium and semi-conducting silicon. The chosen approximation allows an exact evaluation of the imaginary time behavior by matrix diagonalization for arbitrarily low temperatures, also for degenerate systems. For all sizes of silicon and for the 54 atom super-cell of lithium the low temperature DFT reference is non-degenerate. The low-but finite-temperature results for these systems can thus be compared with existing non-degenerate zero temperature linearized drCCD results and agreement is found. Going beyond linearized drCCD requires iterative schemes and a sampling of the imaginary time dependent amplitudes. At high enough temperatures full coupled cluster singles and doubles converges on a uniform grid, as done by White and Chan. A Brief derivation of finite temperature many-body perturbation theory This appendix summarizes finite temperature MBPT following the notation of Matsubara's original work. since N commutes with Ĥ0 and Ĥ1 . The derivative of ρ with respect to β defines an equation of motion for ρ as a function of β, referred to as Bloch equation Inserting Eq. ( from which the equation of motion for the correlated part Ŝ follows with Ĥ1 (τ ) = e +τ ( Ĥ0 -μ N ) Ĥ1 e -τ ( Ĥ0 -μ N ) . This is the finite-temperature analog to the interaction picture. The Note that Ŝ(β) also depends on μ although this is not explicitly denoted. The grand canonical partition functions of the fully interacting system Z and of the reference system Z 0 are given by respectively. We are interested in the grand potential difference between the fully interacting and the reference system where Â 0 = Tr{ρ 0 Â}/Z 0 (β, μ) denotes the statistical expectation value of the operator Â in the reference system Ĥ0 . found in Ref. 16. Derivatives of the log-partition function with respect to β or μ yield central statistical moments of the Hamiltonian Ĥ and of the number operator N , respectively and so forth, with ∆ Â = Â -Â . lation contributions to the expectation value of the number operator N are also expected to be different. Twist averaging