In a recent work by Ji Seop Oh et al., BaBiO 3 (001) thin films were grown on SrTiO 3 by Pulsed Laser Deposition. It was argued that the films are BiO 2terminated from the modelling of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy experiments. The authors claim, in opposition to previous theoretical predictions, that there are no metallic surface states on their films. In this short comment we question that the authors have enough evidence to make such a claim, as we consider that the large mismatch between SrTiO 3 and BaBiO 3 and the lack of control of their fabrication process with reflection high energy electron diffraction could unlikely give high quality films with a single BiO 2termination, which is one of the requisites for the stabilization of these surface metallic states. Ji Seop Oh et al. have recently studied the electronic structure of (001) oriented epitaxial BaBiO 3 (BBO) thin films grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) single crystals We consider that the claim of Ji Seop Oh et al. (and previously by Gozar et al. First, the lattice mismatch between BBO and STO (∼12%) is unusually large to allow high quality, single terminated, epitaxial films of BBO. Indeed, it has been shown that the structure of the BBO films on STO is similar to the bulk material Second, the standard procedure to obtain a desired atomic termination for an ABO 3 perovskite grown by PLD on TiO 2 -terminated STO is by using reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) assisted deposition. In particular, the growth conditions should be optimized in order to get a layer-by-layer growth mechanism, and the RHEED intensity oscillations allows to control the film termination (either BO 2 or AO). In their paper, Ji Seop Oh et al. do not report a growth process assisted by RHEED, so that we consider that it is highly unlikely to obtain a BBO single termination without this high control of the deposition process. In addition, they did not complement their studies with a BaO-terminated film, as one would expect. Based on these considerations, we think that the modelling of the ARPES data is not enough evidence to claim that the fabricated BBO films are BiO 2 -terminated and that the measured surface band structure by Ji Seop Oh et al. does not correspond to the single BiO 2terminated (001) surface. Finally, we would like to criticize the authors claim saying that the absence of a metallic surface state could be attributed to the oversimplified theoretical calculation, which fails to give an accurate estimation of the band gap in BBO. It is true, as the authors say, that the theoretical value of the band gap depends strongly on the approximation done in the exchange-correlation functional. BBO is not an exception of this rule. This effect was studied in detailed in Ref. 7 and confirmed by some of us in the Supplementary Material of Ref. 3. In addition, the authors claim that the theoretical gap values of Ref. 3 were much smaller than the lower bound of 1.9 eV they obtained from the ARPES spectra. Here, the authors should distinguish between the direct optical gap (E g ) that, for bulk BBO, is around 2 eV, and the smaller indirect gap, E i . While the experimental value of E g is quite well accounted by several functionals used in the above mentioned theoretical works (regarding bulk BBO), there is some dispersion in the reported experimental values of E i , ranging from 0.2 to 1.1 eV. The functional used both in Ref. In summary, we consider that the conclusions of the work by Ji Seop Oh et al. are inaccurate, as the chosen STO substrate is not the appropriate to obtain high quality single terminated BBO films due to the large mismatch between both structures. The experimental validation of the mechanism theoretically proposed by Vildosola et al. waits for the band structure characterization of highly controlled BiO 2 -terminated BBO films grown on lower mismatch substrates. Preprint submitted to CAPJuly 3, 2018 