We theoretically investigate the interaction between the conductive graphene layer with the dual-spectral electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) metamaterial and achieve independent amplitude modulation of the transmission peaks in terahertz (THz) regime. The dual-spectral EIT resonance results from the strong near field coupling effects between the bright cut wire resonator (CWR) in the middle and two dark double-split ring resonators (DSRRs) on the two sides. By integrating monolayer graphene under the dark mode resonators, the two transmission peaks of the EIT resonance can exhibit independent amplitude modulation via shifting the Fermi level of the corresponding graphene layer. The physical mechanism of the modulation can be attributed to the variation of damping factors of the dark mode resonators arising from the tunable conductivity of graphene. This work shows great prospects in designing multiple-spectral THz functional devices with highly flexible tunability and implies promising applications in multi-channel selective switching, modulation and slow light. Electromagnetic induced transparency (EIT), as a result of the destructive quantum interference between different excitation pathways, exhibits a sharp transmission window within the broad absorption band in a three-level atomic system Recently, continuous interests have focused on the independent modulation of the multiple-spectral EIT resonance. In most of the previous reports, the independent tunability was realized by changing the geometry parameters in a passive way, which sets obstacles for flexibility in practical applications. The advent of graphene with dynamical optical and electric properties facilitates the development of the active metamaterial, especially in terahertz (THz) regime However, the independent and precise modulation on the resonance strength of the multiple-spectral EIT is yet to be investigated. In this paper, we demonstrate a novel approach based on a hybrid metal-graphene metamaterial to realize the independent modulation of the dual-spectral EIT resonance amplitude at THz frequencies. In the metal structure, the strong near field coupling between a bright cut wire resonator (CWR) in the middle and two asymmetric dark double-split ring resonators (DSRRs) on the two sides gives rise to the dual-spectral EIT resonance with two distinct transmission peaks. By integrating monolayer graphene under the two DSRRs, the independently on-to-off modulation of the two transmission peaks can be obtained through shifting the Fermi level of the corresponding graphene layer. To explain the physical mechanism, we employ the classical three-oscillator model and the distributions of electric field and surface charge density. The active modulation for individual transmission peak can be attributed to the increasing damping factors of the dark DSRRs arising from the conductive effect of graphene layer during corresponding modulation process. The schematic of the hybrid metal-graphene metamaterial is depicted in Figure The periods of the unit cell in the x and y directions are P x = 200 μm and P y = 120 μm, respectively. The CWR is located in the middle of the unit cell with the length of H = 100 μm and the width of W = 8 μm. The two DSRRs at the two sides of the CWR have different sizes as the asymmetry is the prerequisite for the dual-spectral EIT resonance. The DSRR on the left side is marked as DSRR1 with the base length of To explore the EIT resonance characteristics of the proposed hybrid metamaterial, the optical response and field distributions are numerically calculated based on the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. The plane waves are normally incident onto the metamaterial structure along the -z direction and the electronic field is along the y direction, as shown in Figure where ε ∞ is the dielectric constant at the infinite frequency, w p is the plasmon frequency, γ is the damping constant, ω is the angular frequency of the incident light. Here the parameter values of ε ∞ = 3.7, ω p = 2.24 × 10 16 rad/s and γ = 1.22 × 10 14 rad/s are adopted for the simulations where e is the electron charge, E F is the Fermi level of graphene, h is the reduced Planck constant, τ is the carrier relaxation time. The parameter τ is dependent on the carrier mobility μ, the Fermi level E F and the Fermi velocity v F , i.e., τ = (μE F )/(ev 2 F ) To analyze the coupling effects between the CWR and the two DSRRs in the Al-based metamaterial, the optical properties of the CWR array, DSRR1 array, DSRR2 array and the combined structure array are simulated and their transmission spectra are depicted in Figure where A is provided by In the two equations, (ω b , γ b ), (ω d1 , γ d1 ) and (ω d2 , γ d2 ) are the resonance frequencies and damping factors of oscillators b, d1 and d2, respectively. κ d1 and κ d2 are the coupling coefficients between the oscillators b and d1 and between b and d2, respectively. With the relation between transmission amplitude T and the energy dissipation P , i.e., T = 1 -P , the simulated transmission spectra can be analytically fitted using Eq. ( The theoretical fitting results are depicted in Figure It is observed that the parameters γ b , γ d1 , κ d1 and κ d2 stay basically constant while the damping factor γ d2 of dark DSRR2 increases from 0.011 to 0.41 THz in the modulation process. The similar conclusion can be drawn that the tunable transmission peak II is attributed to the change in γ d2 . This phenomenon can be explained by the same mechanism that the monolayer graphene with increasing surface conductivity induces the reduction of the coupling effect between the bright CWR and the dark DSRR2, and leads to the final disappearance of the transmission peak II. To further understand the physical mechanism of the active modulation, the distributions of electric field and surface charge density at the resonance frequencies of the transmission peak I and II are investigated. Consequently, the physical origin of the independently active modulation on the dualspectral EIT resonance strength essentially comes from the tunable conductivity of the monolayer graphene positioned under the two dark DSRRs. In conclusion, we have provided an approach to achieve the modulation of dual-spectral 