We prospose a novel heterostructure system consisting of compounds with chemical formula A2Mo3O8 (A, B : Zn,Mg,Cd) that can host a two dimensional electron/hole gas (2DEG/2DHG). We study spontaneous polarization and piezoelectric properties of these compounds using first principles methods and Berry phase approach. We show that these kind of heterostructures are very stable due to extreamly low interfacial strain. The formation of a 2DEG/2DHG has been investigated in case of Zn2Mo3O8/Mg2Mo3O8 and polarization discontinuity has been found to be driving mechanism. The sheet carrier densities and charge localization in these kind of heterostrcutures have been found to be of the same order of magnitude in other well known system that hosts 2DEG through similar mechanism, such as AlN/Al(Ga)N or ZnO/Zn(Mg)O. In addition to conventional applications of a 2DEG, these materials hold promise to exciting pioneering technolgy such as piezo-phototronics using solar radiation, as they are also capable of absorbing a significant fraction of it due to low optical gap of ∼ 2 eV. Transition metal oxides (TMOs) have stimulated a large amount of theoretical and experimental research over the last few decades. These oxides simultaneously possess spin, charge and orbital degrees of freedom originating from their strongly-correlated open d-shell electrons. As a result, they exhibit a variety of interesting properties such as Mott insulators, various charge, spin and orbital orderings, metal-insulator transitions, multiferroics and even superconductivity Two dimensional electron gas (2DEG) formation at TMO interfaces is an interesting phenomenon that can serve as a testbed for understanding electron correlations in low dimensions In this work we propose a new heterostructure system of TMOs where a polarization discontinuity driven 2DEG can be formed at the interface. The group of TMOs we propose have a chemical formula A 2 Mo 3 O 8 . This group of materials have been synthesized using non-magnetic (Zn, Mg, Cd) as well as magnetic (Fe, Ni, Co, Mn) A 2 Mo 3 O 8 compounds crystallize in a hexagonal unit cell with space group P6 3 mc We use the first-principles plane-wave pseudopotential method as implemented is Quantum Espresso package The lattice parameters obtained from our calculation is in good agreement with experimental results In Fig. Table . I shows the calculated piezoelectric constants and spontaneous polarizations of A 2 Mo 3 O 8 compounds. Spontaneous polarizations of these materials are larger than Group III nitrides To compute the properties A 2 Mo 3 O 8 /B 2 Mo 3 O 8 interface and to show the formation of 2DEG, we construct a heterostructure consisting of 1×1×3 supercell of A 2 Mo 3 O 8 and 1×1×3 supercell of B 2 Mo 3 O 8 , stacked along (0001) direction ) We then proceed to validate our polarization discontinuity hypothesis, by calculating the electric field and surface charges from electrostatic model. The charges at the heterostructure interface and the field inside the material can be computed from polarization discontinuity hypothesis using the electrostatic boundary conditions where, ∆P 0 = P 0 1 -P 0 2 ; ̄ = 1 ( We calculate the electronic dielectric constant by applying a small static homogeneous electric field (0.3 × 10 9 V /m) along [0001] direction and studying the response of the system using modern theory of polarization The agreement between results obtained from heterostructure calculation and from Eq. 1 which is derived assuming polarization discontinuity hypothesis proves that the surface charge density in this heterostructure is indeed due to polarization discontinuity at the interface. The electric field created by these bound surface charges bring any free carriers created inside the bulk of the material to the interface making a 2DEG (or 2DHG). It is important to note that in a real material the formation of 2DEG (or 2DHG) in some cases may be hindered by formation of defects such as Oxygen vacancies We have also performed the same calculation with increasing the thickness of both ZMO as well MMO layers (Fig. To study the localization of the 2DEG (or 2DHG) in the ZMO/MMO heterostructure, we simulate the addition of free carriers in the system by moving the Fermi level upwards into the conduction band (n-doping) or downwards into the valence band (p-doping). We move the Fermi level of the system such that we add (remove) 0.003 e to (from) the heterostructure supercell. This corresponds to a surface charge density of ∼ 1 × 10 12 cm -2 . In Fig. In this work we explore the possibility of 2DEG formation in a novel heterostructure system. The materials forming these heterostructure has the chemical formula A 2 Mo 3 O 8 where A can be Zn, Mg or Cd. All these materials have been synthesized before and found to be very stable. We calculate the piezoelectric properties of these materials by applying an external strain and studying the response of the system. We also compute the value of spontaneous polarization of these materials using Berry phase method. We then proceed with DFT calculation of slab based heterostructure system consists of ZMO and MMO. We show that there are localized surface charges at the interface and electrostatic field inside the material. We show that these bound charges are due to polarization discontinuity at the interface. We show excellent agreement of surface charge density and electric field values between heterostructure calculation and polarization discontinuity model. We then simulate doping of the system by moving the fermi level of the system and show that the additional charges are localized within < 10 Å from the interface. We also report the values of surface charge densities for other possible heterostructure system of these materials such as ZMO/CMO or MMO/CMO. We show that the surface charge densities in these systems are comparable to other well known heterostructure system that forms 2DEG, such as AlN/Al(Ga)N or ZnO/Zn(Mg)O. In practice, we apply a small strain (±1%) along c-axis (to calculate e 33 ) or in xy-plane (to calculate e 31 ) and calculate the polarization of the relaxed structure at the strained lattice parameters. In the small strain limit, the polarization is linear with respect to the strain. The piezoelectric constants can thus be simply calculated from the slope of the polarization vs strain curve. 