The nature of the nuclear pairing condensates in heavy nuclei, specifically neutron-proton (spintriplet), versus identical-particle (spin-singlet) pairing has been an active area of research for quite some time. In this work, we probe three candidates that should display spin-triplet, spin-singlet, and mixed-spin pairing. Using theoretical approaches such as the gradient method and symmetry restoration techniques, we find the ground state of these nuclei in Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov theory and compute ground state to ground state pair-transfer amplitudes to neighboring isotopes while simultaneously projecting to specific particle number and nuclear spin values. We identify specific reactions for future experimental research that could shed light on spin-triplet and mixed-spin pairing. The presence of pairing in atomic nuclei has been established for more than five decades For most known nuclei, with neutron excess, the ground state consists of nn and pp (j = 0, t = 1 ) pairs coupled to angular momentum J = 0. For nuclei with comparable number of neutrons and protons, the nucleons near the Fermi surface should occupy identical orbitals and np pairing should be present. Due to the Pauli exclusion principle, isospin-singlet and isoscalar (t = 0) is associated with spin-triplet (s = 1) pairing, and vice versa. The elusive spin-triplet pairing in nuclei has been both an experimental and theoretical puzzle over the decades Neutron-proton pair correlations have been studied by analyzing the results of large-scale shell-model calculations However, in finite systems, pairing can be difficult to define, and many proxies have been used in the literature The Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov approach is a versatile tool that can describe a large number of many-nucleon problems where pairing is important In this work, we focus our attention on the A ≥ 130 region close to the proton dripline. In Ref. The first step, then, is finding the ground state for a given nucleus. In practice, particle number and nuclear spin are not conserved and need to be restored. Employing the gradient method developed in Ref. Symmetry restoration can be a nontrivial task. In the past, various formulas based on determinants have been used, which suffer from a sign ambiguity As found in Refs. Another area of investigation is how pair-transfer cross sections (probabilities) compare in ground state to ground state transitions In this paper, our goal is twofold: (i) To confirm the nature of the ground state condensates survives after projection and, (ii) For future studies, to find the most promising pair-transfer reactions for each case. A detailed discussion can be found in Sec. IV, and we draw our conclusions in the last section. The HFB theory is based on a variational principle for the energy of the ground state of the system. The many-body wave function is varied in the space of Slater determinants of quasiparticles defined by the Bogoliubov transformation. The "effective" Hamiltonian in this theory consists of one-body and two-body operators, which we write in second quantization language, in terms of spin-half particle operators, as The one body potential used in this work is of Wood-Saxon shape including contributions from spin-orbit interactions, and the two body interaction is a contact term for each of the pairing channels given in Table The numerical values for the parameters v s and v t are 300 and 450 MeV respectively, taken from Ref. As a result, the Hamiltonian can be expressed in the new basis, where the superscripts count the number of creation and annihilation operators of quasiparticles. A more detailed explanation of the various terms appearing in Eq. ( The ground state wave function used in this work is defined as follows: where pf() is the Pfaffian of the matrix, and |0 is the reference vacuum state. The three main isotopes investigated here share the same reference vacuum state, and the same quasiparticle basis, which technically is infinite. Different isotopes occupy different subspaces, and when their overlap is calculated, an augmented subspace which encompasses both nuclei is used The parameters λ α are analogous to Lagrange multipliers and the operators Q α are particle number, pairing amplitudes, etc. In this sense, this formulation employs the grand canonical ensemble. As already mentioned in the Introduction, the three representative isotopes analyzed here are 132 60 Nd, 132 64 Gd , and 132 66 Dy, taken from Ref. All the various possible pairing channels are given in Table The basis chosen is block diagonal in orbital angular momentum L (multiple l values are present), and diagonal in isospin T , and spin Ŝ. The symmetries we are studying are particle number Â, more specifically neutron and proton number, and nuclear spin ( Ĵ = L + Ŝ). The respective operators are represented by matrices in this basis, where J D is the angular momentum operator in the irreducible diagonal representation in which D is the maximal eigenvalue of Ĵz Following previous work, we find the ground state through energy minimization and then perform symmetry projection, also called projection after variation (PAV) The probability for a quantum number K to be present in the wave-function |Φ is given by the formula, where P K II (Ω) is a diagonal matrix element of the symmetry group P in representation of dimensionality d K , and Ω 0 is the volume integral of the group. The overlap Φ|P(Ω)|Φ is calculated based on the expressions from Ref. In the case of simultaneous projection of proton and neutron number, the projection operator is, As the plot in Fig. To have a better understanding of the pattern observed, it is instructive to perform symmetry restoration on the mixed-spin isotope, by constraining one type of pairing at a time, to see how the ground state configuration looks in terms of neutron and proton number distributions. As displayed in Fig. As a check, we have carried out further calculations, where we remove spin-singlet pairing from the ground state of 132 66 Dy: there was no significant change in the particle number distribution. The same turned out to be the case when removing spin-triplet pairing for 132 60 Nd. To avoid any confusion when reading our two-dimensional distribution plots, we emphasize here that projection to only integer particle number was performed, since N and Z are treated as integers throughout this work. The rotational group is parametrized in terms of the three Euler angles Ω = (α, β, γ) and the symmetry group under consideration is SU(2). The respective expression for Ĵ projection is is to allow for the simultaneous projection of both half and full angular momentum values. If the number of quasiparticles is even, only integer values of I 0 are to be expected, but for odd-number nuclei, spin-half values might be present. Figure Figure Apart from analyzing the eigen-composition of the HFB ground state, we are also interested in applying symmetry restoration to ground-state to ground-state pair-transfer reactions. While this overlap has been treated extensively in various approximations where the(U , V ) matrices, describing the wave-function in Eq. ( Given that ( Ĵ 2 , Ĵz ) commute, the transformation from the ( L, Ŝ) basis to the Ĵz basis is achieved through constructing a matrix pencil And, in the basis of the HFB wavefunction, The order of the operators in the HFB basis is orbital angular momentum-isospin-spin (LT S), and we need to have isospin-orbital angular momentum-spin (T LS). The order reshuffling can be performed with the use of permutation matrices S p,r = p i=1 e t i ⊗ I r ⊗ e i As the careful reader might notice, two successive permutations are performed, the first one is (LT S -→ T SL) and the second one is (T SL -→ T LS). This leads us to connect the basis used to find the HFB ground state with a basis in which particle creation or annihilation operators with specific nuclear spin quantum numbers can be easily expressed in matrix notation. C. Pair-transfer amplitude To estimate which pair-transfer reaction is more probable, for each of the three nuclei studied so far, we define the pair-transfer amplitude rate as follows: where (I i , I f ) are the nuclear spin values of the ground states of the two nuclei. For isotopes with even number of neutrons and protons, we assume this value to be I i = 0, I f = 0 and for isotopes with odd number of neutrons and odd number of protons we take it to be I i = 1. J p refers to the total angular momentum of each particle in the pair, as explained in detail in Sec. IV B. We assume that both particles in the pair have the same angular momentum and opposite projection in the ẑ direction. The symmetry projection operator acts to the left on the final state, which has been studied in detail in the previous sections. We create single-particle states with quantum numbers (n, l, J p , m jp ), where l takes the values (0, 2, 4, 5) [with n respectively (0, 1, 2, 3)] In Eq. ( There are various definitions of the transfer amplitude in the literature Let us turn to a detailed discussion of Fig. Symmetry restoration allows us to discern the particle number and nuclear spin eigenstate composition of the ground state wave function found in HFB theory. By mapping out the probability distributions for each of these quantities for three isotopes, 132 66 Dy, 132 64 Gd, and 132 60 Nd we were able to study how different types of spin pairings shape the eigen-composition of the ground state. We were able to find specific patterns in the probability distributions that can be used as theoretical qualitative indications of spin-triplet, spin-singlet or mixed-spin pairing. In the case of spin-triplet pairing, the proton and neutron number distributions seem rather symmetric. In the spin-singlet case there is checkered pattern, and the mixed-spin pairing is in between. The second part of this work focuses on calculating ground state to ground state pair-transfer amplitudes in order to find the most likely candidate reactions for probing spin-triplet and mixed-spin pairing in heavy nuclei. We find We are hopeful to see future experiments that can verify our predictions in this region of the nuclear chart. In addition, in a future work, the framework developed and tested here, will be applied to lighter isotopes, where mixed-spin pairing might be present, and which could be within reach of current experiments. search, Innovation and Science, the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Nuclear Physics under Contract DEAC02-05CH11231 (LBNL). Computational resources were provided by SHARCNET and NERSC.