A new class of high-performance pyrrolidinium cation based ionanofluid electrolytes with higher lithium salt concentration are developed. The electrolytes are formed by dispersing imidazolium ionic liquid functionalized TiO2 nanoparticles in low conducting, 0.6 M lithium salt doped N-alkyl-N-butylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Pyr14TFSI) ionic liquid (IL) hosted electrolyte. Viscosity, ionic conductivity and thermal properties of these electrolytes are compared with well-studied 0.2 M salt doped Pyr14TFSI IL-based electrolyte. The highly crystalline 0.6 M lithium salt dissolved IL-based electrolytes gradually become amorphous with the increasing dispersion of surface functionalized nanoparticles within it. The ionic conductivity of the electrolytes shows unusual viscosity decoupled characteristics and at the 5.0 wt% nanoparticle dispersion it attains a maximum value, higher than that of pure IL host. As compared to pure IL-based electrolytes, the ionanofluid electrolyte also possesses a significantly higher value of lithium ion transference number. The Li/LiMn2O4 cell with the best conducting ionanofluid electrolyte delivers a discharge capacity of about 131 mAh g -1 at 25 °C at a current density of 24 mA g -1 , much higher than that obtained in 0.2 M Li salt dissociated Pyr14TFSI electrolyte (87 mAh g -1 ). Superior interfacial compatibility between ionanofluid electrolyte and electrodes as indicated by the excellent rate performance with outstanding capacity retention of the cell as compared to pure IL-based analogue, further establish great application potentiality of this optimized newly developed electrolyte for safer LMBs. Lithium metal batteries (LMBs) containing lithium In this manuscript, we describe a strategy to develop a novel class of lithium ion conducting PYR14TFSI-based electrolyte system for the application in LMBs. The electrolytes are prepared by dispersing different extents of TiO2 nanoparticles tethered 1-n-butyl-(3-(trimethoxysilylpropyl) imidazolium bis(trifluoro-methanesulfonyl) imide nanoscale hybrid ionic fluids (NHIF), into the 0.6 M lithium salt doped PYR14TFSI IL based, low conducting, crystalline electrolyte. It has been observed that in the presence the NHIF the overall crystallinity of the system drastically subdued. Furthermore, despite a steady increase in macroscopic viscosity the ionic conductivity of system substantially improves and at 5.0 wt% NHIF the system exhibits an ionic conductivity higher than that of the 0.2 M salt doped electrolyte. Moreover, the lithium transference number of the newly designed ionanofluid electrolyte is substantially higher than that of the 0.2M electrolyte. The charge-discharge characteristics of LMBs assembled with the highest conducting electrolyte in combination with Li/LiMn2O4 electrodes are compared with that of the 0.2 M salt doped electrolyte containing similar system. Observed excellent rate capability and cycling performance with higher specific capacity of the ionanofluid electrolyte cell as compared to that of pure IL based system demonstrate the applicability of the electrolyte for safer LMBs. Anatase titania (TiO2) nanoparticles were synthesized according to our earlier report. The hydrophilic ionic liquid 1-n-Butyl-1methyl pyrrolidinium bromide (PYR14Br) was synthesized by refluxing equimolar 1-Methylpyrrolidine (98.0%, TCI) and 1-Bromobutane (99%, Sigma Aldrich) in acetonitrile at 80 °C under nitrogen atmosphere for 2 days, followed by purification by liquid extraction in ether. 1 H NMR (Fig. Two Pyr14TFSI IL-based electrolytes were prepared by dissolving predetermined quantities of Lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) and lithium bromide (LiBr) salts such that the total lithium salt concentration in the electrolyte was kept at either x=0.2 M or 0.6 M (i.e. xM(0.7LiTFSI+0.3LiBr) in Pyr14TFSI). 30.0 wt% of lithium bromide (LiBr) was added with LiTFSI as dopant salt to improve the cycle life of LMBs by suppressing the dendrite formation or short-circuiting, as was reported earlier. The ionanofluid electrolytes were obtained by incorporating y wt% (y=1.0, 2.5, 5.0, 7,5 and 10.0) of TiO2-NHIF in the 0.6LiPyr14TFSI electrolyte in an argon atmosphere, under slow stirring. The final composition of the ionanofluid electrolytes became yNHIF-(100-y) [(0.6(0.7LiTFSI +0.3LiBr) in Pyr14TFSI] and are denoted as yNHIF0.6LiPy in the manuscript. The chemical structures of the ionic liquids and NHIF were determined by 1 Avance-400 MHz NMR Spectrometer. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of the hybrid ionic fluid and different ionanofluids were performed on a JEOL JEM-2100, 200 kV microscope in high-resolution mode. Thermogravimetric (TGA) scans were performed within a temperature range from room temperature to 700 0C using a Netzsch TG 209 F3 Tarsus system at a heating rate of 10 °C/min with equal sample mass (15±0.5) mg (Fig. The ionic conductivity as a function of frequency (Fig. To evaluate the lithium transference numbers (tLi + ) of the ionanofluid electrolytes, Symmetric lithium coin cells (type 2032) (Li|electrolyte|Li) were assembled in an argon filled glovebox (MBraun. Labmaster), with a glass fibre filter (Whatman, GF/A) as the separator. Lithium metal foil with a thickness of 0.75 mm was procured from Alfa Aesar (99.9%, metals basis) and used as received. The tLi + was measured by chronoamperometry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at room temperature using a multichannel electrochemical analyser analyser (Bio-Logic, model VMP3). Lithium manganese oxide, LiMn2O4 (LMO) with two-dimensional layered crystal structure are of great interest as cathode materials for rechargeable lithium-metal batteries. Fig. The ionic conductivity falls sharply with further increase of NHIF dispersion in the electrolyte. Observed non-Arrhenius temperature dependence of both the viscosity and ionic conductivity can be suitably described by the Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann (VFT) equations Here, a E η and a E σ are the activation energies for viscous flow and ion conduction, respectively. T0 is considered as the equilibrium glass transition temperature where molecular mobility vanishes i.e. flow resistance becomes maximum. Its value is usually considered as about 30 °C lower than the thermodynamic glass transition temperature (Tg). Solid lines in Fig. Higher salt concentration further enhances the ion-pairs and a redistribution of charge species occurs in the system. Consequently, a slowdown in the overall ion dynamics i.e. a substantial reduction in the Li + ion mobility occur A steady decrease in a E σ along with a corresponding increase in a E η also supports the same. However, for the electrolyte with NHIF content above 5.0 wt%, although the crystallinity of the system substantially reduces, the sufficiently higher flow resistance supersedes all the positive effects of NHIF, resulting in a sharp decrease in conductivity with a higher value of a E σ . Table Viscosity Dc conductivity Ionic conductivity in IL-based lithium electrolytes resembles the mobility of three different ions (i.e. IL and Li + cations, and anions) in the system where I s and I 0 are the initial (polarized state) and steady-state (unpolarized state) currents, respectively. Similarly, 0 I R and S I R are the initial and steady-state resistances of the passivation layers, respectively. Li-ion transference numbers, (tLi + ) of the low (0.2 M) and high (0.6 M) salt doped electrolytes are compared with the ionanofluid electrolyte with highest ion conductivity (5NHIF0.6LiPy). Fig. Inset of the figures show the corresponding DC polarization currents. Using Eq. ( It is interesting to observe that the value tLi + for 0.2LiPy14TFSI electrolyte estimated using Eq. ( Accordingly, the values of 0.6LiPy14TFSI and 5NHIF0.6LiPy electrolytes are found to be 0.32 and 0.43 respectively. This is plausible as the higher salt concentration improves the tLi + and release of more Li + ions in the electrolyte in presence of NHIF enhances the value further. The room temperature (25 °C) battery performance of the highest conducting 5NHIF0.6LiPy ionanofluid electrolyte is compared with popular 0.2LiPyr14TFSI electrolyte by assembling Li/electrolyte +GF/A separator/LMO cells. Fig. Finally, the discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency at a low current density (24 mAg -1 ) of different cells with cycle number is plotted in Fig. Thus, both the polarization effect and increase in interfacial resistance during longterm cycling are minimized in presence NHIF in the ionanofluid electrolyte to provide improved rate capability and cyclic ability with the better Columbic efficiency of the cell. In summary, a unique class of ionanofluid electrolytes have been presented for the application in LMBs. The electrolytes are formed by dispersing ionic liquid functionalized TiO2 nanoparticles in a higher amount of lithium salt dissolved Pyr14TFSI electrolyte. Apart from the advantageous properties of IL, the electrolytes exhibit several remarkable features, among which the viscosity decoupled ionic conductivity and suppression of crystallinity in presence of higher lithium salts, are favourable for LMB applications. The electrolytes possess higher ionic conductivity, as compared to much lower lithium salt dissolved Pyr14TFSI IL-based electrolyte, along with substantially higher lithium ion transference number at ambient temperature. At 25 °C, the Li/LiMn2O4 cell containing the optimized highest conducting electrolyte deliver more than 88% of the theoretical discharge capacity at a current density of 24 mAg -1 , much higher than that obtained (59%) from conventional pure IL-based electrolyte cell. Moreover, the ionanofluid electrolyte shows noticeably superior performance in terms of cycling ability and rate capability, as compared to the pure ILbased electrolyte. 