We report an experimental and numerical investigation of the fragmentation mechanisms of micrometer-sized metal droplet irradiated by ultrashort laser pulses. The results of the experiment show that the fast one-side heating of such a droplet may lead to either symmetric or asymmetric expansion followed by different fragmentation scenarios. To unveil the underlying processes leading to fragmentation we perform simulation of liquid-tin droplet expansion produced by the initial conditions similar to those in experiment using the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method. Simulation demonstrates that a thin heated surface layer generates a ultrashort shock wave propagating from the frontal side to rear side of the droplet. Convergence of such shock wave followed by a rarefaction tale to the droplet center results in the cavitation of material inside the central region by the strong tensile stress. Reflection of the shock wave from the rear side of droplet produces another region of highly stretched material where the spallation may occur producing a thin spallation layer moving with a velocity higher than expansion of the central shell after cavitation. It is shown both experimentally and numerically that the threshold laser intensity necessary for the spallation is higher than the threshold required to induce cavitation in the central region of droplet. Thus, the regime of asymmetrical expansion is realized if the laser intensity exceeds the spallation threshold. The transverse and longitudinal expansion velocities obtained in SPH simulations of different regimes of expansion are agreed well with our experimental data. Fragmentation of liquid droplets underlies a wide range of technological processes including mass spectrometry, liquid fuel dispersion systems, coating deposition, and fabrication of microstructures. In addition, the processes of droplet fragmentation are observed in nature An unperturbed liquid droplet is a hydrodynamically stable object. Fragmentation occurs only as a result of a sufficiently strong external influence. Thus, the fragmentation process strongly depends both on the mechanism of an external action and on the properties of a droplet itself. This incorporates a wide range of fragmentation mechanisms which are observed in external electric and magnetic fields The most intense fragmentation occurs under the influence of shock waves. A shock wave can propagate in an extrenal environment The problem of interaction of a laser pulse with a droplet has attained practical interest during the development of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) sources used in the next-generation industrial lithography Our previous work To understand the mechanism of the cavities formation within a droplet, we perform the detailed numerical simulations of a shock waves propagation induced by a laser pulse. The smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method is used as the most appropriate one to model flows with the loss of continuity and fragmentation. The results of the numerical study clearly demonstrate that the formation of cavities is a result of exceeding liquid tensile strength under the action of strong rarefaction stresses which follow the shock front. The experimental setup scheme is shown in Fig. Figure L ), varies in the range (0.4 -8.0) × 10 13 W/cm 2 . The droplet response to the focused laser pulse is recorded using the shadow photograph method. CCD cameras are directed perpendicular to a drop fall with the 30 • angle to the horizontal projection of the laser beam (Fig. The obtained shadowgraphs of the time evolution of liquid-metal droplets, which are subjected to short laser pulses, are ordered by the applied laser intensity I L (Fig. Our detailed analysis begins with the droplet response to the most intense laser pulse with I L = 4×10 13 W/cm 2 shown in Fig. A decrease in the laser pulse intensity leads to a decrease in the shells expansion rate and a change in their geometry. We noticed that under irradiation with I L ≥ 4 × 10 13 W/cm 2 the rear-side shell expands until fragmentation. However, with the decrease in intensity the shape of the rear shell gradually changes from the elongated ellipsoid into the cone-like form (Figs. The decrease in the laser intensity down to I L = 1.5 × 10 13 W/cm 2 (Fig. It is also worth noting that at low intensities, starting at ∼ 4 μs, convexities appear on a droplet surface which then evolve into jets. These convexities are observed even at I L ≤ 1.5×10 13 W/cm 2 (Figs. A change in the morphology of the fragmented droplet Expansion velocities of the rear (squares) and spherical (circles) shells as functions of pulse intensity (low axis) or exposure energy per droplet mass (top axis). Red symbols correspond to the experimental data, and the blue ones show simulation data. The top axis is linked to the low one via the absorption coefficient of 0.125. at low laser intensities, which is the damping of the rear shell formation, is also observed in the projection perpendicular to the laser beam. Figure At late stages the dispersed fragments of a droplet continue to move by inertia. Their size distribution lies within a range of several micrometers or less. The velocity of fragments movement can be estimated from the expansion rates of the shells in the corresponding directions. The results of measuring the characteristic expansion rates of the shells along and perpendicular to the laser beam are shown in Fig. The simulated tin droplet is a sample represented by a continuous compressible material. Its evolution is determined by the mass, momentum, and energy conservation equations: where ρ and U are the density and the velocity of the material respectively; P is the hydrostatic pressure, which is determined from the equation of state; E = e + U 2 /2 is the total specifc energy which consists of the internal and kinetic specific energies; and Q is the volumetric heat source which emulates the heating induced by laser radiation. The reduced system of Eqs. ( The system (1)-( We use the Mie-Grüneisen equation of state for liquid tin: where Γ is the Grüneisen parameter, and P r and e r are the reference pressure and specific energy represented by the shock hugoniot. The latter is usually defined using the linear approximation for the shock velocity u s dependence on the material velocity u p : u s = c + su p , where c is the bulk sound velocity in normal state and s is the parameter. Thus, the reference pressure and specific energy curves take the form: where x = ρ 0 /ρ is the reversed compression ratio. The values for the liquid tin equation of state parameters are given in Table Our initial simulations demonstrated that the propagation of the shock induced by laser irradiation forms a condition for the cavity formation within the droplet due to high tensile stresses which follow the shock. The cavitation condition, as well as the spallation, is the exceeding of tensile strength within material. At this point the medium reacts by forming free internal boundaries. The choice of this terminology does not contradict the generally accepted definitions of these concepts and is used to explicitly separate the studied processes. Otherwise, we mean that the processes of cavitation and spallation have a single physical nature associated with stress relaxation in response to the stretching of the material. The critical value of tensile stresses (or tensile strength) is not a property of the material in question, but depends on the nature of the loading, in particular on the strain rate. The information about the tensile strength in liquid tin is rather scarce. It is known that for most metals the tensile strength in a material is greatly reduced at a transition from solid to liquid. Thus, the tensile strength in tin decreases by an order of magnitude: from 1.2 GPa in the solid state to 0.12 GPa in the molten state To take into account the dependence of the tensile strength on the strain rate, fittings are made from known experimental points and molecular dynamics simulations (Fig. The energy of the femtosecond laser pulse is absorbed by free electrons in metals during a period that does not exceed ∼ 100 fs (∼ 10 fs for tin) what may be considered instantaneous in contrast to the 800-fs laser pulse. Electron-ion energy transition occurs due to the collisions between heated electrons and cold ions. The electron-ion relaxation finishes within ∼ 10 ps what results in an equilibrium temperature within the skin layer of a droplet. Our simulations do not take into account these relaxation processes: the laser energy absorption is modeled by setting the resulting intertnal energy within the skin layer. The source term in the energy transport equation ( Here E in,0 is the aborbed energy amplitude, R is the radius of the droplet, r is the distance from the center of the droplet, δR is the skin layer depth at which the absorbed energy is reduced by e times (70 nm), and θ is the angle between the laser beam and a point within the droplet. The skin layer depth δR of initial heating is estimated using the two-temperature (2T) hydrodynamic model of a nonequilibrium system of electrons and ions. The calculation is carried out using electron-ion exchange coefficients and electronic thermal conductivity obtained from ab-initio calculations of liquid tin at various electronic temperatures. The obtained equilibrium temperature profile takes a gaussian shape with the corresponding skin layer depth about 60-80 nm in a wide range of absorbed fluences. The angular dependence of the absorbed energy Q(θ) in ( The direct 3D simulation of droplets with experimental sizes is resource consuming since the skin layer and the droplet radius differ by almost 3 orders of magnitude (R ∼ 25 m, δR ∼ 100 nm). We need at least 5-10 SPH particles to resolve the skin layer what results in ∼ 10 11 SPH particles for the droplet. Therefore, in the present paper we confine ourselves to smaller droplets (R = 1, 2 μm). The possible scaling effects are discussed in the next Section. The detailed analysis of processes within the irradiated liquid-metal drop with the diameter D = 2 μm is based on SPH simulation results. The dynamic response of the droplet to the high-intensity experimental regime is illustrated in Fig. The pressure pulse, which is formed due to irradiation, begins to converge to the center of the droplet. The tensile wave, which radial profile has a typical triangular form, moves behind it. The initial pressure pulse is very short and comparable with the skin layer depth, so its propagation is accompanied by a quite rapid decrease in its amplitude and spatial broadening The pulse convergence towards the center of the droplet is accompanied by the gradual decrease in its amplitude what is the result of the focusing effect. However, at a certain moment the amplitude begins to increase as shown in Fig. Focusing of the pulse energy within the droplet's center is followed by the shock wave divergence with a decrease in its amplitude (Figs. The shock wave profile takes the triangle form for positive pressures at the moment of the arrival to the opposite side of the droplet (Fig. Relaxation of tensile stresses in the center of the droplet, as mentioned above, is accompanied by the formation of an ensemble of small cavitation bubbles. Their growth and further coagulation leads to the formation of a single cavity which eventually increases in size. At the moment t * = 12.925 its radius is x/R ∼ 0.5 (Fig. The additional mechanism of fragmentation at relatively high laser intensities is associated with spallation at the droplet's pole opposite to the irradiated one. Figure The thickness of the central shell is minimal on the rear and front sides and much wider in the region of the equator (Fig. The laser intensity reduction leads to a gradual sup-pression of both cavitation and spallation at the center of the droplet and at the rear pole, respectively. The cavitation bubbles induced by a laser pulse with the twice lower intensity are formed within a smaller volume (Figs. 8-2A-8-2C). Moreover, the droplet shape evolution for decreasing intensities shown in Fig. The effect of the droplet size on expansion and fragmentation is studied using droplets with diameters D = 2 μm and D = 4 μm. It should be noted that the problem of scaling effects is complex. First, the amplitude of the pressure pulse near its center can increase with increasing droplet diameter because the integral energy input rises. On the other hand, an increase in the size is accompanied by a large broadening of the initial pulse, thereby reducing the amplitude of the shock wave. Thus, there are two competing processes, one of which contributes to the increase in the amplitude of the shock wave, while the other, on the contrary, to its decrease. Hydrodynamic similarity is realized for different droplet sizes if simultaneous scaling of spatial and temporal variables is performed in governing equations, boundary and initial conditions A pressure wave, generated as a result of instantaneous heating, begins to forget its original profile at a considerable distance from the thin surface layer of its formation. Due to the fact that the initial pressure pulse width is about 100 nm, this width will increase by an order of magnitude at a relatively small propagation distance because the large sound velocity dispersion in the given range of compression. Therefore, even if there is a difference in the widths of initial pressure pulses, it will be leveled with distance. Thus, the micrometer-sized pulse profiles will be asymptotically similar for the surface layers heated to the depths within a few hundred nano-meters, and their integral characteristics being preserved. We will rely on the above-mentioned fact that solutions for different droplets are similar, provided the value of E tot /R 3 is constant. In the first approximation, it can be assumed that an increase in the heated depth with increasing droplet size, and the input energy E in,0 is fixed in Eq. ( Figure Figure In general, a good coincidence of the profiles for droplets of different sizes suggests that the fragmentation described above for a droplet with D = 2 μm will be similar for droplets of a larger size if E tot /R 3 is kept constant. To quantitatively compare the calculation results with the experimental data, we estimate the energy of laser irradiation of the droplet at its total mass 3E tot /4ρπR 3 . In the section describing the experimental setup, it is noted that the laser pulse intensity I varied in the range (0.4 -8.0) × 10 13 W/cm 2 . This corresponds to the specific energy E exp = 3Iτ /4ρR = (0.14 -2.81) × 10 6 J/kg. At such laser intensities, the experimentally estimated velocity of the rear surface, which is carried away as a result of spallation, varies in the range from 100 to 500 m/s (Fig. Figure We have studied experimentally and numerically expansion and fragmentation of a liquid-metal droplet irradiated by a short laser pulse. The fast energy deposition heats and pressurizes material within a thin frontal layer of the droplet in the almost isochoric regime. Propagation of laser-generated pressure wave and physical mechanisms of fragmentation at various laser pulse energies are examined in detail. It is found in SPH simulation that fragmentation of a droplet is triggered by the increasing tensile stress produced in a rarefaction wave following the shock wave toward the center. As a result of rarefaction wave convergence, the central cavitation zone is formed in the droplet. For higher laser pulse energy the second cavity can be formed at the rear surface as a result of spallation of a thin rear-side layer after reflection of the shock wave from the free droplet boundary. Two fragmentation regimes have been experimentally demonstrated. It has been shown that at a high intensity two spatially separated shells are formed, the expansion of which leads to fragmentation of the droplet. Only single spherical shell is formed in the low-intensity regime, at which the expansion and subsequent fragmentation of the droplet becomes more symmetrical in comparison with the high-intensity regime. We have shown the existence of a critical intensity of the laser light below which the spall processes on the rear side of the droplet are completely suppressed. It has been shown in simulation that the fragmentation pattern is preserved for droplets of different sizes, provided that the absorbed energy of the laser pulse per total droplet mass remains constant. Quantum molecular dynamics (QMD) simulations are performed for tin in the cubic super cell containing 64 atoms with periodic boundary conditions. The cube face size is 1.28 nm which corresponds to the density of 6.05 g/cm 3 . The simulation time step is 1 fs. There are 3 stages of simulation: 1. 1000 steps using the NVT thermostat with an increase in temperature from 300 to 4000 K in order to accelerate melting; 2. 1000 steps using the NVT thermostat with cooling from 4000 to 1000 K; 3. 300 steps using the NVE ensemble (without a thermostat) to make sure that the final state is stable and remains liquid during the simulation (2-3 ps). The effect of the semi-valence 4d electrons on the interatomic interaction is correctly taken into account by using the PAW pseudopotential which considers these electrons to be valence. The pseudopotential is a part of the library within the VASP software The averaging over the last 60 configurations obtained in the stage 3 provides the electronic density of states (DoS) in liquid tin which is parabolic in the region near the Fermi energy. Similarly, DoS is computed for tin at equilibrium temperatures of 2000, 4000, and 8000 K without significant difference from the 1000 K result. In addition, we conducted a test to determine the effect of the electronic temperature on DoS. The unit cell of α-tin with ion density of 6.05 g/cm 3 is considered. Electron temperatures to test are 10 000, 20 000, 45 000, and 55 000 K. The electronic exchange and correlation are taken again in the generalized gradient approximation (PBE) The two-parabolic approximation remains valid according to calculations with the twoparabolic DoS up to 100 000 K. The role of d-electrons below -20.5 eV with respect to the Fermi energy manifested itself in a moderate increase in thermal conductivity at T e above 30 000 K, which was already obtained for tungsten and electron pressure: The effect of electron-electron collisions in the twotemperature electron thermal conductivity is taken into account in accordance with the modification Using the Drude model, The processing of the experimental data Here, the temperature of tin ions T i is also given in K. The final expression for the electronic thermal conductivity (in W m/K) is also obtained using the Drude model. The s and p electrons are considered as charge and energy carriers used in the two-parabolic approximation: The sp-electron velocity V s = 3×10 14 T e (in SI units). The electron-phonon heat exchange is described using the approach The system of equations for two-temperature hydrodynamics is solved numerically to estimate the skin layer δR in tin. The nonequilibrium process of heating the electronic subsystem of the material and its further relaxation are taken into account. In the Lagrangian coordinates dm = ρdx, the energy balance is divided into two independent equations for the electronic and ionic subsystems: where , P , T are the internal energy, the pressure and the temperature, respectively, for the electronic (subscript e) or ionic (subscript i) subsystems; α is the coefficient of electron-ion heat transfer, κ e is the coeffi-cient of electronic thermal conductivity which is determined using QMD simulations. Material motion in onedimensional hydrodynamics is described via the energy balance equations ( where F abs is the laser energy, absorbed by the unit of the irradiated surface, δ is the thickness of the skin layer, x = x(m, t) and x 0 = x(m 0 , t) are the trajectories of lagrangian particles with coordinates m and m 0 , m 0 is the lagrangian coordinate of the metal surface on which the light is incident, and τ L is the laser pulse duration. A series of calculations is performed to estimate the heating depth. As a result, it varies from 60 to 80 nm over a wide range of fluences. Fig. A complete similarity in the evolution of irradiated droplets of various sizes is shown for two droplets with D = 2 μm and D = 4 μm. The heated skin layers δR are 70 and 140 nm for the first and the second case respectively. In addition to physical dimensions it is necessary to change the mesh size properly. Figures 11-1A-11-1C demonstrate the velocity profiles at different times for the droplets of different sizes (2 and 4 μm). The x axis in the figures corresponds to the distance reduced by the droplet radius, and the origin corresponds to the droplet center. The obtained profiles almost completely coincide as expected. Direct similarity in the evolution of droplets with a fixed skin layer depth with the same the specific absorbed energy E/R 3 is not observed. However, simulations demonstrate the asymptotic similarity what is shown in Figs. 11-2A-11-2C. The velocity profiles in the reduced coordinates for waves, approaching the droplet center, are very close. There is only a slight difference in the cavitation zone. Similarity takes place even when the pulse approaches the rear surface of the droplet (Fig. 