Understanding depairing effects in a hybrid-superconducting interface utilizing high spin-orbit materials such as topological insulators or 1D semiconducting nanowires is becoming an important research topic in the study of proximity-induced superconductivity. Experimentally, proximity-induced superconductivity is found to suppress at much lower magnetic fields compared to the superconducting layer without a good understanding of its cause. Here, we provide a phenomenological tool to characterize different pair-breaking mechanisms, the ones that break or preserve time reversal symmetry, and show how they affect the differential tunneling conductance response. Importantly, we probe the properties of the SC layer at the hybrid interface and observe conductance peak pinning at zero bias in a larger field range with eventual signs of weak peak splitting. Further, the effect of varying the spin-orbit scattering and the Lande g-factor in tuning the conductance peaks show interesting trends. Recent studies of proximity induced superconductivity (PIS) at the interface between a s-wave superconductor (SC) and a topological material (TM), such as 3-Dimensional (3-D) topological insulators (TI) 1 , 2-D TI layers 2 or 1-D high spin-orbit (SO) semiconducting nanowires 3 is laying a new scientific foundation bed for the exploration of conceptually rich condensed matter phenomena, especially in the quest for topological superconductivity. Here, the PIS is known to lead to three important consequences. Firstly, it leads to suppression of superconductivity in the SC layer, giving rise to a reduced superconducting gap (Δ r ) near the interface compared to the bulk of SC (Δ o ) 4 (Fig. experience other forms of depairing effects: one that preserves time-reversal symmetry (TRS) such as spin-orbit (SO) scattering which contributes to depairing only in presence of applied magnetic field and one that breaks TRS in zero field such as orbital depairing and magnetic impurity scattering. Thus, the BTK model does not provide a complete microscopic picture in such systems where such depairing effects may contribute differently to suppression of superconductivity. In the PIS study with TMs, experimental visualization of topological superconductivity to realize Majorana modes as zero-energy quasiparticle excitations in differential tunneling conductance spectroscopy has been widely attempted In this article, we focus our attention on two aspects of the hybrid SC/TM interfaces. Firstly, how does the property of the SC film, driving the PIS state, gets affected due to the proximity effect. Secondly, can the response of the induced quasiparticle excitations be explained using a model better than the BTK formalism that can capture the microscopic origin of the various pair-breaking mechanisms responsible for the stronger suppression of induced superconductivity. In this regard, a systematic experimental study to characterize such hybrid interfaces is missing. We therefore focus on a device geometry as shown in Figure where ρ ! is the normal density of states, E is the energy with respect to Fermi level, and u ± are the complex energy functions for the spin down(+) and spin-up states(-) represented as: Here, Δ is the superconducting energy gap, ζ, b so , d sf are the parameters related (inversely) to the orbital depairing, spin-orbit and spin-flip scattering lifetimes where y ! ; i ∊ 1,4 , represents the four complex variable related to the complex energy functions by the following expression: This procedure of arriving at solution to Eq. 2 results in 8 sets of complex solutions, seven of which are discarded due to triviality (e.g. 0 or negative value of density of states from Eq. 1). The differential tunneling conductance for the device structure in Figure In the context of an SC/TM hybrid interface, the effect of the spin-orbit interaction and Zeeman field on the properties of the quasiparticle excitations in the SC and TM layers may require careful analysis. In the case of TM layer, contributions from a bulk spin-orbit coupling or Rashba spin-orbit coupling is expected to give rise to a topological electronic band structure, confirmed from ARPES studies 6 . However, due to stronger suppression of induced superconductivity at low applied magnetic field, there is still no clear evidence of topological gap opening in transport measurements (for SC/TM/I/NM device geometry as shown in Figure In the subsequent study, we devote our attention to investigate the superconducting properties of the SC layer by simulating the differential conductance response (see Fig. Figure Next, we probe the ZBCP state in applied field and simulate the response of the SC layer in the hybrid SC/TM interface to the modulations in b so . Experimentally, gate voltage modulation may also indirectly affect the strength of the SO scattering potential due to the adjacent TM layer (see Figure In conclusion, our work highlights the distinct characteristic response of different depairing interactions to differential conductance measurements in presence of external stimulus. Further, it is known that SO mechanisms can lead to exotic behaviors, such as the possibility of co-existence of superconductivity and magnetism at these interfaces. Our model can also study such a phenomena, i.e. co-existence of proximity induced superconductivity and ferromagnetism, by considering an internal exchange field acting on the SC condensates 30 (see Fig. The real solution for the quasiparticle density of states determined above is used to calculate the differential tunneling conductance by taking the convolution of the density of states with the Fermi-Dirac function. Assuming the density of states in the region of NM to be constant, the expression for the differential conductance is given by: where V is the applied bias, N ! is the quasiparticle density of states, f E, T = 1 1 + exp (E -E ! )/k ! T , being the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at a temperature T and energy E with k ! as the Boltzman constant and E ! as the Fermi level. Equation ( The above expression it is used to calculate the differential conductance at any arbitrary value of temperature. The above term reduces to the quasiparticle density of states at very low temperatures.