The Bernard-LeClair (BL) symmetry classes generalize the ten-fold way classes in the absence of Hermiticity. Within the BL scheme, time-reversal and particle-hole come in two flavors, and "pseudo-Hermiticity" generalizes Hermiticity. We propose that these symmetries are relevant for the topological classification of non-Hermitian single-particle Hamiltonians and Hermitian bosonic Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) models. We show that the spectrum of any Hermitian bosonic BdG Hamiltonian is found by solving for the eigenvalues of a non-Hermitian matrix which belongs to one of the BL classes. We therefore suggest that bosonic BdG Hamiltonians inherit the topological properties of a non-Hermitian symmetry class and explore the consequences by studying symmetryprotected edge instabilities in a simple 1D system. Topological phase transitions were first discovered in gapped fermionic systems, described by quantum Hamiltonians which are necessarily Hermitian operators Quadratic fermion Hamiltonians can be sorted into ten classes Surprisingly, the BL classes are also relevant for Hermitian bosonic models. While topological fermionic BdG models (i.e. superconductors) are fully understood within the ten-fold way, no such classification exists for bosonic BdG models yet. Hermitian bosonic BdG models are diagonalized via a symplectic (non-unitary) transformation. We show that the resulting spectrum is equivalent to the eigenvalues of a non-Hermitian matrix and, moreover, that this matrix belongs to one of the BL classes. Remarkably, it is thus useful to consider non-Hermitian random matrix classes when discussing Hermitian bosonic BdG models. While typical equilibrium setups have a spectrum which is fully real We briefly review the ten Hermitian symmetry classes For any H we can check for the presence of the following symmetries: which are known as time-reversal, particle-hole, and chiral symmetry respectively. One can construct ten unique classes based on the presence or absence of these symmetries. These ten classes are of paramount importance since it has been shown that each symmetry class can either possess Z, Z 2 , or 0 topologically distinct phases in a given dimension d for Hermitian, non-interacting models where u, v, w ∈ R and c A/B,i represents an annihilation operator on lattice site i in sublattice site A/B. edge . Any (gap preserving) disorder entering the Hamiltonian which respects this relationship will ensure that edge modes will have exactly zero real energy, Re[E edge ] = 0 (though their imaginary energy can be arbitrary). This implies that non-Hermitian models can possess edge-mode-protecting symmetries which are not included in the ten-fold way. Classifying symmetries should be sensitive to more general relationships between H and H † . A recent study has analytically derived the topological periodic table of the ten-fold way in the absence of Hermiticity Guided by this intuition, in the next section we identify a more comprehensive classification (at the cost of more symmetry classes) for non-Hermitian models. We describe the symmetries which define the BL classes where c,q,k = ±1 and I is the identity. We mandate that the symmetries commute and are of order two (i.e. each symmetry operation squares to the identity) which implies the constraints on the right. We label these symmetries as P, C, K, Q respectively. The physical motivation to consider these relationships is as follows. The P symmetry is standard chiral symmetry. The C, K symmetries can be viewed as two distinct flavors of particle-hole ( = -1) or time-reversal ( = +1). This is because in the Hermitian case H T = H * however H T differs from H * in the non-Hermitian case. Therefore the C, P symmetries along with Hermiticity exhaust the standard ten-fold way. In addition, we will consider Q symmetry (or "pseudo-Hermiticity") which generalizes Hermiticity. BL found that these four relations result in 43 distinct symmetry classes which may be viewed as non-Hermitian generalizations of the ten-fold way classes. For details we refer to Refs. Having introduced these relationships and discussed some of their basic properties, we will now show that any bosonic BdG equation will possess a Q and a K symmetry by construction. The BL classification thus provides us with a unified framework to discuss both non-Hermitian single-particle Hamiltonians and Hermitian bosonic BdG models simultaneously. We demonstrate that the spectrum of every Hermitian bosonic BdG Hamiltonian is equivalent to the eigenvalues of a non-Hermitian matrix. We then sort this matrix into one of the BL classes. Let us consider a Hermitian 2N × 2N bosonic BdG Hamiltonian where b are bosonic operators and represents the most general form where B = B † , A = A T , H = H † . We define the transformation such that where Σ z = σ z ⊗I N and Λ is a diagonal matrix. If we impose bosonic commutation relations on the quasiparticles β then the transformation T must obey which implies T is symplectic (i.e. non-unitary). In addition, T needs to diagonalize the Hamiltonian Multiplying by Σ z on the left leads to which implies that the eigenvalues of H BdG ≡ Σ z H will determine the spectrum of the system, and the righteigenvectors will determine the transformation matrix T . We refer to corresponding to a Q symmetry with q = +1 (pseudo-Hermiticity) and a K symmetry with k = -1, kk * = I (particle-hole) Note that this analysis does not apply to fermionic BdG models (i.e. superconductors). These are diagonalized by a unitary transformation such that the fermionic BdG equation is particle-hole symmetric and Hermitian: q = +1, q = I, q = +kq * k † , representing class D The non-Hermiticity of H BdG suggests that imaginary modes can appear which are populated exponentially fast in time (also known as dynamically-unstable modes). Physically, these modes can arise if bosons condense in a state which does not minimize the mean-field energy of the evolving Hamiltonian, such as after a quench protocol. The system proceeds to rapidly depopulate the condensate into one of the unstable modes, which has been observed experimentally in cold atoms Up to now our discussion has been general. To explicitly show the effects of non-Hermiticity in the bosonic BdG equation, we will study the simplest 1D model which undergoes a topological transition and observe symmetry-protected edge instabilities. Consider the Hamiltonian where v, w ∈ R, u ∈ C, and b A/B,i represents a bosonic operator on lattice site i in sublattice site A/B. This Hamiltonian was proposed in Ref. The spectrum with open boundary conditions is given in Fig. Of particular interest are the edge modes (given in red), which have a purely imaginary energy. Each edge hosts two modes: one with energy +i|u| and one with -i|u|. Edge modes are particle-hole symmetric: t edge,+ ∝ Σ x t * edge,+ which suggests that E edge,+ = -E * edge,+ where t edge,+ represents an eigenstate of H BdG on an edge with energy E edge,+ = +i|u|. Thus because the mode on the edge is its own particle-hole symmetric partner, its energy must be purely imaginary. The stability of these edge modes will be discussed in the next section. Since we have found that edge modes are particle-hole symmetric, one may wonder whether edge excitations are inherently non-local, in analogy with Majorana excitations in a Kitaev chain We return to the question of the robustness of edge modes in the bosonic-SSH model via an adiabatic argument. A few subtleties arise due to the non-Hermiticity of H BdG . We begin by considering a parameter regime where all the bulk modes are fully real and gapped, and we restrict our attention to the left edge for concreteness. First, recall that the this edge hosts two right-eigenvectors of H BdG : t ± with associated energies E ± = ±i|u| respectively. These modes are particle-hole symmetric, satisfying t ± ∝ Σ x t * ± which constrains energies via E ± = -E * ± . For Hermitian models, this condition results in the modes having exactly zero energy e.g. Majorana modes in the Kitaev chain Can edge modes with Re[E ± ] = 0 be adiabatically removed without closing the real energy bulk band gap? The answer is no, as long as symmetries are respected and H BdG remains diagonalizable during the deformation process. In principle, the two modes with energies ±iu can become deformed to degeneracy at zero energy, allowing the associated eigenvectors to couple via t 1,2 = t + ± it -such that the resulting modes t 1,2 are not particle-hole symmetric In this work, we have emphasized the need to go beyond the ten-fold way symmetry classes in order to generalize our understanding of symmetry-protected topolog-ical phase transitions. Our main motivation came from the dissipative bipartite quantum-walk model, where chiral symmetry is broken while edge modes are protected by a uniquely non-Hermitian relationship. This led us to consider four symmetry relations originally proposed by BL An open task remains to fully classify all bosonic BdG models A more ambitious next step involves constructing a "periodic table" from the 43 distinct non-Hermitian BL classes. We note that the BL classes can distinguish topological from trivial models in any dimension since they include the original ten Hermitian classes. then E n = E * n . So we find that eigenvalues are either purely real or come in conjugate pairs. Suppose a pseudo-Hermitian Hamiltonian H(α) is parameterized by some value α such that all its eigenvalues are non-degenerate and real when α = 0. In order for complex modes to appear as we tune α, two real eigenvalues must "coalesce" (i.e. become degenerate) at α c such that a complex conjugate pair forms adiabatically. The degeneracy point α c is known as an exceptional point where the Hamiltonian is non-diagonalizable. This is also called a broken-to-unbroken transition point. It is easy to show that bulk modes undergo a broken-to-unbroken transition as a function of quasi-momentum k for the parameter values |w -v| < |u| for the bosonic-SSH. Additionally, pairs of modes on a given edge with energy E ± = ±i|u| can be deformed to have real energies via a broken-to-unbroken transition.