Inorganic halide perovskite Cs(Rb)PbI 3 has attracted significant research interest in the application of light-absorbing material of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Although there have been extensive studies on structural and electronic properties of inorganic halide perovskites, the investigation on their thermodynamic stability is lack. Thus, we investigate the effect of substituting Rb for Cs in CsPbI 3 on the chemical decomposition and thermodynamic stability using first-principles thermodynamics. By calculating the formation energies of solid solutions Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 from their ingredients Cs 1-x Rb x I and PbI 2 , we find that the best match between efficiency and stability can be achieved at the Rb content x ≈ 0.7. The calculated Helmholtz free energy of solid solutions indicates that Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 has a good thermodynamic stability at room temperature due to a good miscibility of CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 . Through lattice-dynamics calculations, we further highlight that RbPbI 3 never stabilize in cubic phase at any temperature and pressure due to the chemical decomposition into its ingredients RbI and PbI 2 , while CsPbI 3 can be stabilized in the cubic phase at the temperature range of 0-600 K and the pressure range of 0-4 GPa. Our work reasonably explains the experimental observations, and paves the way for understanding material stability of the inorganic halide perovskites and designing efficient inorganic halide PSCs. Recently, research interest in inorganic halide perovskites ABX 3 (A = Cs, Rb; B = Pb, Sn; X = I, Br, Cl) has been rapidly growing for applications in photovoltaic solar cells. This is due to their potential high stability against decomposition upon exposure to humidity, light and high temperature Through recent theoretical and experimental works, it has been found that phase-stable cubic CsPbBr 3 has too wide band gap to be used as light-absorbing materials for solar cells There exist several first-principles works for these inorganic perovskites, highlighting the success and failure in their appli-cations to PSCs However, the most important question how much the material stability of the all-inorganic perovskites against their chemical decomposition can be enhanced is yet untouched. In fact, this is the most challenging towards the commercialization of PSCs when using the organic-inorganic hybrid halide perovskite absorber, because CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 has been found to decompose into its ingredients CH 3 NH 3 I and PbI 2 intrinsically as well as extrinsically upon the influence of humidity, temperature and ultraviolet light In this work, we first demonstrate the impact of Rb substitution for Cs on thermodynamic stability of mixed rubidium-cesium iodide perovskite Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 by using first-principles thermodynamic calculations. Insights into the thermodynamic stability of Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 are gained by calculating the Helmholtz free energy of mixing CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 . We investigate the intrinsic instabilities of these solid solutions by estimating the formation energies of Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 from their components Cs 1-x Rb x I and PbI 2 . We then perform lattice dynamic calculations for CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 to obtain their phonon dispersion curves and thus assess their thermodynamic stabilities at finite temperature and pressure. The Gibbs free energy differences between Cs(Rb)PbI 3 and its components Cs(Rb)I and PbI 2 are estimated, providing a conclusion that RbPbI 3 is easily decomposed at any temperature and pressure while the decomposition of CsPbI 3 is thermodynamically prohibited at the temperature range from 0 to 600 K and pressure range from 0 to 4 GPa. All calculations were carried out using the pseudopotential plane-wave method within the density functional theory (DFT) framework, as implemented in ABINIT package Suggesting the chemical reaction for synthesis of the solid solutions Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 as follows, the intrinsic instability can be estimated as the DFT total energy difference as follows, where E Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 , E Cs 1-x Rb x I , and E PbI 2 are the DFT total energies of Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 , Cs 1-x Rb x I, and PbI 2 compounds, respectively. To assess the miscibility of CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 for composing the solid solutions Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 , the Helmholtz free energy of mixing for each composition is calculated as follows, where ∆U and ∆S are the internal energy and entropy of mixing, and T is the absolute temperature. The internal energy of mixing is calculated according to the following equation, The entropy of mixing can be calculated in the homogeneous limit as follows, where k B is the Boltzmann constant. It should be noted that this approach was proven to be successful for both the all-inorganic and organic-inorganic perovskite solid solutions To gain more insightful result for thermodynamic stability, the contribution of lattice vibration should be included through a calculation of phonon dispersion curve and phonon DOS. We applied the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) method The Gibbs free energy G(T, P) of a compound as a function of temperature T and pressure P is given as follows, where F(T, V) is the Helmholtz free energy as a function of temperature and volume V. For the PV term, we calculated the total energies as systematically varying the volume, fitted them into the empirical equation of state (EOS) for solid to obtain E(V) function, and estimated the pressure by conducting a differentiation like P = -(∂E/∂V) T It should be noted that in the electronic Helmholtz free energy, F el (T, V) = E(T = 0 K, V) -T S el , the T S el term is ignored because the electronic temperature effect is negligible for non-metallic systems at the room temperature vicinity where ω(V) is the phonon frequency (or phonon energy) as a function of volume, M the atomic mass, g(ω) the normalized phonon DOS and ω L the maximum of the phonon frequencies. Finally, we estimated the thermodynamic stability of Cs(Rb)PbI 3 against the decomposition into Cs(Rb)I and PbI 2 by calculating their Gibbs free energy difference as follows, ∆G(T, P) = G Cs(Rb)PbI 3 (T, P) -[G Cs(Rb)I (T, P) + G PbI 2 (T, P)] (9) which is at the finite temperature and pressure. The structural and electronic properties of the inorganic lead-iodide perovskite solid solutions Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 were sufficiently described in the previous studies The crystalline structures of Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 and Cs 1-x Rb x I were supposed to be cubic phase with a P m3m space group, and PbI 2 to be hexagonal phase with a P 3m1 space group (see Fig. Then we calculated the formation energies of Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 from their components Cs 1-x Rb x I and PbI 2 using Eq. 2 with PBE and vdW-DF functionals, as shown in Fig. The compositional stability of compound from its components can be interpreted by analyzing charge transfer upon its formation, and to this end, we analyzed Hirshfeld charge of each atom in CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 (see Table In the assessment of material stability of solid solution Cs 1 -x Rb x PbI 3 , the miscibility of mixing CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 can also play an important role. In the previous work In order to thermodynamically describe the miscibility between CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 , we calculated the Helmholtz free energy of mixing those two materials using Eq. (3)-Eq. ( We turned our attention to the chemical stability of CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 against their decomposition into CsI, RbI and PbI 2 at finite temperature and pressure. To this end, we carried out a series of SCF calculations as systematically varying unit cell volume for the PV term and DFPT phonon calculations for the T S term, and therefore, estimated the Gibbs free energy of all the compounds, viz. CsPbI 3 , RbPbI 3 , CsI, RbI and PbI 2 . To estimate the PV term, we calculated the total energies of each compound as increasing the unit cell volume from 0.9V 0 to 1.1V 0 with 10 volume points, where V 0 is a predicted equilibrium volume with the lowest energy. In the case of PbI 2 with the hexagonal lattice, we optimized the lattice constant ratio of a/c with an allowment of atomic relaxation at each fixed volume. Subsequently, we did a fitting of the obtained E -V data into the natural strain 4th-order EOS Using the calculated P -V data, we estimated the enthalpy H = E + PV for all the compounds. To consider the pure effect of pressure on the chemical decomposition, we calculated the formation enthalpy for the chemical reaction (Eq. 1) as follows, As shown in Fig. To investigate the finite temperature effect, we calculated the phonon dispersion curves and the corresponding phonon DOS of CsPbI 3 , RbPbI 3 , CsI, PbI and PbI 2 , which were used in calculation of ionic vibrational contribution to the Helmholtz free energy given in Eq. 8. Figure For both CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 compounds, we observe imaginary phonon modes represented by negative energies in the phonon band structure, so-called soft phonon, which are a typical characteristics of ferroelectrics in the cubic perovskite structure In Fig. It should be emphasised that the lattice instability or thermodynamic instability discussed above is different from the chemical instability for the decomposition of compound. In order to account for the temperature-dependence of chemical decomposition, the Helmholtz free energy difference of Cs(Rb)PbI 3 with respect to Cs(Rb)I and PbI 2 was calculated as follows, By performing a post-process of the calculated phonon DOS, we calculated the Helmholtz free energy of all the compounds, that is, CsPbI 3 , RbPbI 3 , CsI, RbI, and PbI 2 , as increasing the temperature from 0 to 1000 K with an interval of 100 K. Then, the Helmholtz free energy difference ∆F in CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 as a function of temperature was determined and plotted in Fig. According to our calculation, the free energy difference in RbPbI 3 was estimated to be positive at the whole range of temperature, but in the case of CsPbI 3 the sign of energy difference changes from the negative to the positive at ∼600 K as it gradually increases when increasing the temperature. This result indicates that RbPbI 3 is unstable upon the chemical decomposition at any temperature, whereas CsPbI 3 is stable upon the chemical decomposition at lower temperature than ∼600 K. It should be noted that in the calculation of the free energy the imaginary phonon modes were excluded because they might not be necessarily related to the chemical stability, the aim of this work, though the anharmonic contribution from those should be required to predict the phase transition temperature and pressure. In spite of ignoring the anharmonicity, moreover, our result agrees well with the experimental fact that smooth and uniform thin film of cubic CsPbI 3 can be easily synthesized and stabilized by spin-coating a 1:1 CsI:PbI 2 solution and heating to ∼600 K To take the temperature and pressure effects together into account, we calculated the Gibbs free energy difference of CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 with respect to their constituents CsI, RbI and PbI 2 at finite temperature and pressure simultaneously. By using the calculated PV and T S term, the Gibbs free energy of all the compounds at the temperature range from 0 to 1000 K and the pressure range from 0 to 20 GPa. Then, the Gibbs free energy difference of each perovskite can be obtained straightforwardly according to Eq. 9. In Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated the effect of substituting Rb for Cs on the thermodynamic miscibility and chemical stability in the all-inorganic iodide perovskite solid solutions Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 by using the VCA method within the framework of DFT. Through the calculation of formation energy of (a) Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 from its constituents Cs 1-x Rb x I and PbI 2 , it has been found that the Rb content x ≈ 0.7 is a turning point at which the decomposition reaction changes from the exothermic to the endothermic, indicating the best performance of PSC at the Rb content x ≈ 0.7. Based on the miscibility estimation of mixing the end pure materials CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 , we have demonstrated that Cs 1-x Rb x PbI 3 becomes stable at room temperature due to the increase of configurational entropy. To investigate the chemical stabilities of CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 upon their decompositions into CsI, RbI and PbI 2 at finite temperature and pressure, we have calculated the formation enthalpy, Helmholtz free energy difference, and Gibbs free energy difference of CsPbI 3 and RbPbI 3 with respect to their constituents, resulting in their P -T diagrams for the chemical decomposition. It has been revealed that RbPbI 3 could not be stable in cubic phase at any temperature and pressure due to the ready chemical decomposition into its constituents RbI and PbI 2 , whereas CsPbI 3 can be stabilized in cubic phase in the temperature range of 0-600 K and the pressure range of 0-4 GPa. We believe that this work paves the way for understanding the material stability of the inorganic halide perovskites and thus designing efficient and stable inorganic halide PSCs. Preprint submitted to ElsevierJuly 9, 2018 