The quantum phase-coherent behavior of superconducting weak links (WL) is often quenched in the finite voltage state, due to the heat dissipation and related thermal hysteresis. The latter can be reduced by improving heat evacuation and/or by lowering the critical current, so that a phase-dynamic regime is obtained, albeit over a narrow bias-current and temperature range. Here we demonstrate that an inductive shunt with well-chosen parameters introduces unexpected nonlinear dynamics that destabilize an otherwise stable fixed point in the dissipative branch. This leads to a nonhysteretic behavior with large voltage oscillations in intrinsically hysteretic WL-based micron-size superconducting quantum interference devices. A dynamic thermal model quantitatively describes our observations and further allows us to elaborate on the optimal shunting conditions. Superconducting weak links (WL) In this paper, we uncover the striking effect of finetuned inductive shunting on the behavior of a WL-based μ-SQUID. When we use a shunt made of a resistor with an adequate inductor in series, we observe reversible IVCs with a large voltage modulation by the magnetic flux over an increased temperature and bias current range. The dynamic retrapping current increases with the in-ductance up to a limiting value above which relaxation oscillations appear. The dynamic thermal model incorporating the nonlinear dynamics of temperature and current quantitatively explains the observations. Across a WL in a non-zero voltage state, superconducting phase-correlations can remain, so that the bias current through it is dynamically shared between a normal current and a superconducting component. Due to dissipation from periodic phase slips, the WL heats up above the bath temperature T b . Still it can remain at a temperature T WL below the WL critical temperature T c , In the DTM, the thermal heat loss from the WL to the substrate is described by k(T WL -T b ). A dimensionless parameter 17 then determines the accessibility of the dynamic regime at a given bath temperature T b . Here I 0 c , R N and k are the zero-field critical current, normal resistance and heat loss coefficient of the WL, respectively. The two extreme values β → 0 and β ≫ 1 lead the DTM to the isothermal RSJ We consider a WL, with normal resistance R N , that is resistively and inductively shunted with a resistance R S and an inductance L in series, as shown in Fig. with V and φ as the voltage and the phase difference across the WL, respectively. Writing, in addition, an RSJ-type equation and the heat balance in the WL, one obtains the full set of dimensionless equations determining the dynamics of phase, temperature and shunt current: 3,17 The relevant time scales are the thermal time τ th = C WL /k, the Josephson time τ J = Φ 0 /I 0 c (T b )R N , and the inductive time τ L = L/R S . Here, C WL is the WL heat capacity and I 0 c (T b ) is assumed to vary linearly with T b . We introduce the parameters r = R N /R S , γ = τ L /τ J and α = τ th /τ J . The time unit is τ = t/(γτ J ) and we use the reduced phase φ = φ/(2πγ) and the reduced temperature p = (T WL -T b )/(T c -T b ). Currents denoted by i with relevant sub/super-script represent the same in units of I 0 c (T b ). We focus our analysis on the large α, γ limit that is relevant in most practical cases. In this limit, the time evolution of the phase φ is much faster than that of the temperature p and the shunt current i sh . Therefore, the deviation in p and i sh , over the phase-slip time τ ps , from their time averages p and i sh can be neglected. Here, τ ps is the time over which the phase φ changes by 2π. By integrating Eq. ( The averages φ2 and φ are obtained as φ2 = 2π(ii sh )/τ ps and φ = 2π/τ ps . Taking the time-averages of Eqs. ( In this set of two non-linear equations, the ratio γ/α determines the dynamics of the temperature p, and hence of the WL critical current i c (p) = 1 -p. In contrast, the dynamics of the shunt current i sh is not (directly) dependent on γ/α. Moreover, Eqs. ( Removing the average symbol for the sake of simplicity, one can write two relations between the fixed points' coordinates p * and i * sh with the bias current i as a parameter: As elaborated in Appendix A, Equations (9,10) feature two real and non-zero solutions (p * ,i * sh ) only when the bias current i is above a threshold i 0 , where a saddlenode bifurcation occurs. Our focus here is on finding the values of the bias current i for which a stable, non-zero fixed point exists. Here, these values cover a continuous bias current range. We identify the lower limit of this range as the dynamic retrapping current i dyn r . In the absence of fluctuations, a WL in the finite voltage state and with a decreasing bias current would retrap to the superconducting state precisely at i = i dyn r . The stability of the fixed point is dictated by the trace Tr and determinant ∆ of the Jacobian matrix associated with the dynamical system: a stable fixed point requires ∆ > 0 and Tr < 0. 24 Using Eqs. ( Whereas the fixed point coordinates as well as the sign of ∆ are independent of γ/α, the sign of Tr, and hence the stability of the fixed points, depends on γ/α. Figure Therefore, when the inductive and thermal times (or γ and α) are close to each other, a large portion of the dissipative, phase-dynamic branch becomes unstable. A physical understanding for this could be as follows. Near the stable fixed point (with non-zero voltage), the WL temperature-dynamics gets perturbed periodically by the inductive current-dynamics having a similar time scale. The matching of these time scales, resembling a resonance-like condition, leads the system far enough from its stable fixed point to eventually end up with the other fixed point, i.e. the zero-voltage superconducting state. On the other hand, when γ/α is well below 1, the inductance has little influence on the shunt current dynamics (as it is much faster than the temperature dynamics) and consequently little contribution to the overall behavior. Thus the dynamic retrapping current remains close to the prediction of the zero-inductance DTM. For the other limit of large γ/α, the current switching from the WL to the shunt is slowed down by the large inductance, leading to a sharp rise in WL temperature above T c when the bias current exceeds the WL critical current. Once enough current is diverted away from the WL over a time determined by inductance, the WL starts cooling and at some time its temperature goes below T c . This leads to a larger current through the WL and cooling accelerates as a part of the current flows as supercurrent. This trend gets interrupted when the WL current exceeds again the critical current, leading to repetition of the same cycle. To summarize this theoretical description, an inductive shunt brings in a new dynamical variable, i.e. the shunt current. The single parameter γ/α can destabilize the otherwise stable fixed point of the 2D nonlinear dynamical system constituted by the dissipative WL coupled to the thermal bath. Thus an appropriate inductive shunt can enhance the reversibility of a WL-based μ-SQUID and enable large voltage modulations in the SQUID response. We fabricated μ-SQUIDs on a silicon substrate using lift-off of an Al mask and Nb etch following a recipe discussed elsewhere. For a shunt resistance, a Nichrome wire was connected in parallel to the device's voltage leads and at a distance from the μ-SQUID of about 1 cm. An estimate of the shunt loop inductance L gives a few nH, already much larger than the total (geometric and kinetic) μ-SQUID inductance L SQ , which is of pH order. Inductive shunts in the μH range, resulting in τ L of order μs and γ/α ≃ 1, were realized by a superconducting wire coil. The related magnetic flux coupled to the SQUID loop is estimated to be negligible compared to Φ 0 . The schematic of a μ-SQUID, shunted by a resistor R S and an inductor L is shown in Fig. In the following, we discuss results from a single device but with different shunting conditions. Similar results from another device can be found elsewhere. The V (Φ) oscillations are observed down to 2.2 K for the unshunted device, and till 1.8 and 1.3 K (the lowest temperature investigated here) for the R S1 and R S2 shunted devices respectively, see Fig. We now discuss experiments on the same device but with an inductive shunt, which is the main focus of this work. For the results discussed here, the shunt is . The fit is good, given that the model does not include the effect of fluctuations arising from thermal and other extrinsic effects, which lead to rounding in IVCs when I dyn r and I 0 c are close. Based on the model, the relaxation oscillation regime in IVCs is expected to start above γ/α = 1.15, i.e. L ≈ 1.84 μH at 1.3 K. At a somewhat higher value of L = 6 μH, i.e. γ/α = 3.75, clear relaxation oscillations in voltage are observed for a fixed current bias, as seen in Fig. In conclusion, we have discovered that shunting a superconducting WL with a fine-tuned inductance can eliminate thermal hysteresis and provide a large voltage modulation by the magnetic flux in a μ-SQUID well below the critical temperature. This result is opposed to the usual belief that an inductive shunt gives rise to relaxation oscillations. Such inductive shunts could be realized with disordered superconductors featuring a highkinetic inductance. We are indebted to T. Crozes for help in the device fabrication at the Nanofab platform at Néel Institute. SB acknowledges a financial grant from CSIR, Government of India and IIT Kanpur. AKG acknowledges a research grant from the SERB-DST of the Government of India. AKG thanks Université Grenoble Alpes for an invited professorship. CBW and HC acknowledge financial support from the LabEx LANEF project (ANR-10-LABX-51-01), and we acknowledge a research grant (5804-2) from CEFIPRA. APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL RESULTS ON THE MODEL Using Eqs. ( Here, 2βir and e = (1 -i 2 )r 2 . However, the formula with such coefficients is unwieldy to get an analytical expression for i * sh in terms of the parameters β, i and r. A more insightful approach is to plot p * and i * sh as per Eqs. ( At the bifurcation point i = i 0 , the two functions are tangent at the only coinciding point, see Fig. The stability of the fixed points is obtained from the trace (Tr) and determinant (∆) of J given in Eqs. ( The bath temperature T b dependence of I 0 c and I dyn r is shown in Fig. The voltage modulation by the flux for the three shunt cases is displayed in Figs. 