Spontaneous rotational-symmetry breaking in the superconducting state of doped Bi2Se3 has attracted significant attention as an indicator for topological superconductivity. In this paper, high-resolution calorimetry of the single-crystal Sr0.1Bi2Se3 provides unequivocal evidence of a twofold rotational symmetry in the superconducting gap by a bulk thermodynamic probe, a fingerprint of nematic superconductivity. The extremely small specific heat anomaly resolved with our high-sensitivity technique is consistent with the material's low carrier concentration proving bulk superconductivity. The large basal-plane anisotropy of Hc2 is attributed to a nematic phase of a two-component topological gap structure η = (η1, η2) and caused by a symmetry-breaking energy term δ(|η1| 2 -|η2| 2 )Tc. A quantitative analysis of our data excludes more conventional sources of this two-fold anisotropy and provides the first estimate for the symmetry-breaking strength δ ≈ 0.1, a value that points to an onset transition of the second order parameter component below 2K. The prospect of fault-tolerant quantum computing based on the non-Abelian braiding properties of Majorana fermions has generated enormous interest in the synthesis and study of topological superconductors The two-fold H c2 -anisotropy in Sr x Bi 2 Se 3 has been studied using several complementary approaches, including magnetotransport firming the two-fold rotational anisotropy, these studies also point towards an isotropic response in the normal state, i.e., excluding conventional sources of anisotropy such as an elliptic Fermi surface, structural inhomogeneities, or magnetic impurities. A specific heat study In this paper, we report calorimetric measurements on Sr 0.1 Bi 2 Se 3 single crystals synthesized by the meltgrowth technique [25] and show the first observation of a clear step of 0.28 mJ/mol K 2 in the specific heat at the superconducting transition near 3K. The step height, albeit small, is in agreement with estimates based on magnetization measurements and the electronic band structure. The specific heat measurements do not reveal a double-transition as seen for instance in UPt 3 [22] establishing boundaries on the coupling strength to a symmetry-breaking strain field of δ > 0.1. In conjunction with a theoretical analysis of the upper critical field of a superconductor with a two-component order parameter our measurements reveal that Sr 0.1 Bi 2 Se 3 is in the strong-coupling regime accompanied by a temperatureindependent in-plane anisotropy. The ac specific heat is measured on a SiN calorimetric membrane The measured heat capacity (chip background subtracted) is featureless and does not reveal any indication for a structural transition occurring during cooldown from room temperature (Figure derived These relations remain valid for a multi-component order parameter in the linear regime near T c . With the slope ∂M/∂T = 2.5 10 -3 emu/cm 3 K reported in Reference [26] for single crystals from the same synthesis batch] and the slope ∂H c2 /∂T = -10kG/K determined below, we arrive at an estimate ∆C/T c = 0.2mJ/mol K 2 which agrees well with the observed value and demontrates that different measured parameters are thermodynamically consistent. Within single-band weak-coupling BCS theory The in-plane anisotropy of the specific heat is studied by applying a field of fixed strength (0.4 Tesla) in the plane normal to the crystallographic c axis and by rotating it in steps of 10 degrees. At each step we measure the specific heat upon cooling through the transition from 3.2K down to 1.8K. A set of scans is shown in Figure ]η b , with T c0 the bare transition temperature (when δ = 0), D α = -i∂ α -2eA α (α = x, y, z) are gauge-invariant gradients, with A the electromagnetic vector potential, and τ α are the Pauli matrices, {} the anticommutator, and = 1. Summation is over double indices. In this picture, a two-fold anisotropy can exists only if both parameters δ (coupling the order parameters to the strain), and μ (ratio between GL parameters for the isotropic and mixed gradient terms) are non-vanishing. A finite δ (we take δ > 0 for definition) shifts the mean-field transition temperature of the component η 1 to T c ≡ T c0 (1 + δ) and that of η 2 to T c0 (1 -δ) respectively. It takes a substantial effort and limiting assumptions to derive the angular dependence of H c2 (θ). Several such limits have been considered in preceding works Our experiment clearly indicates a temperatureindependent anisotropy, hence excluding the scenario for very small δ δ c . An implicit equation for H c2 (θ) has been derived for moderate δ ( 1-μ), see Equation (108) in the Supplementary Materials of Reference [21]. A numerical fit (weak pinning fit, see Figure For UPt 3 -an extensively studied unconventional heavy-Fermion superconductor with a two-component order parameter [22]-it is believed that weak antiferromagnetism lifts the degeneracy of the order parameter components giving rise to two distinct zero-field transitions in the specific heat split apart by 60 mK [37-40]. A phenomenological GL analysis [41] shows that the ratio of the specific heat jumps at the two transition temperatures (T c and T c,2 ) involves the phenomenological parameters associated to the quartic terms in the GL free energy. As a result, no parametric smallness is imposed on the second calorimetric discontinuity. A thermodynamic analysis [42, 43] reveals that the amplitude ratio of the specific heat anomalies depends on the slopes of the phase boundaries separating the normal state and the various order parameter configurations, respectively. Here again, unless these boundaries are very steep or horizontal, the amplitudes of the specific heat anomalies are expected to be of the same order of magnitude. In the case of Sr 0.1 Bi 2 Se 3 , only the normal state boundary is currently known. Noting the absence of a second discontinuity in the specific heat, our results therefore imply that δ is large, shifting the second transition to low temperatures. Then, by identifying the measured anisotropy of 3.5 with Γ > , a value of μ = 0.85 and a lower bound for δ > δ c ≈ 0.11 are obtained. For very large δ δ c , the order parameter is pinned to the pure form η = (η 1 , 0) at H c2 (along any angle), and a simple effective-mass like dependence H max c2 [cos 2 θ + Γ 2 sin 2 θ] -1/2 can be derived We have investigated the anisotropic response of the superconducting state of Sr 0.1 Bi 2 Se 3 through highprecision calorimetric measurements. From our work we conclude that (i) the normal state has an isotropic basal plane, (ii) no structural transition is observed down to 1.8K, (iii) the jump in the specific heat at T c is small, consistent with the behavior of the magnetization and with a very low electron concentration, and (iv) the basal-plane anisotropy of H c2 is large, i.e. Γ exp = 3.5 and temperature-independent. The prevailing theoretical explanation for this anisotropy is based Whereas the appearance of the order parameter's second component is expected to leave its trace in calorimetry, see References [37] and [22] on UPt 3 , we surmise this feature to be below 1.8K giving another indication of a strong pinning field δ. These results open the door for further studies looking for the proof to topological superconductivity in the material class of the doped Bi 2 Se 3 . It shall be noted here, that a more rigorous definition of the transition temperature involves an entropy conserving construction. The latter however requires an accurate determination of the specific heat away from the transition temperature, a criterion that is not systematically met for all angles. Comparing both methods (where applicable) reveals a small shift by ∼ 0.05K in Tc and a negligible difference in its angular dependence.