We develop a strain gradient plasticity formulation for composite materials with spatially varying volume fractions to characterize size effects in functionally graded materials (FGMs). The model is grounded on the mechanismbased strain gradient plasticity theory and effective properties are determined by means of a linear homogenization scheme. Several paradigmatic boundary value problems are numerically investigated to gain insight into the strengthening effects associated with plastic strain gradients and geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs). The analysis of bending in micro-size functionally graded foils shows a notably stiffer response with diminishing thickness. Micro-hardness measurements from indentation reveal a significant increase with decreasing indenter size. And large dislocation densities in the vicinity of the crack substantially elevate stresses in cracked FGM components. We comprehensively assess the influence of the length scale parameter and material gradation profile to accurately characterize the micro-scale response and identify regimes of GNDs relevance in FGMs. Functionally graded materials (FGMs) are multifunctional composites with spatially varying volume fractions of constituent materials. The resulting graded macroproperties enable designers to tailor the microstructure to specific operating conditions, while minimizing problems associated with discrete material interfaces. FGMs are widely used in the biomedical, aerospace, and automotive sectors, and have become particularly popular in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) We develop a mechanism-based model for graded materials that incorporates the role of geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs) through a Taylor-based flow stress where k is the material gradient index or volume fraction exponent. A Mori-Tanaka homogenization scheme is employed to obtain the local effective elastic properties as a function of the volume fraction. Thus, the effective bulk modulus K e and shear modulus μ e can be obtained as, and one can readily compute the effective Young's modulus E e and Poisson's ratio ν e from K e and μ e using the standard relations. Furthermore, we compute the local effective yield stress σ Y e and the effective strain hardening exponent N e using the rule of mixtures. E.g., the effective yield stress is given by, where σ Y 1 and σ Y 2 respectively denote the yield strength of material 1 and material 2. The size-dependent response of metals is captured by means of a mechanismbased approach that builds upon Taylor dislocation model (see Here, b is the magnitude of the Burgers vector and α is an empirical coefficient that is generally taken to be 0.5. The mechanism-based strain gradient (MSG) plasticity model provides an implicit multiscale framework where the microscale concepts of statistically stored dislocations (SSDs) and geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs) are respectively linked to the mesoscale concepts of plastic strains and plastic strain gradients. Accordingly, the dislocation density is composed of the SSDs density, ρ S , and the GNDs density, The GND density ρ G is related to the effective plastic strain gradient by, where r is the Nye-factor which is taken to be 1.9 for face-centered-cubic (fcc) polycrystals. The effective plastic strain gradient is defined as, where the third-order tensor η p ijk is given by, The tensile flow stress σ f low is related to the shear flow stress τ by, where M is the Taylor factor, taken to be 3.06 for fcc metals. Rearranging Eqs. ( The SSD density ρ S can be determined from Here, σ ref is a reference stress and f is a non-dimensional function of the plastic strain ε p determined from the uniaxial stress-strain curve. Substituting back into where l e is the (effective) intrinsic material length, which depends on parameters of elasticity (μ e ), plasticity (σ ref ), and atomic spacing (b), Here, we assume the following isotropic hardening law, where we define the reference stress as σ ref = σ Y e (E e /σ Y e ) Ne and f (ε p ) = (ε p + σ Y e /E e ) Ne . We follow the work by Huang et al. and substitute the reference strain by an effective strain rate ε. Values of m larger than 20 have proven to capture the rate independent response with δ ij being the Kronecker delta and σ ij the Cauchy stress tensor. Both lower and higher order versions of MSG plasticity predict identical results in their physical regime of validity The size-dependent plasticity formulation for FGMs outlined is implemented in the well-known finite element package ABAQUS by means of a UMAT subroutine. The plastic strain gradient is obtained by numerical differentiation within the element: the plastic strain increment is interpolated through its values at the Gauss points in the isoparametric space and afterwards the increment in the plastic strain gradient is calculated by differentiation of the shape functions. In the present finite strain analysis, rigid body rotations for the strains and stresses are carried out by means of the Hughes and Wingets algorithm We comprehensively investigate the behavior of an aluminum-titanium FGM under bending (Section 3.1), indentation (Section 3.2) and fracture (Section 3.3). Applications of Al-Ti FGMs include jet engine components and dynamic high-pressure technology Bending of micron-sized foils is a paradigmatic benchmark of small scale plasticity since the experiments of Stölken and Evans where κ is the applied curvature. The beam is uniformly meshed with a total of 12000 plane strain quadrilateral quadratic elements with reduced integration. After a sensitivity study, 40 elements are employed along the beam thickness. Material properties change gradually along the y-axis from aluminum (top) to titanium (bottom). We compute the bending moment and normalize by, where σY and ν correspond to the average yield stress (578 MPa) and Poisson's ratio (0.338), respectively. Unlike the cases of indentation (Section 3.2) and fracture (Section 3.3), the use of the infinitesimal deformation theory is appropriate for bending, given the strain levels attained. Results are shown in Fig. Strain gradient hardening becomes increasingly noticeable for thinner foils, in agreement with expectations. Fig. Since the pioneering works by Poole et al. Geometrically necessary dislocations play a fundamental role in fracture problems as, independently of the size of the specimen, the plastic zone adjacent to the crack tip is physically small and contains strong spatial gradients of deformation. These large dislocation densities promote strain hardening and lead to high crack tip stresses that conventional plasticity is unable to capture Crack tip fields are computed in an edge-cracked plate of height-to-width ratio W/H = 8 and crack size a/H = 0.1. As shown in Fig. with σY being the average yield stress. After a sensitivity study, the specimen is discretized by means of 7560 finite elements. We use the same type of element as for the indentation and bending case studies, 8-node quadrilateral plane strain with reduced integration. As shown in Fig. x axis y axis Aluminum Crack opening stresses are shown in Fig. Size effects in elastic-plastic functionally graded materials (FGMs) have been extensively investigated by means of a strain gradient plasticity formu-lation for graded materials. A suitable homogenization scheme is employed to accurately sample material properties as a function of the volume fraction of material. The analysis of (i) bending of thin functionally graded foils, (ii) small scale indentation in the gradient direction, and (iii) stress fields in cracked FGM specimens reveals that, • Gradients of plastic strain have a profound effect on the mechanical response of metal-based FGMs. Large geometrically necessary dislocation densities significantly elevate the flow strength when nonhomogeneous plastic deformation is confined to small volumes. • The smaller is stronger behavior is very sensitive to the material gradation, with aluminum convex volume fraction profiles exhibiting considerably smaller size effects. The design strategy of increasing the volume fraction of the harder metal to maximize stiffness will be compromised when the specimen size is on the order of a micron (or less). • Neglecting the length scale variation across the specimen brings important differences in the macroscopic response. The intrinsic gradation of the length scale parameter must be accounted for to accurately characterize gradient effects in FGMs. Results highlight the need to conduct critical experiments to accurately characterize the behaviour of elastic-plastic FGMs at the micro scale.