We present a systematic study on the heavily Cr doped iron pnictides BaFe1.9-xNi0.1CrxAs2 by using elastic neutron scattering, high-resolution synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD), resistivity and Hall transport measurements. When the Cr concentration increases from x = 0 to 0.8, neutron diffraction experiments suggest that the collinear antiferromagnetism persists in the whole doping range, where the Néel temperature TN coincides with the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition temperature Ts, and both of them keeps around 35 K. The magnetic ordered moment, on the other hand, increases within increasing x until x = 0.5, and then decreases with further increasing x. Detailed refinement of the powder XRD patterns reveals that the Cr substitutions actually stretch the FeAs4 tetrahedron along the c-axis and lift the arsenic height away Fe-Fe plane. Transport results indicate that the charge carriers become more localized upon Cr doping, then changes from electron-type to hole-type around x = 0.5. Our results suggest that the ordered moment and the ordered temperature of static magnetism in iron pnictides can be decoupled and tuned separately by chemical doping. Unconventional superconductivity (SC) emerges in the iron pnictides after suppressing the three-dimensional antiferromagnetic (AF) order by chemical doping or high pressure Particularly in Cr and Mn doped compounds, the ordered moments align along the c-axes with a checkerboard pattern for heavily doping levels, the so called G-type AF order In our previous study, we show that Cr is an ideal dopant to suppress superconductivity in BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 system, where about 1.5% Cr will totally eliminate the optimal superconductivity in x = 0.1 compound High-quality single crystals of BaFe 1.9-x Ni 0.1 Cr x As 2 were grown by the self-flux method similar to our previous reports XRD measurements of single crystals were carried out on a Mac-Science MXP18A-HF equipment with wavelength of 1.54 Å at room temperature. Synchrotron XRD measurements of polycrystal were performed with wavelength of 0.413 Å at beamline 11-BM-B, Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory. All the polycrystalline samples were diluted by the amorphous silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) with ratio of 1:2, and sealed into capillaries with a diameter of 0.3 mm. The capillary was rotated during the measurement to average intensity and reduce the preferred orientation effect. The slew scan range was from -6 • to 28 • with a very small step 0.001, which enabled us to obtain the high precision and accuracy data over a 2θ range from 0 • to 50 • based on 12 independent detectors. Elastic neutron scattering experiments were carried out at the RITA-II cold neutron triple-axis spectrometer at Swiss Spallation Neutron Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland. The fixed final energy was E f = 4.6 meV with the wavelength of λ f = 4.2 Å. To eliminate the scattering from higher-order neutrons with wavelength λ/n(n ≥ 2), a pyrolytic graphite (PG) filter before the sample and a cold Be filter after the sample were used. The wave vector Q at (q x , q y , q z ) was defined as (H, K, L) = (q x a/2π, q y b/2π, q z c/2π) in reciprocal lattice units (r.l.u.) using the orthorhombic lattice parameters a ≈ 5.61 Å, b ≈ 5.59 Å and c ≈ 13 Å. For each doping, a single crystal with a mass of nearly 0.5 grams were aligned to the [H, 0, 0] × [0, 0, L] scattering plane. The thickness of our sample for neutron scattering was about 0.5 mm, and the neutron absorption was negligible due to small neutron absorption cross sections for all the elements. The in-plane resistivity (ρ ab ) was measured by the standard four-probe method with the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from Quantum Design. A large current (5 mA) and slow sweeping rate of temperature (2 K/min) were applied to lower the noise. To compare the temperature dependence of resistivity at different doping concentrations, we normalized the resistivity ρ ab (T ) data at room temperature (T = 300 K). The in-plane Hall resistivity (ρ xy ) was measured by sweeping the magnetic field at several fixed temperatures. In order to remove the asymmetric electrodes effect and possible magneto-resistance from the sample, the polarity of the magnetic field (H c) was applied from negative to positive during the measurement, where ρ xy (B) = (ρ xy (+B) -ρ xy (-B))/2. Further Hall coefficient was obtained from the Hall resistivity after considering the geometry of the sample and electrode contacts. TABLE I: Summary of real composition of BaFe1.9-xNi0.1CrxAs2 single crystal from ICP analysis, the estimation of the correlation length from Q scans at (1, 0, 1) and (1, 0, 3), the effective ordered magnetic moment for the collinear AF order, the profile factors Rp, Rwp and reduced χ 2 of refinements for all samples at 12 K. The data of ξ ab , ξc and ordered moment of x = 0.1 is extracted from Ref. [46] Moreover, the room temperature (300 K) Seebeck coefficient was measured by a homemade system. We firstly present our neutron diffraction results. Since the results for x = 0 and 0.1 dopings have been already reported in our previous paper √ 2 ln 2σ is very close to the instrument resolution. The broadening peak along [1, 0, L] for x = 0.6 is due to accidental large sample mosaic. The spin-spin correlation length ξ in the ab plane and along the c axes are calculated by using the published method In elastic neutron scattering, the intensity of the mag- , where L is the Lorentz factor, and F M (Q) is static magnetic structure factor (1) where C and B 0 depend on instrument parameters, M ij and N are functions of scattering angel θ M , α is the angle between the wave vector Q and the scan direction. For θ -2θ scans, we have α = 0, thus L = 1/ sin(2θ M ) Here R M is a modifying factor from Eq.1 and determined by instrument resolution and scan directions, which is about 0.92 and 1.1 for the H scan at Q = (1, 0, 1) and (1, 0, 3), respectively. The magnetic structure factor can be expressed as , where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, r 0 is the classical electron radius, f M (Q) is the magnetic form factor, S is the spin amplitude, and η is the angle between the spin S and wave vector Q. Therefore, the intensity ratio between Q=(1, 0, 1) and (1, 0, 3) is determined by the following equation: (3) The difference of the form factor between Fe 2+ and Cr 2+ is negligible, we have f M (101) = 0.91 and f M (103) = 0.81 calculated from their d-spacings Similarly, the intensity of the nuclear Bragg peak is proportional to | F N (Q) | 2 L, where F N (Q) is the structural factor, and the Lorentz factor L = 1/ sin(2θ N )R N for nuclear scattering angle θ N (for H scan around Q=(2, 0, 2), R N = 0.91). After considering the twinning effect from the magnetic domains, and comparing the intensity of H scans between the magnetic peaks at Q AF =(1, 0, 1), (1, 0, 3) at 2 K and nuclear peaks at Q=(2, 0, 0), (2, 0, 2) below T s , we then estimate the static magnetically ordered moment via (4) The error bars of the magnetic moment are determined by the standard deviation of statistics among four case combination of this calculation including the measurement uncertainty of peak intensities. By using the nuclear peak intensities above T s instead may slightly change the obtained values, but overall the differences are within error bars. Surprisingly, the static moment non-monotonically depends on the Cr doping with a maximum at x = 0.5 with 0.452 ± 0.061 μ B . For comparison, the cases for x = 0.05 and 0.8 only show small ordered moment with 0.036 ± 0.032 μ B and 0.109 ± 0.031 μ B , respectively (Table To determine the magnetically ordered temperature (T N ), we have measured the temperature dependence of the magnetic Bragg peak intensity at Q AF = (1, 0, 3). The results are shown in Fig. We have carried out XRD experiments to check the Cr doping effect on the lattice structure. The as-grown single crystal XRD are measured at room temperature with incident beam along c-axes, typical results of the normalized data for x = 0, 0.4 and 0.7 are shown in Fig. , where the insert shows the peak shift of (0, 0, 6) for all samples. The sharp peaks with a narrow width about 0.1 • indicate the high crystalline quality of our samples. The systematic shift of (0, 0, 6) peak towards to low scattering angle upon Cr doping, suggests that Fe is indeed substituted by Cr, and the lattice is stretched along c-axes by larger ionic size of Cr. To further check the Cr doping effect on the lattice parameters and bonding angles, we have performed high resolution synchrotron XRD on powder samples with wavelength of 0.414 Å at T = 12 K (below T s ), 55 K, 270 K (above T s ). The polycrystalline samples are ground The impurity from the flux Fe 1.9-x Ni 0.1 Cr x As 2 or other phases, even if they exist, should be less than 0.6% from our refinements. For comparison, we refine the patterns with one phase uniformly for all Cr doping levels, and list the R p , R wp and reduced χ 2 in the Table We summarize all refinement results in Fig. To examine how Cr doping affects on the properties of the charge carriers, we have performed resistivity, Hall coefficient and Seebeck coefficient measurements on BaFe 1.9-x Ni 0.1 Cr x As 2 system. The normalized resistivity in the ab plane ρ ab /ρ 300K down to 2 K is shown in Fig. The effective carrier density can be measured from Hall resistivity at normal state. The temperature dependence of the Hall coefficient R H above T N is shown in Fig It is theoretically predicted that the Fe-pnictogen distance and the shape of FeAs 4 tetrahedron have crucial influence on the static moment 