Ferrimagnetic TbFe or TbFeCo amorphous alloy thin films have been grown by co-evaporation in ultra-high vacuum. They exhibit an out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy up to their Curie temperature with a nucleation and propagation reversal mechanism suitable for current induced domain wall motion. Rutherford back scattering experiments confirmed a fine control of the Tb depth-integrated composition within the evaporation process. However, a large set of experimental techniques were used to evidence an interface related contribution in such thin films as compared to much thicker samples. In particular, scanning transmission electron microscopy experiments evidence a depth dependent composition and perturbed top and bottom interfaces with preferential oxidation and diffusion of terbium. Despite of that, amorphous and homogeneous alloy film remains in a bulk-like part. The composition of that bulk-like part of the magnetic layer, labeled as effective composition, is biased when compared with the depth-integrated composition. The magnetic properties of the film are mostly dictated by this effective composition, which we show changes with different top and bottom interfaces. Recent progress have highlighted the interest to spintronics of systems with small magnetization, such as ferrimagnets, antiferromagnets or synthetic antiferromagnetic stacks Ferrimagnetic alloys built from the combination of two types of magnetic elements Rare Earths (RE) and Transition Metals (TM) with antiferromagnetically coupled sublattices display magnetic properties (as magnetization and angular momenta) tunable with temperature and composition The main purpose of this paper is to present the structural and chemical properties of TbFe or TbFeCo alloys thin films stacks grown by co-evaporation in relation with their magnetic behavior. The influence of the layers surrounding the ferrimagnet is discussed. We show that the effective composition of a bulk-like part is biased due to interfaces and that this effective composition tunes compensation, one of the most sensitive fingerprint of TbFe(Co) alloys thin films stacks. 2. GROWTH AND STRUCTURE OF AMORPHOUS //TBFE(CO)/AL ALLOYS THIN FILMS TbFe (respectively TbFeCo) alloys have been grown by co-evaporation of Tb and Fe (respectively a fused Fe 85 Co 15 target) in a dedicated UHV chamber. Its base pressure is about 2.10 -10 mbar and it's equipped with two electron guns of 7 crucibles each, allowing to develop complex multilayer stacks. For growing ferrimagnetic alloy films, pure Fe (Fe 85 Co 15 ) and pure Tb were co-evaporated. The tuning of the alloy composition is a prerequisite to any further study. For that purpose, three independent quartz balances are available in the chamber: one in the vicinity of each electron gun and a removable one that can be positioned at the exact substrate position to perform a precise determination of the geometrical tooling factors between the flux received by the sample and those measured above the electron guns. During growth, the evaporation rates were measured continuously on both lateral quartz balances. A home-made software, integrating systematic tooling factors and feeding back the quartz balance readings, was used to continuously tune the electrical power applied on both guns. Specular X-Ray Reflectivity measurements with a PANalytical X'Pert MRD diffractometer were used to determine the thickness of evaporated single element layers and to calibrate the quartz balances of the evaporation chamber Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) was used to assess the crystallographic nature of the films and give information on the alloy top and bottom interfaces. For microstructural analysis, cross-sectional electron transparent samples were prepared by Focused Ion Beam on a SCIOS dual-beam platform following a standard procedure. To protect the sample surface during this preparation process, a thick carbon cap layer was deposited. STEM-EELS (Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy) measurements were performed with an aberration corrected (Cs) STEM Nion UltraSTEM200 equipped with an in-house modified Gatan spectrometer The STEM image (Fig. In consequence, from the substrate to the top of the stack, the TbFe alloy concentration profile is i) at the bottom interface, an oxidized layer with a Tb excess followed by a thin layer with a Tb deficit (up to 30% less) ii) a bulk-like TbFe alloy film with an almost constant effective composition of 16.5% (a bias of about -4% from the total RBS composition of 20.5%) and iii) a top interface slightly mixed with the Al cover, also lacking a bit of terbium sunk by the aluminium oxide. The general features are in agreement with former results on GdCo films In TbFe films, compensation above RT (Tb-rich case) is difficult to observe because T comp is close or equal to the Curie temperature. Above RT, a selection of illustrative hysteresis loops of two 7 nm Tb x Fe 1-x films from either side of compensation is shown as a function of temperature in Figure The samples were further investigated using a commercial Quantum Design Pluri Physical Measurement Systems (PPMS) that enables to measure both transport properties (Extraordinary Hall Effect EHE) and magnetization by Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM), with magnetic field (-9T/+9T) applied perpendicular to films in a temperature range between 2 K and 400 K. EHE and magnetoresistance measurements were simultaneously performed employing the four-probe technique. Since TbFeCo resistivity is very large Those are antisymmetric and understood as resulting from DW perpendicular to the magnetization and to the current during the reversal Neither EHE nor MOKE amplitude enable quantitative magnetization measurements. In order to obtain magnetization values representative of the thermal evolution of the difference between the 3d TM parallel to 5d RE moments and the antiparallel 4f RE moments, hysteresis loops were measured with VSM and with a commercial Alternating Gradient Force Magnetometer (AGFM) from Princeton Measurement Corporation allowing working at room temperature with magnetic field up to 1 T. The typical sensitivity of VSM with such configuration is around 10 -6 emu. The AGFM system has about the same limit of sensitivity. For very thin films like ours of typical volume around 10 -8 cm 3 , the two set-ups lead to a magnetization sensitivity of about 100 emu/cm 3 = 125 mT. Extracting the signal arising from the ferrimagnetic layer in question from the background signals requires: a) minimization of the sample holders magnetic signature and b) a means for subtracting substrate contributions. With both techniques, apart from a large diamagnetic contribution relatively easy to remove, a S shape contribution was evidenced around H=0. This contribution, temperature independent in our investigation range, was attributed to the substrate. Its removal at low temperature where the ferrimagnetic film has a huge coercivity was quite easy but sometimes a bit more tricky at larger temperature. Figure To further investigate the diffusion processes and the preferential oxidation of the rare earth that occurs at the interfaces, simple films of fixed thickness have been encapsulated with vanadium and aluminium or embedded between layers of heavy metals like Ta and Pt. The evolution of the T comp in different 7 nm Tb x FeCo 1-x stacks is presented in Figure In this paper, Tb x Fe 1-x or Tb x FeCo 1-x alloys thin films grown by co-evaporation were investigated by combining structural, transport and magnetic investigations. The films exhibit the desired integrated Tb composition and are amorphous. We also evidenced a non homogeneous depth distribution of the Rare Earth within the film depth. Terbium, being very sensitive to its local environment, can be sunk by buffer/cover layers, in particular if they contain oxygen. This leads to Tb oxidizied interfaces and a biased magnetic compensation temperature that reflects the reduced Tb amount of the bulk of the layer. We also evidenced that this shift in magnetic properties may be modified by changing the nature or thickness of the buffer/cover layers. A very appealing property, when thinking about experiments that require to inject a significant amount of current in the wire, is that the anisotropy remains out-of plane and the loops keep their remanence up to high temperature, as required for further CIDWM experiments. Moreover, magnetization reversal occurs by rare nucleation and a smooth domain wall propagation. Already in such a simple TbFe stack, it's very interesting to note the asymmetric character of the considered interfaces, crucial for properties like Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction 