In this work we employ the GW approximation in the framework of the SternheimerGW method to investigate the effects of many-body corrections to the band structures and Fermi surfaces of bulk and monolayer NbS2. For the bulk system, we find that the inclusion of these many-body effects leads to important changes in the band structure, especially in the low-energy regime around the Fermi level, and that our calculations are in good agreement with recent ARPES measurements. In the case of a free-standing monolayer NbS2, we observe a strong increase of the screened Coulomb interaction and the quasiparticle corrections as compared to bulk. In this case we also perform calculations to include the effect of screening by a substrate. We report in detail the results of our convergence tests and computational parameters, to serve as a solid basis for future studies. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been the focus of many studies in recent years, as their physical and chemical diversity offers an ideal platform to investigate semiconductors, metals, and superconductors in layered systems using the same structural template The metallic compound 2H-NbS 2 stands out in the TMD family, as it is superconducting with a critical temperature of ∼6 K, but does not exhibit CDW order in the bulk. It has recently been proposed that bulk NbS 2 is actually on the verge of a CDW instability In the present study, we want to expand on these findings and provide an extensive view on the electronic properties of bulk and monolayer NbS 2 beyond DFT by con-sidering many-body perturbation theory in the framework of the GW approximation This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we provide structural details about bulk and monolayer NbS 2 , we give a short overview of the methods used in this work, and summarize the computational setup and the convergence properties of the GW calculations. In Sec. III we discuss our results for the band structures, densities of states, and Fermi surfaces of bulk and monolayer NbS 2 . In the case of bulk NbS 2 we compare our calculations with recent ARPES data. In Sec. IV, we offer our conclusions and identify important avenues of future research. In the appendixes we report detailed convergence tests of the GW calculations with respect to plane waves, energy cutoffs, and Brillouin-zone sampling. Bulk 2H-NbS 2 crystallizes in a layered hexagonal structure with space group P 6 3 /mmc. The unit cell contains two S-Nb-S layers, as shown in Fig. First-principles DFT calculations All these advantages, however, require a considerably heavier computational workload compared to DFT methods. Specifically, traditional GW approaches show a very slow convergence with respect to unoccupied Kohn-Sham states where Ĥ represents the effective single-particle Hamiltonian. To obtain the first-order variations to the occupied electron states ∆ψ ± ν[r,ω] corresponding to the perturbation ∆V [r,ω] (r ), one has to evaluate the two Sternheimer equations: (2) Here, the operator Pν projects onto the subspace of occupied states, with the index ν running over only occupied electron states. θ( ν ) accounts for the partial occupation in the case of a metallic system In Eq. ( In the case of the perturbation being set to the bare Coulomb interaction, i.e., ∆V [r,ω] (r ) = v(r, r ), the variation of the density matrix can be related to the dielectric matrix via and the screened Coulomb interaction W can then be obtained by inverting this matrix, Another possibility to solve the Sternheimer equations would be to set the perturbation ∆V [r,ω] (r ) = W (r, r , ω), in which case the variation of the density yields a Hartree potential screening of the bare Coulomb interaction. The disadvantage of this approach is that Eq. ( In the following, we will report the results of GW calculations for bulk and monolayer NbS 2 . These calculations have been performed at the G 0 W 0 level with the SternheimerGW code We calculated the QP corrections to the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues for the bulk structure for a 6×6×2 Brillouinzone (BZ) grid and used maximally localized Wannier functions At first, we want to take a close look at the electronic band structures in the bulk compound. Compared to the LDA electronic structure, the inclusion of many-body interaction effects slightly increases the bandwidth of bulk 2H-NbS 2 for the electronic states up to ±7 eV around the Fermi level [cf. Fig. To better distinguish between the different effects the GW corrections have on the DFT electronic structure, we show the exchange-correlation potential V xc , the exchange and correlation parts of the self-energy, Σ x and Σ c respectively, as well as the QP strength Z n,k = (1 -∂ReΣ n,k /∂E) -1 and the QP correction (before the Wannier interpolation) as a function of the DFT eigenvalues in Fig. We find that in our calculations Z n,k ranges from 0.54 to 0.71, showing that GW corrections decrease the QP strength considerably. In the case that the self-energy is not explicitly k dependent, which is in first approximation true for the Fermi-surface bands in NbS 2 , Z n,k can be related to the velocity renormalization , with v n,k and v 0 n,k being the interacting and noninteracting electron velocity, respectively. For bulk NbS 2 , we find a renormalization of the electron velocity at the Fermi level of around -51%. The Fermi velocity, as well as the mass renormalization around the Fermi level and the size of the Fermi surfaces, would be experimentally accessible by quantum oscillation measurements, like the de Haas van Alphen effect Plotting the QP corrections as function of the LDA eigenenergies, as depicted in Fig. In Fig. In the following, we want to take a detailed look at the changes of the Fermi surface, once GW corrections are taken into account. In Fig. In order to compare our Fermi surfaces with those from experiments, we broaden the QP energies close to the Fermi level by a Lorentzian with an energy-dependent width, as detailed before, to mimic the energy and momentum resolution of ARPES measurements (Fig. We now want to focus our attention on the monolayer of NbS 2 . In contrast to the bulk, the monolayer is comprised of only one formula unit, and due to the fact that in the monolayer the interaction between neighboring S atoms along the z direction vanishes, the bandwidth of the S p z states decreases, and they are pushed below the Fermi energy. The Fermi surface originates therefore from only one electron band, which has out-of-plane Nb d z 2 character around Γ and in-plane Nb d xy/x 2 -y 2 character around K, as shown in Fig. The impact of many-body corrections is much more pronounced in the free-standing monolayer than in the bulk system. As shown in Fig. The observed increase of GW corrections in the freestanding monolayer can be attributed to the fact that the Coulomb screening is weaker in two-dimensional systems compared to their three-dimensional counterparts. For the isolated monolayer, the electric-field lines close in the vacuum region, therefore increasing the screened Coulomb interaction, as has been reported for many different systems, including BN, MoS 2 , and graphene The results of this calculation are shown as solid black lines in Fig. Using a Lorentzian with energy-dependent broadening to simulate the experimental resolution, we provide a prediction for the ARPES spectrum of monolayer NbS 2 in Fig. In Fig. In this work, we employed the SternheimerGW method to perform a detailed investigation of the electronic properties of bulk and monolayer NbS 2 , using many-body perturbation theory in the framework of the GW approximation. We document in the appendixes convergence studies for the GW calculations, to serve as a solid technical foundation for future investigations including many-body corrections in metallic transition-metal dichalcogenides. We analyzed the individual components of the selfenergy, and found that Σ x behaves as in the the homogeneous electron gas. The QP strength is found to be between 0.54 and 0.74 for the bulk, and between 0.87 and 0.93 for the monolayer (when we take into account substrate screening). For the bulk system, we find that the inclusion of many-body corrections increases the bandwidth of the S p and Nb d bands by pushing the unoccupied states to higher energies, and a decrease of the DOS at the Fermi level by 18%. This decrease of the DOS has important effects on the electron-phonon coupling and superconductivity in this compound. In addition, we have compared our calculations with ARPES measurements and found that including many-body effects improves the agreement between theory and experiments in terms of the shape of the Fermi surface and the low-energy electronic structure. We also observe that a Fermi-level shift of 300 meV brings our calculations in very good agreement with the ARPES measurements. We proposed that such a shift could arise from unintentional doping in the experimental sample. For the monolayer system, we observe a strong increase of the screened Coulomb interaction as compared to bulk due to its two-dimensional nature, and we have shown that the consideration of a substrate via changing the dielectric constant on one side of the monolayer results in a marked reduction of the interaction potential and the effects of the many-body corrections. When we take into account the screening from the substrate, the electronic bandwidth is smaller than in the free-standing case, and the DOS at the Fermi level is larger. This in turn also means that the electron-phonon coupling and superconducting properties will be sensitive to the choice of substrate. As another example of the importance of substrate effects, we find that the ratio of the effective masses is 1.7 times larger for the NbS 2 monolayer on a substrate compared to the free-standing monolayer. As we are not aware of any experimental work on monolayer NbS 2 , these calculations provide a first insight into the electronic properties of this compound beyond DFT. In summary, this work highlights the importance to include many-body perturbation theory corrections in the study of metallic TMDs. These corrections will lead to improved carrier velocities and densities of states, and are crucial for a more accurate understanding of charge transport and superconductivity in these compounds. Data Driven Discovery (CSD3) funded by EPSRC (grant EP/P020259/1). We further acknowledge PRACE for awarding us access to Cartesius at SURFsara, Netherlands; Abel at UiO, Norway, and MareNostrum at BSC-CNS, Spain. First, we test the convergence of our GW calculations with respect to the kinetic-energy cutoff E k for the plane waves used in the ground-state DFT calculation. We report the results of this study in Table In Table In SternheimerGW, there are three BZ grids to consider: (i) the grid used to sample the exchange, (ii) the grid used to sample the correlation, and (iii) the grid Table E k (Ry) used to sample the dielectric response (in our calculations, this grid is set to be the same as for the exchange). The dependence of the correlation part of the self-energy on the number of points used to sample the Brillouin zone is shown in Fig. In Table Table Table In Table Table In Table X we show the convergence behavior of the GW quasiparticle energies at Γ closest to the DFT Fermi energy as a the energy cutoff E c for the dielectric matrix. Convergence is very fast, allowing us to choose a value of 10 Ry for the energy cutoff E c . Table (k) of the three electronic states at k = Γ closest to the Fermi energy (at DFT level) as a function of the kineticenergy cutoff E k for the plane-waves of the DFT ground state calculation. For these calculations, we used a 12 × 12 × 1 k grid and an energy cutoff in the dielectric matrix of 10 Ry.