Controlled anisotropic growth of two-dimensional materials provides an approach for the synthesis of large single crystals and nanoribbons, which are promising for applications as low-dimensional semiconductors and in next-generation optoelectronic devices. In particular, the anisotropic growth of transition metal dichalcogenides induced by the substrate is of great interest due to its operability. To date, however, their substrate-induced anisotropic growth is typically driven by the optimization of experimental parameters without uncovering the fundamental mechanism. Here, the anisotropic growth of monolayer tungsten disulfide on an ST-X quartz substrate is achieved by chemical vapor deposition, and the mechanism of substrate-induced anisotropic growth is examined by kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. These results show that, besides the variation of substrate adsorption, the chalcogen to metal (C/M) ratio is a major contributor to the large growth anisotropy and the polarization of undergrowth and overgrowth; either perfect isotropy or high anisotropy can be expected when the C/M ratio equals 2.0 by properly controlling the linear relationship between gas flux and temperature. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been a star family of two-dimensional (2D) materials Email addresses: wulx@hdu.edu.cn (Lixiang Wu), yangwh@hdu.edu.cn (Weihuang Yang), gaofeng@hdu.edu.cn (Gaofeng Systematic understanding of the anisotropic growth of monolayer TMDCs is a theoritical challenge due to the diversity of involved kinetic mechanisms and the wide range of growth conditions (e.g., gas flux, C/M ratio, temperature, and substrate conditions). The kMC simulation Study on the substrate-induced anisotropic growth of monolayer WS 2 can provide a complete perspective closer to reality on the growth of 2D materials. In this work, by introducing local substrate effects on the adsorption, desorption, and diffusion processes, a substrate-sensitive kMC model is established to study the growth anisotropy using the representative case of the CVD growth of mono- layer WS 2 on ST-X quartz. And the kMC model introduces the on-the-fly calculation of substrateinduced variation of atomic potential energy. Then the growth morphological anisotropy and its origin are analyzed and discussed with experimental observations and simulation results. We conducted a preliminary experiment and observed the anisotropic growth of monolayer WS 2 before the experimental optimization. It has been found that the morphology of TMDC flakes varies from upward triangle to downward triangle and to hexagon due to the variation of conditions such as temperature (T), gas flux (Ra, defined as the adsorption rate of W atoms in the kMC model), the C/M ratio, and substrate adsorption contrast (xEads, the ratio of the highest adsorption energy to the lowest on the same substrate). The experimental is detailed in the section of METHODS. Figure Quantitative analysis is applied to observation and measurement of the anisotropic growth of 2D TMDC flakes. To make the growth anisotropy measurable, anisotropic growth ratio (AGR) is defined to describe the extent of growth anisotropy and the formula for calculating AGRs is as follows: for triangle for hexagon , where a, b, and S are the polygon diameter, grown length along a side, and area of the TMDC flake, respectively. Figure To study the anisotropic growth of 2D TMDCs, we propose a full-diffusion kMC model coupling with local substrate effects including substrate adsorption and surface diffusion, which are considered as two key factors that influence the topological evolution of TMDC monolayers and would result in the anisotropy of film growth. Compared with the bond-counting model of first order approximation, as shown in Figure Before the kMC simulations, we conducted firstprinciples calculations to obtain energy parameters for modeling the above-mentioned kinetic events. Without loss of generality, the growth of WS 2 -1.28 --0.64 * * The adsorption energy varies periodically in a specific range in corresponding to the periodical sawtooth profile of the ST-X quartz surface (see Figure ST-X quartz, also called 42.75°Y-X quartz (see Figure Three groups of kMC simulations are designed and presented in Table On the kMC perspective, there exists a competitive balance among the gas flux, C/M ratio, and temperature with regard to the impact on growth anisotropy. Figure (r) (s) ically grown and it is terminated by 3 bottomlayer S-zz edges. In comparison, the simulated flake shown in Figure As for the controlled growth of nanoribbons of TMDC materials, we think it is feasible but still a challenge to obtain a reliable CVD product of TMDC nanoribbons though the preliminary experiment result presents a good and potential tendency to the controlled growth of elongated flakes. At first, the two regression lines shown in Figure Compared with the above-mentioned experiment results in Figure In practice, AGR measurement curves and morphological classification maps provide a whole picture and detailed guide for operation. The steep slope of AGR curves displayed in Figure The anisotropic growth of monolayer TMDCs such as WS 2 is a critical step to reach the controlled growth, which would be a practical and effective approach to produce large single crystals and nanoribbons. We studied the extremely anisotropic growth induced by the specific substrate using kMC simulations, proposed a quantitative model to measure the growth anisotropy and determine whether it is overgrown or undergrown, and provided a phenomenological picture of the morphological evolution of TMDC monolayers. The simulation results not just predict the tendency of substrate-induced growth anisotropy but also provide the general technical requirments for the CVD equipment in order to produce TMDC nanoribbons. For example, multi-zone temperature control and dual-direction gas flow control may be required to precisely control temperature and gas flow in the CVD furnace. The open-source codes, i.e., Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) The QE suite was used to conduct DFT calculations, where the bond energy is obtained by the regression of vacancy activation energies, the diffusion energy is calculated by the nudged elastic band method, and the adsorption energy is estimated by relaxation. The kMC package, kmos The substrate-induced anisotropic growth of WS 2 on ST-X quartz substrate (8 mm × 10 mm) was carried out in a quartz tube furnace (2 inch diameter). The ST-X quartz substrate and SiO 2 /Si wafers were cleaned in the sequence of acetone, isopropanol, and DI water for 10 min, respectively. 5 nm WO 3 films pre-deposited onto SiO 2 /Si substrates via thermal evaporation of WO 3 powders (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) and S powders (Aladdin, 99.99%) were used as precursors. Subsequently, WO 3 -coated SiO 2 /Si substrates were loaded into the tube together with the ST-X quartz substrates placed face-down above the former. A boat with 200 mg of S powder was placed outside the furnace and this zone was wrapped with a heating belt. After purging the quartz tube to 3.0 × 10 -2 Torr with a mechanical pump, the atmospheric pressure was recovered by introducing Ar gas. Then the substrate zone was heated to 875 °C at a rate of 20 °C/min while the S was heated to a temperature of 200 °C when the substrate zone reached 650 °C. The growth process was conducted at 875 °C for 30 min and then the furnace was cooled down to the room temperature naturally. * S (substrate)