Graphene-silicon (GS) Schottky junctions have been demonstrated as an efficient architecture for photodetection. However, the response speed of such devices for free space light detection has so far been limited to 10's-100's of kHz for wavelength λ > 500nm. Here, we demonstrate graphenesilicon Schottky junction photodetectors fabricated on a silicon-on-insulator substrate (SOI) with response speeds approaching 1GHz, attributed to the reduction of the photo-active silicon layer thickness to 10μm and with it a suppression of speed-limiting diffusion currents. Graphene-siliconon-insulator photodetectors (GSOI-PDs) exhibit a negligible influence of wavelength on response speed and only a modest compromise in responsivities compared to GS junctions fabricated on bulk silicon. Noise-equivalent-power (NEP) and specific detectivity (D * ) of GSOI photodetectors are 14.5pW and 7.83×10 10 cm Hz 1/2 W -1 , respectively, in ambient conditions. We further demonstrate that combining GSOI-PDs with micro-optical elements formed by modifying the surface topography enables engineering of the spectral and angular response. Graphene is an appealing material to realize ultrafast and broadband photodetectors (PDs) due to its versatile electronic and optical properties such as high carrier mobility The co-integration of graphene with silicon technology allows the realization of a hybrid platform that is suitable for large scale fabrication due to the possible integration of graphene into back end-ofline (BEOL) complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) processing GS Schottky PDs exhibit a dual operating regime where both graphene and silicon act as active light absorbing materials for different wavelength ranges To date, the performance of GS PDs in terms of response speed remains far below that of MGM and commercial silicon photodetectors which exhibit cut-off frequencies (f c ) on the order of GHz for free space light detection After the substrate fabrication for the GSOI-grating device, the device fabrication process is identical for both the GSOI-planar and GSOI-grating devices. The previously fabricated grating substrate and un-processed substrate (planar) are both coated with a 100nm thick silicon-dioxide (SiO 2 ) layer by ICP-PECVD (Oxford Instruments). Subsequently, two areas are opened in the SiO 2 layer for the formation of the GSOI junction and the metal-silicon contact. These areas are defined by optical lithography and the oxide layer in these areas is removed by wet etching in a buffer-oxide-etch (BOE) solution. In the case of the GSOI-grating device, the GSOI junction area corresponds to the previously patterned region. Right after the BOE of the oxide, contacts to the top silicon layer are fabricate by an additional lithography step followed by thermal evaporation of Au/Cr/Al (50nm/3nm/50nm) and lift-off. Aluminum is chosen as the metal contact to the silicon substrate as it forms an ohmic contact to silicon due to its low work function Commercially sourced graphene grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) on copper foil is spin coated with a 200nm thick poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA, 950K A4) layer before being etched in ammonium persulfate solution to remove the copper foil. The PMMA/graphene membrane is rinsed in de-ionised (DI) water twice before the final transfer to remove etchant and copper residues. The substrates are dipped in BOE for five seconds to remove any native oxide layer formed on the silicon area for the graphene-silicon junction window, before the wet transfer of CVD graphene. The substrates with the PMMA/graphene membrane are baked at 140 • C for 5 minutes to enhance graphene adhesion to the substrate before removing the PMMA layer in an acetone bath. The shape of graphene is defined by optical lithography and subsequent O 2 /Ar plasma etching (60s at 8W, Moorfield NanoETCH). A further optical lithography step is used to define the electrical contact to graphene and Au/Cr (50nm/3nm) are evaporated as contact metals with a following lift off step. Optical images of the finalized devices are shown in Fig. The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of both the GSOI-planar and GSOI-grating devices are shown in Fig. Here, A is the Schottky diode contact area, A * is the effective Richardson constant (112 A -2 K -2 ) for n-type silicon) and φ B is the Schottky barrier height (SBH) for a given voltage (V), k B is the Boltzmann constant, q the electron charge, and T is the temperature in Kelvin. The values of n and R s obtained through fitting eq.1 to the experimental data are 2.03 and 1.7kΩ for the SOI-planar device, respectively, and 5.23 and 1.21kΩ for the SOIgrating device, respectively. We intentionally employ a fit of eq.1 over the whole bias voltage range despite deviations of the experimental data from ideal diode characteristics. This avoids vastly different results for n and R s depending on which voltage region the experimental data has been fitted to. It further allows a fair compari- son with other devices since it prevents choosing a sweet spot in the J-V characteristics to optimize n and R s . The extraction method is described in detail in where NEP is the incident optical power that results in a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of one, R is the responsivity of the device at a given wavelength and bias conditions, A d is the photoactive device area and ∆f is the electrical bandwidth. The NEP is determined by the ratio of the root-mean-square (RMS) noise and responsivity R of the photodetector at a given wavelength. To extract NEP and D * , the time-dependent response of the GSOIplanar device has been recorded with 8 Hz sampling rate at bias voltages of V b = 0 and 2V, respectively, under optical excitation at a wavelength of λ = 520nm, chopped at 0.5s intervals. Fig. with I max the peak response, τ r and τ f the rise-and fall-times and t 0 the time-offset at which the photoresponse occurs. The rise-and fall-times of the GSOIgrating device are τ r < 4ns and τ f ∼ 10-15ns for all tested wavelengths (λ = 420-900nm) and are moreover almost constant for all wavelengths. The GSOI-planar device exhibits slightly increased rise-and fall-times in the orders of τ r ∼ 10ns and τ f ∼ 20-70ns, attributed to the larger average thickness of the active silicon layer of the GSOI-planar device compared to the GSOI-grating device with a patterned surface. Note that fall-times can be further decreased upon application of a bias voltage V b to facilitate extracting charge carriers out of the device; due to restrictions in our characterization setup this is not possible in present experiments. The temporal response of a photodiode to an instant injection of excess carriers upon photon absorption depends mainly on three independent components which can be expressed (5) with τ r the overall 10% to 90% response time of the photodiode, τ RC the resistor-capacitor (RC) time constant of the photodiode, τ dr the electric-field driven drift time of the carriers in the depletion region and τ diff the diffusion time of carriers in the non-depleted region of the substrate. The wavelength dependent optical absorption coefficient of silicon determines the penetration depth of incident light into the silicon substrate according to Beer-Lambert law In a straight forward manner, the necessary time τ diff for a hole to diffuse 10μm and 480μm, representative of employed SOI wafers and typically employed bulk silicon wafers with identical doping concentration of N d ∼3.5×10 14 cm -3 , can be calculated as ∼42ns and ∼98μs, respectively. As such we argue that the decrease of the active optical silicon layer thickness to 10μm in our devices based on SOI material and with it a reduction of speed limiting diffusion currents is the major reason for an increase of the operating speed of both the GSOIplanar and GSOI-grating device by more than two orders of magnitude compared to GS devices based on bulk silicon. The argument of diffusion currents being the speed limiting component is further supported by comparing the 3-dB cut-off frequency (f c ) of our GSOI devices fabricated on SOI substrate with GS junction diodes fabricated on bulk silicon substrates in the literature, including our previous report (Fig. Devices fabricated on SOI substrate are further sensitive to the angle of incident light. Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that graphenesilicon Schottky photodetectors fabricated on an SOI substrate exhibit a significant improvement in operating speeds compared to their bulk silicon counterparts, approaching cut-off frequencies of f c ∼ 1GHz. The speed improvement can be attributed to a suppression of speed limiting diffusion currents due to the reduced thickness of the photoactive silicon layer. We anticipate that down scaling of the junction area to decrease the RC-time constant can further improve operating speeds. Ultimately, the thickness of the silicon substrate determines the trade off between responsivity and speed for GSOI-PDs. We demonstrated that an active silicon layer thickness of 10μm significantly improves the speed of the GSOI device with only a modest decrease in the responsivity. The integration of micro-optical elements through surface patterning allows control of the spectral responsivity and angular dependence of GSOI devices. These micro-optical elements might further pave the way towards GSOI photodetectors operating in a total internal reflection (TIR) architecture, particularly for wavelengths beyond λ > 1.1μm for which silicon is fully optical transparent and absorption is taking place in the graphene only. [54] C. Haase, H. Stiebig, Appl. Phys. 