We report a statistical analysis of sizes and compositions of clusters produced in cascades during irradiation of SiC. The results are obtained using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of cascades caused by primary knock-on atoms (PKAs) with energies between 10 eV and 50 keV. The results are averaged over six crystallographic directions of the PKA and integrated over PKA energy spectrum derived from the Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) code. Specific results are presented for 1 MeV Kr ion as an example of an impinging particle. We find that distributions of cluster size n for both vacancies and interstitials obey a power law f = A n % and these clusters are dominated by carbons defects. The fitted values of A and S are different than values reported for metals, which can be explained through different defect energetics and cascade morphology between the two classes of materials. In SiC, the average carbon ratio for interstitial clusters is 91.5%, which is higher than the ratio of C in vacancy clusters, which is 85.3%. Size and composition distribution of in-cascade clusters provide a critical input for long-term defect evolution models. Silicon carbide (SiC) has been proposed for use in many nuclear reactors applications, such as fuel coating of high temperature gas-cooled reactor , structural components in fission nuclear reactors, and blanket structures for fusion energy systems A few molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been performed to address the question of what clusters form in SiC directly during irradiation. However, these studies have been performed only for limited conditions (e.g., one primary knock-on (PKA) energy and direction). For example, Devanathan et al. In order to obtain a statistical description of cluster sizes and their composition in a primary radiation damage, it is important to analyze cascades caused by different PKAs as well as the energy spectrum of PKAs caused by specific ions or neutrons. Below, we report the results of MD simulations of displacement cascades where we determined how distribution of debris from PKAs varies with PKA species, energies, and directions. We have also applied Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) simulation code to determine PKAs species and energies when SiC is irradiated with 1 MeV Kr ion as a representative example. Finally, we combine statistical results from MD and SRIM to determine the total distribution of defect clusters (i.e., their size, type, and composition) generated by one 1 MeV Kr ion. Our results can be generalized to irradiation with other ions and energies by combining results of our MD simulations with new SRIM calculations, following the procedure outlined in this paper. The SRIM software was applied to calculate PKA energy distribution with full damage cascades model for cubic (β) silicon carbide (SiC) irradiated with 1 MeV Kr ions. In order to obtain statistically relevant information, 2,000 Kr ion are used in the SRIM simulation. Threshold displacement energies for C and Si atoms are 20 eV Cascade simulations require a repulsive interaction at very close interatomic distances to better represent ballistic and thermal processes that occur during ion bombardment c Damage energies of PKA in current simulations include 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, ......, 0.09, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, ......, 0.9, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, ......, 9.0, 10.0, 20.0, 30.0, ......, 50.0 keVs. For simplicity, only several of them are listed in this table. d R H/IJ = E C E LMN the ratio between the damage energy and the PKA energy. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in all three spatial directions of the simulation box. PKAs were given an instantaneous velocity corresponding to specific damage energies and we performed multiple simulations where the velocity vector was aligned with six directions, i.e., To simplify our simulations, we build on the conclusions of Devanathan et al. PDs generated in MD cascade simulations are analyzed using the Voronoi cell method, which is described in Ref. SRIM simulations of 2,000 1MeV Kr ions impinging on SiC generate 326,634 carbon and 295,925 silicon PKAs. The energy spectrum of these PKAs is shown in Figure The number and the size distribution of intra-cascade clusters produced by PKAs with given energies are averaged over six directions of the PKA velocity. The size distribution of clusters is shown in Figure We compared our result to those previously reported for specific cases, such as 30 keV Si PKA studied by MD Intra-cascade clusters can act as nuclei for growth of larger clusters by attracting isolated PD or smaller clusters at the early stages of annealing It is interesting to note that the largest cluster sizes among all cascade simulations are not found in simulations with the largest PKA damage energies of 50 keV. Specifically, Figure Figure It has been speculated by Katoh et al. One PKA from each energy interval in the PKA energy spectrum is used to conduct MD simulations of cascades, and we assume that the result can represent the damages caused by other PKAs in the same group. For example, we use the 10 eV MD cascade simulation result to represent the damage caused by all PKAs in the energy interval of 0 eV -10 eV, which provides the upper bound on the cascade efficiency. C and Si PKAs that have damage energy larger than 50 keV are neglected due to their low percentages, i.e., 0.0005% and 0.177% for C and Si, respectively. The numbers of Frenkel pairs (FPs) produced by PKAs of certain damage energy averaged over six PKA directions are multiplied by the production rate of PKAs in the corresponding energy interval (energy intervals are defined in Section 3.1). The results are shown in Figure The cascade efficiency of PKA is defined as the ratio of successful displacements (SDs) at the end of the cascade over the number of total displacements (TDs) generated during cascade. TD has been often estimated using Norgett, Robinson, and Torrens (NRT) model where E ]^ is the average threshold displacement energy, and NNRT is an estimate of TD. The threshold displacement energy for carbon is 20 eV and for silicon is 35 eV Cascade efficiency as a function of Si PKA damage energy with the PKA velocity along the 111 direction. We have conducted MD simulations of cascades caused by PKAs with energies from 0.01 keV to 50 keV with velocities along the following directions [001], [011], [111], 111 , 133 and [135] in order to determine the distributions of intra-cascade cluster size and composition in SiC. Both intra-cascade interstitial and vacancy clusters productions obey a power law and vacancy clusters are found to be larger than interstitial clusters. Carbon is the dominant species in both interstitial and vacancy clusters and stoichiometric clusters constitute only 7.4% and 3.9% of all the interstitial and vacancy clusters, respectively. Carbon vacancy ratio in vacancy clusters is lower than C interstitial ratio in interstitial clusters, which can be explained by the fact that the production rate of SiC is higher than CSi. The calculated distributions for intra-cascade clusters can be integrated with the PKA energy spectrum from ion irradiations to determine the overall production function of intra-cascade clusters and their compositions. 1 MeV Kr ion irradiated 3C-SiC is used as an example in the current study. Both vacancy and interstitial clusters obey power law f = A n % with AV = 0.429 ± 0.011, SV = 2.092 ± 0.114 and AI = 0.804 ± 0.002 and SI = 3.591 ± 0.005. The average carbon monomer ratios are 91.5% and 85.3% for interstitial and vacancy clusters, respectively. a Energy of PKA which is gained during a collision with impinging ion.