The proximity effect, which arises at the interface between two fermionic superfluids with different critical temperatures, is examined with a non-local (integral) equation whose kernel contains information about the size of Cooper pairs that leak across the interface. This integral approach avoids reference to the boundary conditions at the interface that would be required with a differential approach. The temperature dependence of the pair penetration depth on the normal side of the interface is determined over a wide temperature range, also varying the inter-particle coupling along the BCS-BEC crossover independently on both sides of the interface. Conditions are found for which the proximity effect is optimized in terms of the extension of the pair penetration depth. Recently, a novel approach for designing and tailoring entirely new classes of materials through "proximity effects" has ben suggested, which could overcome limitations inherent to more conventional (such as doping) methods The above is a typical problem in inhomogeneous superconductivity, which can in principle be treated in terms of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations with the inclusion of boundary effects A characteristic quantity in the context of the proximity effect is the (temperature dependent) pair penetration depth (or thickness of the leakage region on the normal side of the interface, which we shall refer to as ξ R according to our reference geometry). This quantity was estimated theoretically in Ref. Experiments could as well be directed at determining the temperature dependence of the pair penetration depth in the normal side, also in systems where the superconducting coupling may not be so weak, along the lines of the original experimental work of Ref. This two-slope dependence of the pair penetration depth was qualitatively put in relation in Ref. With these premises, it appears highly desirable to study theoretically the proximity effect when either one of the fermionic systems at one side of the interface (or when even both of them) spans the BCS-BEC crossover up to the highest attainable temperature in the superfluid phase. To this end, here we approach the problem in terms of a non-local (integral) equation for the gap parameter, which contains a kernel that depends on the gap parameter itself in a highly non-linear way and thus extends the linearized Gor'kov equation used originally in Ref. By making use of this approach, we will determine the pair penetration depth ξ R on the normal side of the interface over a wide temperature range and under quite different physical conditions on the two sides of the interface, thereby enabling us to identify the limiting behaviors (close to T R c and to T L c ) of this length in terms of a single calculation. In addition, by this approach we will have the flexibility of modelling the inter-particle coupling and the trapping potential in a physically smooth way across the interface that separates the left and right superconductors, and we will avoid at the same time any reference to the boundary conditions at the interface The main results of our calculations are as follows: (i) For given coupling at the left of the interface, the pair penetration depth ξ R at the right is found to increase (thereby amplifying the relevance of the proximity effect) when the bulk values ∆ L and ∆ R , reached by the gap profile deep on the left and right of the interface, respectively, differ appreciably from each other. This finding could also be used in reverse, in cases one would instead like to attenuate the occurrence of the proximity effect. (ii) When the coupling at the left of the interface is increased toward the unitary limit, such that the Cooper pair size decreases and becomes comparable with the inter-particle distance, the pair penetration depth ξ R at the right is found to decrease, too. At the same time, however, there is an increase of the range of temperatures over which the proximity effect can occur. Optimizing the proximity effect may thus require one to compromise between these two contrasting behaviors. (iii) The temperature dependence of ξ R turns out to reproduce the behaviors in the vicinity of both T R c and T L c that were anticipated in Ref. In contrast to the present approach, more conventional treatments of the proximity effect in terms of the BdG equations The paper is organized as follows. Section II sets up the treatment of the proximity effect in terms of the NLPDA equation. Section III presents our numerical results for the profile of the gap parameter under a variety of circumstances, from which we are able to extract the temperature dependence of both the pair penetration depth ξ R and coherence (healing) length ξ L at the right and left of the interface, respectively. This information is then used for optimizing the proximity effect along the BCS-BEC crossover, Section IV gives our conclusions. Finally, in Appendix A a summary is given of the numerical procedure that solves the NLPDA equation in one dimension for the problem at hand. In this Section, we briefly recall the structure of the NLPDA equation, that was obtained in Ref. In Ref. (referred to as the NLPDA equation) was obtained by a suitable coarse-graining procedure applied to the BdG equations. (We set = 1 throughout.) The kernel of this equation reads: where m is the fermion mass, f F (E) = e E/(kB T ) + 1 the Fermi function at temperature T (k B being the Boltzmann constant), and 2E(k; Q|r) = E + (k; Q|r)+E -(k; Q|r). In the above expression, μ(r) = μ-V (r) is the local chemical potential in the presence of an external potential V (r) and |∆(r)| is the magnitude of the local gap parameter. (As they stand, the above expressions do not include the effects of a magnetic field.) In addition, the kernel in (real) R-space results from Fourier transforming the kernel (3) in (wave-vector) Q-space. The left-hand side of the NLPDA equation (in either form (1) or ( where k F = (3π 2 n 0 ) 1/3 is the Fermi wave vector with (uniform) particle density n 0 . This parameter ranges from (k F a F ) -1 -1 in the weak-coupling (BCS) regime when a F < 0, to (k F a F ) -1 +1 in the strong-coupling (BEC) regime when a F > 0, across the unitary limit when |a F | diverges (in practice, the "crossover region" The NLPDA integral equation (1) (or (2)) is highly non-linear in the gap parameter ∆. It thus generalises the linear integral equation adopted in Refs. where ξ(k|r) The expression ( In Refs. ) where g L = -m/(4πa L F ) and g R = -m/(4πa R F ) are the asymptotic values on the left and right sides of the interface, respectively. For most calculations, we shall consider the function G σ (x) of the form for the sake of comparison, however, we have sometimes utilized also the following function with compact support A typical profile of g(x) with the choice ( The potential V (x), that enters the NLPDA equation (1) (or (2)) and the density equation ( We assume that the system at the left (right) of the interface extends to -∞ (+∞), such that away from the interface in the bulk region it approaches a homogeneous superconductor with coupling (k ) and bulk (asymptotic) value μ L (μ R ) of the chemical potential. For simplicity, we further assume that the density has the same bulk (asymptotic) value n 0 = k 3 F /(3π 2 ) on both sides of the interface. At a given temperature, this corresponds to the value n(-∞) obtained from Eq.( At a given temperature, the arbitrariness on the value of μ can be eliminated by fixing μ = μ L , which corresponds to a homogeneous system with density n 0 and coupling (k F a L F ) -1 . In this way, V (-∞) = 0 and the expression (10) reduces to the form: which depends on temperature through the temperature dependence of both μ L and μ R . In particular, when Under the above circumstances, the gap parameter in Q-space that enters the right-hand side of Eq.( Correspondingly, the NLPDA equation (2) simplifies as follows: with the notation of Eq.( The integral equation ( In this expression: (i) 2λ refers to values of x in real space and λxj √ 2 to values of Q in wave-vector space; (ii) the points {x j ; j = 1, • • • , N } correspond to the zeros of the (normalized) Hermite polynomial H N (x) (cf. Eq. A16)); (iii) the matrix elements of the orthogonal matrix S are given by Eq. (A10); (iv) the positive definite weights w j are obtained by the normalization condition (A17) for the eigenvectors of the eigenvalue problem (A16); and (v) the quantity y j is given by Eq. (A10). The (positive) parameter λ is meant to add extra flexibility to the numerical calculations. The number of points N in the two (x and Q) meshes and the parameter λ can be varied to achieve optimal convergence of the Fourier transforms, from ∆(x) to ∆(Q) and viceversa. A typical profile for ∆(x) obtained in this way is shown in Fig. The discretized version The numerical solution of the integral equation ( The various curves refer to different temperatures chosen according to the expression (0.12, 0.50), and we have correspondingly adapted the value of (k In addition, we have taken k F σ = (2.5, 5.0, 10.0) for the choice The basic results of the present calculation are represented by the gap profiles ∆(x) across the interface. Several examples of these profiles are shown in Figs. In each panel, several temperatures are further considered according to the expression such that T = T R c for ν = 0 and T = T L c for ν = 1. In particular, in Figs. It is also interesting to compare the gap profiles ∆(x) for different shapes of the barrier. This is done in Fig. is essentially independent from the shape of the barrier. This result gives us confidence that the values of the pair penetration depth ξ R , that we will extract from ∆(x) for x > 0 to characterize the proximity effect, will not appreciably depend on a specific choice of the barrier. For the sake of definiteness, in what follows we will thus limit ourselves to consider a barrier specified by the form (8) with k F σ = 5.0. Out of the numerical results for ∆(x) like those reported in Figs. while for k F x ≪ -1 we make use of the specular expression In all fits we that have performed, it turns out that the optimal value of D + η is 2.5. We have then set η = 0 and interpreted D = 2.5 as an "effective" dimensionality, which is intermediate between D = 2 of the planar boundary surface separating the left (L) and right (R) superconductors and D = 3 of the space in which this surface is embedded. Note that the expressions ( C. Optimizing the proximity effect in terms of ξ R Figure For both couplings of the left superconductor, it is seen that ξ R attains larger values as soon as the coupling of the right superconductor differs appreciably from that of the left superconductor. This implies that the relevance of the proximity effect is amplified when the bulk values ∆ L and ∆ R differ appreciably from each other, a criterion that could be exploited in practice to optimize the spatial extension of the proximity effect. For the sake of example, typical values of ∆ L and ∆ R at zero temperature are reported in Table When comparing the sets of values for ξ R that correspond to (k F a L F ) -1 = -1.0 and (k F a L F ) -1 = 0.0, as reported in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. The numerical results for ξ R (T ) reported in Fig. where " " and " " signify "in the vicinity of" and "≪" signifies "well above than". The results of these fits for ξ R are shown in Fig. ) vs the variable ν of Eq. ( for (k F a L F ) -1 = -1.0 and in Fig. As anticipated in subsection II-D, the presence of the external potential face. The results of this calculation are shown in Fig. The spatial width of the kernel K of the NLPDA equation (1) was shown in Ref. To extract this dependence, we consider the kernel in real space [24] which is an even function of x and is calculated according to an expression similar to Eq. (A13) of the Appendix. Here, x 0 is the spatial point whereby the values of the local gap ∆(x 0 ) and chemical potential μ(x 0 ) enter the kernel K(|Q||x 0 ) in Eq. The width of K(x|x 0 ) is then determined for given x 0 by considering the function where x max > 0 is the position of the maximum at the right in the profile of K(x|x 0 ) (which also depends on x 0 and has to be determined in each case). The function Figure In addition, in Fig. In this paper, we have examined theoretically the proximity effect at the interface between two superconductors with different critical temperatures under a variety of circumstances. To the extent that the size of the Cooper pairs represents a crucial ingredient for the proximity effect, we have been able to vary this size appreciably by making the inter-particle coupling for both superconductors to vary along the BCS-BEC crossover (although always remaining on the BCS side of unitarity, which is where the Cooper pair size is comparable with the interparticle distance). We have also been able to consider temperatures quite close (up to 99%) to the critical temperature of either superconductor, as well as to modify the shape of the interface separating the two superconductors in order to assess the physical robustness of the calculations. In this way, from the numerical profiles of the inhomogeneous gap parameter ∆(x) we have been able to extract the pair penetration depth ξ R on the normal (by our convention, the right) side of the interface, as a function of both coupling and temperature. This was done in such an accurate way that the temperature dependence of ξ R was always found to match the behaviors expected from the analytic estimates made some time ago in Ref. All of this has been possible because the profiles ∆(x) of the gap parameter have been obtained by solving numerically the NLPDA integral equation in the form Given the flexibility of the theoretical approach we have adopted, one may hope that the present study could stimulate a revival of the experiments that adopt similar geometry and physical arrangements, in particular by extending the work of Ref. (for clarity, in this Appendix we add a tilde to the symbol of the Fourier transform). Owing to the property of the Fourier transforms The above expressions can be cast in an approximate form useful for numerical calculations, by introducing a Gaussian quadrature of the form (cf. Eq. A3)): 2 to values of Q, with the two meshes of x and Q points closely interlinked to each other. In these expressions, both the number of points N in the two meshes and the parameter λ can be varied to achieve optimal convergence of the Fourier transform from ∆(x) to ∆(Q) (and vice versa). The two results (A13) and (A14) taken together provide an efficient algorithm to calculate the Fourier transform of any function in 1D. There remains to determine the sets of points {x j } and the corresponding weights {w j } that appear in the definitions (A10). To this end, we take advantage of the recursion relation The above results can be used to solve the 1D-NLPDA integral equation 