In the electroplating industry Ni-P coatings are extensively employed owing to their excellent properties which enable substrate protection against corrosion and wear. Depending on their composition and structure, as-plated deposits demonstrate good mechanical, tribological and electrochemical features, catalytic activity but also beneficial magnetic characteristics. With subsequent thermal treatment hardness of Ni-P metal-metalloid system can approach or be even higher than that of hard Cr coatings. The purpose of this paper is to provide a general survey of the research work dealing with the electrodeposition of Ni-P binary alloy coatings. Proposed phosphorus incorporation mechanisms, Ni-P alloy microstructure before and after thermal treatment, its mechanical, tribological, corrosion, catalytic and magnetic properties are considered, so are the key process variables influencing phosphorus content in the deposits and the roles of the main electrolytic bath constituents. Findings on the merits of employing pulse plating and fabrication of unconventional (layered and functionally graded) structures are succinctly explored. In the modern world billions of dollars per year are lost due to machinery overhaul or complete breakdown related to material structural failures induced by progressive corrosion, wear, fatigue and rupture. Surface degradation impacts a large number of industrial sectors and can account for up to 3-4% of the Gross Domestic Product in developed economies For the deposition of coatings a variety of techniques exist that can be mechanical, physical, chemical and electrochemical in nature It involves a process that takes place in the low cost electrolysis cell, in an aqueous solution, at normal pressure and at relatively low temperature, which makes it ideal for the industrial scaling up In terms of types of coatings fabricated through electroplating, in aerospace, automotive and general engineering industry functional Cr coatings are very widely employed owing to their remarkable combination of properties which include: high hardness, good corrosion, wear and heat resistance and low friction coefficient It has been reported by many authors that certain binary, ternary or quaternary alloy coatings may present a suitable replacement for hard Cr and may possess an interesting combination of features that can culminate even in a possible improvement in terms of performance characteristics In order to attain the uttermost enhancement of the Ni-P deposit beneficial properties it is paramount to control the coating's composition and its microstructure. This can be achieved through altering electroplating bath composition, deposition conditions and by applying appropriate alloy posttreatment. To go beyond the limits of the properties that can be achieved for this binary alloy system, co-deposition of nano, sub-micron or micron size particles and fabrication of composite coatings is the centre of attention of the modern electroplating research and innovation efforts. While classical industrial demands on hard, homogeneous, wear resistant coatings and corrosion protection are still valid, added capacities in terms of: chemical stability, bio-compatibility, microstructured surfaces and functional coatings (lubricant, magnetic) are in high demand. This is where the production of composites but also compositionally modulated coatings, characterized by variable configuration across their thickness, can offer new possibilities and new combinations of properties that can be adapted to almost any need and satisfy the increasing demands on multi-functionality. Conventional electroplating possesses many advantages in terms of versatility, ease of use and cost effectiveness. The technique has many assets when compared to physical methods such as magnetron sputtering and chemical methods such as chemical vapour deposition. Physical vapour deposition is a high cost line-of-sight process with possibly poor throwing power, while in chemical vapour deposition high operating temperatures may cause substrate softening In his work Dini Electroplating possesses advantages over traditional electroless plating also, in terms of providing a higher deposition rate in a simpler electrolyte and the added benefit of the possibility to control deposit's composition and microstructure by changing the applied current waveform and electroplating conditions Electroplating is quite a mature technique and although widely applied in industry since the end of the 19 th century, currently it is exhibiting stagnancy in terms of growth owing to the lack of technological innovations. However, according to several global market studies, electroplating is to demonstrate an expansion, predominantly in the Asia-Pacific excluding Japan region (APEJ). In the market report titled "Electroplating Market: Global Industry Analysis and Opportunity Assessment, 2016-2026" Ni-P electroplating is predominantly performed in an aqueous electrolytic bath that contains Ni +2 ions as a source of nickel and a phosphorus oxyacid (or its salt) which acts as a source of phosphorus. Electrodeposition process is being driven by the electric current passing between the anode and the cathode (plating substrate) In the direct mechanism it is proposed that Ni +2 ions and phosphorus oxyacid are directly reduced to Ni and P atoms which then form a Ni x P solid solution. According to Brenner According to the indirect mechanism, first proposed by Fedotev and Vyacheslavov Figure Saitou et al. Morikawa and colleagues Sotskaya and Dolgikh Bredael et al. One can infer that making an attempt to delineate the phosphorus co-deposition process with Ni constitutes a significant endeavour. Disagreements exists on whether direct or indirect mechanism can be assumed, with most of the authors supporting the latter. Additionally, indications exist that phosphorus incorporation is not completely straightforward and that several different mechanisms might govern its co-deposition depending on the process conditions. In the origin of the incurred difficulties lie the large number of factors directing and influencing the deposition process and many different approaches applied to define their nature and magnitude, all in various electroplating environments. The properties of the electrodeposited Ni-P coatings depend greatly on the composition of the employed electrolytic bath. The majority of nickel plating solutions are based on the 'Watts' formulation developed by Professor Oliver P. Watts in 1916 Nickel source-Most of the studies dedicated to nickel and nickel alloys electrodeposition have been restricted to simple sulfate containing or on Watts baths. A wide range of coatings can be deposited from these versatile and stable electrolytes, thus they still remain a basis for electroplating Nibased coatings Sulfamate baths are employed primarily for the purposes of high speed plating and electroforming. Nickel sulfamate possesses high solubility in aqueous solutions, thus higher nickel concentration can be achieved compared to other nickel electrolytes which facilitates higher plating rates Another interesting electrolyte for Ni-P alloy electroplating is the one containing methanesulfonate or methanesulfonic acid. Sknar et al. Phosphorus source-Source of phosphorus in the Ni-P electroplating bath is typically a phosphorus oxyacid or its salt. There exist mainly two kinds of electrolyte systems for Ni-P electroplating: the one containing phosphorous acid and the other containing hypophosphite. Generally, the quality of Ni-P deposits electroplated from electrolyte containing hypophosphite is changeable because the deposits darken when electroplating time gets longer or current density becomes higher, while the Ni-P deposits electroplated from electrolyte containing phosphorous acid are smooth and bright Anode dissolution-If used as a contributing source of Ni in the bath, nickel chloride has two major functions: it appreciably increases solution conductivity thereby reducing voltage requirements and it is important in obtaining satisfactory dissolution of nickel anodes Buffering-As most authors claim, boric acid limits the effects on the solution pH value resulting from the discharge of hydrogen ions and simplifies pH control One of the possible alternatives is proposed in the terms of substituting boric acid with citric acid. This species can complex free nickel ions in the solution influencing the deposition rate but also acts as a buffering agent When it comes to the environmental impact exerted by the electroplating process from either of the two baths: the one containing boric or the other containing citric acid, findings are quite contradictory. Takuma et al. In the Brenner type sulfate bath Electroplating baths containing phosphorus and/or phosphoric acid can be very acidic, hence typically partial neutralization is necessary in or-der to increase the pH value of the solution up to an optimum value Additives-Electrolyte additives are another crucial factor in the Ni-P electroplating process. They can be incorporated in the electrolytic solution in order to influence grain growth and crystallites orientation, to suppress undesirable secondary reactions, to promote the co-deposition of alloys, dissolution of metals, etc. Additives can be grouped according to their main purpose as: carriers, surface wetters, inhibitors or levellers, auxiliary brighteners, buffers, conductive electrolytes and chemical complexants Grain refiners/carriers are usually aromatic organic compounds that contain sulfur whose codeposition with nickel inhibits its grain growth. Most commonly employed grain refiner in Ni-P electrodeposition is saccharin. This species is reported to effectively reduce the internal stress of the fabricated deposits It is known that properties of Ni electrodeposits depend on their crystallographic structure. Ni (100) soft-mode texture is associated with deposits that possess maximum ductility, minimum hardness and internal stress Non-aqueous baths-All mentioned traditional Ni-P electroplating baths are corrosive and their use possesses a drawback in terms of generating toxic effluents. As an alternative to conventional electroplating solutions, You and colleagues It has been proposed that environmental issues related to the use of aqueous baths in Nickel electroplating can be mitigated also by performing electrodeposition in a supercritical CO 2 fluid In accordance with both proposed phosphorus incorporation mechanisms, direct or indirect, concurrent reduction of protons at the surface of the growing deposit layer is necessary for the co-deposition of phosphorus with nickel (Figure Non-pitting agent 0.15 g L -1 Durney, 1984 and wear resistance after Saccharin 5 g L -1 Magnetic stirring heat treatment at 370 Cathode current efficiency of Ni-P electroplating is primarily affected by the electrolytic bath composition, plating regime, applied current density, temperature, bath pH value and agitation rate. Ross et al. Cathode current efficiency in Ni-P electroplating is generally found to increase with the increase of current density In general, reactions involved in the conversion of phosphorus in the solution into phosphorus in the deposit can be interpreted differently and thus the discrepancies in elaborating cathode current efficiency behaviour may arise. Cathode current efficiency of Ni-P alloy electrodeposition can be as reported significantly improved by employing pulse instead of direct current plating As mentioned in the previous section, certain additives such as saccharin are found to improve the current efficiency of Ni-P electrodeposition In Ni-P electroplating, anodes are usually made of nickel and current efficiency of nickel dissolution in additive free solution is approximately 100% (small percentage of the current is consumed on the discharge of hydrogen ions from water). Hence there exists a difference in cathode and anode efficiency which leads to nickel ions build up in the solution and its pH value increase. This problem can be solved by solution drag-out Ni-P electrodeposits' crystallographic structure is strongly influenced by their phosphorus content and the employed deposition conditions. Incorporation of even small amounts of phosphorous in the nickel lattice substantially refines the nickel grains. In the case of low-phosphorus Ni-P electrodeposits, obtained XRD patterns reveal a set of diffraction peaks corresponding to face-centred cubic (f.c.c.) nickel, i.e.: Bredael et al. Owing to the variations of the pH value at the electrode-solution interface inherent to the Ni-P electroplating process, phosphorus content varies across Ni-P deposit thickness, hence its composition and microstructure are not homogeneous (Section 7). Alkaline solutions are more influenced by the pH variations compared to acidic ones, thus electrodeposits produced in this environment are often characterized by a lamellar structure Ni-P electrodeposits can be grouped in three categories, alloys with: low (1-5 wt.%), medium (5-8 wt.%) and high (above 9 wt.%) phosphorus content Pillai et al. In general, discrepancies which exist in the lit-erature related to the structural transitions of Ni-P electrodeposits can be attributed to the lack of appropriate techniques that would allow to make a proper differentiation between different crystallographic structures. Additionally, Ni-P alloys are frequently not straightforward amorphous or crystalline but they represent a mixture of several phases. This can be owing to the low solubility of phosphorus into the nickel lattice. Namely, often Ni-P deposits contain more of the alloying element (P) than what the f.c.c. Ni matrix can dissolve, thus the surplus must separate out resulting in regions that have a different concentration of phosphorus, different lattice parameters and different crystallite sizes. Vafaei-Makhsoos et al. Microstructure of Ni-P electrodeposits undergoes a transformation if they are exposed to a subsequent thermal treatment. This aspect is further elaborated in Section 5. Suitable structure of the electroplated Ni-P alloy depends on the desired features of the fabricated deposit. Crystalline materials are traditionally interesting on account of their exceptional mechanical properties. Amorphous materials are very appealing owing to the isotropy of their properties and them lacking disadvantages characteristic for crystalline ones, namely the presence of crystal boundaries, lattice defects, segregation, etc. Phosphorus content of Ni-P electrodeposits reportedly depends on many factors, dominantly on the concentration of the phosphorus donor in the bath, temperature, pH, current density, waveform in the case of pulse current deposition, agitation rate and the presence of additives. Thus, phosphorus quantity can be controlled by altering the electroplating bath composition and the employed deposition conditions. In the 1950s, Brenner Yuan and coworkers Hu and Bai Bredael and coworkers The increase in temperature has been observed to cause a decrease in phosphorus content in general. However, too low temperature leads to unsatisfactory current efficiency and plating rate, thus a compromise is needed. Temperatures from around 50 • C to 70 • C are generally adopted as acceptable for optimal feasibility of the Ni-P electroplating process. Phosphorus content in the deposit has been reported to be influenced by the presence of certain additives in the electroplating bath. Increase of the saccharin concentration was found to induce the decrease of phosphorus content Influence of the pulse plating on Ni-P alloy structure and composition will be further elaborated in Section 6. Ni-P alloys Alloying nickel with phosphorus via electroplating effectuates many improvements of its properties: increased hardness ( 500 HV as-plated Ni-P), wear and corrosion resistance, decreased coefficient of friction (0.4-0.7 as-plated Ni-P), but also transition towards paramagnetic features. Overall, properties and functional behaviour of Ni-P electrodeposits depend on their composition and microstructure. Ni-P coatings with low phosphorus content demonstrate high hardness and good wear resistance, while coatings with higher phosphorus content exhibit good corrosion resistance but poor mechanical properties owing to the transition towards amorphous structure. Amorphous Ni-P deposits are generally brittle and possess low ductility. At the same phosphorus content, microstructure of the deposit can be modified by altering the deposition conditions. Applying pulse plating instead of direct current plating can help to preserve Ni-P crystalline structure even at higher incorporated phosphorus quantities, thus good mechanical properties characteristic for low-phosphorus deposits can be maintained Another way to ensure good mechanical and electrochemical properties is to design multilayered or graded coatings. For example, a duplex coating that consists of an inner layer having high phosphorus content and an outer layer with low phosphorus content presents a structure that combines advantageous features characteristic for each of the two compositions Adhesion of the coating on the substrate's surface is critical for all possible functional applications. Ni-P electrodeposits exhibit good adhesion on a range of widely differing substrates (brass, soft steel, copper, etc.). However, stainless steel for example can be problematic owing to the formation of a passive oxide layer which prevents Ni-P coating from sticking to its surface. Conventional way of addressing this issue is to apply on the substrate surface a Wood's or another nickel strike before Ni-P electroplating Published data offer diverse information regarding corrosion characteristics of Ni-P alloy, particularly about the nature of its anodic dissolution, ability to passivate and pitting susceptibility. Corrosion resistance of Ni-P coatings is much better than in the case of pure Ni Well controlled internal stress is a very important criteria for successful fabrication and use of protective Ni-P coatings. Compressive stresses are advantageous in mechanical structures under load, since they tend to inhibit crack formation and growth, they rise strength and hardness of the coating The amount of phosphorus, hence crystallographic structure, of the Ni-P electrodeposit influences its stress value. Lin et al. Certain organic additives are known to induce a reduction of the internal stress of the Ni-P deposits. A grain refiner saccharin is typically employed for this purpose, inducing compressive internal stress Another possibility to reduce stress of a Ni-P electrodeposit is to apply a low temperature heat treatment that would help to desorb hydrogen present in the coating Employing pulse current instead of direct current deposition is reported to be beneficial for stress reduction. Chen et al. Nickel is a typical ferromagnetic material, while magnetic properties of the Ni-P alloy present a function of its composition and preparation technique Bakonyi et al. Ni-P alloy is known to exhibit catalytic activity foremost in water splitting reaction. This presents a very important feature especially in the light of to-day's rapidly increasing energy demands and progressive exhaustion of fossil fuels resources. Catalysts (platinum and ruthenium) conventionally employed to reduce the large overpotentials for hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions (HER and OER respectively) are fairly scarce and their use not feasible when it comes to incurred costs, thus suitable alternatives are in high demand. Nickel is a very popular electrode material owing to its reasonably high hydrogen generation activity, availability as well as its low cost Hu and Bai Elias et al. As an alternative to alkaline media in which water electrolysis systems are simple but demonstrate low efficiency and high energy consumption, Lu et al. With subsequent heat treatment the hardness of Ni-P electrodeposits increases substantially. This phenomenon is caused by the precipitation of the crystalline phases. Most studies report detecting a mixture of Ni 3 P and f.c.c. nickel as a final product of the thermal treatment The annealing temperature under which crystallization occurs depends on the phosphorous content in the deposit as well as on the heating rate Nava et al. Habazaki et al. Jeong et al. Chang et al. Opting for subsequent Ni-P alloy thermal treatment and accordingly choosing the suitable heat treatment temperature, finally depend very much on the employed substrate nature and the intended process complexity. Constant direct current is the most commonly applied regime in which metallic coatings are electrodeposited. However, in recent years the use of pulsed, alternating currents is exhibiting an increase. This is owing to number of findings that demonstrate that pulse current (PC) exerts a beneficial influence on the structure and properties of the fabricated deposits. Among others, comprehensive reviews on pulse and pulse reversed plating are composed by Devaraj and Seshadri During electroplating, a negatively charged layer is formed around the cathode as the process advances. When performing DC deposition, this layer charges to a definite thickness and prevents ions from reaching the substrate. In a simple form of PC electrodeposition, where cathodic pulse is alternatively switched on and off, when the output is turned off this layer discharges which allows easier transport of ions from the bulk of the solution Pulsed current results in metal deposition at the same rate as direct current provided that the average pulse current is equal to the mean direct current of DC electrodeposition In PC plating, choice of the applied waveform is critical and care must be taken to appropriately optimize all parameters (peak current, duty cycle, frequency, pulse shape, etc.). In his work Pearson In pulse reversed current technique (PRC) anodic pulse is introduced into the plating cycle. PRC has the same effect of replenishing the diffusion layer as PC does. It results in dissolution of the protrusions on the metal surface ensuring a more uniform deposition through elimination of the discrepancies between high and low current density areas and increases coating thickness uniformity It has been reported that the application of PC deposition results in the increase in limiting current density In Ni electrodeposition, pulse plating is extensively employed and studied In Ni-P electroplating, pulse plating also possesses several advantages over DC plating. Lin and coworkers In DC plating ways of improving deposit properties include microstructure manipulation by varying deposition conditions or alloying in which case a twocomponent deposit is formulated by employing an appropriate bath formulation. However, technological development imposes the demand for coatings that combine favourable properties of different metals, a task unachievable solely by employing individual components neither their resultant alloys. In this case compositionally modulated (functionally graded or multi-layered) coatings present them selves as a remarkable opportunity owing to the possibility of engineering coatings fitting a wide range of requirements in terms of functional properties. In nickel electroplating, production of multilayer coatings consisting of films of bright and semi bright nickel (60-75% of the total nickel thickness) is traditionally employed to improve deposits' corrosion resistance. Preferential corrosion in the electrochemically more active upper bright nickel layer and propagation of the corrosion in the lamellar direction protects the columnar lower layer of semibright nickel through retarded pitting attack penetration In the number of applications including the use of coatings for thermal, wear or corrosion protection and microelectronics, the mismatch in properties at the interface between the coating and the substrate can cause stress concentration that could result in the failure of the interface. Employing functionally graded materials (FGMs) A non-uniform, graded Phosphorus content in Ni-P electrodeposits inherently varies with layer thickness. pH at the electrode-solution interface rises concomitantly with the discharge of hydrogen. After escape of a cohort of hydrogen bubbles from the cathode resultant enhanced convection increases the interfacial proton concentration. Interfacial pH variations cause the variations in the deposit phosphorus content as electroplating continues It is known that Ni-P deposits with low phosphorus content exhibit high hardness and good wear resistance but poor corrosion resistance, conversely high phosphorus coatings exhibit good corrosion resistance but poor mechanical properties. Developing multilayer coatings can be an effective way to obtain deposits characterized by both optimal mechanical and electrochemical properties. For example, a duplex coating with an outer layer having a low phosphorus content and an inner layer with high phosphorus content is a good way to ensure corrosion stability in the contact with surrounding environment and in the same time favourable mechanical properties Techniques in order to produce layered Ni-P electrodeposits include either using two baths with different phosphorus source contents or a single electroplating bath in which case electrochemical methods are employed in order to achieve composition modulation (changing cathodic current or potential). In the dual-bath electrodeposition technique, the item to be electroplated is moved between two plating baths of arbitrary composition and a layer is plated from each electrolyte in cycles. First multi-Figure When employing single bath deposition method pulsed current is a useful tool to achieve the desired composition modulation. Early attempt with two-pulse plating was reported by Girard In the realm of compositionally modulated Ni-P electrodeposits, Goldman and coworkers Wang et al. Multilayers of Ni-P with other metals or alloys can be engineered also in order to ensure optimal functional performance in demanding environments. Improved corrosion properties of multilayers of Ni-P/Zn-Ni, when compared to pure Ni-P and Zn-Ni alloys, was detected by Liu and colleagues Bozzini and colleagues Ni-P protective coatings can be electrodeposited with a wide range of crystallographic structures. Deposits extending from fully crystalline to amorphous ones can be easily fabricated. Properties of the obtained coatings very much depend on the deposition conditions and their phosphorous content. Applied post treatment, such as alloy heating, can bring significant improvement of its overall mechanical, tribological and electrochemical properties. Designing unconventional structures, such as graded or multilayered ones, can also with proper optimization give rise to substantial deposits' characteristics amelioration. However, even though technology of Ni-P electroplating is quite mature, there are still many unknowns and numerous issues still remain to be addressed. Phosphorus incorporation mechanism is still a matter of great disagreement. Factors influencing phosphorus content of the deposit are many and with the plethora of variables characterizing Ni-P electroplating process and poor definition of certain process parameters it is not easy to establish clearly the key influencers, manner and the extent of their impact. Up-scaling of the electroplating procedure induces new process variables and more attention in research needs to be bestowed on feasibility study of method transferral to larger scales and its robustness. Current density distribution is a parameter that is often poorly defined. Ageing of the electrolytic baths is not addressed in many of the research works. Additionally, distinguishing between different Ni-P microstructures and establishing a point of transition from one state to another is still a matter of some difficulty.