We experimentally demonstrate wide-band (>100 THz) frequency down-conversion of near-infrared (NIR) femtosecond-scale pulses from an Er:fiber laser to the mid-infrared (MIR) using four-wave-mixing (FWM) in photonic-chip silicon-nitride waveguides. The engineered dispersion in the nanophotonic geometry, along with the wide transparency range of silicon nitride, enables large-detuning FWM phase-matching and results in tunable MIR from 2.6-3.6 μm on a single chip with 100-pJ-scale pump-pulse energies. Additionally, we observe up to 25 dB broadband parametric gain for NIR pulses when the FWM process is operated in a frequency up-conversion configuration. Our results demonstrate how integrated photonic circuits could realize multiple nonlinear optical phenomena on the same chip and lead to engineered synthesis of broadband, tunable, and coherent light across the NIR and MIR wavelength bands from fiber-based pumps. On-chip photonic platforms have allowed for exploration of novel classical and quantum nonlinear phenomena in highly controlled environments. This is due to the ability to precisely tailor the dispersion and nonlinearity for a given interaction Nonlinear optical processes in second-order χ (2) and thirdorder χ (3) nonlinear media such as difference-frequency generation (DFG) Towards this goal, we utilize optical parametric amplification (OPA) using degenerate-pump FWM in χ (3) materials (χ (3) -OPA) since phase-matching requires careful dispersion engineering and frequency conversion only occurs at desired spectral bands. In such a FWM process, two pump photons are annihilated, providing gain for a signal wavelength, and generate frequency converted light at the idler wavelength, where 2ω p = ω s + ω i is the energy conservation relation. The corresponding phase-matching condition is ∆β = 2β pβ sβ i + 2γP = 0, where β denotes the wave-vector, γ is the nonlinear parameter, and P is the pump peak power. Moreover, numerous materials with large χ (3) nonlinearity can be processed with commonplace electron-beam-and photo-lithography techniques. This enables an integrated photonics realization of the χ (3) -OPA. In previous work, such schemes have typically employed single-mode silica-based optical fibers due the favorable anomalous dispersion and low losses around 1.55 μm Here, we exploit the wide transparency region (0.4-4.5 μm) and negligible two-photon absorption of SiN to realize phasematched χ (3) -OPA pumped at 1.55 μm to generate MIR light in the first atmospheric window (3-5 μm) (Fig. We generate tunable MIR light by using a single mode-locked Er:fiber laser (100 MHz repetition rate) to generate the pump pulses at 1.55 μm (degenerate pump) and the signal at 1.07 μm. In this configuration, the laser output is amplified in an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) to yield a 50-fs, 1-nJ pump pulse. A second EDFA output is spectrally broadened in HNLF (γ = 10 W -1 km -1 ) and a bandpass filter around 1.0 μm isolates the seed pulse (Fig. The stoichiometric SiN waveguides are fabricated via lowpressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) with 700-nm thickness on a silicon dioxide substrate. Electron-beam lithography is used to define 1-cm-long ridge waveguides, which are air-clad except at the input and output facets where symmetric oxide cladding helps with coupling by making the waveguide modes symmetric. The waveguide input facet, in addition, has inverse taper couplers for efficient pump coupling (< 2 dB insertion loss) The waveguides with widths 3000-4000 nm have anomalous dispersion at 1.5 μm (Fig. Wide tunability from 2.6-3.6 μm is observed as the waveguide widths are changed. The MIR bandwidth and power in each waveguide is approximately constant across the chip. We theoretically model the FWM/OPA process using the nonlinear Schrodinger equation Due to competing nonlinear processes, increasing the pump energy beyond a certain level does not increase the MIR power. To investigate this effect, we modeled the pulse propagation in a 3400-nm-wide waveguide and plot the output spectra as a function of pump-pulse energy in Fig. The measured MIR power is on the order of 10 μW and is limited in our present devices by the weak optical confinement of the longer wavelengths and strong absorptive loss in the oxide. This linear loss for the MIR constrains the conversion efficiency in FWM When strong confinement is available for all the waves, high conversion efficiency and large parametric gain can be expected in the nonlinear process. In the present waveguides, such performance is observed for an all-NIR FWM process. In order to demonstrate these advantages, we employ χ (3) -OPA using a 1.0μm (degenerate) pump and a 1.3-μm seed in the 2400-nm-wide waveguide on the same chip. To experimentally realize these conditions, we modify the experimental setup slightly: (i) the input aspheric lens is aligned to favor coupling the 1.0μm pulse (30 dB higher on-chip pulse energy than the signal) (ii) the 1.5 μm pulse is spectrally broadened in HNLF and filtered, resulting in a 1.3-μm pulse (50 fs pulse duration), and (iii) matched input and output aspheric lenses are used. At the pump wavelength (1.07 μm), the group-velocity dispersion is approximately zero (Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrated tunable MIR light from 2.6-3.6 μm in the OPA configuration using SiN nanophotonic waveguides driven by an Er:fiber laser with only 100-pJ-scale pumppulse energies. The low pulse energy requirements make this system amenable for further photonic integration as well as GHz-repetition rate nonlinear optics 