A theoretical investigation of the ultrafast processes and dynamics of the excited carriers upon irradiation of GaAs with femtosecond (fs) pulsed lasers is performed in conditions that induce material damage and eventually surface modification of the heated solid. A parametric study is followed to correlate the produced transient carrier density with the damage threshold for various pulse duration values τ p (it increases as ~0.053 0.011  p  at relatively small values of τ p while it drops for pulse durations of the order of some picoseconds) based on the investigation of the fundamental multiscale physical processes following fs-laser irradiation. Moreover, fluence values for which the originally semiconducting material demonstrates a metallic behaviour are estimated. It is shown that a sufficient number of carriers in the conduction band are produced to excite Surface Plasmon (SP) waves that upon coupling with the incident beam and a fluid-based surface modification mechanism lead to the formation of sub-wavelength periodic structures orientated perpendicularly to the laser beam polarization. Experimental results for the damage threshold and the frequencies of induced periodic structures show a good agreement with the theoretical predictions. Over the past decades, laser-based material processing with ultra-short pulsed laser sources has received considerable attention due to its important technological applications, in particular in industry and medicine One type of surface modification, the so-called laserinduced periodic surface structures (LIPSS) on solids have been studied extensively for linearly polarized beams. In recent works, it was also shown that it is possible to produce even more functional surfaces by using more complex polarisation states. It turns out that the morphological features of structures provide unique optomechanical properties that can be used in many applications Previous theoretical approaches or experimental observations related to the understanding of the underlying physical mechanism for the formation of these structures were performed in a variety of conditions To explain the underlying physical origin of LIPSS formation, it is important to note that following irradiation with ultrashort pulses, a series of multiphysical phenomena take place While the precise physical mechanism for the origin of LIPSS is still debatable, one process that undoubtedly occurs is a phase transition that eventually leads to a surface modification. Physical mechanisms that lead to surface modification have been explored both theoretically and experimentally On the other hand, femtosecond laser interaction involves several complex phenomena, including energy absorption, photon-ionisation processes, electron excitation, electron-relaxation processes, phase transitions and/or thermomechanical effects, resolidification and mass ejection. In principle, the laser beam parameters (wavelength, pulse duration, fluence, number of pulses, angle of incidence and beam polarisation state) determine the onset of the surface modification as energy absorption, electrodynamical effects and relaxation processes are critical to the material heating. The complexity of the processes and ionisation mechanisms is material dependent as the laser source is used to excite, firstly, electrons/carriers from the valence to the conduction band before the energy is transferred into the lattice system To fully understand the ultrafast dynamics of the excited carriers upon irradiation with ultrashort pulses, it is important to perform a thorough analysis of the influence of the laser parameters on the thermal response of the material. Theoretical models that describe the fundamentals of laser-matter interaction for various types of materials (i.e. metals, semiconductors, dielectrics) and experimental studies successfully provide a detailed analysis of the physical mechanisms behind a plethora of structural effects (i.e. production of craters, evaluation of damage thresholds, LIPSS formation) Nevertheless, although for many semiconducting materials, the physical mechanism that describes ultrafast dynamics is well-established and the theoretical model works efficiently in various conditions (that lead to high excited carrier densities, ~ 10 20 -10 22 cm -3 ), there is still a missing picture for some types of semiconductors such as GaAs To this end, we present an extension of the wellestablished theoretical model that describes ultrafast dynamics in semiconductors During laser irradiation of a semiconducting material, various physical processes occur on a femtosecond timescale. As excitation of GaAs is performed through a laser beam of λ L = 800 nm corresponding to photon energy equal to 1.55eV that is higher than the band gap of the material (~ 1.42 eV, at 300 K), it is assumed that one-and two-photon absorption mechanisms are sufficient to excite carriers from the valence to the conduction band while higher order photon processes are less likely to occur. On the other hand, (linear) free carrier photon absorption can increase the electron energy (but not the number of the excited carriers) while Auger recombination and impact ionization processes lead to decrease or increase of the carriers in the conduction band, respectively. To describe the carrier excitation and relaxation processes, the relaxation time approximation to Boltzmann's transport equation where C c (C L ) is the carrier (lattice) heat capacity, k e (k h ) is the heat conductivities of the electron (holes), L  stands for the photon energy (~1.55eV for λ L = 800 nm), SPA  and TPA  correspond to the single and two-photon absorption coefficients, respectively, γ is the coefficient for Auger recombination, θ is the impact ionization coefficient, and τ e is the carrier-phonon energy relaxation time. It is noted, that the expression for Si was used to approximately estimate τ e as there is not any reported relevant value. Through this expression, the significance of carrier density dependence of the relaxation time is recognised. Other quantities that need to be evaluated are the carrier current density J and the heat current density where D stands for the ambipolar carrier diffusivity, 0 e  and 0 h  are the electron/hole mobilities (8500 cm 2 /Vs and 400 cm 2 /Vs, respectively, for GaAs assuming that the laser beam is Gaussian, both temporally and spatially, and the transmitted laser intensity at the incident (flat) surface is expressed in the following form where E p is the fluence of the laser beam and  p is the pulse duration (i.e. full width at half maximum), R 0 is the irradiation spot-radius (distance from the centre at which the intensity drops to 1/e 2 of the maximum intensity, and R is the reflectivity while irradiation under normal incidence was assumed. The computation of the free carrier absorption coefficient and the reflectivity are derived from the dielectric constant of the material (assuming also corrections due to band and state filling where ε un is the dielectric constant of the unexcited material at λ L = 800 nm (ε un = 13.561+ 0.63105i) = 0.34 m e0 are the optical effective masses of the carriers ) and τ col stands for the carriers (electron-hole) collision time. It is noted that optical effective masses are taken to be constant for GaAs and the excitation conditions do not alter them. Similar assumptions were made for Silicon or Germanium that demonstrate that constant values yielded an adequate description of dynamics and morphological effects Despite estimates in other reports that assume a dynamical variation of τ col x, y, 0, As explained in the Introductory section, the excitation of SP and its interference with the incident beam constitutes one of the dominant mechanisms that aim to explain the formation of LSFL According to theoretical predictions and experimental studies, the interference of the incident and the surface wave results in the development of periodic ripples (LSFL) with orientation perpendicular to the electric field of the laser beam The dispersion relation for the excitation of SP is derived by the boundary conditions (continuity of the electric and magnetic fields at the interface between a metallic and dielectric material) (ε d = 1) for a flat surface (NP=1). Therefore, a requirement for a semiconductor to obey the above relation and conditions The condition Re( '  ) <-1 and Eqs. (5,8) can be used to derive the range of values of the excited carrier densities that lead to SP excitation. It is evident that carrier densities larger than ~1.5 × 10 21 cm -3 lead to excitation of SP (Fig. when the surface profile changes from a flat to a periodically corrugated one. Previous studies reported that a systematic analysis of the distribution of the electric field of the laser beam shows that there exists a correlation of the SP wavelength with the depth of the periodic structure that leads to the best SP-laser coupling and therefore Eq.8 is no longer valid Due to the need for the consideration of a phase transition for the description of an induced morphological change, fluid dynamics is introduced. The material that undergoes melting is assumed to be an incompressible Newtonian fluid and its dynamics is described by the following equations (ii). for the energy conservation: where () is the thermal conductivity of the molten material. The presence of a liquid phase requires a modification of the second of Eq.1 to incorporate convection. This means that while the second equation in Eq.1 that describes the lattice temperature evolution still holds for material which is in the solid phase, an appropriate modification is required to account for the transport/convection of the fluid (iii). for the momentum conservation: where u is the velocity of the fluid, μ is the liquid viscosity, P is the total pressure (hydrodynamical and recoil) and () m L C stands for the heat capacity of the liquid phase. Vapour ejected creates a back (recoil) pressure on the liquid free surface which in turn pushes the melt away in the radial direction. The recoil pressure and the surface temperature are usually related according to the equation where P 0 is the atmospheric pressure (~ 10 5 Pa), L v is the latent heat of evaporation (of the order of 10 7 kJ/m 3 as for Silicon and Germanium (iv) shallow water equations: Due to the phase transition, the dynamics of the molten material will determine the surface profile when solidification terminates. Thus, the generated ripple height is calculated from the Saint-Venant's shallow water equation where ( , ) H r t stands for the melt thickness which evolves and provides the final surface morphology upon resoldification. The presence of an intermediate zone that contains material in both phases when the solid undergoes a phase transition will complicate the description of flow dynamics (presence of a mushy zone Due to the inherent complexity and highly nonlinear character of the equations in Section II, an analytical solution is not feasible and therefore, a numerical approach is pursued. Numerical simulations have been performed using a finite difference method while the discretization of time and space has been chosen to satisfy the Neumann stability criterion. Furthermore, it is assumed that on the boundaries, von Neumann boundary conditions are satisfied and heat losses at the front and back surfaces of the material are negligible. The initial conditions are T e (t=0) = T L (t=0) = 300 K, and N e = 10 12 cm -3 at t=0. The parameters for GaAs used in the simulation are summarised in Table The values of the laser beam used in the simulation are: The (peak) fluence is , where I 0 stands for the peak value of the intensity while R 0 in Eq.4 is taken to be equal to 20 μm. The wavelength of the beam is λ L =800 nm. A common approach followed to solve similar problems is the employment of a staggered grid finite difference method which is found to be effective in suppressing numerical oscillations. Unlike the conventional finite difference method, temperatures (T c and T L ), carrier densities (N e ), pressure (P) are computed at the centre of each element while time derivatives of the displacements and first-order spatial derivative terms are evaluated at locations midway between consecutive grid points. Similarly, the carrier current density J (x, y, z, t) and the heat current density W (x, y, z, t) are evaluated at the above locations rather than at the centres of each element. On the other hand, the horizontal and vertical velocities are defined in the centres of the horizontal and vertical cells faces, respectively (for a more detailed analysis of the numerical simulation conditions and the methodology towards the description of fluid dynamics, see Ref. Regarding the boundary conditions for the fluid dynamics, the following constraints are imposed: 1. 0 u  , on the solid-liquid interface (non-slipping conditions), 2. , on the top surface (T s is the surface temperature and σ stands for the surface tension). Its gradient along the tangential direction t u is balanced by shear stress (the position vector, r ,is taken on the surface of the molten profile), 3. P=0, on the top surface. Numerical integration is allowed to move to the next time step provided that all variables at every element satisfy a predefined convergence tolerance of ±0.1%. To simplify the solution procedure, it is noted that hydrodynamic equations are solved in regions that contain either solid or molten material. To include the 'hydrodynamic' effect of the solid domain, material in the solid phase is modelled as an extremely viscous liquid (μ solid = 10 5 μ), which will result into velocity fields that are infinitesimally small. An apparent viscosity is then defined with a smooth switch function similar A Titanium Sapphire (Ti:Sa) regenerative amplifier laser was used with central wavelength at 800 nm, at 1 kHz repetition rate, of 100 fs pulse duration and 5 mJ pulse energy. The laser beam was guided through an optical microscope setup onto a semi-insulating Gallium Arsenide (SI-GaAs) substrate. A pyroelectric sensor was used to measure the power on the sample surface (~200 mJ/cm 2 ). The irradiation took place in room conditions at pressure equal to 101.325 kPa (1 atm). A two dimensional high precision translation stage was used to move the sample with spatial resolution of 1 μm. The sample was fixed on a two axis translation stage that was set to move at a constant velocity equal to 300 μm/s perpendicularly to the laser beam direction. By setting the repetition rate of the laser at 1 kHz and the beam spot size of 4.24 μm on the focal plane of the surface, each point of the material was irradiated with 14 pulses (on average). The beam moved relatively to the sample in a zig-zag motion scanning a square area of 50 μm × 50 μm. On the sample shown in Fig. Α parametric analysis was performed by varying the scanning velocity, the beam overlapping area of ablation and fluence relative to the scanning direction. Since comparison of results as a function of scanning velocity is not convenient, the scanning velocity is converted to the number of pulses per spot through the relation with the laser repetition rate (hence only the NP is used in this work and not the scanning velocity). To characterize the produced T 0 ( 0 K) 300 Electron-hole pair heat capacity Auger recombination coefficient Dynamic viscosity Surface tension surface profiles, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used (Fig. The ultrafast dynamics and the thermal response of the heated material are investigated to take into consideration the role of fluence and the pulse duration. Firstly, laser conditions for irradiation of GaAs with a single pulse of fluence E p = 70 mJ/cm 2 and pulse duration τ p = 100 fs are assumed. The evolution of the carrier density and the carrier and lattice temperatures are illustrated in Fig. of their interaction with the lattice while Auger recombination delays the heating of the lattice. On the other hand, the decrease of the carrier density is caused by the Auger recombination effect (Fig. The reflectivity of the irradiated material drops rapidly within the pulse duration to a minimum value that corresponds to Re (ε)=1 (Fig. To illustrate the effect of fluence on the optical properties of the irradiated material and the induced energy absorption that is expected also to influence the thermal response of the system (and equilibration process) as well its surface morphology, the evolution of reflectivity is investigated for various values of E p . Simulation results indicate that there exists a faster acquisition of the minimum value (shift of the minimum to smaller times in Fig. On the other hand, the lifetime of the SP (i.e. smaller than the time required for melting and larger than the time needed to couple with the incident beam) as well the carrier density value (~2.6 × 10 21 cm -3 at around 80% of the intensity (Fig. In previous reports, a correlation of the SP wavelength on the corrugation depth was proposed based on Finite Difference Time (FDTD) simulations The decrease of the SP wavelength with increasing dose (i.e. NP) that is reflected on the periodicity of the rippled profile (Fig. While a detailed description of the physical mechanisms that lead to LIPSS formation is expected to allow production of the periodic structure formation in a systematic way, another significant area of investigation is the correlation of the damage thresholds (for NP=1) with the laser parameters and more specifically the laser pulse duration. In regard to the determination of the value of the 'damage threshold', it is noted that there is an ambiguity regarding to whether morphological damage is associated to a mass displacement due to melting and resolidification of the material or it is related to a mass removal (i.e. or ablation). In Fig. The theoretical model presented in this work aimed to describe systematically the parameters that influence the ultrafast dynamics of GaAs after heating with ultrashort pulses and estimate the thermal response of the material (associated eventually with surface modification); nevertheless, there are still many unexplored issues that need to be addressed (i.e. effective mass dependence on fluence, wavelength dependence, excitation in very short pulses, role of more complex beam polarisation states, structural effects in extreme conditions, distinction between amorphous or crystalline material, mechanical effects, more accurate behaviour in ablation conditions, formation of voids inside the material after repetitive irradiation, role of incubation effects, consideration of degeneracy and departure from a Maxell-Boltzmann-based assumption of carrier distribution, precise computation of carrier collision frequency and electron-phonon coupling, inclusion of the influence of impact ionisation and carrier diffusion, etc.) before a complete picture of the physical processes that characterise heating of GaAs with femtosecond laser pulses is attained. A detailed theoretical framework was presented that describes, for the first time, both the ultrafast dynamics and surface modification physical mechanism after heating of GaAs with ultrashort pulsed lasers. The influence of the laser conditions such as the pulse duration and the fluence were evaluated in an effort to explore conditions that lead to SP excitation. Results show an increase of the maximum value of the reflectivity at increasing fluence that emphasises the metallic character of the heated material. To account for the frequencies of the experimentally observed periodic structures, a dose-dependent modulation of the SPwavelength which is excited on the corrugated surface is performed. Simulation results revealed a ~0.053 0.011 relatively small values of the pulse duration) dependence of the damage threshold and a SP-related periodic structure formation. The correlation of the laser characteristics dependencies of the ultrafast dynamics, material damage and onset of periodic structure formation can be used to streamline the modulation of the frequencies of the structures on the surface of a still not fully explored semiconductor under intense heating. Hence, a detailed description of the thermal response of the material is aimed to allow a systematic laser-based processing and produce surface structures with application-based properties. As shown also in R. Rupp and G. Muller, Journal of Crystal Growth 113, 131 (1991), the surface tension is temperature dependent. The expression that was used in our computations are σ=0.401-0.18  10 -3 (T L -T m ) (T L <1611 K). To justify the latter value, we considered the evolution of the surface tension as a function of the temperature in the case of Si (G. D. Similarly, an approximating function with a similar behavior (as in Si) for σ for larger T L is produced and illustrated in Fig. In this Fig. (a) (b) FIG. Heat conductivity of the carriers (denoted with 'c', where it is 'e' ('h'), for electrons (holes), respectively) is provided by the following expressions An alternative methodology to compute the carrier collision time In principle, femtosecond pulsed laser interaction with matter triggers a variety of timescale-dependent processes, influenced by the fluence and pulse duration; different combinations of those parameters are capable to induce phase transition or material removal. A solid material subjected to ultrashort pulsed laser heating at sufficiently high fluences undergoes a phase transition to a superheated liquid whose temperature reaches 0.90T cr (T cr being the thermodynamic critical temperature). A subsequent bubble nucleation leads to a rapid transition of the superheated liquid to a mixture of vapour and liquid droplets that are ejected from the bulk material (phase explosion). This has been proposed as a material removal mechanism. By contrast, the interpretation of a possible surface modification due to evaporation has been related to the presence of a Knudsen layer adjacent to the liquid-vapor interface and the process has been analysed in numerous works. The proposed scenario of modelling material removal is based on a combination of evaporation of material volumes that exceed upon irradiation lattice temperatures close to 0.90T cr and evaporation due to dynamics of Knudsen layer, which is a scenario that was elaborated in a previous work On the other hand, as values for T cr or T b (boiling point temperature) are not known for GaAs, based on experimental observations for mass removal (i.e. ablation) for Silicon 