A novel mathematical approach has been developed to complete the inversion of the Biot-Savart law in one-and two-dimensional cases from measurements of the perpendicular component of the magnetic field using the well-developed Magneto-Optical Imaging technique. Our approach, especially in the 2D case, is provided in great detail to allow a straightforward implementation as opposed to those found in the literature. Our new approach also refines our previous results for the 1D case [Johansen et al., Phys. Rev. B 54, 16264 (1996)], and streamlines the method developed by Jooss et al. [Physica C 299, 215 (1998)] deemed as the most accurate if compared to that of Roth et al. [J. Appl. Phys. 65, 361 (1989)]. We also verify and streamline the iterative technique, which was developed following Laviano et al. [Supercond. Sci. Technol. 16, 71 (2002)] to account for in-plane magnetic fields caused by the bending of the applied magnetic field due to the demagnetising effect. After testing on magneto-optical images of a high quality YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 superconducting thin film, we show that the procedure employed is effective. Magnetic imaging techniques are increasingly prevalent in many fields of science and medicine, as they can be used to determine the properties of materials and provide powerful medical diagnostic tools through non-contact, non-destructive measurements. Such techniques in physics and materials science research include but are not limited to Magnetic force microscopy; 1 SQUID (Superconducting Quantum Interference Device) microscopy, Though a magnetic field is applied solely in the z-direction, in-plane magnetic fields exist at the finite measurement distance in MOI due to the bending of magnetic fields around the superconducting sample by the demagnetising effect. To account for this, a technique was proposed by Johansen et al., The accuracy of any correction technique is vital to the practice of MOI, since it can avoid calculation of misleading current distributions. Such techniques could also lead to higher resolution image reconstructions for determination of local electrodynamic quantities, allow more accurate determination of properties such as local current-carrying capacity, In detecting the magnetic field around superconducting samples, the magneto-optical imaging technique measures the local z-component of the magnetic field at each point in a Faraday-active indicator film, Figure When a magnetic field is present at a point on the indicator film, the local magnetic moment is perturbed by an angle / as shown in Fig. Zuber et al. where E A is the anisotropy energy, M s is the value of the spontaneous magnetisation, and a is the angle formed between the magnetic induction B and the xy-plane. To find an expression for the equilibrium magnetisation, an angle / is determined such that the interaction energy is a minimum. This angle represents the balance between the magnetocrystalline anisotropy and the tendency to align with the external magnetic field. defining the following: E A M s 1⁄4 B A as the magnetic anisotropy field and The polarisation of light incident on the indicator film is rotated by the Faraday effect. In the MOI setup, polarised light is applied to the indicator film parallel to the film's optical axis. Therefore, the angle of rotation a F is proportional to the magnetisation along the light propagation direction, allowing us to use the Faraday rotation law where C is an experimental constant dependent on the indicator film thickness. After rotation the light passes through an analyser at a fixed angle h with respect to the polariser. Invoking Malus' law then gives the intensity at the analyser as The light intensity is then measured employing a camera, and the magnetic field can be determined directly from the measured light intensity. This light intensity can be used to calculate currents in a superconducting film placed underneath (Fig. The inverse problem is the problem of calculating currents from magnetic field measurements of a thin film superconductor placed in a homogeneous perpendicular magnetic field. Since magnetic field values are used to calculate current in a non-local manner, the Biot-Savart law is always taken as the starting point of the problem. The solution to the 1D inverse problem depicted in Fig. The sheet is taken to be thin so that J z 1⁄4 0, and since we are only considering the 1D case, J x 1⁄4 0 here too. For the currents, the sheet thickness, d, is taken to be small compared to the height of the detector above the sheet, h: d ( h. Hence, in the application of the Biot-Savart law, the sheet current is given by where j(x, z) is the local current density caused by current moving in the y-direction producing a magnetic field in the xz-plane. An application of the Biot-Savart law in 1D gives Prior to taking the Fourier transform of the inhomogeneous Fredholm integral equation of the first kind above observe that the kernel is translational invariant, so a convolution in the x-plane can be applied. Hence, the Fourier transform of Eq. ( Now, obtaining an expression for J(x)-the current value at the small region of current not the x-ordinate of the magnetometers position (x 0 )-and using the inversion theorem gives In order to compute the Fourier transform of the integral kernel, it can be shown where sgn(x) is the sign function. A proof is provided in Appendix A. Before discretisation of the integral can take place, the functions in the integrand must be transformed into those which can be represented by an infinite series. So, using Eq. ( However, noting that the transfer function is given by , it is evident that components with high frequency will be highly amplified, since by Eq. ( Such components are to be removed. Hence, a low pass filter should be included in the analysis so that components with jk x j ! K c are cut out, where K c is a cut-off frequency. Including this cut-off frequency gives ÀK c e ik x x B z ðx 0 Þe Àik x x 0 Àipsgnðk x Þe Àhjk x j dk x dx 0 : By defining Eq. ( The following solution to Eq. ( however, it lacks a small numerical factor of À With such an integral kernel, A(n), the integral in Eq. ( The infinite sum representing the revised version of Eq. ( Hence, the 1D inverse problem has been solved. A discrete sum is obtained here to represent the current density given the magnetic field values. However, this solution was not consistent with previous literature due to the aforementioned small factor of À 2 p . Therefore, the current appears to flow in the opposite direction and has a slightly smaller amplitude by a factor of 2/p, compared to the result in Ref. 31. The true "Current Direction" is shown in Fig. The inverse problem in two dimensions was analysed using a novel approach, which somewhat resembles that given by Jooss et al. To derive a formula for J x (x, y) and J y (x, y) as a function of B z , we start with the continuity condition for the sheet current density r Á Jðx; yÞ 1⁄4 0: (19) It assumes that there is no current flowing in the z-direction of the sheet since it is thin. We then define a scalar function g(x, y) by the relation which is consistent with the continuity equation (19). To alleviate the freedom of gauge choice, the Coulomb gauge condition can be applied so that g(x, y) is totally defined as the local magnetisation and is the potential function for the current density. Using the new expression for J(x, y) in the integrand given by the Biot-Savart law, we obtain where r is the position we measure the field being produced from position r 0 and the volume element d Taking into account the finite thickness of the sample (d), we integrate z 0 over the domain Àd 2 to d 2 . Now in taking the Fourier transform of the x 0 and y 0 integrals (since we may swap the order of integration so as to only transform the inner integrals, then integrate the result over the z 0 domain); mapping the spatial variables x and y to the frequency variables k x and k y , respectively; applying the convolution theorem in the xy-plane; and noting that we are always measuring the field at a constant height h above the surface of the sample, hence z 1⁄4 h, we obtain Bz ðk x ; k y ; h; dÞ 1⁄4 À l 0 4p To compute the Fourier transform shown above, we claim that where . This claim may be re-written using the inversion theorem as The proof of the claim is given in Appendix B. Hence, the magnetic field detected becomes The only subsequent analysis to be performed is to transform Eq. ( and the continuity equation Finally, we can obtain expressions for both components of the current as functions of physical variables and the magnetic field detected in the z-direction by using Eqs. ( Both of the above equations can have the FFT algorithm applied to them so that the values of B z obtained can be used to calculate J x and J y and hence obtain a current map of the superconductor. Thus, solving the inverse problem and ending with final equations consistent with those derived by Jooss et al. The intensity at the analyser in the equilibrium position in a magneto-optical imaging apparatus is found by substituting Eqs. ( It has been common practice to take B xy 1⁄4 0 for simplicity, however, that leads to an interpretation of MOI data that may not be physically accurate. Below, we scrutinize the in-plane correction proposed by Laviano et al. Combining Eqs. ( This neatly presented equation is used in an attempt to produce better approximations of B z from known B zj0 ; B x , and B y values while taking B A as a constant. It was proposed (i) Use B ðnÞ z to find J ðnÞ x ðx; yÞ and J ðnÞ y ðx; yÞ using an FFT algorithm on the Eqs. ( (iv) Assign B ðnþ1Þ z 1⁄4 B ðnÞ z , and go to (i), unless the difference between successive iterations is suitably small. To complete stage (ii) of the algorithm proposed above, equations for B x and B y in terms of B zj0 , are determined using the inversion techniques previously presented. By considering again the 2D inversion problem, but now solving for B x and taking into account the finite height of the detector which can be Fourier transformed with an application of the convolution theorem to gain an integral kernel with a derivative identical to the negative of that in (24). Hence, employing the claim in (24) then integrating gives which can be integrated to find These are the expressions used in Ref. 36 for the calculation of B x and B y , but simpler expressions may be found by substitution of Eq. ( These equations may be used in step (ii) of the algorithm to provide a streamlined correction procedure that remains analytically identical. This in-plane correction technique was applied to a number of magneto-optical images. The results are presented for a 3 mm 2 YBCO thin film. All images tested were acquired using the MOI technique and the apparatus described in Ref. 8. The sample is cooled to a temperature of 4 K in a Janis continuousflow helium cryostat. The YBCO films used have been grown using the pulsed laser deposition technique. After appropriate calibration, the grey-scale value of each pixel in the acquired MO images was converted to a magnetic field value. The resultant images, along with Eqs. ( The results of the correction procedure are presented in Figs. . This is evidence that the effects of in-plane fields have been successfully removed. However, an undesired effect has also emerged when the number of iterations is >5: a series of non-physical bright and dark fringes are seen close to the edges of the sample in both the field and current images [Figs. The inverse problem for finding the current distribution in superconducting thin films from magnetic field measurements in a plane above the film has been uniquely solved for both the one-and two-dimensional cases. A new method for computation of the integral kernel in the 2D case has been devised which involves reducing the problem to a Laplace transform of a Bessel function of the first kind. The derivations are provided in great detail to enable a straightforward implementation, as opposed to those available in the literature with limited information. In the 2D case, the solution was found to be consistent with that previously determined in Refs. 32 and 33 although the use of Green's function identities were not required whilst still taking into account the finite height of the magnetisation above the surface. In the 1D case, it was found that the calculated current appears to flow in the opposite direction and has a slightly smaller amplitude by a factor of 2/p, compared to the result in Ref. 31. Otherwise, the solution is fully consistent with Ref. 31. For the in-plane field correction procedure proposed in Ref. 36, the equations used to calculate the x and y components of the magnetic field at the detector [Eqs. (43) and (44)] were simplified slightly for our new approach, which is provided in every detail to enable straightforward implementation. The final equation and correction algorithm are fully consistent with the result obtained in Ref. 36. Experimental verification of our approach is efficient. The correction procedure does effectively remove the unwanted influence of in-plane field components with no more than 5 iteration steps required. The optimal images are obtained with only 3-5 iterations. Due to the internal LabVIEW FFT routine, the artefacts in the form of fringes appear in the field and current mapping after >5 iteration steps, which, if done with a FFT routine having a smaller binning size, should not occur up to a large number of iteration steps. A possible improvement to the presented in-plane correction technique might be to consider the magnetic anisotropy field as non-constant across the sample due to its micro-geometry or to account for these in-plane fields in a different way such as by deriving a modified Biot-Savart inversion procedure that avoids iterative calculations. By the inversion theorem Now, swapping the roles of x 0 and k x and letting k Q.E.D. Proof of the claim (25) To prove the claim (25), first notice that the integral kernel is radially symmetric. Hence, following the theorem of Hankel transforms, the co-ordinate system is changed using the following substitutions: Since the integrand involved the Laplace transform of the function k 2 J 0 ðrkÞ, time scaling, and general frequency domain differentiation properties of the Laplace transform can be used to give ; (B11) verifying Eq. ( x ; k y Þdz 0 : (26) Now, we can assume that gðk x ; k y Þ is not J. Appl. Phys. 123, 123906 (2018) gðx 0 ; y 0 Þd r 0 : (22) 123906-4 Zuber et al. J. Appl. Phys. 123, 123906 (2018)