In skyrmion-based racetrack memories, the information encoded by skyrmions may be destroyed due to the skyrmion Hall effect, which can be surmounted by using synthetic antiferromagnetic racetracks. Hence, the manipulation of skyrmions in synthetic antiferromagnetic racetracks is important for practical applications. Here, we computationally study the interaction between a pair of skyrmions and a locally modified region in a synthetic antiferromagnetic racetrack, where the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy or thickness is locally adjusted to be different from that of the rest region of the racetrack. It is found that the skyrmions can be attracted, repelled, and even trapped by the locally modified region in a controllable manner. Besides, we demonstrate that the skyrmion location can be precisely determined by the locally modified region. The possible manipulation of skyrmions by utilizing locally modified regions in a synthetic antiferromagnetic racetrack may be useful for future skyrmion-based applications. Racetrack memories Magnetic skyrmions are nanoscale topological spin textures a) These authors contributed equally to this work. b) E-mail: dearaujo@ufv.br On the other hand, in order to avoid the detrimental effect of the skyrmion Hall effect, which prevents skyrmions from moving along the central line of the racetrack, several methods have been proposed recently. For examples, the racetrack modification by insertion of lateral stripes with higher perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) In this work, we numerically investigate the controllable manipulation of skyrmions in a SyAF racetrack by locally modifying the PMA under the framework of micromagnetics. Such an investigation is necessary for further applications and can be used for controlling the spacing between adjacent skyrmions, defining the bit length, where a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) could be placed to detect the skyrmion, defining the bits "0" or "1" whether the skyrmion is present or absent, and protecting skyrmions from external fluctuations such as stray fields from nearby racetracks, similar to what have been proposed and studied for domain wall-based racetracks As shown in Fig. Figure The results given in Fig. Figure coupling is stronger in the thinner region, behaving as higher value of anisotropy. As shown in Fig. In order to understand why the local modifications of PMA constant and shape anisotropy (i.e., thickness) in the racetrack are able to induce the SyAF skyrmion decoupling and pin or expel top-layer/bottom-layer skyrmions, we continue to investigate the in-plane magnetization configurations of the SyAF racetrack. Figure The presented results suggest that it is possible to apply local modifications in the racetrack to generate bits, where the skyrmion is pinned, and in that position a MTJ could be fabricated to sense the skyrmion for information read-out processing. In order to test the shortest bit length we apply two separated spaces where the thickness of the racetrack is reduced by 0.5 nm. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated the dynamic behavior of skyrmions near the locally modified region of a SyAF racetrack, where the PMA constant or shape anisotropy is artificially adjusted. We have shown that it is possible to use the locally modified region to manipulate the skyrmion, such as defining the bit length and setting the right location to develop the read-out MTJ. We found that certain in-plane magnetization configurations are generated at the borders of the locally modified region, which can interact with the skyrmion. The SyAF skyrmion could be decoupled into a top-layer skyrmion and a bottom-layer skyrmion when it is close to the locally modified region, due to the DDI and exchange interaction between skyrmions and in-plane magnetization configurations at the borders of the locally modified region. Depending on the PMA constant or thickness of the locally modified region in relation to the rest region of the racetrack, the skyrmions can be either attracted or expelled by the locally modified region. We have also demonstrated that by using locally modified regions with thinner thickness and with small separation among each other, it is possible to move skyrmions between desired bit locations with very small driving current pulse. The micromagnetic simulations are performed with the GPU-accelerated micromagnetic simulator MUMAX3, which solves the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation augmented with the adiabatic STT where m = M /M S is the reduced magnetization, M S is the saturation magnetization, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio with absolute value, α is the Gilbert damping parameter, β is the non-adiabatic STT strength, is the reduced Planck constant, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, e is the electron charge, P is the polarization ratio of the electric current, and H eff is the effective field. The considered micromagnetic energy terms include the interlayer and intralayer Heisenberg exchange interaction energies, Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) energy, PMA energy, applied magnetic field energy, and DDI energy. The energy density of the DMI can be expressed as The third and fourth terms on the right-hand side of Eq. ( The images of magnetization configurations are obtained by using the MUVIEW software and the topological charges are calculated based on the following definition 13 In theory, the topological charge Q for a skyrmion is strictly equal to ±1 in the continuous model, however, due to the numerical discretization of the micromagnetic simulation process, we have Q ≈ ±1 for a skyrmion in the micromagnetic system.