High quality factor optical microcavities have been employed in a variety of material systems to enhance nonlinear optical interactions. While single-crystalline aluminum nitride microresonators have recently emerged as a low loss platform for integrated nonlinear optics such as four wave mixing and Raman lasing, few studies have investigated this material for second-harmonic generation. In this Letter, we demonstrate an optimized fabrication of dually-resonant phase-matched ring resonators from epitaxial aluminum nitride thin films. An unprecendented second-harmonic generation efficiency of 17,000%/W is obtained in the low power regime and pump depletion is observed at a relatively low input power of 3.5 mW. This poses epitaxial aluminum nitride as the highest efficiency second-harmonic generator among current integrated platforms. On-chip optical nonlinearity has gained a significant interest for their applications in classical and quantum photonic information processing. Compared to their bulk counterparts, the tight optical confinement and facile device engineering in nanophotonic waveguides allow for greater experimental control over common nonlinear processes such as second-harmonic generation (SHG) Single-crystalline AlN has emerged as the likely successor to polycrystalline AlN photonics. As noted in previous studies, AlN epitaxially grown on sapphire substrates exhibit exceptionally high film quality and can achieve optical Q factors on the order of 2x10 6 in the telecom band In this Letter, we demonstrate a fabrication process for realizing fully-etched AlN-on-sapphire devices with a 1.1 μm thickness. This process is then employed to fabricate ring resonators with both high optical Q factors as well as a tunable phase-matching bandwidth of 1480-1640 nm. By optimizing the visible extraction waveguide and the coupling conditions of both infrared and visible modes, an on-chip SHG conversion efficiency of 17000 %/W was achieved in the low-power regime and a χ (2) value of 6.2 ± 0.4 pm/V is extracted for epitaxial AlN. Pump depletion was observed in the high-power regime, with an absolute conversion efficiency as high as 11%. We model the SHG process in a microring cavity possessing both an infrared and visible mode at angular frequencies ω IR and ω vis , respectively, each with internal loss rate, κ 0,IR(vis) and external coupling rate κ c,IR(vis) . The coupling strength between these two resonance modes is represented by the parameter g, which can be determined from the mode overlap between infrared and visible modes, the microring geometry, and the χ (2) coefficient of AlN where P SHG and P p represent the on-chip SHG and pump power, respectively, and κ IR(vis) is the total coupling rate κ IR(vis) = κ c,IR(vis) + κ 0,IR(vis) . Under ideal phase matching conditions, the microring geometry is optimized such that δ IR = δ vis = 0 and ω vis = 2ω IR = 2ω p . Fulfilling this dual- resonance condition, the SHG conversion efficiency can be reduced to (κ c,IR + κ 0,IR ) 4 (2) According to Eq. 2, maximum η SHG can be achieved when both the IR and visible modes are critically coupled (κ c = κ 0 ) and the SHG efficiency is dependent only on the intrinsic device parameters. As noted in our previous report in polycrystalline AlN In this experiment, single-crystalline AlN films are grown on c-plane sapphire by metal-organic vapor deposition (MOCVD) to a nominal thickness of 1.1 μm. The AlNon-sapphire platform is quite insulating compared to typical silicon-based substrates and suffers from significant charging effects in our 100 kV electron-beam lithography process (Raith EBPG 5000+). While metal masks are typically used for increasing the conductivity of insulating substrates, many are not compatible with typical negative-tone resists such as hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) and/or require a twostep etching process that ultimately limits the process selectivity This process provides a simplified route for AlN-onsapphire fabrication, requiring a single masking step compared to the two-step processes previously reported in Ref. Fig. The near-visible extraction waveguide width is tapered from 175 to 125 nm at a constant coupling gap. As a result, the fundamental mode of the extraction waveguide can be sufficiently matched to the near-visible TM 2,0 ring mode while minimally perturbing the infrared TM 0,0 ring mode. Seven ring resonators share the same IR bus and visible drop waveguides to account for fabrication imperfections across the AlN chip. The infrared and visible waveguides rejoin in an onchip wavelength division multiplexer (WDM), while an offchip WDM separates the infrared and near-visible light for simultaneous characterization We then optimize the SHG wavelength by varying the width of the AlN ring waveguide, as shown in Fig. At low pump levels, SHG output power is known to increase quadratically with the pump power and deviates from this behavior with high pump power due to pump depletion. Fig. Finally, we look to Eq. 2 to optimize the SHG efficiency. As noted earlier, the SHG efficiency is optimized when the fundamental and second-harmonic resonances are both critically coupled. However, this proves difficult in practice as one (or both) resonances may deviate from critical coupling when varying the device geometries. Fig. The device used in the previous pump-power experiment in Fig. We do not believe a defect-related SHG proces plays a role at this time, as the effective χ (2) value for surface charge SHG is typically one to two orders of magnitude less than that observed in AlN In conclusion, we demonstrate a fabrication process to realize high quality AlN-on-sapphire nanophotonic devices for integrated nonlinear photonic applications. In the low pump power regime, an on-chip SHG conversion efficiency of 17,000 %/W (0.17 mW -1 ) is recorded, which is the new state-of-the-art thus observed among integrated platforms. At high pump power, pump depletion is observed at a relatively low pump power of 3.5 mW. The demonstrated high SHG efficiency paves the way for applications including low loss coherent frequency conversion 