Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials are promising candidates for sub-10 nm transistor channels due to their ultrathin body thickness, which results in strong electrostatic gate control. Properly scaling a transistor technology requires reducing both the channel length (distance from source to drain) and the contact length (distance that source and drain interface with semiconducting channel). Contact length scaling remains an unresolved epidemic for transistor scaling, affecting devices from all semiconductorssilicon to 2D materials. Here, we show that clean edge contacts to 2D MoS 2 provide immunity to the contact-scaling problem, with performance that is independent of contact length down to the 20 nm regime. Using a directional ion beam, in situ edge contacts of various metal-MoS 2 interfaces are studied. Characterization of the intricate edge interface using cross-sectional electron microscopy reveals distinct morphological effects on the MoS 2 depending on its thickness -from monolayer to few-layer films. Chromium is found to outperform other metals in the edge contact scheme, which is attributed to the shorter Cr-MoS 2 bond length. Compared to scaled top contacts with 20 nm contact length, in situ edge contacts yield better performance with an effective contact length of ~ 1 nm and 18 times higher carrier injection efficiency. The in situ edge contacts also exhibit ~8 times higher performance compared to the best-reported edge contacts. Our work provides experimental evidence for a solution to contact scaling in transistors, using 2D materials with clean edge contact interfaces, opening a new way of designing devices with 2D materials. Booming applications, such as smartphones, autonomous vehicles, and server farms, leave society starving for more computational power. At the heart of virtually all computation is the transistor, which yields increased computational ability with each successive technology node through size scaling. Such scaling, which enjoyed decades of success predicted by Moore's law, is now undisputedly slowing and potentially reaching an end based on the limitations of silicon 1- 5 . Not surprisingly, the electronic device community has been eager to explore new materials for the transistor channel that may extend the scalability roadmap, even for a few more generations. Nanomaterials have long been seen as a viable option, from 1D carbon nanotubes to the expanding family of 2D crystals. For 2D, graphene initially captured widespread attention and spawned a whole library of 2D materials with a variety of electronic band structures and properties [6][7][8][9] . The main advantage of 2D materials is their ultra-thin nature, which could enable extremely scaled transistors for the "Beyond Moore" era. The ultrathin body thickness directly affects the screening length, which dictates how short the channel length can be scaled down without inducing deleterious short channel effects. Using a planar device structure, it is estimated that monolayer MoS 2 has a screening length of less than 1 nm Moreover, a plethora of atomic heterostructures can be formed between different 2D materials While the channel length scalability of 2D FETs has been well studied Ideally, for scaling, contacts would be bonded directly to the side of the 2D channel as pure "edge contacts," as illustrated in Fig. Several studies on edge contacts to 2D materials have been reported, beginning with Cr edge contacts to graphene that exhibited a low contact resistance of 150 Ω•μm Here, we demonstrate edge-contacted MoS 2 FETs by using an in situ Ar ion beam. We show the ultimate scalability of pure edge contacts to CVD-grown MoS 2 of various layer thicknesses and metal types, providing evidence for the immunity of edge contacted 2D FETs to aggressive contact scaling. In order to understand carrier transport, we use cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and low-temperature electrical measurement to characterize the edge contacts. Our study elucidates the intriguing metal-2D edge interface and the potential of edge contacts for future scaled transistors. The use of an in situ ion beam to etch the MoS 2 immediately prior to contact metallization is crucial to avoid reactivity between the created edge states and molecular species other than the contact metal. The in situ ion beam source is incorporated with an electron beam evaporator in the same ultra high vacuum (UHV) chamber, as shown in Fig. Upon exposing the MoS 2 edge in the contact regions under UHV, contact metal is then deposited using an electron beam evaporator in the same chamber. The newly generated edge states are able to react with the depositing metal, forming a bonded edge interface. To study this interface, we use cross-sectional scanning tunneling electron microscopy (STEM) to characterize the etched edge. Fifteen layers of MoS 2 were exfoliated onto a silicon wafer with 300 nm SiO 2 (see cross-sectional STEM image in Supplementary Fig. To further understand the metal-MoS 2 edge interface, EDS was used to characterize the elements present in the right-side edge of the contact. As shown in Figure In addition to the interface highlighted in Fig. In order to demonstrate the ultimate scalability of edge contacts, in situ edge contacts were fabricated on CVD-grown MoS 2 . These MoS 2 films have a large area with uniform thickness, making them suitable for device fabrication and performance comparison. V gs -V th = 30 V and V ds = 4 V (see Supplementary Fig. Edge contacts to monolayer MoS 2 from CVD-grown crystals were also explored. A device structure similar to the one illustrated in Fig. The cross-sectional STEM images show the metal entrenching into the oxide, representative of complete MoS 2 removal in the contact region. EDS images of the contact (Fig. We also compare the I d -V ds characteristics for the monolayer edge and top contacted devices in Supplementary Fig. MoS 2 films grown on other substrates (for example, sapphire) and then transferred to SiO 2 substrates could offer less variability and higher performance (see Supplementary Fig. A scaling comparison between top and edge contacts is essential to determine the advantages of the edge contact scheme. On the multilayer CVD-grown MoS Estimating the R c of in situ edge contacts is also important. We first extracted R sh and R c for top Cr contacted devices from using transfer length model (TLM) structures (see Supplementary Fig. To further understand the in situ edge contact, we characterized Cr edge contacts under lowtemperatures. As given in Supplementary Note 5, a Schottky barrier of 120 meV is extracted. The Arrhenious plot in Supplementary Notes Fig. ). This unique Arrhenius profile suggests there is an additional tunneling route formed at the edge contacts that are independent of V gs . A more focused, detailed analysis in subsequent studies is deserved to investigate the formation of this tunneling route and the impact of edge interfaces on the band diagram of the edge contacts. The effect of different metal types is also important in understanding the in situ edge contact scheme. The I-V characteristics of Au, Cr, and Ni are compared in Supplementary Fig. Theoretically, Cr has been proposed to be an ideal metal to contact MoS 2 in the top contact scheme, with its shorter bond length to S, larger binding energy, and larger density of state at As the bonding length could be shorter in the edge contact scheme, density-functional theory (DFT) calculations on Cr edge contacts to MoS 2 remain to be conducted in order to confirm the orbital overlapping profile. Experimentally, devices with different metals have different threshold voltages, which can be explained by the different height and shape of the Schottky barrier for different metal-MoS 2 interfaces. We also compare the contact resistance for different metals in Supplementary Note 3. The huge contact resistance of Au edge contact compared to Au top contacts contradicts the suggestion that there might be some top interface transport component in the edge interface, otherwise the Au edge contact should perform similar to the Au top contacted devices. Overall, while the top contacts can outperform in situ edge contacts at long contact lengths of L c > 20 nm, attention should be given to the short contact length where the 2D materials would most likely be utilized in future scaled transistors. Furthermore, now that edge contacts to a 2D semiconductor have been demonstrated, continued study and optimization will improve their quality and resulting device performance. Further investigations may include: 1) improving the film quality of the 2D materials to have fewer defects and higher mobility; 2) doping the contact region before fabricating the edge contacts to further increase the number of carriers injected to the flake through the edge and thus decrease the contact resistance In situ edge contacts to MoS 2 FETs were demonstrated to provide immunity to contact length scaling for future generation devices. The challenge of preserving and utilizing the exposed, reactive edge of the MoS 2 was overcome by using in situ ion beam etching with contact metal deposition. The performance of the transistors remained consistent even as L c ranged from 20 nm to 60 nm across a set of devices, experimentally demonstrating that edge contacts are advantageous for ultimate 2D contact scaling. Moreover, the comparison of edge contacts versus top contacts was demonstrated and the impact of different metals (Ni, Cr, and Au) was explored using the same edge contact scheme. Further theoretical and experimental investigations are warranted to better understand the edge contact interface and decrease the contact resistance. Our work sheds light on the potential of edge contacts for ultimate contact scaling in MoS 2 transistors and could be applied to other 2D materials and nanoelectronic devices, paving the road for future aggressively scaled devices. Growth of the MoS 2 by CVD. The MoS 2 flakes were grown using a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process reported previously For devices using exfoliated flakes, multilayer MoS 2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto a heavily-doped Si substrate with 300 nm SiO 2 . For devices using CVD-grown MoS 2 films, the MoS 2 crystal was grown using the above process. EBL with PMMA was used to define the contact regions, leads, and pads. The substrate was then developed in a solution of IPA:MIBK= 3:1. After developing, the substrate was transferred to the UHV chamber (base pressure ~10 -8 torr) having an ion beam source (KDC 40, KRI) in situ with an e-beam evaporator. The chip was exposed with a 600 eV directional Ar ion beam, followed by metal deposition. A top Au layer (30 nm) is also in situ deposited on top of the in situ Ni and Cr metal (normally 15 nm) to prevent oxidation of the contacts when exposed to ambient. This in situ ion beam process with metal deposition is crucial for protecting the exposed edges from other molecules in the ambient environment. Finally, the fabricated devices were characterized in ambient air after lift-off in acetone at a temperature of 80 °C. Characterization of the edge contact interface. The AFM images in Fig. Notes Figure Considering the thickness of this flake is similar to the 10 nm flake demonstrated in the manuscript, we expect the tapering effect to show up here. Performance of the quasi-edge contacted devices is shown in Supplementary Notes Figure Au Ti V gs (V) V gs (V) V gs (V) Au Ti The data for the first in situ Cr edge contacts is from Fig. * It is unclear how large the overdrive voltage is. But the carrier density is high, n ~ 1×10 Note that I d and R tot in this reference is not normalized to contact width. In this row, R tot was calculated by using 1 V/I d . Because of the S-shape output characteristics, the actual R tot is likely even larger. the metal and the edge states of the 2D materials. Considering that the edge states will alter the bandgap at the termination of the 2D materials, the exact band diagram remains to be investigated using Density Function Theory. Supplementary Table Edge contacts q/(K B T) ). The reported R tot of the ex situ metal-MoS 2 edge contacts varies from 3 to hundreds of MΩμm. The current at V ds = 0.5 V of in situ edge contacts in this work is 7.8 times higher than the best-reported ex situ counterparts. Since R tot = 0.5 V/ I d , R