Two dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are promising candidates for ultra-low intensity photodetection. However, the performance of these photodetectors is usually limited by ambience induced rapid performance degradation and long lived charge trapping induced slow response with a large persistent photocurrent when the light source is switched off. Here we demonstrate an indium tin oxide (ITO)/WSe 2 /SnSe 2 based vertical double heterojunction photoconductive device where the photo-excited hole is confined in the double barrier quantum well, whereas the photo-excited electron can be transferred to either the ITO or the SnSe 2 layer in a controlled manner. The intrinsically short transit time of the photoelectrons in the vertical double heterojunction helps us to achieve high responsivity in excess of 1100 A/W and fast transient response time on the order of 10 μs. A large built-in field in the WSe 2 sandwich layer results in photodetection at zero external bias allowing a self-powered operation mode. The encapsulation from top and bottom protects the photoactive WSe 2 layer from ambience induced detrimental effects and substrate induced trapping effects helping us to achieve repeatable characteristics over many cycles. W EAK intensity light detection in the visible and in- frared range is of utmost technological importance in multiple fields encompassing remote sensing, public safety, medical instrumentation, space, military and industry applications. Transition metal di-chalcogenides (TMDCs) are layered two-dimensional materials Although photodetection with large responsivity has been demonstrated using TMDCs, there are two important bottlenecks that need to be overcome for these photodetection schemes to become technologically viable. First, the response time of most of the high gain photodetectors is very large owing to long lived traps The second problem arises from the ultra-thin nature of the TMDC films, providing a large surface to volume ratio. This results in exposure of the active medium to surroundings, leading to ambience (including moisture effect) induced detrimental effects and hence poorly repeatable characteristics. In order to overcome these bottlenecks, here we demonstrate a vertical heterojunction of WSe 2 /SnSe 2 capped with indium tin oxide (ITO) transparent electrode. The transparent ITO layer allows light to pass through it to generate photoexcited carriers in the buried WSe 2 layer, while protecting the heterojunction from changing ambient conditions, allowing repeatable characteristics over many cycles. On the other hand, SnSe 2 eliminates the substrate induced trapping effects by isolating the WSe 2 layer from the SiO 2 /Si substrate. Both SnSe 2 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We discuss the detailed features of the vertical design in section II. Followed by this, we explain the photoelectron transfer mechanism in the heterojunction using photoluminescence and Raman experiments in section III. The fabrication and electrical characterization details of the devices are explained in section IV and the photodetection performance is discussed in section V. We conclude the paper in section VI. collection layers. The current-voltage characteristics of a 30 nm thick SnSe 2 film is shown in Fig. 1) Short transit time: The WSe 2 active layer is sandwiched by closely separated conducting layers, where the separation is defined by the thickness of WSe 2 . Such a small separation is difficult to achieve using lithography in a planar structure, and allows to achieve very short transit time of electrons (τ tr ). On the other hand, the photoexcited holes are confined in the WSe 2 layer either due to valence band confinement in the quantum well produced by the double heterojunction or due to the band-tail state induced traps inside the bandgap. The photoconductive gain, defined as G = τ τtr , where τ is the time a hole takes on an average to either recombine with an electron or flee from the quantum well. A reduced τ tr helps to achieve a high gain while maintaining a fast response time. 2) Repeatable characteristics: The ITO layer on top completely seals the active WSe 2 layer from ambience which helps to achieve stable characteristics over many cycles without any performance deterioration. On the other hand, SnSe 2 screens all the defect states of SiO 2 substrate, thus eliminating the slow response tail and any persistent photocurrent. 3) Large built-in field: The asymmetric band offsets at the two interfaces of the ITO/WSe 2 /SnSe 2 heterojunction creates a large built-in potential across WSe 2 . This, coupled with the small thickness of WSe 2 results in a large built-in field, supporting efficient transport of photo-excited electrons. This, on one hand, allows high responsivity at zero external bias operation, and on the other hand provides a large open circuit voltage. 4) Improved carrier collection: It is important to suppress the series resistance to enhance the performance of the photodetector. The planar structure, as schematically illustrated in the left panel of Fig. The band offsets of WSe 2 and SnSe 2 are illustrated in Fig. Thus, we are able to tune the degree and direction of the photoelectron transfer from the WSe 2 layer by controlling the excitation wavelength and the thickness of the WSe 2 flake. Such controlled and efficient carrier transfer from the WSe 2 even without the application of any external bias forms the basis of the operation principle of the proposed photodetector, as explained in the next sections. The photoconductive vertical detector is fabricated on Si substrate covered with 300 nm SiO 2 . The SnSe 2 multi-layer flake is first mechanically exfoliated on the substrate. After identifying the flake of interest, a few-layer thick WSe 2 flake is precisely transferred on top of the SnSe 2 flake using PDMS film with the help of a micromanipulator under an optical microscope. For better adhesion, we heat this stack at 180 • C for 3 minutes in hotplate. A transparent metal electrode (ITO) is defined on top of the heterojunction using electron beam lithography, followed by deposition of 30 nm ITO using RF sputtering and subsequent lift off. Finally, the electrodes for contacts are defined by a second electron beam lithography, followed by the deposition of Ni (10 nm)/Au (50 nm) electrodes by DC sputtering. After this, the substrate is pasted on a PCB. External wires are taken for photocurrent measurement by wire bonding these devices using Al wire from the Ni/Au contacts. Fig. All photoresponse measurements are carried out using continuous wave laser excitation with wavelength of 532 nm and 785 nm. Electrical transport measurements are conducted on several devices with varying thickness of WSe 2 flakes. In this paper, all the measurements are taken in ambient air condition and applying bias on the SnSe 2 contact while keeping ITO side grounded. Fig. The device shows strong photoresponse, as indicated in Fig. Note that the photogenerated electrons in WSe 2 experiences a sharp band offset on both ITO and SnSe 2 sides [Fig. To further support the above mentioned mechanisms, we fabricate another set of devices (D2), which are identical to D1, however, but with a thinner WSe 2 (≈ 10 nm), as schematically shown in the inset of Fig. We now discuss the performance of the devices D1 and D2 as near infrared detectors at 785 nm wavelength. Fig. where G and η are the gain and the quantum efficiency, respectively, we estimate G × η in excess of 1000 for these devices. The results in Fig. where q is the absolute value of electron charge and J dark is the dark current density. Under V ext = 0, owing to suppression of dark current, we achieve a large specific detectivity (10 13 Jones for D1 and 4.5 × 10 11 Jones for D2). We next discuss the transient photoresponse of the devices. A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. Finally, we benchmark the performance of the devices presented with other 2-D material based photodetectors from literature in a responsivity versus fall time chart. The fall time τ f after the light source is turned off provides an estimate about the duration the photogenerated hole is trapped in the WSe 2 quantum well. Thus the gain can be estimated as G = The parallel lines in Fig. In conclusion, using systematic optical and electrical probes, we demonstrate efficient control of the charge transfer efficiency and its direction in a skewed and highly staggered ITO/WSe 2 /SnSe 2 double heterojunction. This leads to achievement of high photoconductive gain and high speed photodetection -a unique feature achieved by reduction of transit time of photo-excited electrons using the vertical heterojunction, while confining the photo-excited holes in the WSe 2 quantum well. In addition, the built-in electric field in the proposed detector allows photodetection at zero external bias -providing a selfpowering feature to the device. The device also exhibits a large open circuit voltage which is promising for solar energy harvesting applications. The device will open a pathway for a novel type of inexpensive, high performance photodetecting devices using vertical heterostructures based on two dimensional materials. 