The ferroelectric material is an important platform to realize non-volatile memories. So far, existing ferroelectric memory devices utilize out-of-plane polarization in ferroelectric thin films. In this paper, we propose a new type of random-access memory (RAM) based on ferroelectric thin films with the in-plane polarization called "in-plane ferroelectric tunnel junction". Apart from nonvolatility, lower power usage and faster writing operation compared with traditional dynamic RAMs, our proposal has the advantage of faster reading operation and non-destructive reading process, thus overcomes the write-after-read problem that widely exists in current ferroelectric RAMs. The recent discovered room-temperature ferroelectric IV-VI semiconductor thin films is a promising material platform to realize our proposal. To meet the daily increasing demands of modern electronic devices, especially of portable devices, memories with low energy consumption and high performance are highly desired. The current commercial dynamic random-access memories (DRAM) are volatile, which consume a large amount of energy to refresh the stored data in order to prevent leakage from the capacitor. To reduce the energy consumption, a non-volatile memory might be the ultimate solution The ferroelectric material has been proposed to be an ideal candidate for non-volatile memories due to its electric switchable bistable ground states since 1952 Depending on the readout mechanism, ferroelectric non-volatile memories can be roughly classified into two generations. The first generation of ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) uses polarized charges in the ferroelectric capacitor to represent the data To overcome the destructive readout problem, the second generation of ferroelectric tunnel junction (FTJ) is proposed to probe the ferroelectric polarization using the tunneling electroresistance effect In this work, we propose a new type of ferroelec-tric memory which we call "in-plane ferroelectric tunnel junction". Different from FeRAM or FTJ, which employs bistable states of out-of-plane ferroelectric polarization to represent "ON" and "OFF", our proposal is based on the in-plane polarization of ferroelectric thin films. Due to the insufficient screening in two dimensions (2D), the in-plane polarization could induce strong band bending around the edge or the ferroelectric domain wall. Depending on the polarization direction, the upward/downward band bending could be used to represent the ON/OFF state. By measuring the out-of-plane tunneling current through ferroelectric thin films, the bending direction can be detected and hence the stored information can be read non-destructively. Moreover, our design enjoys great tunability. By choosing proper layer sizes and the insulator layer band gap, the tunneling current and the ON/OFF current ratio can be tuned simultaneously. In principle, all ferroelectric thin films with in-plane polarization can be used as the material platform to realize our proposal Ferroelectricity as a symmetry-breaking state is generally destabilized by the finite-size effect. The out-ofplane ferroelectric polarization is found in perovskite ultrathin films, in which imperfect charge screening, substrate strain and chemical bonding play important roles in stabilizing ferroelectricity An important signature of the in-plane polarization is the band bending near the interface such as the material edge potential bending in the framework of COMSON. To simply the problem and only show the striking properties, we assume that the ferroelectric thin films possess uniform in-plane polarization P along y direction. First, we studied the free standing ferroelectric thin films without any substrate. As shown in Fig. The robust potential bending induced by in-plane polarization motivated us to propose a new type of nonvolatile RAM. As shown in the Fig. The robust band bending induced by the in-plane polarization motivates us to propose a new type of nonvolatile memory. The schematic of the device is shown in Fig. To write the information or manipulate the polarization direction, one can apply a writing voltage ±V W on the writing electrode with reference to the reading electrode to generate an in-plane electric field across the ferroelectric thin film, thus forcing the polarization along ±y direction regardless of the initial polarization direction. The stored information is represented by the ±y polarization direction, which can be seen as the "0/1" bit. The polarization persists a longer duration even after the write voltage is turned off, and in this way the information storage is non-volatile. The time cost of the writing operation is determined by the polarization switching time, which in turn is determined by the applied writing voltage V W . For example, the coercive field in GeTe thin films is reported to be E c = 0.206V/nm, which translates to around V c = 20.6V for writing and reading electrodes separated by 100nm To read the information or measure the polarization direction, one can apply a reading voltage V R on the reading electrode with reference to the metallic substrate and measure the tunneling current. The tunneling current depends on the band bending and hence the polarization direction. More specifically, the charge carriers can be holes or electrons if the chemical potential is near the valence or the conduction band respectively. In the case of hole charge carriers, the tunneling current in the ON state I ON , where the band bends upward near the reading electrode, is significantly larger than that in the OFF state I OFF , where the band bends downward. This is illustrated in Fig. We now turn to a detailed study of the tunneling electroresistance effect between the metallic substrate and the reading electrode. Without loss of generality, we assume the Fermi level of the metal is close to the valence band of the ferroelectric film. If the band bending is upward and strong enough, the valence band edge would be higher than the Fermi level of the metal, making the ferroelectric thin film conducting. In this case (ON state), the tunneling happens between the ferroelectric thin film and the reading electrode (Fig. To make the above intuitive argument more concrete, we compute the tunneling current in a metalferroelectric-insulator-metal junction using two-terminal Landauer's formula where T (E) is the transmission probability and f L/R (E) = e -(E-μ L/R )/k B T + 1 -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. μ L and μ R are the chemical potential of the left and the right electrode respectively. In the following, we always set μ L = 0 as the reference. At zero temperature, f L/R (E) becomes the step function and Eq. ( Inside the junction, the electrons and the holes are governed by the Schrödinger equation The potential barrier of the ferroelectric V (x, y, 0 ≤ z < d FE ) is modeled by the fitted potential of 1 ML SnTe thin film We first discuss the voltage-current characteristic (Fig. From a device design point of view, the ON/OFF ratio and the size of the "sweet spot" V OFF /V ON can be enhanced by increasing the d FE /d I ratio, as is shown in Fig. The magnitude of the ON state current after the threshold V > V ON can be enhanced by simply increasing the width of the device in the x direction. As shown in Fig. We emphasize that although Fig. In conclusion, we have proposed a new type of ferroelectric memory based on the in-plane polarization. Compared with the DRAM or the out-of-plane polarization based FeRAM, our design has advantages including non-volatility, non-destructive reading operation, faster reading and writing operation, and the greater tunability of the tunneling current and the ON/OFF ratio. Our design is based on the ferroelectric thin film with in-plane polarization component that is switchable by an external electric field. Compared with FTJ, the in-plane polarization is much more robust in thin films. The 2D nature of the material, i.e. the weak van der Waals interlayer couplings, makes the device easy to fabricate. In particular, boundary effect caused by the lattice mismatching can be reduced greatly if the device is fabricated by stacking 2D materials A wide family of materials, for example, the IV-VI semiconductors XY, where X=Ge,Sn,Pb and Y=S,Se,Te, along with their alloys (for example, Pb x Sn 1-x Te and Pb x Sn 1-x Se) and superlattices (for example, PbTe/SnTe), are ideal candidates to realize our proposal where T (E) is the transmission probability and f L/R (E) = e -(E-μ L/R )/k B T + 1 -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. μ L and μ R are the chemical potentials of the left and right electrode respectively. Here the factor of 2 is due to the spin degeneracy. In the following, we always set μ L = 0 as the reference. At zero temperature, f L/R (E) becomes the step function and Eq.( where U ≡ μ Rμ L is the voltage bias. Because of the complicated shape of the potential, we exploit the numerical method to compute the transmission probability, where we first discretize the Scrödinger equation. It is straightforward to show that the discretized version of (6t + V (x, y, z))ψ(x, y, z)t [ψ(x + a, y, z) + ψ(xa, y, z)+ ψ(x, y + a, z) + ψ(x, ya, z) + ψ(x, y, z + a) + ψ(x, y, za)] = 0, where t = 2 /(2m * a 2 ). a is the lattice constant in the discretized lattice and a → 0 reduces Eq. ( Insulator Region V h max(-αe -y/λ -μFE, 0) -μI Ve max(αe -y/λ + μFE + ∆FE, 0) μI + ∆I TABLE II. Fitted band bending V = αe -y/λ + c from STM measurements for SnTe thin films with 1 ML taken from Ref. Here the substrate is metallic graphene. Note that the fitting parameter c is not the conduction band minimum (CBM) but the energy of the quantum well state. Upward Downward α(V) λ(nm) c(V) α(V) λ(nm) c(V) 0.198 4.85 1.57 -0.329 6.12 1.57 effective potentials of these two tunneling channels are summarized in Table . I. μ FE /∆ FE and μ I /∆ I are the chemical potential/band gap of the ferroelectric and the insulator respectively. In the following, we use the parameter of thin SnTe film for the ferroelectric region and that of monolayer h-BN for the insulator region. The band bending parameters are in Table . II. The band gap of the ferroelectric film and the insulator is chosen to be ∆ FE = 1.6eV The chemical potential of the insulator is set to be μ I = -∆ I /2 = -3eV respectively. The chemical potential of the ferroelectric is μ FE = -0.1eV for Fig. For a typical semiconductor, m * /m e is usually between 0.01 -0.1 where m e is the free electron mass and λ F ∼ 1 -10nm. In the following calculation, we use parameters for SnTe m * /m e = 0.1 In the last section, the chemical potential is near the valence band of the ferroelectric and the main current contribution is from holes. In this section, we consider an opposite scenario where the main current contribution is from electrons. To achieve this scenario, we take μ FE = -1.4eV, which corresponds to Fig. It is helpful to separate the current contribution from the hole channel and the electron channel in order to distinguish the two scenarios more clearly. The contribution of the tunneling current from the hole and the electron channel for both cases with upward band bending are plotted in Fig. where a0 is the Bohr radius. For the choice of m * /me = 0.1 and a = 1nm, we have E0 = 0.38eV. The current computed in Eq. ( 