The frustrated pyrochlore iridate Pr2Ir2O7 was proposed as a metallic quantum spin liquid located at a zero-field quantum critical point. Here we present the ultralow-temperature thermal conductivity measurements on the Pr2Ir2O7 single crystals to detect possible exotic excitations. In zero field, the thermal conductivity shows a dramatic suppression above a characteristic temperature Ts ≈ 0.12 K. With increasing field, Ts increases and the thermal conductivity tends to saturate above H = 5 T. The Wiedemann-Franz law is verified at high fields and inferred at zero field. It suggests the normal behavior of electrons at the quantum critical point, and the absence of mobile fermionic magnetic excitations. The strong suppression of thermal conductivity is attributed to the scattering of phonons by the spin system, likely the fluctuating spins. These results shed new light on the microscopic description on this novel compound. Spin ice state on a frustrated pyrochlore lattice has attracted numerous interests in condensed matter physics, due to the emergent magnetic monopole excitations from the manifold of degenerate ground states Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 is a metal with the antiferromagnetic RKKY interaction of about 20 K in Pr 4f moments mediated by Ir 5d conduction electrons For such an exotic metallic spin-liquid candidate with quantum criticality, although various efforts have been made, two main issues remain to be solved in Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 . Firstly, how do the electrons behave at the QCP? In other words, will the electrons still be well-defined Landau quasiparticles? Secondly, little information is known for possible exotic magnetic excitations in Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 , probably due to the large neutron absorption cross-section of the iridium ions, and the very small size of its single crystals Ultralow-temperature thermal conductivity measurement is an important technique to address above two issues. For the former one, the verification of the Wiedemann-Franz (WF) law κ/σT = π 2 k B 2 /3e 2 = L 0 can be viewed as an evidence of the survival of Landau quasiparticles at the QCP. Anomalous reduction of the Lorenz ratio L(T )/L 0 with L(T ) = κ/σT has been observed in CeCoIn 5 In this Letter, we report on ultralow-temperature thermal conductivity measurements on single crystals of Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 . The WF law is verified at high fields and inferred at zero field, suggesting the normal behavior of electrons at the QCP and the absence of fermionic magnetic excitations. A huge magneto-thermal conductivity at finite temperature is found, which may result from the strong scattering of phonons by the fluctuating spins. We ‫؍‬ 0 H ( T ) ‫؍‬ 0 H = 0 T shall discuss the implications of these results. High-quality single crystals of Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 were grown by the KF flux methods Figure ) the curves are very flat, we can safely extrapolate them to the zero-temperature limit and get the residual resistivity ρ 0 = 776, 757, and 769 μΩ cm for μ 0 H = 0, 3, and 6 T, respectively. The thermal conductivities of Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 single crystal up to 7 T are shown in Fig. more strongly above T s . At zero field, T s is about 0.12 K. Similar behavior is also observed in another sample B (see the Supplemental Material The magneto-thermal conductivity MTC = ∆κ(H)/κ(0T) = (κ(H) -κ(0T))/κ(0T) × 100% at various temperatures is plotted in Fig. In Fig. Since the thermal conductivity data at low fields collapse on the high-field data below T s (see Fig. The verification of WF law in Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 demonstrates that there is no additional contribution to the thermal conductivity from mobile fermionic magnetic excitations. Furthermore, since the phonon thermal conductivity in high fields defines the upper boundary of κ in Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 , there is also no positive contribution to κ from other bosonic magnetic excitations. For pyrochlore Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 , one scenario to describe its possible QSL state is the QSI ) ) state of Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 thus above-mentioned magnetic excitations do not exist. Now let us discuss the origin of the huge MTC in Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 . In Fig. In case that there are no well-defined magnetic excitations in Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 , the strong scattering of phonons at low fields may be associated with the fluctuating spins. Intuitively, the spin fluctuations are weakened with lowering the temperature and increasing the field. For Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 , a bifurcation of the field-cooled and zero-field-cooled magnetic susceptibility curves at about 0.3 K suggests that a partial fraction of spins freezes Interestingly, an unusual scaling behavior κ ∼ H 8/3 F (T /H 4/3 ), where F (x) is the scaling function, is observed, as shown in Fig. In summary, we have measured the ultralowtemperature thermal conductivity of Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 single crystals. The Wiedemann-Franz law is verified at high magnetic fields and inferred at zero field, suggesting the normal behavior of electrons at the zero-field quantum critical point and the absence of mobile fermionic magnetic excitations. A huge isotropic magneto-thermal conductivity is found at finite temperatures, indicating the strong scattering of phonons by the spin system, likely the fluctuating spins. The observed scaling law may help put constraints on the theoretical modelling on Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 . These results will shed light on the microscopic description on this metallic quantum spin liquid candidate. Supplemental Material for "Ultralowtemperature thermal conductivity of Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 : a metallic spin-liquid candidate with quantum criticality" The typical x-ray diffraction (XRD) data is plotted in Fig. We performed transport measurements on another Pr 2 Ir 2 O 7 single crystal (Sample B), and obtained similar results to Sample A. Sample B was cut and polished into a rectangular shape with length l = 0.72 mm, width w = 0.26 mm and thickness t = 0.20 mm. The electric and thermal conductivity were measured by standard fourwire method. Figure Figure 