Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is an attractive van der Waals material for studying fluorescent defects due to its large bandgap. In this work, we demonstrate enhanced pink color due to neutron irradiation and perform electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements. The new point defects are tentatively assigned to doubly-occupied nitrogen vacancies with (S = 1) and a zero-field splitting (D = 1.2 GHz). These defects are associated with a broad visible optical absorption band and near infrared photoluminescence band centered at ~ 490 nm and 820 nm, respectively. The EPR signal intensities are strongly affected by thermal treatments in temperature range between 600 to 800oC, where also the irradiation-induced pink color is lost. Our results are important for understanding of point defects in h-BN and their deployment for quantum and integrated photonic applications. Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a wide bandgap ( ~ 6 eV) two dimensional (2D) semiconductor with excellent thermal, mechanical and optical properties In h-BN so far, the most investigated paramagnetic centers are the so-called one boron centers (OBC) and three boron centers (TBC), both related with single electron trapped (S = 1/2) nitrogen vacancies Commercial h-BN ultrafine powder samples (Graphene supermarket) 99.0 % purity, particles size ~70 nm and specific surface area ~20 m2/g were neutron irradiated in nuclear reactor Triga Mark I IPR-R1 of CDTN, Brazil with thermal flux of 4 x 1012 n•cm -2 s -1 for different times reaching integrated dose of approximately 3×10 17 , 6×10 17 , 12×10 17 , 23×10 17 n•cm -2 .The powdered samples were neutron irradiated in Cd capsules for which thermal neutrons are blocked, and mostly energetic neutrons pass the samples. The identification of samples in relation to the integrated dose is shown in the table As-received hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) powders showed optical absorption (measured as reflectance spectra) only in the ultraviolet (UV), near bandgap region, which gives it a white color (Figure (i) a broad UV absorption band centered near band gap and (ii) a broad absorption band in the visible spectral range centered at about 490 nm. These features result in the pink color for the neutron irradiated powders. The intensity of both bands increases with the dose of the irradiation, which indicates the formation of color centers, i.e. point defects that induce energy levels in the band gap of h-BN. Figure Comparing the samples 2h, 4h and 16h to the non-irradiated sample, it is possible to observe that the peak at about 400 nm increases with dose; new broad band emissions appear at about 530 nm, 590 nm and 690 nm, but on the other hand narrower peak emissions between 400 and 600 nm are lost with increasing dose. Isochronal annealing at 800oC for1 hour (sample 8h -1A), reduces strongly the 400 nm emission (Figure EPR measurements carried out at X-band frequencies and room temperature of as-received (nonirradiated, 0h) h-BN powders did not show any EPR signature. On the other hand, three different EPR signals, which we name A, B and C were observed for the neutron irradiated samples (Figure Optical characterization of the samples after annealing shows that the pink color is lost for temperatures at about 600oC which also coincides with the loss of the signature of the EPR lines attributed to defect C (Figure (not shown). In order to test the hypothesis that the defect C annealed out from the sample during the heat treatments, or simply is lost because of depopulation, gamma irradiation from a 60 Co (0 -400 kGy) was used for the sample 8h treated after hear treatment at 800oC. It was found that after gamma irradiation the signal intensities of A and B were enhanced again (not shown), however, the pink color and the EPR signals due to C did not appear. To analyze in more detail the microscopic origin of the three powder EPR lines (~150 mT, 280 mT and 410 mT) associated to defect C, three hypotheses are discussed: (i) the three lines belong to a center with three very different g values including strong deviation from the g value of the electron, (ii) the three lines are due to a hyperfine interaction with a nuclear spin of I = 1 or (iii) the lines are caused by electronic fine structure from a paramagnetic center with spin S  1. On a first sight, the defects C induced by neutron irradiation should be of intrinsic origin because they were observed in h-BN from different sources, not only in h-BN samples shown in this work but also in h-BN nanotubes produced by others Therefore, the best interpretation of the nature of defects C is that they belong to a center with high spin state of S  1. To confirm this, we performed EPR spectra calculations using the Easyspin @ software (Figure where the symbols  B , B, S, g and D represent respectively the Bohr magneton, the magnetic field, the electronic spin, the g and electronic fine structure tensors. The calculations show that defects C can be attributed to a center with high spin S = 1, g value of 2.0(1) and electronic fine structure interacting D of 1.2(1) GHz assuming Lorentzian line shape and linewidth of about 9(1) mT (Figure Theoretical calculations on point defects in h-BN are controversial. DFT calculations on isolated nitrogen vacancies suggest that the V N defects act as single donors with singlet ground state while pair defects based on V N -C B , frequently discussed as potential candidate for single photon emission in h-BN, are predicted with singlet or triplet ground states On the other hand, the TBC centers are associated with the single electron trapped nitrogen vacancy, i.e. spin (S = 1/2), which originate a yellow color in h-BN due to broad absorption band in the UV spectral region. It is likely that at about 500oC the nitrogen vacancy starts to diffuse and some may recombine with nitrogen interstitials produced also by the neutron irradiation as primary Frenkel pairs. Finally, we checked also the presence of single photon emitters in neutron irradiated h-BN samples. PL measurements from two irradiated samples (8h and 16h) are shown in Figure Notably, the defects that produce the absorption band that generate the pink color that is most likely associated with the S = 1 defect is excited at much higher energies (375 nm). We did not observe single emitters under these excitation conditions. However, it may be plausible that these defects have a different charge state, or have a significantly lower quantum efficiency. A similar effect is currently under debate in the literature for the neutral silicon vacancy in diamond that is EPR active To conclude, we demonstrated that neutron irradiation in h-BN samples creates a previously unknown paramagnetic defect associated with an optical absorption band that gives a pink color to the materialand also a broad near infrared luminescence centered at 820 nm. EPR measurements were used to confirm that the irradiation-induced color center is composed by a state with high electronic spin (S = 1) and isochronal annealing experiments illustrate a behavior that can be associated to nitrogen vacancies that trap two electrons. These results are an important step towards identification of defects with high electronic spin, and further understanding of emission properties of h-BN.