Nonlinear acoustic metamaterials (NAMs) open new freedoms in exploiting novel technologies for wave manipulations. Recently, the desired ultra-low and ultra-broad-band wave suppressions were achieved by the chaotic bands in NAMs [Nature Commun. 8, 1288 (2017)]. This work describes a remote interaction mechanism in NAMs-bridging coupling of nonlinear locally resonant bandgaps. Bridging bandgaps generate chaotic bands and share the negative mass between nonlinear resonators. The bandwidth and the efficiency for the wave reduction in chaotic bands can be manipulated effectively by modulating the frequency distance between the bridging pair. Theoretical analyses on the triatomic model containing two nonlinearly coupled resonances clarify the principle of bridging bandgaps. NAM beams are created to demonstrate this mechanism experimentally by including the bifurcations of periodic solutions. Our study extends the content of NAMs and more nonlinear effects are anticipated based on this mechanism. Acoustic metamaterials (AMs) provide unconventional and unusual approaches to control subwavelength elastic/acoustic waves LR bandgaps induced by this regime suppress the low-frequency wave propagations However, LR bandgap is narrow in nature Generally, γ<<1 for single LR bandgap. Moreover, the passbands of finite LAMs consist of dense resonances that amplify waves. These properties limit LAMs' applications in fields like vibration and noise control, where broadband wave suppression is desired. A natural approach to expand the total width of a bandgap is connecting a LR bandgap with Bragg or other LR bandgaps, that is, Bandgap Coupling Δ   =-, herein (l) c  ( (h) st  ) denotes the cutoff frequency of the lower bandgap (the start frequency of the higher bandgap). Bandgap coupling in LAM implies Δω→0 + or Δω<0, so we define it as Adjacent Coupling. Adjacent coupling overcomes the bandwidth of single LR bandgap in a certain extent Nonlinearities can boost the development of novel methods for achieving wave manipulations. Extensive studies on nonlinear elastic periodic structures, such as FPU chains However, nonlinear acoustic metamaterial (NAM) is a young topic appearing recently. For the proposed AMs made of side holes, Helmholtz resonators or membranes, weak nonlinearities arise when the intensity of the sound field becomes extremely high Recently, X. Fang et al The wave in the bandgap of NAM features a multi-state behavior, so the LR bandgap becomes nonlinear local resonant (NLR) bandgap when calculating the responses of the chain, F(t) where ( L) eff m denotes the effective mass of the linear ) ( ) ( ) The motion equation of the primary discrete monoatomic chain is . This equation can be rewritten as a difference formula, which can model this chain as a continuum medium whose wave equation is given by The imaginary part of κ eff , Im(κ eff ), approximately shows the dissipative characteristic of the effective LAM. A larger Im(κ eff ) leads to a stronger attenuation of wave. To study the properties of effective mass m eff /M and the responses of the finite chain, we specify parameters M=1, branch-1 originates from m eff →-∞ in NLR1 and monotonously approaches to 0 near NLR2, which implies m eff <0 on the whole branch-1. This branch expands the first negative mass region and connects the two negative mass regions, so that the nonlinear coupling between the two resonators m 1 and m 2 shares the negative m eff between NLR1 and NLR2 through the energy transmission. Therefore, NLR1 and NLR2 are coupled. This interaction appears in the case Δω > 0, and it is independent of Δω in theory (FIG. A finite chain made of 20 cells is adopted to describe the response properties. The left boundary of the chain is x 0 =A 0 sinωt, and the right is free. x 0 also acts as the driving displacement. To make the comparison be more rigorous, a dissipation c=0.01 is considered. Numerical Moreover, the width of LR2 also increases against Δω. FIG. For the NAM model, there are also N To By considering the first and the second flexural modes of oscillator-1, and the first flexural mode of oscillator-2, this manuscript establishes the physical models of oscillator-1&2 with mode superposition method (see Appendix). And then, the finite element (FE) model of a periodic cell is built based on the Bloch theorem Harmonic balance method is adopted to solve the dispersion curves of this model To phenomena like the studies made on diatomic/tetratomic models in Ref. Further increasing the driving force to F =5 N (FIG. Accordingly, stronger nonlinearity results in greater transmission losses in the chaotic band. These analyses of periodic solutions confirm that the bridging coupling pair NLR1-NLR2 makes the passband between them a chaotic band suppressing wave transmissions. Modal superposition method is adopted to model the Herein, x denotes the distance to the fixed point; q ij is the modal coordinate; W ij (x) represents the modal displacement given by ( ) sin sinh cos cosh (cos cosh ) sin sinh where, cos cosh 1 . The kinetic energy T r and the strain energy U r of oscillators in a cell are given by where (•) x =∂/∂x and Ẋ=∂X/∂t; w 0 and θ 0 are deflection and angle displacements of the primary beam at the fixed point respectively. All parameters are listed in Table A transformation yields Defining a new vector   T r 0 0 11 12 d w q q q  = q , we obtain r r r = q A q and If the dissipation arising from the pyramid rubber is approximated as the linear viscous damping, the virtual work made by a rubber is given by Therefore, the motion equation of the oscillators in a cell is expressed as 3 r r r r rL r rN r + + + = m q c q k q k q f As verified, the geometrical nonlinearity of the primary beam is neglectable The steps of this algorithm are detailed in Ref. The periodic solution is determined by the algebraic equations below ( ) ( ) The Jacobian matrix J used to analyze the stabilities of