The great practical utility has motivated extensive efforts to discover ultra-low resistance electrical conductors and superconductors in ambience. Here we report the observation of vanishingly small electrical resistance at the ambient temperature and pressure conditions in films and pellets of a nanostructured material that is composed of silver particles embedded into a gold matrix. Upon cooling below a sample-specific temperature scale ( ) as high as K, the film resistance drops below , being limited by measurement uncertainty. The corresponding resistivity ( .m) is at least four orders of magnitude below that of elemental noble metals, such as gold, silver or copper. Furthermore, the samples become strongly diamagnetic below , with volume susceptibilities as low as . We additionally describe methods to tune to temperatures much higher than room temperature. Suppressing the scattering of electrons is the key to the absence of resistance ( ) in a conductor, which may be achieved via non-trivial topological protection The explanations of transition temperature rise were based on extensions of the BCS formalism Here we investigated the properties of nanostructures (NS) prepared from Au and Ag. Both materials have low electron-phonon coupling and are not known to exhibit a superconducting state independently. During our studies we synthesized NS comprising of silver particles (~ nm) embedded into a gold matrix. Sample preparation was done using standard colloidal techniques. Briefly, the method employed by us involves the preparation of silver particles (exemplified in Figure For electrical characterization, these NS were cast into films with thickness ranging from nm to of order hundred nm. Figure Given the nanostructured nature of the film, we confirmed that the absence of voltage drop below the transition is not due to physical detachment of the current path from the part of the film coupled to the voltage leads To investigate the impact of an external magnetic field ( ) on the transition, we measured thedependence of up to Tesla. As shown in Figure Besides the transition in , we observed appearance of strong diamagnetism when the NS are cooled below the . To demonstrate this with direct magnetic measurements, we prepared bulk pellets (roughly μL volume) of the NS, and measured the -dependence of the susceptibility in a SQUID magnetometer. Figure To explore if the resistive and magnetic transitions in the NS films are concurrent, we subsequently measured the inductive response simultaneously with in several films with twocoil magnetometry as a function of (inset of Figure From the structural characterization (Figure K, where and are the electronic diffusivity ( m 2 /s) and nanoparticle diameter ( nm), respectively Nonetheless, the close proximity of the resistive transition and that in inductive response may also suggest a superconducting transition, which is further supported by the change in at the transition signifying dissipative coupling (Figure We further studied the variation of as a function of the nanoparticle composition. In particular, Section S22 (SI) shows the transition in three samples containing different Au and Ag mole fractions. In each case the stoichiometric ratio has been altered by growing different amounts of Au over the same Au/Ag core NS. Figure ). While a measurable transition could not be observed in the window ( K) accessible to us, the characteristics, show no evidence of a voltage drop above the noise level of ~ 100 nV (inset of Figure In conclusion, we have carried out detailed electrical and magnetic characterization of nanocomposite films and pellets based on Ag nanoparticles embedded in an Au matrix. At the ambient pressure, films with Ag mole fraction > , and minimal environmental exposure, were found to undergo superconductor-like transition to vanishingly small electrical resistance ( ), corresponding to electrical resistivity .m, below a critical temperature. The transition was observed at as high as K, which could be increased beyond the experimentally accessible window ( K) by tuning the nanoparticle density. SQUID magnetometry with the pellets of the same nanostructures indicates a strongly diamagnetic phase below the critical temperature. The concurrence of the resistive and magnetic transitions was further verified using two-coil magnetometry, which provides compelling evidence for a superconducting phase in our nanostructures that can be stabilized at the ambient conditions. Temperature-dependence of resistance of film P11017FE0_02 (Table were used as received without any further purification. All the aqueous solutions have been prepared in 18.2 M-Ohm milli-Q water to avoid contamination. Gold nanospheres of 10-12 nm size were synthesized by a seed mediated process. 5 mL of 0.5 mM HAuCl 4 was added to 5 mL of 0.1 M CTAB solution. The solution was stirred vigorously. To it was added 0.6 mL of 0.01 M NaBH 4 . The final colour of the solution obtained was brownish indicating the formation of gold nanocrystals. These nanocrystals were used as seeds for the synthesis of 8-10 nm gold nanospheres. A 500 mL growth solution comprising of 5 mM HAuCl 4 , 0.1 M CTAB in 500 mL water was prepared. 3mL of 0.079 M Ascorbic acid. To the growth solution, 0.8 mL of Au seed was added. The solution was shaken well and kept for 1 hour. Freshly prepared gold nanosphere solution was cleaned through centrifugation with water. The precipitate was re-dispersed in 10 mL of water. Then it was taken in a conical flask and 10 mL of 0.1 M CTAB solution was added to it. The solution was stirred. Next 5 mL of 1 mM silver nitrate solution was added rapidly into the solution and the timer for the reaction was switched on. When time reached 1 min 22 sec, 2 mL of 0.1 M NaBH 4 was added rapidly followed by drop wise addition of 100 microliters of 1 mM HAuCl 4 solution over 2 minutes. The solution was immediately cleaned and re-dispersed in water. For experiments where a higher Au:Ag stoichiometry was desired, the ungrown sample was This procedure was found to work for lot nos. SLBL8064V, SLBN6918V, SLBT7250, SLBC8213V, SLBS1066V of CTAB, however failed with other grades and lots of CTAB. We could not identify the impurity/purity criteria that influence the efficacy of CTAB towards these reactions. In particular, it is evident from the Gold nanospheres of 10-12 nm size were synthesized by a seed mediated process. 5 mL of 0.5 mM HAuCl 4 was added to 5 mL of 0.1 M CTAB solution. The solution was stirred vigorously. To it was added 0.6 mL of 0.01 M NaBH 4 . The final color of the solution obtained was brownish indicating the formation of gold nanocrystals. These nanocrystals were used as seeds for the synthesis of 8-10 nm gold nanospheres. A 500 mL growth solution comprising of 5 mM HAuCl 4 , 0.1 M CTAB in 500 mL water was prepared. 3mL of 0.079 M Ascorbic acid. To the growth solution, 0.8 mL of Au seed was added. The solution was shaken well and kept for 1 hour. In the first step, aqueous solutions of 0.1 M CTAB (5 mL), 0.1 M of KI and 1 mM silver nitrate (5 mL) were mixed. The mixture was continuously stirred for 4 min 30 seconds (solution 1). In the second step, a separate vial with 5 mL aqueous solution of cleaned gold nanospheres and 2 mL aqueous solution of 0.1 M sodium borohydride were taken. The resulting solution was stirred continuously. 10 mL of solution 1 from above and 2 mL aqueous solution of 0.05 mM HAuCl 4 were added to the nano-sphere solutions over 8 minutes. Several batches of such samples were synthesized and mixed together. The sample was cleaned through centrifugation with water. The centrifugation was done five times. The obtained precipitate was collected in 30 ml vial and was kept for drying. To the dried sample, 5 mL of CHCl 3 (Chloroform, LR grade) was added and the solution was sonicated for 10 min. The solution was kept in CHCl 3 solution for 4 hrs. After 4 hours the solid sample was separated from CHCl 3 through centrifugation and a fresh CHCl 3 was added. The above process of sonication and the addition of CHCl 3 after every four hours were carried out for 2 days. On the next step, the sample in CHCl 3 is centrifuged and precipitated. The precipitated was kept for drying. Once dried the solid sample was washed with acetone several times and left for drying. To the dried sample 5 mL of > 1 M KOH (Potassium hydroxide) solution in water was added. The sample in KOH solution was sonicated for 5 minutes and was kept for half an hour. KOH solution was changed every 30 minutes and the sonication step was repeated. The process was continued over 24 hours. The final obtained mass of fine grains was pressed to form a pellet. TEM characterization: Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) grid was prepared by depositing samples from aqueous solution. HR-TEM and STEM images were obtained on a Themis TITAN transmission electron microscope. STEM-EDX elemental mapping was also performed using the same instrument. Magnetic susceptibility measurement: Pellets were prepared by pressing grains isolated above in a titanium die. The typical pellet weight for magnetometry measurements was about 65 mg. The magnetometry measurement was done in a SQUID (MPMS ® 3, Quantum Design). The sample was filled into a tube that was then attached to the sample holder. Method 1: As synthesized samples were cleaned twice by centrifugation. The obtained precipitate was re-dissolved in water and the solution was then drop cast on a glass substrate which had six gold metallic pads (100 nm height with and an equidistant separation of 100 μm) deposited on it. The film making was carried out inside a glove box. The dried film was washed with propanol once. To the dried film, CHCl 3 (A.R grade, SDFCL) was added and left for drying. Following this, the film was dipped into 2 M aqueous KOH (A.R grade, SDFCL) and left for drying. The film was then gently washed with methanol and propanol. Care was taken so as not to wash away the nanoparticles. The process of washing was repeated twice. The process of addition of CHCl 3 followed by the addition of KOH was repeated. The next round of sample was drop-cast on top of this film and crosslinking was again carried out. This process was repeated multiple times (typically 15) until the desired density of film is obtained. Films prepared prior to August 2018 employed this method. grade, SDFCL) for 10 minutes. The process of addition of CHCl 3 followed by the dipping was repeated twice. After each addition the film was washed with water several times. The next round of sample was drop-casted on top of this film and crosslinking was again carried out. This process was repeated several times until the desired quality of film is obtained. For samples where resistance measurements were performed in AC, an SRS 830 lock-in amplifier was used, with an AC excitation current of 1 mA. For DC-resistance measurements, a Keithley 2400 source-meter was used to pass a current of 1 mA, and the voltage was measured with a Keithley 2002 multimeter. For inductive response measurements in the two-coil geometry, an AC-current of 1 mA was passed through the drive coil at a fixed frequency KHz, using an SRS 830 lock-in amplifier. The phase of the lock-in amplifier was kept fixed at 90 degrees during the phaselocked detection of the voltage developed across the sense coil. The winding on both coils were carried out in dipolar manner. Powder XRD patterns were collected using a 0.154 nm source. Au and Ag have similar lattice constants and as a result, their independent contributions cannot be resolved within the NS. We therefore turned to microscopy to characterize the distribution of Au and Ag in the NSs. This is exemplified in the structural and elemental mapping shown in panels b-e. These data are consistent with a structure comprising of Ag nanoparticles distributed within an Au matrix. Section S4. Energy Dispersive X-Ray spectrum and elemental composition of the NS. Figure The composition of the NS was analysed through EDAX measurements. The results on a typical structure are exemplified in Figure To reduce the time of exposure to ambient conditions, and simultaneous investigation of both resistivity and any associated magnetic transitions, specially designed sample holders, compatible with the Van der Pauw geometry of the contacts pads were constructed. The holder was fabricated out of macor, which has a thermal conductivity of W/m.K. Eight holes were drilled and pogo pins with a base diameter of mm, were attached through the holes, which contacted the Cr/Au pads to ensure electrical continuity. The macor sample holder is composed of two parts: the top part, contained both the pogo pins and the drive coil, and was firmly anchored to a copper block to ensure proper thermalization. While one end of the spring-loaded pogo pins touched the Cr/Au contacts, the other end was soldered to a printed circuit board attached to the cryostat using micron copper wires. The bottom part contained a step of mm approximately to press the glass slide against the pogo pins. This part also contained the sense coil for mutual inductance measurements (also see Section S13). For film-type samples, nm Cr/Au was deposited on standard glass slides, which were covered with shadow masks with Van der Pauw configuration, fabricated from -micron stainless steel sheets. The glass slides were then cut into mm by mm pieces. The DC measurements were performed with Keithley 2400 source meter which was used to source the current ( ), while the voltage was measured using Keithley 2002 multimeter. To evaluate the resistance limit in the superconducting state, at first, was swept between mA in steps of μA, and the voltage was recorded. Between 25 to 50 sweeps were recorded, following which the average voltage at each was calculated, finally followed by a sequential 10-point averaging. The averaged voltage values form a histogram with a Gaussian distribution, from which the full width at half maximum (FWHM) was extracted. The resistance limit is then obtained by dividing the FWHM by the maximum current ( mA). The resistance limit calculated was μ, for most of our measurements. The nature of resistance vs. temperature of the samples along different channels were often found to be different. This is possibly due to inhomogeneity in the cluster density or environmental contamination in the sample. As an example, in sample P20119FES_07 in a particular thermal cycle, only one of the channel's showed a drop in , while the other channels were metallic. In sample, P20119FE0_08, two of the channels showed metallic behaviour, while another channel displayed insulating behaviour. The temperature-dependence and effect of thermal cycle in a highly resistive film is shown in Figure In order to ensure the electrical contacts used in the measurement of the superconducting state maintained metallic electrical connectivity through the transition, we measured twoprobe characteristics among the relevant contacts in a pair-wise manner. The superconducting transition in Figure In addition to metallic connectivity we have also confirmed the reciprocity of the superconducting behaviour by swapping the current and the voltage leads. Figure The zero-resistance resistance state in sample P20319FEE_06 was stable for over days (Section S11.1). During this period, we measured the characteristics, which is presented in Figure To measure the inductive response of our films during the resistive transition, a two-coil method, which is based on Faraday's law of magnetic induction was used. According to Faraday's law, any change in magnetic flux will generate an electro motive force in a coil. The basic method to determine any magnetic transition is given below: The primary coil with turns is excited with an AC-current source while the induced voltage is measured across the secondary coil, having turns. The coils are assumed to be cylindrical with a diameter of , and the centre to centre separation between the coils is . The magnetic field produced by the primary coil due to a fixed current ( ) at the centre of the secondary coil can be calculated using Biot-Savart's law, and can be expressed as (for ) where is the average area of each turn of the coil. The induced voltage ( ) in the secondary coil due to a time-varying current in the primary is given as Here is the total flux through one turn of the sense coil. The pre-factor of on the right hand side of equation S4, is effectively the mutual inductance between the coils, and parameter of interest here. Any change in the magnetic state of the sample, especially any emerging diamagnetic behaviour in the context of superconductivity, would screen the magnetic field generated by the primary coils due to screening current in the sample. The degree of screening is dependent on the magnetic penetration depth of the sample. This would lead to a reduction in , which can be readily measured. In our case, the primary (drive) coil with 36 turns (3 layers with 12 turns in each layer), which is on the upper macor piece, is connected to an AC-source (output of SRS 830 lock-in amplifier). The secondary (sense) coil with 48 turns (4 layers with 12 turns in each layer) is attached to the lower macor fixture. The diameter of the coils was 1.51 mm. We have carried out control experiment of simultaneous measurement of the resistance transition and inductive response with a nm thick Pb film, deposited thermally on a glass slide on nm Cr/Au in Van der Pauw geometry (inset of Figure As can be seen in Figure The penetration depth has been estimated using expression valid for an infinite film in the thin limit, which is given as (1-3) Here is the measured mutual inductance in presence of the film, is the film thickness, is the magnetic penetration depth, is the centre to centre distance between the coils, is the magnetic permeability, and is the first order Bessel function of the first kind. The term in the square brackets in the right-hand side of the equation contains the information about the coil geometry and is calculated numerically. For multiple turns, the integral is summed over all possible coil configurations. While most of the samples measured were metallic in nature (See Table Several of the samples, pristine or aged, showed a surprising "re-entrant behaviour", with the resistance fluctuating between superconducting state (zero-resistance state) and the normal state at various temperature. This effect is illustrated with Sample P20119FE0_13 where the re-entrant behaviour can be seen at K, K, K (in this particular cycle). This "re-entrant" behaviour was observed in several cycles, as shown in Figure has been calculated by subtracting a (background) resistance by fitting the red dashed line as shown in Figure Sample P20219FE0_18 also showed simultaneous changes in these parameters around K (Figure In Sample P20119FE0_08 a simultaneous change in resistance and inductive response could be observed at K (Figure Some of the samples have shown a strong inductive response as the temperature has been reduced. The response was observed only in susceptibility measurements, with no simultaneous signature in resistance. In Sample P21218FE0_05, the transition temperature for such a response was at K, as shown in Figure The resistive transition in several devices could be fitted with the Nelson-Halperin formulation that is applicable to the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition in thin superconducting films, and is given as (4) Here and are the normal state resistance and BKT transition temperature, respectively. and are numerical terms that depend on superfluid density and other parameters Intriguingly, although the sample thickness (~ nm) is not necessarily smaller than , we find that the Nelson-Halperin formula, which is applicable to the BKT transition in thin superconducting film, does seem to fit the -dependence of . We however emphasize that the BKT framework may not be unique in describing the transition, and further understanding of the quantum state of the nanostructure at low is required for a more quantitative analysis. Two different varieties of unusual "noise" patterns were observed in magnetic measurements. Both classes of patterns occur significantly above the instrument noise threshold, and therefore suggest a possible physical origin related to the sample as opposed to instrument artefacts. We note that most Au-Ag NS samples that undergo transitions within the squid measurement system show unusually greater noise as compared to the normal instrument threshold. We could not locate any measurement protocol anomalies/data acquisition problems/processing errors that could possibly give rise to these patterns. Indeed, enhanced noise below the transition was not observed in standard Pb pellets that were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Lead Shot 99.995 % trace metal basis Lot No. MKBS8698V) that were measured using similar protocols. Based on our present understanding, the two categories of repeat patterns that are described below may or may not have a physical origin and further study is needed to understand these more completely. The data presented in Figure To check this hypothesis, we prepared pellets of a more studied conventional superconductor (lead) with CTAB. Figure 