Atomically thin 2D materials provide a wide range of basic building blocks with unique properties, making them ideal for heterogeneous integration with a mature chip platform. An understanding of the role of excitons in transition metal dichalcogenides in Silicon photonic platform is a prerequisite for advances in optical communication technology, signal processing, and possibly computing. Here we demonstrate passive tunable coupling by integrating few layers of MoTe2 on a micro-ring resonator. We find a TMD-to-ring's circumference coverage length ratio to place the ring into critical coupling to be about 10% as determined from the variation of spectral resonance visibility and loss as a function of TMD coverage. Using this TMD-ring heterostructure, we further demonstrate a semi-empirical method to determine the index of a 2D material (nMoTe2 of 4.36+0.011i) near telecommunication-relevant wavelength. Silicon photonics is poised to revolutionize a number of diverse fields including data centers, highperformance computing, and photonic information processing The implementation of an optical switch can aid this process by achieving high bandwidth, low latency, and controllable switching mechanism However, it is still an open challenge to find a single material able to provide electro-optic functionality, gain, low-loss, and strong light-matter-interactions in integrated photonics. Alternatively, hybrid materials and heterogeneous integration solutions are currently being explored, particularly on silicon substrates for compatibility with microelectronics. For instance, the integration of germanium as a detector and III-V compound semiconductors for light sources are technologically challenging on a silicon substrate due to mismatched lattice constants and thermal expansion coefficients, despite some efforts having been made TMDs, which are semiconductors of the type MX2, where M is a transition metal atom (such as Mo or W) and X is a chalcogen atom (such as S, Se or Te), provide a promising alternative 2D TMDs exhibit unique physical properties such as indirect to direct bandgap transition Here we demonstrate heterogeneous integration of few layers of MoTe2 on Si photonics platform for the first time. The interaction between the TMD and the Si MRR provides novel tunable coupling phenomena that can be tuned from over coupling to under coupling regime via critical coupling condition by means of altering the rings effective index via the integration of TMD. We analyze the coupling physics and extract fundamental parameters such as quality factor, visibility, transmission at resonance etc., as a function of TMD coverage on the ring. We find a criticalcoupling coverage-ratio value (~10%) for a given ring resonator which is relevant for device functionality. Furthermore, we determine the index (nMoTe2 = 4.36+0.011i) of the few layered TMD at 1.55 μm wavelength in a semi-empirical approach using the ring resonator as an index sensor platform. In order to obtain an understanding of phase modulation in heterogeneous integrated systems it is important to understand the interaction between TMDs (MoTe2, MoS2, WS2 etc.) and a MRR. Our system to analyze such phase modulation uses an all-pass type silicon MRR incorporating a few layers of MoTe2 transferred onto a part of the ring (Figure The performance of a ring resonator is determined by two coefficients: the self-coupling coefficient (r), which specifies the fraction of the light transmitted on each pass through the coupler; and the round-trip transmission coefficient (a), which specifies the fraction of the light transmitted per pass around the ring. For the critical coupling condition, i.e. when the coupled power is equal to the power loss in the ring 1-a 2 =k 2 or a=r, (k=cross coupling coefficient), the transmission at resonance becomes zero. At this point, the difference (| a-r|) is found to be minimum at ~10% of coverage (figure where, φ is the round-trip phase shift, a is round-trip transmission coefficient related to the power attenuation coefficients by, a ) = exp5-α 89 (2πR -l)@ * exp (-α BCD(89 * l) where l = TMD coverage length, ⍺Si and ⍺TMD-Si are the linear propagation losses for Si waveguide and TMD-transferred portion of the Si waveguide in the ring, respectively. We find the propagation loss for Si and TMD-Si to be 0.008 dB/μm (Figure , therefore, the critical-coverage (a=r) anticipates zero-output transmittance. Hence, for a given MRR (fixed k 2 ), the critical coverage value could be determined provided lossless coupling (r 2 +k 2 =1) (figure Si-based MRRs provide a compact and ultra-sensitive platform as refractive index sensor to find an unknown index of the 2D materials at telecom wavelength (1.55μm). In essence, the shift in resonant wavelength can be used to sense the optical properties effecting entities on the silicon core or the cladding We map out the resonance shift (∆λ) as a function of MoTe2 coverage (figure where, R is the radius of the ring and l is the MoTe2 coverage length. Using (3), it is straightforward to find neff, after TMD transfer. Once, neff is known, we can find the effective index of the heterogeneous optical mode (SOI plus TMD) through Eigenmode analysis for a device geometry and provide experimentally measured thickness values of the flake (figure We have studied the interaction between few layers of MoTe2 and Si MRR for the first time. We observed tunability of the coupling strength i.e. the ring resonator can be tuned from the overcoupled to the under-coupled regime while passing through the critically-coupled point. The underlying physical mechanism of tunable coupling can be explained by extracting different coupling coefficients as a function of coverage length. For the materials properties examined here, the critical coverage value for a given MRR is ~10%. We further demonstrated a semi-empirical approach to determine the index of miniscule (~500 nm) TMD material flakes using the index sensitivity of the ring resonator. These findings along with the developed methodology for placing MRRs into critical coupling and determining the refractive index of 2D materials could be useful tools in future heterogeneous integrated photonic and optoelectronic devices. This developed technique could also be used to determine the optical refractive index of monolayer 2D materials, which is challenging with traditional techniques due to lateral TMD flake size, and atomic thickness of these materials. The Si waveguide and MMR system was fabricated by using a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) substrate, where the Si device layer is 220 nm and the oxide layer is 2 μm thick. The pattern was defined by using electron-beam lithography with negative photoresist (HSQ). Then a Bosch etching process was performed to etch silicon and the HSQ layer performed as an etching mask during the Bosch process. After etching, the HSQ residue was removed by using HF. Then the precise transfers of TMD materials were performed by using our developed 2D printer method (Figure The experimental setup for measuring the hybrid TMD-Si devices is shown in SI2. Briefly, light from a broadband source (AEDFA-PA-30-B-FA) is injected into the grating coupler optimized for the TM mode propagation in the waveguide. The light output from the MRR is coupled to the output fiber by a similar grating coupler, and detected by the optical spectral analyzer (OSA202).