Superconductors with the A15 structure are prototypical type-II s-wave superconductors which have generated considerable interest in early superconducting material history. However, the topological nature of the electronic structure remains unnoticed so far. Here, using first-principles band structure calculations based on density functional theory, we show that the A15 superconductors (Ta 3 Sb, Ta 3 Sn, and Ta 3 Pb) have nontrivial band topology in the bulk electronic band structures, leading to the formation of topological surface states near the Fermi energy. Due to the bulk superconductivity, the proximity effect in the topological surface states would induce topological superconductivity even without heterostructure of a topological insulator and an s-wave superconductor. Our results indicate that the A15 superconductors are promising candidates for the realization of the topological superconductivity and the Majorana fermion. Topological phase of a matter has been a central theme of recent condensed matter physics A natural strategy for the search in this direction would be to examine existing superconductor material families in view of topological band theory. In conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors, the band structure in the normal phase is metallic and sizable density-of-states exists at the Fermi level. In contrast, the topological characterization of the band structure requires a band gap in order to define a topological invariant of the occupied band manifold since the band topology is defined using continuous deformation of the Hamiltonian without closing a gap. However, we note that it is still possible to define the band topology as long as there is a gap in the energy spectrum at each k-point (i.e., separate band manifolds). While the band structure of the superconductor would have metallic bands at the Fermi level, it is possible to have topological surface states in part of the Brillouin zone (BZ) where the metallic bulk bands do not overlap with them for appropriate surface termination. Thus, if we find a superconductor which has gaps at every k-point in the BZ with nontrivial band topology, it would be a potential candidate for the topological superconductor. Here, we show that superconductors with the A15 structure, which are representative metal-based superconductors mostly discovered from 1950's to 1970's We performed first-principles electronic structure calculations based on density functional theory as implemented in Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The experimental lattice constants were used The superconductors with the A15 structure have cubic symmetry with the space group P m3n #223 (Fig. with the lattice constant set to 1 for simplicity. This operation is a 4-fold rotation around z axis with respect to (0, 1/2, 0) followed by a fractional translation along z direction. Accordingly, we have 4-fold rotational symmetry in the bulk electronic band structure although we do not have the strict 4-fold rotation in the crystal structure. The electronic band structure of the representative superconductor Ta 3 Sb shows metallic feature with separate band manifolds, i.e., separation of the "valence" and the "conduction" bands in the whole BZ as shown in Fig. strong topological phase with (ν 0 ; ν 1 ν 2 ν 3 ) = (1; 000) where ν 0 is the strong Z 2 index and ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 are the weak ones (Fig. One of the direct consequences of the nontrivial bulk band topology is the existence of the topological surface bands. In the [001] surface of Ta 3 Sb, we indeed find topological surface states as shown in Fig. Here, the α R term gives rise to helical (Rashba-type) spin texture (Fig. in the effective Hamiltonian, the Hamiltonian becomes mathematically analogous to the isotropic helical Dirac cone described by v(k y σ x -k x σ y ). The analysis can be given in a similar way with Ref. . with ∆ = ∆ 0 e iφ . Then the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is given by H BdG = 1 2 Ψ † H BdG Ψ where and Ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ † ↓ , -ψ † ↑ ) T with μ being the chemical potential. By solving the BdG equation H BdG ζ = Eζ for a vortex-like condition ∆ = ∆ 0 (r)e iθ in polar coordinates, the zero energy bound states can be found. The solution for μ = 0 case is simple and can be written as which represents the Majorana zero mode localized at the vortex. The electronic band structure of Ta 3 Sn shows qualitatively the same band topology. Since we substitute Sb (Group VA in the periodic table) with Sn (Group IVA), the Fermi energy moves downwards below the surface states (Fig. Another variation of the composition would be the substitution of Ta with Nb since they belong to the same group in the periodic table. However, we find that the valence and the conduction bands in Nb 3 Sb and Nb 3 Sn are not separated unlike the Ta compounds probably due to the weaker SOC strength of Nb. Thus, the Z 2 bulk band topology is not properly defined in the Nb compounds. In conclusion, we reported hitherto unnoticed topological phases in A15 superconductors, Ta 3 Sb, Ta 3 Sn, and Ta 3 Pb. The topological band structure was characterized by the nontrivial strong Z 2 topological invariant ν 0 = 1. Corresponding topological surface states appear in the [001] surface, and they show non-helical spin texture due to the reduced symmetry at the surface. The proximity induced superconductivity at the surface would give rise to the Majorana zero mode. The topological surface bands of the proposed compounds could be experimentally verified using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) Our study shows that the A15 superconductors are promising candidates for the realization of the topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions, and potentially useful for topological quantum computation.