We show that the behaviour of the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) superconductors near a surface is considerably different from the usual case. The order parameter of the FF state is strongly deformed near the surface, which leads to a number of unusual features in the linear magnetic response, such as "anti-screening" or "over-screening" of the applied field. In a fully isotropic FF case, the Meissner effect is still present, despite the vanishing of the transverse superfluid density in the bulk. We also calculate the surface critical field Hc3, which exhibits a peculiar temperature dependence. It was shown by Fulde and Ferrell 1 (FF) and Larkin and Ovchinnikov 2 (LO) that by increasing the spin splitting of the electron bands in a singlet superconductor one can drive the system into a peculiar nonuniform superconducting state, known as the FFLO state. Due to the Cooper pairs in an FFLO superconductor having a nonzero center-of-mass momentum, the order parameter is periodically modulated, for instance, ψ(r) ∝ e iqr , which corresponds to the FF state. More complicated structures containing two or more plane waves, such as the LO state with ψ(r) ∝ cos qr, are also possible. Experimental realization of the FFLO superconductivity has remained a challenge, because it requires a weak orbital pair breaking and a sufficiently clean sample. For these reasons, the search for the FFLO state has focused on materials with low effective dimensionality and unconventional pairing, see Ref. 3 for a review. A particularly strong evidence of the FFLO state has been recently found in quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) organic compounds, such as λ-(BETS) 2 FeCl 4 (Ref. 4). While proposed originally in the context of solid-state superconductors, the FFLO states are now recognized as a universal feature of paired fermionic systems with mismatched Fermi surfaces, ranging from "cold" Fermi gases Our second goal is the calculation of the surface critical field in an FFLO superconductor. If an external magnetic field H is applied parallel to a superconductor-insulator interface, then in the usual (non-FFLO) case superconductivity first nucleates at H = H c3 , which is higher than the upper critical field H c2 by a universal factor: H c3 (T ) ≃ 1.695H c2 (T ) (Ref. 7), with both critical fields having a linear temperature dependence. At H c2 < H < H c3 , the order parameter is localized near the surface. One can expect that in the FFLO superconductors this effect would be very different, if present at all, just by looking at the temperature dependence of the FFLO upper critical field. In contrast to the usual case, H c2 exhibits the "Little-Parks" oscillations, due to the contribution of the Cooper pairs in the higher Landau levels. We consider a quasi-2D spin-singlet superconductor with the xy plane being the basal plane and the order parameter depending only on r = (x, y). In order to split the electron bands and drive the system into the FFLO regime at low temperatures, we apply a sufficiently strong uniform magnetic field H parallel to the plane. The orbital effects, in particular, the Meissner effect and the surface critical field, are probed by tilting the magnetic field out of the plane, so that H z = 0 and B z (x, y) = ∇ x A y -∇ y A x = 0. Here A = (A x , A y ) is the "orbital" vector potential, and we use the gauge ∇ • A = 0. Below the "zero field" limit always refers to the situation when the orbital effects are absent, i.e. H z = B z = 0, and Formation of a nonuniform superconducting state can be described phenomenologically by a modified GL functional in 2D, F = F d 2 r, with the free energy density given by Here D = ∇ + i(2e/hc)A is the covariant derivative and α = a(T -T c,0 ), with T c,0 being the critical temperature of the transition into a uniform superconducting state. In order for the instability with a finite wavevector to occur, we put K < 0 but K > 0. According to the discussion in the Introduction, we assume that β > 0, therefore the bulk state is of the FF form and the superconductor-normal transition is of the second order. The additional gradient terms, with ε > -1 being a dimensionless parameter, are included to describe the effects of the in-plane crystal anisotropy, appropriate for a 2D square lattice. where and ∆ 0 = a(T c -T )/β. This solution exists below the critical temperature which is higher than that of a uniform state. If ε > 0, then at zero field the bulk FF state is modulated along one of the diagonals of the square lattice, i.e. ψ(r) ∝ e iqr , with q 2 x = q 2 y = |K|/2(2 + ε) K. In order to highlight the issues with the Meissner effect in the FF state, let us consider the isotropic case, i.e. put ε = 0 in Eq. (1). At zero field, we obtain from Eq. (1) the nonlinear GL equation which has an isotropically degenerate solution of the form where the optimal wavevector is given by |q| = q 0 = |K|/2 K. The supercurrent j s = -c(δF /δA) can be expanded in powers of the vector potential: s + O(A 2 ), where is the spontaneous supercurrent, while the linear response to A is given by j (1) Note the difference of Eqs. ( Thus we have reproduced the well-known observation 1 that there is no linear response of the FF state in a fully isotropic system to a vector potential which is transverse to q, see also Ref. 16. This surprising property actually holds beyond the GL model. Indeed, since the total free energy of the isotropic FF state depends only on |q|, the gauge invariance dictates that a uniform vector potential enters F only via |q -A|. The supercurrent can be written as j where The second term here vanishes, because the equilibrium FF state with q = |q| = q 0 corresponds to the minimum of the free energy, and one obtains Q ij ∝ qi qj , i.e. a purely longitudinal response. We would like to stress that the result (9) should not be taken as a proof of the absence of the transverse current response and the Meissner effect in a realistic FF superconductor. The point is that the Meissner effect is measured in a finite sample and the applicability of Eq. ( In this section, we consider a half-infinite superconductor, with a straight surface at x = 0. The GL free energy has the general anisotropic form given by Eq. ( where the supercurrent is calculated in the linear approximation in the vector potential. In the Landau gauge, A = A(x) ŷ, the "orbital" magnetic induction is given by B z = B(x) = dA/dx. It follows from Eq. ( s,y = 0. For the linear response term we obtain: and j s,x = 0. In order to find the zero-field order parameter in a half-infinite sample one has to solve the GL equation supplemented by some boundary conditions for the order parameter at x = 0. We propose that the first boundary condition is This form was shown in Ref. 7 to be appropriate for an interface between a non-FFLO superconductor and an insulator. Since Eq. ( A more formal justification of the boundary conditions ( To solve the nonlinear equation ( where v s = ∇ x θ can be called the superfluid velocity, by analogy with its non-FFLO counterpart. and respectively. Here R1 = ∇ 2 x -v 2 s , R2 = {∇ x , v s }, and the curly brackets denote the anticommutator of two operators. It follows from Eq. ( It is straightforward to check that ∇ x I is equal to the left-hand side of Eq. ( In the absence of an external current injected into the system, we have I = 0. In an infinite system, Eq. ( 0 , see Eq. ( We have to find a solution, ∆(x) and v s (x), of two coupled nonlinear differential equations, Eq. ( which follow from Eq. ( whose solution vanishing at the boundary is where q 0 is given by Eq. ( The magnetic response of the FF state in a half-infinite sample can be found by substituting ψ(x) = ∆ 0 e iθ(x) , where ∇ x θ is given by Eq. ( The Maxwell equation (10) takes the form which has to be solved subject to the matching condition at the surface: Note that in the isotropic case (ε = 0), we have Q(x → ∞) → 0, i.e. the transverse current response kernel vanishes in the bulk, in agreement with the discussion in Sec. II. By making a change of variables ξ = tanh(q 0 x), Eq. ( where The differential equation ( where P μ ν (ξ) is the Ferrers function of the first kind. where Γ(z) is the Gamma function, it is easy to show that c 1 = 0. The remaining coefficient c 2 is found from the boundary condition B(ξ = 0) = H z , see Eq. ( we obtain: and We can also calculate the supercurrent j s (x) ≡ j s,y (x) = -Q(x)A(x). It follows from Eqs. ( where We see that, in contrast to the usual case, the x-dependence of the induction and the supercurrent is not exponential, although an exponential asymptotics is recovered far from the surface, see below. The expressions for A, B, and j s all contain see Ref. 17, which reveals an interesting feature of the magnetic response of the FF state. At μ -ν = -2n, where n is a non-negative integer, Eq. ( At ν = ν c , the linear response approximation fails and the singularity is expected to be cut off by the higher order terms in the supercurrent expansion in powers of A. Since the nonlinear effects are relevant only at some exceptional values of the parameters, we leave their investigation outside the scope of the present work and consider only ν = ν c . The magnetic field distribution inside the sample turns out to be qualitatively different for ν < ν c and ν > ν c . In Figs. 2, 3, 4, and 5, this is illustrated by plotting the induction B(x), Eq. ( if the nonlinear effects are neglected. The magnetic field is anti-screened at T < T < T c and over-screened at T < T . These unusual features of the Meissner response can be verified analytically by calculating the initial slope of B(x) at the surface and also its asymptotics at x → ∞. Substituting Eq. ( On the other hand, Eqs. ( In the general anisotropic case we have μ = 0, therefore where we again used Eq. ( To examine the transition from a weakly anisotropic to the fully isotropic case, one can keep the parameter ν fixed while reducing the value of |ε|. According to Eq. (30), the system will eventually enter the over-screening regime with ν > ν c . One can show that as ε → 0 -, the point at which the magnetic induction changes sign moves to infinity, therefore no field inversion is expected to occur in the isotropic limit. This is confirmed by an explicit calculation in the next subsection. The isotropic case is recovered from Eqs. ( where F (a, b; c; z) is the hypergeometric function (Ref. 17). The magnetic induction and the screening supercurrent take the following form: and It follows from Eq. (34) that the magnetic field is expelled from the superconducting bulk, with an exponential asymptotics far from the surface: Similarly, the screening current decays exponentially, as j s (x → ∞)/j 0 ∼ e -2q0x . We have plotted B(x) and j s (x) in Figs. It is well known that if a half-infinite non-FFLO superconductor is placed in a magnetic field parallel to the surface, then superconductivity first appears in the field equal to the surface critical field H c3 (Ref. 7). In this section, we calculate the surface critical field in the FFLO case. We only consider the isotropic system (ε = 0), in which case an exact analytical solution is possible. Assuming that the phase transition is of the second order, the surface superconducting instability can be studied by solving the linearized GL equation, supplemented by the boundary conditions ( Using the Landau gauge, A = H z x ŷ (recall that the "orbital" pair breaking is due to the component of H perpendicular to the basal plane), the solution can be written as where the function f satisfies the following equation: The notations here are as follows: , and Φ 0 = πhc/e is the magnetic flux quantum. Without loss of generality, we assume that H z > 0. From Eq. (39) we obtain that the critical temperature as a function of the applied "orbital" field is given by where T c (0) = T c,0 + K 2 /4a K is the critical temperature of the zero-field FFLO transition, Λ min is the lowest eigenvalue of the operator and q 0 = |K|/2 K. First, let us calculate the upper critical field H c2 , by solving Eq. ( As the out-of-plane magnetic field changes, the ground state of Λ switches between different Landau levels and the critical temperature shows the Little-Parks oscillations, see Ref. 8 and Fig. Switching from the nth Landau level to (n + 1)th Landau level occurs at H z = Hn = Φ 0 |K|/8(n + 1)π K, which satisfies H n+1 < Hn < H n . Now let us look at the surface superconductivity in a half-infinite sample. The boundary condition (15) is satisfied automatically for the order parameter (38) with a real f . We further require that according to Eq. ( where H ν (z) is the Hermite function, where r = √ hx 0 . The roots of this last equation determine the eigenvalues of the operator Λ at given r: The lowest four solutions of Eq. ( From this we obtain the well-known expression for the surface critical field in the non-FFLO case: According to Eq. ( or dν/dr = 0, i.e. The first possibility leads to Λ min = 0, therefore the critical temperature is not affected by the field: T c (H z ) = T c (0). However, this can only be realized if ν > ν * , i.e. at h < h * = q 2 0 /(2ν * + 1). At higher fields, we have the second possibility, with Λ min = K (2ν * + 1)h -q 2 0 2 . Collecting everything together, we finally arrive at the following expression for the critical temperature of the FFLO instability near the surface: which is plotted in Fig. and H 0 is the field below which the bulk critical temperature exhibits the Little-Parks oscillations, see Eq. (42). We would like to mention the study of the FFLO state in a disk geometry in Ref. 19, whose numerical results are qualitatively consistent with our analytical calculation. Regarding the shape of the superconducting nucleus near the surface, it is given by Eq. ( We studied the "orbital" magnetic properties of a half-infinite quasi-2D FFLO superconductor, which can be probed by tilting the applied field out of the basal plane. We used the modified GL formalism, supplemented by the boundary conditions at a superconductor-insulator interface. Due to the presence of the higher-order gradient terms in the GL equations, the number of the boundary conditions increases compared to the usual (non-FFLO) case. We focused on two observable properties: (i) the magnetic field screening (the Meissner effect), which is a result of the linear response of a given order parameter configuration to a weak external field, and (ii) the surface critical field H c3 , in which case the order parameter is small and the linearized modified GL equations are solved in an arbitrary magnetic field. In order to satisfy the boundary conditions, the order parameter near the surface deviates considerably from the single-plane wave FF state, showing a domain wall-like phase texture. In the isotropic case, this leads to the generation of the screening currents and the expulsion of magnetic field from the superconductor, despite the vanishing of the transverse superfluid density in the bulk. Even in an anisotropic system, when the bulk superfluid density is nonzero, the linear magnetic response turns out to be very different from the usual case. Depending on the temperature, the Meissner effect exhibits two different regimes. Near the critical temperature, the field is anti-screened, with the magnetic induction near the surface exceeding the applied field, passing through a maximum and then decreasing to zero at x → ∞. At lower temperatures, the field is over-screened, with the induction changing sign inside the superconductor, before decaying to zero. Similar to the usual case, the FFLO superconductivity in an external "orbital" magnetic field preferentially nucleates near the surface of the sample. However, the temperature dependence of the surface critical field considerably differs both from that in the usual case and also from the FFLO upper critical field in the bulk. In contrast to the latter, H c3 (T ) does not show any Little-Parks oscillations. At low fields, H z < H * , the surface superconductivity appears at the same temperature as at zero field, i.e. T c (H z ) = T c (H z = 0), while at higher fields, H z > H * , the surface superconductivity is suppressed, with T c (H z = 0) -T c (H z ) ∝ (H z -H * ) 2 . q 0 x q 0 v s FIG. 