The two-dimensional oscillatory crack instability, experimentally observed in a class of brittle materials under strongly dynamic conditions, has been recently reproduced by a nonlinear phase-field fracture theory. Here we highlight the universal character of this instability by showing that it is present in materials exhibiting widely different near crack tip elastic nonlinearity, and by demonstrating that the oscillations wavelength follows a universal master curve in terms of dissipation-related and nonlinear elastic intrinsic length scales. Moreover, we show that upon increasing the driving force for fracture, a high-velocity tip-splitting instability emerges, as experimentally demonstrated. The analysis culminates in a comprehensive stability phase-diagram of two-dimensional brittle fracture, whose salient properties and topology are independent of the form of near tip nonlinearity. Cracks mediate materials failure and hence understanding their spatiotemporal dynamics is of prime fundamental and practical importance Our understanding of these dynamic fracture instabilities is far from complete. In particular, the classical theory of brittle cracks -Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) This theory belongs to a broader class of diffuseinterface approaches to fracture Unlike previous phase-field approaches The strain energy functional e NH strain (H) = 1 2 μ(tr(F T F )+ [det(F )] -2 -3) of 2D incompressible NH materials To assess the generality of these results, our first goal is to consider near tip elastic nonlinearity which is sufficiently general, yet of qualitatively different physical origin and emerging properties compared to e NH strain . To that aim, we invoke the minimal elastic nonlinearity associated with the rotational invariance of isotropic materials. That is, we use the rotationally-invariant (Green-Lagrange) metric strain tensor E = 1 2 (F T F -I) = ε + 1 2 (H T H), instead of its widespread linear approximation ε = 1 2 (H + H T ) This energy functional, corresponding to Saint-Venant-Kirchhoff (SVK) materials While materials typically feature constitutive nonlinearity in addition to geometric nonlinearity, they should at least feature the latter, and hence Eq. ( This possibility is quite intriguing because, if true, it means that near tip elastic nonlinearity is not necessary for the existence of the oscillatory instability, which can alternatively inherit its characteristic length from the dissipation zone. The extensive calculations that gave rise to the wavelength λ in Fig. While α appears to be independent of the form of near tip elastic nonlinearity, the slope β in the linear λ -Γ 0 /μ relation does depend on it. To understand this dependence, recall that the nonlinear length is proportional to Γ 0 /μ, but is not identical to it (e.g. Γ 0 /μ exists also in the absence of elastic nonlinearity, while does not) In Fig. Interestingly, the W/Γ 0 range over which oscillatory cracks exist decreases with decreasing Γ 0 /μξ. In the limit Γ 0 /μξ → 0, it appears to vanish altogether such that straight cracks make a direct transition to tip-split cracks. While present numerical limitations do not allow us to conclude with certainty if the oscillatory instability exists or not in the absence of near tip elastic nonlinearity, they at least show that, if present, this instability would only exist over a vanishingly small range of loading, with a vanishingly small oscillations ampli-tude. Our results further strongly indicate that minute near tip nonlinearity, which is likely to exist in most materials, is sufficient to dramatically affect the instability whose wavelength essentially determined by the dissipation length ξ. Finally, and most remarkably, the salient properties and topology of the stability phase-diagram appear to be universal, i.e. they are the same for two widely different forms of near tip nonlinearity. In summary, we highlighted in this Letter the universal nature of the 2D oscillatory instability whose wavelength follows a universal master curve in terms of dissipation and nonlinear elastic intrinsic lengths, demonstrated the existence of a high-velocity tip-splitting instability and constructed a universal stability phase-diagram of 2D dynamic fracture. Future research should address the existence of the oscillatory instability in the absence of near tip elastic nonlinearity and the origin of the high-velocity tip-splitting instability. Supplemental Material for: "Universality and stability phase-diagram of two-dimensional brittle fracture" In this Supplemental Material file we provide additional technical information about the calculations presented in the manuscript. Phase-field theory, parameters and numerical implementation The phase-field theory of fracture used in the manuscript is presented in [C.-H. Chen, E. Bouchbinder, and A. Karma, Nature Physics 13, 1186 (2017)]. We briefly repeat it here for completeness. The theory formulated in terms of the Lagrangian L = T -U , where U = 1 2 κ (∇φ) 2 + g (φ) (e strain -e c ) dV is the potential energy and T = 1 2 ρ g(φ)(∂ t u) 2 dV is the kinetic energy, ρ is the mass density and dV is a volume element. e strain (H) is the elastic strain energy functional, where H = ∇u is the displacement gradient tensor and u (x, y, t) is the displacement vector field. In this study we considered tensile (mode-I) fracture where cracks propagate in the x-direction and the tensile loading is applied in the ydirection. The scalar phase-field φ (x, y, t) varies smoothly in space between the pristine (φ = 1) and the fully broken (φ = 0) states of the material. The broken state becomes energetically favored when e strain exceeds a threshold e c , and the function g (φ) = 4φ 3 -3φ 4 decreases with decreasing φ such that the elastic constants vanish as φ → 0 at large strains, which exactly corresponds to the traction-free boundary conditions that define a crack. Spatial gradients of φ are energetically penalized, as quantified by 1 2 κ (∇φ) 2 . Finally, the evolution equations for φ and u are derived from Lagrange's equations ∂ t [δL/δ (∂ t ψ i )] -δL/δψ i + δD/δ (∂ t ψ i ) = 0 for ψ = (φ, u), where the functional D = (2χ) -1 (∂ t φ) 2 dV controls the rate of energy dissipation. The latter features a dissipation-related length scale ξ = κ/ (2e c ) and a fracture energy Γ (v), the energy dissipated per unit crack surface when the crack propagation is v. The quasi-static the fracture energy is given by Γ 866e c ξ, which implies that the normalized nonlinear elastic length /ξ ∝ Γ 0 /μξ ≈ 2.866e c /μ can be varied by varying the dimensionless ratio e c /μ. Our systems are loaded in mode-I by fixing u y at the horizontal boundaries by a small amount corresponding to strains of up to a few percent, ensuring that the system remains in the linear elastic regime everywhere except for a small region near the crack tip. The loading can be quantified by the normalized stored elastic energy per unit area far ahead of the crack, W/Γ 0 . Our systems are chosen to be effectively large enough to reduce the finite size effects. In particular, in order to study long crack propagation distances, the crack tip in the simulations is kept at the center of simulation box by using a treadmill approach, which removes a layer at the left vertical boundary behind the crack and adds a strained layer at the right vertical boundary ahead of it. The loading and system sizes used in this study are presented in Table The numerical implementation details, including spatial grid, time spacing and convergence tests, are identical to those of [C.-H. Chen, E. Bouchbinder, and A. Karma, Nature The truncated neo-Hookean energy functional and its regularization The NH energy functional truncated to 4 th order in H is given in Eq. ( In fact, while the 4 th order truncated NH energy functional is bounded from below, it still features a nonphysical minimum with energy lower than that of the H = 0 state. Consequently, it should be regularized once the derived dynamics are implemented. Our regularization scheme is based on the following observation: any physical energy functional must satisfy the condition e strain ((1 + δ) H) ≥ e strain (H) , ∀δ ≥ 0, or equivalently ∂ δ e strain ((1 + δ) H)| δ=0 ≥ 0, i.e the elastic strain energy is a non-decreasing function of deformation. Whenever , and for (right) ec/μ = 0.2, W/Γ0 = 2.5 and system size of 400 × 400 ξ 2 . That is, both the dimensionless loading W/Γ0 and applied strain have been fixed, while ec/μ has been varied. The 2-fold variation in ec/μ in this example resulted in a variation of the area A of the red region between the two cases that corresponds to a 1.86-fold variation in the nonlinear length (close to the predicted 2-fold variation). Similar results are obtained for the SVK energy functional. . FIG. this condition is violated, the dynamics are regularized by replacing the Piola stress, ∂ H e strain , by its linear approximation, ∂ H e le strain (as defined in the manuscript), which always satisfies the non-decreasing condition. Whenever the regularization is activated, there is a local discontinuity in the stress; yet, our results show that the regularization is activated in compact and sparse regions, away from the crack tip, hence having minor influence on the dynamics. In order to quantitatively extract the nonlinear elastic length from our simulations, we defined in the manuscript the region around the crack tip that satisfies ∂ H e nl strain / ∂ H e le strain ≥ 0.5. This region is shown in Fig. The definition of involves a threshold (0.5 in the manuscript), whose exact value is somewhat arbitrary. In Fig. We attach to this Supplemental Material two movies which present a tip-splitting instability (corresponding to the thick-lined squares in Fig. • Movie S1: A rapid oscillatory crack undergoing an asymmetric tip-splitting instability (the movie corresponds to the upper thick-lined square in Fig. • Movie S2: A rapid straight crack undergoing a symmetric tip-splitting instability (the movie corresponds to the lower thick-lined square in Fig. The videos are available here.