We investigate the employment of carefully selected solvent additives in the processing of a commercial perovskite precursor ink and analyze their impact on the performance of organometal trihalide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3-xClx) photovoltaic devices. We provide evidence that the use of benzaldehyde can be used as an effective method to preserve the stoichiometry of the perovskite precursors in solution. Benzaldehyde based additive engineering shows to improve perovskite solid state film morphology and device performance of CH3NH3PbI3-xClx based solar cells. Earth-abundant organic-inorganic trihalide perovskites possess excellent optoelectronic properties and have been successfully implemented in a wide range of applications, including light emitting diodes, sensors and photovoltaic devices. 1 Their general structure is ABX3, where A is an organic cation, B a divalent metal ion and X a Cl, Br, I or any mixture of these halides. The countless composition combinations offer the possibility of tuning important properties such as the energy band gap or the stability of the resulting photoactive layers. Noteworthy, we use a commercial precursor ink containing methylammounium iodide (MAI), PbCl2 and PbI2 at a molar ratio of 1:1:4 (PbCl2:PbI2:MAI) in anhydrous N,Ndimethylformamide (DMF). Importantly, in order to produce a representative study we employ a set of the following criteria to select the appropriate solvent additives: i) inclusion of both higher and lower polarity solvents compared to the reference host DMF solvent, ii) use of higher boiling point (bp) solvents than DMF (bp 153 °C), while iii) keeping high enough vapour pressure to ensure a complete solvent removal during perovskite film formation at low temperature (80 °C) and iv) different nucleophilic strength and/or reducing character. The selected additives are: 1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene (aka tetralin), γ-valerolactone, acetophenone, furfural, benzaldehyde, N-methylformamide, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and benzylamine (see Table upon the inclusion of the other additives. The case of DMSO deserves a special mention, as its ability to form the PbI2(DMSO)2 complex has been used to retard the crystallization process and modify the crystal size. additive while incorporation of 5% vol of DMSO yielded significantly larger crystals with a very poor surface coverage. The wide variation in the microstructure within the small range of DMSO additive employed provides evidence for the critical role of the amount of additives in the structural properties of the perovskite solids. Similarly, the crystal size increased with increasing additive content for benzaldehyde and furfural, though in this case the dense film packing appears unaffected by the additive treatment. Importantly, the addition of only 1% vol. of benzylamine resulted in the formation of large cuboid-shaped crystals, which could be related to the changes in stoichiometry discussed later in the text. UV-Vis absorbance and relevant Tauc plots indicate that the additive treatment has a minor (maximum shift of 5 meV compared to the reference DMF solvent) and non-systematic influence on the material energy band gap, with the exception of benzylamine where a ~20 meV red-shift is observed (Fig. This moderate change could be related to lattice structural distortions derived from a modified stoichiometry in the perovskite film formation. The photovoltaic efficiency measurements under calibrated AM 1.5G irradiation conditions performed for several identical experimental device fabrication runs reveal a consistent trend (Fig. In the CH3NH3PbI3-xClx based formulation under investigation we did not observe any clear correlation between the perovskite film morphology nor the device performance with the polarity, boiling point and vapor pressure of the additives tested. Even so, the most significant changes described above were obtained with DMSO, benzylamine and benzaldhyde, three solvents whose boiling points are 25-35 °C above that of the host solvent DMF. Therefore we can not exclude the relevance of this parameter. Moreover, we believe that further studies based on the selection of additives presented here are necessary to fully understand their morphological influence of polarity, boiling point and vapor pressure on alternative perovskite formulations. Based on the results of our preliminary study, the parameter which appears to have a measurable impact on the film morphology and device performance is the reducing character of the additive. Thus we further explored how the additive reducing character affects the film characteristics and in particular the stoichiometry of the perovskite material. For that reason we characterized the absorbance of the precursor formulations with increasing additive content (Fig. On the other hand, the milder influence of benzaldehyde appears not to alter the crystal structure and at the same time reveals more clear trends in the signatures associated with the different oxidation states of iodine (Fig. This valuable finding demonstrates that the limiting instability of the perovskite precursors can be significantly mitigated by the simple addition of small amounts of specific reducing agents such as the herein proposed benzaldehyde. As a result, the modified ink has a higher unreacted precursor content compared to the untreated material, which results in the improved perovskite microstructure. In summary, we have investigated the use of solvent additives in a commercial CH3NH3PbI3-xClx ink to modify the morphology and optoelectronic properties of the resulting perovskite layers. We have observed a diverse impact on such properties depending on the additive used. Crystal size and surface coverage can suffer large variations upon additive treatment. Although our results suggest no direct influence of the solvent polarity, boiling point and vapor pressure on the properties and device performance of the CH3NH3PbI3-xClx material used for this investigation, we beleive that the selection process of the additives used within this paper can be interested for further studies on alternative perovskite formulations. In contrast, we provide evidence that some of these additives can effectively modify the precursor concentration and stoichiometry in the original perovskite ink. The experimental results indicate that the addition of a low amount (1% vol) of benzylamine favor the growth of CH3NH3PbI3-xClx cuboid shaped perovskite crystals instead of the tetragonal-cubic mixture expected in mixed iodide-chloride perovskites, due to the lower ionization energy of iodine versus chloride and the consequent faster interaction of the additive with PbI2. For the tetragonal-cubic mixture CH3NH3PbI3-xClx perovskites studied benzaldehyde showed the strongest beneficial morphological effect, which we ascribe mainly to its mild reducing character. As a result the power conversion efficiency of CH3NH3PbI3-xClx solar cell devices using addition of small amount (1-5% vol) of benzaldehyde additive increased by 10% and the accelerated lifetime performance under ISOS-D-1 conditions is improved. added to the commercial perovskite precursor formulation and stirred for 5 min prior to use. The perovskite layer was formed on top of PEDOT:PSS by dynamically spin coating the modified ink at 4000 rpm for 30 s and subsequent annealing for 2h at 80 °C, resulting in a ca. 350 nm thick films. A more detailed description of the solar cell architecture used in this work can be found elsewhere. The thicknesses of the layers were determined with a Veeco Dektak 150 profilometer. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) measurements were carried out with a Quanta 200 (FEI, Hillsboro, Oregon, USA) at various magnifications, 10 kV beam voltage and 3.0 spot size. The SEM images were used to correlate morphological features with the additive characteristics. Absorbance of the precursor formulations with different additive content were characterized with a Shimadzu UV-2700 UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Steady-state PL experiments were performed in a Fluorolog-3 Horiba Jobin Yvon spectrometer based on an iHR320 monochromator equipped with a visible photomultiplier tube (Horiba TBX-04 module). The PL was non-resonantly excited at 375 nm by the line of 5 mW Oxxius laser diode. Time-resolved PL was measured using a time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) method at the same spectrophotometer. The PL was excited by a NanoLED laser diode at 375 nm operating at 100 KHz with a pulse FWHM of ∼100 ps. The PL decays were analyzed and linefitted using the DAS6 (Horiba Jobin Yvon) software analysis package. All PL data were acquired with samples placed in vacuum (∼10 -3 mbar) in a custom-made optical vacuum chamber. The ISOS-D-1 protocol was followed to carry out the stability characterization. a The energy from dipolar intermolecular force between molecules, from Hansen Solubility Parameters. b DMF is the host solvent