The semimetal MoTe2 is studied by spin-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to probe the detailed electronic structure underlying its broad range of response behavior. A novel spin-texture is uncovered in the bulk Fermi surface of the non-centrosymmetric structural phase that is consistent with first-principles calculations. The spin-texture is three-dimensional, both in terms of momentum dependence and spin-orientation, and is not completely suppressed above the centrosymmetry-breaking transition temperature. Two types of surface Fermi arc are found to persist well above the transition temperature. The appearance of a large Fermi arc depends strongly on thermal history, and the electron quasiparticle lifetimes are greatly enhanced in the initial cooling. The results indicate that polar instability with strong electron-lattice interactions exists near the surface when the bulk is largely in a centrosymmetric phase. MoTe 2 exhibits a range of phenomena intersecting the physics of polar lattice transitions, topological phases of matter, and novel magnetoelectric properties. The centrosymmetric 1T' crystal undergoes a first order transition into the noncentrosymmetric T d structural phase upon cooling through T S ≈ 250 K, with volume fractions of both phases appearing within the 200-300 K range The WSP is predicted to be sensitive to the lattice parameters Spin-texture visualization provides a resource for understanding scattering amplitudes, spin-transport Fig. . This is a novel property not found in helical spin-textures that suppresses k z → -k z scattering Spin-integrated MDCs in Fig. The signal of δ, indicated by red arrows in Fig. Noting that increased electron density stabilizes the T d structure The results best correspond to a case of local T d order, with at least one T d /1T' phase boundary existing below the surface at T > T S . There is the added possibility of T d domains of opposite or unequal lattice-polarity coexisting in this region. Such cases are analogous to ferroelectric polar instability wherein the symmetry-breaking order is short-ranged or fluctuates In summary, the observed response to cooling the 1T'-MoTe 2 crystal is a gain in electronic coherence that yields a clear view of Fermi arcs and the novel 3D spin texture of T d -MoTe 2 . The existence of finite P z must be considered in future discussions of the magnetoresponse properties for T d -(Mo/W)Te 2 materials. Both small and large Fermi arc states are observed at 340 K, where the volume of the bulk is almost entirely in the 1T' structural phase 