We establish a method to produce cylindrical magnetic nanowires displaying several segments, with a large versatility in terms of segment diameter and length. It is based on electroplating in alumina templates, the latter being prepared by several steps of anodization, wet etching and atomic layer deposition to produce, widen or shrink pores, respectively. We propose an analytical model to analyze the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetization loops of dense assemblies of multisegmented wires. The model considers inter-wires dipolar fields, end-domain curling and predicts the switching field of individual wires with no adjustable parameter. Its ingredients are crucial to extract reliable parameters from the fitting of loops, such as magnetization or the porosity of the array. The continuously decreasing size of magnetic bits in hard disk drives has reached a dimension close to the fundamental superparamagnetic limit, which corresponds to the minimal volume of particles, or "grains", of a certain material needed to maintain a stable magnetic moment. Individual tools needed towards this goal are available from the literature. Straights wires are routinely prepared by electrodeposition of a magnetic metal in an appropriate template, such as 'anodic' alumina. However, those systems feature gradual diameter changes instead of abrupt ones (which is deleterious for domain wall pinning), and limited freedom for separating modulations along the pore length. In this paper, we present a preparative method for generating parallel arrays of magnetic nanowires featuring abrupt changes in diameter at well-defined positions along their length and arbitrarily defined values of the diameters. This is achieved by the combination of several steps involving the anodization of aluminum (in mild conditions), isotropic pore widening, and atomic layer deposition (ALD). Subsequently, we perform electrodeposition of the modulated magnetic nanowires. The magnetization hysteresis of our samples, measured as ensembles of macroscopic size, displays a complex behavior related to the distribution of wire segment lengths, diameters, and dipolar interactions. We propose a model able to reproduce both the hysteretic and reversible parts of these loops, from which accurate geometric and magnetic material parameters can be extracted. The anodization of aluminum enables the experimentalist to generate parallel arrays of straight pores perpendicular to the surface, with well-defined diameters that can be set to values between 20 nm and 400 nm and pore lengths between 0.5 μm and 100 μm. In the next step, an electrical contact is defined on one side of the alumina template by sputtercoating (i). We deposit 6 nm aluminum metal (as an adhesion layer) followed by 50 nm gold. This thin layer is then augmented by galvanic plating, performed in a two-electrode setup under -2.50 V in a K[Au(CN)2] electrolyte. The thick galvanic layer closes the pore extremities completely, and results in a short (1 μm long) Au stub inside the pores. As mentioned above, the diameter of each segment can be adjusted very precisely. Figure The diameter reduction between first and second segment and the diameter increase between second and third segment result in distinct pore profiles (Figure In contrast to this, the diameter increase occurs abruptly given that the hemispherical end of the narrow pore is lost completely upon growth of the next segment. The isotropic pore widening performed as the last preparative step finds an abrupt etch stop defined by the SiO2 layer. Wires grown inside the modulated template exhibit the same geometric properties as the template (Figure Magnetic nanowires display highly anisotropic magnetic properties, as the magnetization of soft magnetic materials tends to align along the long dimensions of an object. A global hysteresis loop is the basic characterization for a magnetic material. Even though one may in the end use local properties of single objects, a global hysteresis loop may inform about intrinsic properties such as material magnetization and sample geometry, having an impact on dipolar interactions. For instance, for a soft magnetic material, magnetization may be derived if the geometry of the system is known, through demagnetizing coefficients. In practice, this is more reliably achieved along hard-axis loops, which do not depend on hysteretic effects. Figure Let us first discuss a way to deal with the diameter modulations. In our case, the outer segments have a larger diameter, thus we expect nucleation to occur at rather low field. Although we estimated these energies in a handwaving fashion, the model was successful, e.g. reproducing the variation of wall width with the square of the wire diameter beyond typically 100 nm found via numerical simulation. Considering domain ends as half a domain wall, here we extend this model to include the Zeeman energy from the magnetic field, be it external or dipolar (see Annex). This field tends to compress the domain end when it is parallel to the magnetization in the body of the wire, and to stretch it when antiparallel. Thus, the curling model provides three features. First, it rounds off the hysteresis loop edges because magnetization in the domain ends is no longer strictly parallel to the applied field. Second, it brings an extra susceptibility contribution to hysteresis loops, through the compression/stretching of the domain ends. Third, it predicts the nucleation field, defined for the divergence of the width of the domain end for a given value of the applied field. Thus, the model predicts the hysteresis loop of any wire with given length and diameter, both in rounding and switching value, in the absence of any adjustable parameter (Figure Here, we report on the magnetic microscopy of single wires, to support experimentally the claims of the curling model introduced previously. We imaged the length L of curling domain ends, identified from the distribution of charges along the wire axis, as a function of the longitudinal applied field favoring magnetization in the wire (Figure The results presented in this paper establish a preparative strategy for the generation of smooth, cylindrical magnetic nanowires featuring well-defined modulations of diameter along their length, with for instance two segments of broad diameter encompassing one segment with narrower diameter. This design allows magnetic domain walls to be kept in the system upon quasistatic demagnetization with an oscillatory magnetic field applied across the axis of the wire. This provides a model system for studying domain walls, such as their inner structure. We gather here technical aspects related to the model for hysteresis loops, and the means for its implementation. Along the oop direction, the saturation field related to inter-wire dipolar interactions is the oop demagnetizing field for a saturated sample: the filling factor of the membrane, which is easily derived from considering the magnetic charges on both sides of the membrane, in a mean field approach. Here we extend an earlier model, In short, we consider a progressive curling state over a distance L (Figure The linearity of this scaling law is checked from the value of L determined experimentally. We use slanted functions to adjust the hysteresis loops, reflecting interaction fields. We define m sl (H, H 0 ) as the symmetric slanted non-hysteretic function saturating at H 0 , i.e., a linear function. For an array of single segments, considered along the oop direction in a mean-field approach, the loop with rising field reads m sl (H -H c , γpM s ), while the one for decreasing field reads m sl (H + H c , γpM s ). These functions, combined with the proper interaction fields discussed in the main text, are implemented in Wavemetrics IGOR procedures.