Laser polymerization has emerged as a direct writing technique allowing the fabrication of complex 3D structures with microscale resolution. The technique provides rapid prototyping capabilities for a broad range of applications, but to meet the growing interest in 3D nanoscale structures the resolution limits need to be pushed beyond the 100 nm benchmark, which is challenging in practical implementations. As a possible path towards this goal, a post processing of laser polymerized structures is presented. Precise control of the cross-sectional dimensions of structural elements as well as tuning of an overall size of the entire 3D structure was achieved by combining isotropic plasma etching and pyrolysis. The smallest obtainable feature sizes are mostly limited by the mechanical properties of the polymerized resist and the geometry of 3D structure. Thus the demonstrated post processing steps open new avenues to explore free form 3D structures at the nanoscale. Three-dimensional (3D) laser lithography has become an established technique that allows direct writing of arbitrary 3D structures at the microscale. The achievable resolution and versatility make this fabrication approach highly suitable for numerous applications ranging from microoptical elements Structuring by 3D laser lithography is based on local curing of a resist with a tightly focused laser beam. The obtainable resolution mainly depends on light-matter interaction and localization of photons, thus these two aspects have been tackled to push the resolution limits. Solutions from the optical microscopy were successfully applied to deliver photons of a wavelength λ into a diffraction-limited spot size of ~λ/2, reaching fundamental limitations of light confinement in the far field. Hence, focal spot sizes of a few hundreds of nanometers can be achieved for lasers operating at visible to near infrared wavelengths. Interestingly, the smallest feature size of the exposed structure may still be smaller than the diffraction limited spot size due to nonlinear lightmatter interaction effects and by taking advantage of selected cross-linking thresholds. To tailor the light-matter interaction and efficiently exploit nonlinear effects novel resist materials were developed However, complicated writing setups and stability issues currently hinder practical applications of free form 3D structuring beyond 100 nm feature sizes and commercially available systems mostly offer writing resolution only in the sub-micrometer range. An alternative approach to produce well defined nanoscale features is the pyrolysis of laser polymerized structures. A few studies reported that the size of 3D objects can be efficiently reduced by thermal decomposition of a resist in vacuum or inert gas atmosphere To add nanoscale precision and flexibility to post processing approaches, we studied the combination of isotropic plasma etching and pyrolysis for fabrication of 3D structures with sub-100 nm feature sizes. Plasma etching provides accurate control of cross-sectional dimensions of structural elements while an overall size of the entire 3D structure is down scaled via pyrolysis. Two types of resists were used to polymerize test structures. The first one was an organic negative tone photopolymer known under the brand name IP-Dip and containing 60-80% of 2-(hydroxymethyl)-2-[[(1-oxoallyl)oxy]methyl]-1,3-propanediyl diacrylate (also known as Pentaerythritol triacrylate). The resist was developed by Nanoscribe GmbH and serves as an immersion and photosensitive material at the same time. The material (25 g bottle, batch: 1-600-0055) was obtained from Nanoscribe GmbH and used according to the provided standard operation procedures for 3D structuring using a commercially available laser lithography system Photonics Professional GT (Nanoscribe GmbH). The second type of resist was an organic-inorganic zirconium-silicon hybrid composite (SZ2080 The resist is composed of an inorganic network and an organic one. The inorganic network consists of Si-O-Si, Si-O-Zr and Zr-O-Zr bonds and is formed during the synthesis of the material prior to photo-polymerization. The organic network is the one formed during photo-polymerization by polymerizing the pendant methacrylate moieties. The photoresist was produced using the sol-gel method MAPTMS and DMAEMA were used as the organic photopolymerizable monomers, while ZPO and the alkoxysilane groups of MAPTMS were used to form the inorganic network. In our case, the organic-inorganic hybrid material was synthesized by mixing the above chemicals in the following molar ratios: MAPTMS:ZPO = 8:2, and (MAPTMS+ZPO):DMAEMA = 9:1. Michler's ketone (4,4-bis(diethylamino) benzophenone) used as a photoinitiator was added at 1% w/w concentration to the final solution of MAPTMS and DMAEMA composite. All chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. The samples were prepared by drop casting onto 100 μm thick silanized glass substrates and the resulting films were dried in air for several days before photopolymerization. A Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser (Femtolasers Fusion, 800 nm, 75 MHz, <20 fs) was used as the light source for the fabrication of three-dimensional microstructures. The complete experimental setup and procedure has been described elsewhere A buckyball structure shown in Figure A tube furnace was used for pyrolysis of laser polymerized buckyballs. The structures were baked at 690 o C in a tube furnace under a constant nitrogen flow at 100 sccm throughout the chamber. At the beginning, the temperature was ramped up to 250 o C and kept at this point for 60 min allowing the remaining solvents in the structures to evaporate. Then the temperature was raised to 350 o C at a ramp rate of 5 o C/min. At this temperature the organic constituents of the resists start to decompose Isotropic plasma etching was carried out in a parallel plate etcher. The etcher uses a radio frequency generator operating at 27 MHz to produce plasma inside the chamber. Biasing is negligible due to the parallel plate configuration, thus structures are being etched in a highly isotropic manner. The etching experiments were done in cycles. First the structures were etched for 1 minute in oxygen plasma and then inspected in a high resolution SEM (Zeiss Supra 55VP). After the SEM imaging, the same structures were etched again for 1 minute and the inspection step repeated. This etch-inspect cycle was repeated until noticeable distortions of the structure occurred. The experiments were done with sets of 2 substrates each having at least 8 buckyball structures to evaluate experimental repeatability. Fabrication and measurement errors are given together with the measured values. During pyrolysis the resist molecules were decomposed and volatile species were removed from the chamber. Depending on the initial composition of the resist, the remaining elements rearrange to form a glassy carbon The same pyrolysis procedure was repeated for the buckyballs prepared using SZ2080 photoresist. As the organic content of SZ2080 is much lower, the structures shrunk less, i.e. to 60-70% of their initial size (Figure As can be noted from Figure In case deformations are not desired, they can be minimized by including additional structural elements into the main structure Pyrolysis allows reduction of an overall size of the entire structure. However, it does not provide much freedom of independently changing the lateral dimensions of the composing structural elements. To add a flexibility of tuning the bar width, isotropic plasma etching was investigated as a post-processing step. Both of the investigated resists have some part of an organic component, thus oxygen plasma was used for the etching. Moreover, oxygen plasma also does not etch typical substrate materials, such as silicon or glass, used for 3D laser lithography. Figures A post-processing combining both oxygen plasma etching and pyrolysis has also been investigated. Due to higher degree of shrinkage and better etching control IP-Dip resist was used to polymerize test structures. The composing bars of the structures were first thinned down in oxygen plasma from initial 340 ± 25 nm to ~220 ± 20 nm and then the entire buckyball structures were pyrolyzed in a tube furnace. By following this procedure we were able to precisely control the dimensions of the composing elements as well as the overall size of the structure. Figure The biggest advantage of the demonstrated post processing approach is that an aspect ratio of polymerized areas caused by the elongated laser spot can be avoided. Up to now, the highest resolution exposures were possible only as single pixel lines with typical thickness to width ratio of ~3. Otherwise, to produce 1:1 aspect ratio lines a few single pixel lines have to be written in an overlapped manner to increase the width, thus the resolution was reduced. In our case, it would be possible to write structures having 1:1 aspect ratio of their building blocks at the microscale and then use isotropic plasma etching and pyrolysis to thin and scale them down beyond 100 nm feature sizes. Pathways depicted in Figure Dry processing is another advantage of this method. Due to the wet development in 3D laser lithography, it is challenging to directly write nanoscale features as capillary forces tend to distort the structures even though critical point drying is used. This is not the case for plasma etching and pyrolysis that allow the limits of mechanical stability of the structures to be reached. Dimensions of structural elements as well as size of the entire structure can be controlled at the nanoscale by combining isotropic plasma etching and pyrolysis as post processing steps. For 3D structures made from organic resists almost five fold scaling down was demonstrated. The smallest obtainable feature sizes were mostly limited by the mechanical stability of the polymerized resist and the geometry of 3D structure. Post processing not only leads to size reduction, but also material properties are changed due to thermal decomposition of the resist which typically becomes more robust, thus the mechanical stability of the structure is improved. Also, thermal down scaling gives an additional lever to engineer 3D nanostructures at the nanoscale by controlling shrinkage induced distortion pattern.