The architectures of biological hard materials reveal finely tailored complex assemblies of mineral crystals. Numerous recent studies associate the design of these local assemblies with impressive macroscopic response. Reproducing such exquisite control in technical ceramics conflicts with commonly used processing methods. Here, we circumvent this issue by combining the recently developed Magnetically-Assisted Slip Casting (MASC) technique with the wellestablished process of Templated Grain Growth (TGG). MASC enables the local control over the orientation of platelets dispersed among smaller isotropic particles. After a high temperature pressure-less treatment, the grains of the final ceramic follow the same orientation of the initial platelets. This combination allows us to produce 95 % dense alumina part with a grain orientation following any deliberate orientation. We successfully fabricated microstructures inspired from biological materials with ceramics that present periodically varying patterns with a programmable pitch of a few tens of microns. We confirmed the capacity of the process to tailor local mechanical properties through local grains orientation using micro-indentation. This micrometer scale control over the local mechanical properties could be applied to adapt ceramic structures to complex loads using this inexpensive and scalable process. In systems where functional properties also depend on anisotropic grain orientation, the principle presented here could enable the creation of new multifunctional ceramics. Ceramics are ubiquitous in extreme environments due to their ability to sustain harsh chemicals and high temperatures while being mechanically loaded. As for most polycrystalline materials, the mechanical response of dense ceramics is strongly correlated to their internal grain structure (1, 2). Generally, ceramics with submicron sized grains are harder and stronger but less tough than ceramics with larger grains Deliberately textured dense ceramics can be obtained by methods that combine control over particle orientation and densification. The term texture refers here to a preferred orientation of grains in a particular direction in the material. Spherical particles with anisotropic magnetic susceptibility in their crystallographic structure can be oriented during casting using ultra high magnetic fields of 10 T, resulting in a textured ceramic after sintering Tailoring the texture at the micrometer scale to explore the effect of local tuning of the properties therefore calls for new processing strategies. In this study, we present a scalable and programmable bottom-up method to fabricate 95% dense ceramics with unprecedented microtexture resulting in unusual control over the local mechanical properties. The technique combines magneticallyassisted slip casting (MASC) to enable the fabrication of periodic microstructures with sub-millimeter pitches, with pressure-less densification by templated grain growth (TGG). The process can be computer-controlled to fabricate periodic textures, offers possibilities of 3D shaping and flexibility in final grain size. Building up periodic microstructures inspired from biological hard materials could provide avenues for technical ceramics with locally tailored response or impact-resistance properties. Beyond mechanics, the process can be extended to locally tune other grain-size dependent functions such as thermal conductivity, optical properties or piezoelectric response. A combination of two processes, magnetically-assisted slip-casting and templated grain growth, was used for the densification of alumina ceramics with controlled texture (Fig. Figure Since powder sintering is driven by the diminution of the particle surface, the smaller particle with a larger specific surface will present faster sintering kinetics than the large template. Consequently, the atoms from the small particles will diffuse at high temperature along the crystallographic planes of the larger particles, increasing the templates' dimensions at the expense of the small particles Using this bottom-up approach based on MASC and TGG, we can produce dense alumina ceramics with a texture directly resulting from the magnetic alignment of the templates. Since no pressing is required for the densification, it is possible to exploit the full potential of magnetic manipulation: its ability to orient anisotropic platelets at along any direction in space. Applying rotating magnetic fields with a well-defined direction of alignment, 95% dense and textured alumina ceramics were fabricated with any desired texture orientation (Fig. The electron micrographs of fractured surfaces of the ceramics obtained using template alignment directions at various angles confirm the development of the texture in so far unachievable directions (Fig. The surface of the templates obtained by molten salt synthesis corresponds to the crystallographic basal plane of miller indices (00l). After the sintering, the grains obtained also exhibit a corresponding preferred crystallographic orientation along this group of plane, the most intense one being the (0012) measured by X-Ray diffraction (Fig. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the rocking curve is thus a direct measure of the grain orientation quality (Fig. Bulk ceramics with precise control of their texture direction adds tailored anisotropy to the traditional TGG process. In addition, the jamming front position is moving inside the suspension during the slip-casting by MASC. Taking advantage of this particularity, periodic microstructures in porous particle assemblies have been obtained by varying the rotating magnetic field orientation during the casting During the slip casting, a step-wise rotation of the magnetic alignment direction with respect to the sample produces a colloidal assembly with periodic orientations of the template particles. After sintering, this assembly converts into a dense ceramic with a periodic orientation of its constitutive grains. As a proof-of-concept, we prepared ceramics with vertical orientations of the grains, rotating in the perpendicular direction at chosen angles (Fig. The setup used to produce these periodic assemblies consists in a permanent magnet rotating around a horizontal axis, and a porous casting mold that will receive the sample placed below the magnet, on a stepper motor. The magnetic field produced by the rotating magnet will align the template particles vertically (φ = 0°) while the stepper motor will rotate the sample in-plane by a chosen angle θ R at every defined time interval τ (Fig. After the sintering at 1600°C, during which the templated grain growth occurs, the sample presents a grain orientation that periodically varies along the z-direction. This periodic change in grain orientation is revealed on the sample polished cross-section (Fig. A closer investigation of the microstructure with a SEM allows the appreciation of the grains alignment within each period (Fig. Furthermore, when the jammed layer increases in thickness during the casting, it opposes a larger pressure drop upon water removal. As a consequence, the jamming front speed decreases with time, and directly affects the pitch of the periodic structures in a predictable fashion. Indeed, the jamming front line at a position z is expressed by: Eq. 1 where η is the viscosity of the liquid, R is the hydrostatic resistance of the cast layer and J is the ratio between the volume of cast layer and of the extracted liquid where H is the Heaviside step function and m an integer. For this function, the period Τ of the temporal variation of the angle θ is given by πτ θ ! . Combining Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 gives the relation for the local texture orientation as a function of the position z from the mold surface: This implies that the n th complete rotation of the templates from θ = 0 to θ = π, which corresponds to one pitch, will occur at distances z ! from the surface given by: Consequently, if the time interval τ between each rotation is maintained constant, the pitch p = z n -z n-1 of the structure decreases. Furthermore, the pitch p of a microstructure with θ ! = 90° is expressed by the following equation as demonstrated in ref Eq. 5 then for θ ! < 90°, the pitch of the microstructure can be expressed directly as a function of this reference pitch p !" : Eq. 6 We measured the pitch in four samples produced with a time interval τ = 30 s but with θ R equal to 5°, 11°, 45°, and 90°. The results are plotted in Fig. MASC-TGG therefore allows the creation of ceramics with periodically varying texture. The range of possible texture patterns is infinite as τ and the platelets alignment angle can be varied simultaneously. The control of the mold shape and topography opens the possibility to alter the texture not only in the z-direction but also in the (x-y) plane. With 10 μm-long grains, the ultimate smallest variation in the texture is thus also 10 μm, with virtually no limit on the largest variation. Since the grain dimensions influence the mechanic properties of dense ceramics, monotextured samples should present anisotropic properties whereas the periodicallytextured specimen should exhibit analogous oscillations in local mechanical response. To quantify the influence of the local variation of texture in dense ceramics on their local mechanical properties, we measured the Young's modulus and Vickers hardness of a monotextured MASC-TGG sample at different angles ψ, defined as the angle between the grain long axis and the testing direction, and compared these values with the periodic variation in hardness with the pitch of the periodic sample (Figure The Young's modulus, measured with an acoustic pulse-echo method, and the materials hardness, measured with a Vickers indenter at a load of 5 N, are plotted as a function of ψ in figure with E 0 = 120 +/-20 GPa and E 90 = 25 +/-10 GPa. The Young's modulus of a sapphire monocrystal is 10% higher along the crystallographic c-axis (415 GPa) than along the a or b-axis (385 GPa) The sample's Vickers hardness similarly depends on the grain orientation and varies from H 0 = 11 +/-4 GPa to H 90 = 3 +/-1 GPa when ψ varies from 0° and 90°. This hardness follows a Reuss type of rule of mixture: which indicates that the softer damaging mechanism dictates the hardness of the sample. The larger number of grain boundaries and pores along the loading direction when ψ = 90° are probably providing an easy damaging mechanism. Polymer composites reinforced with alumina platelets exhibit similar trends with H ! > H !" and E ! > E !" . For example, a polyurethane reinforced with 20 vol% of alumina platelets has mechanical properties of 0.25 and 0.19 GPa for H 0 and H 90 respectively, and 1.25 and 0.75 GPa for E 0 and E 90 , respectively The measurement of monotextured samples proves that the mechanical properties of the ceramic depend on the testing direction with respect to the grain orientation. A periodically textured sample should thus present periodically varying mechanical properties as well. To demonstrate this, we performed in situ microindentation in an scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a Berkovitch indenter at a load of 1 N on a sample with a Bouligand structure of pitch 150 μm (Fig. The microhardness values are 60% to 260% higher than the macrohardness ones, for ψ = 0° and 90° respectively. This increase in material hardness as the indent imprint, thus the volume probed, is getting smaller is commonly observed in polycrystalline alumina The size-dependence of the hardness is associated with a lower number of grain boundaries in the volume tested. The different shape of the indenter could also be responsible for a part of the difference between the macro and micro hardness. Nevertheless, the general trend with H ! > H !" is also observed. The oscillations in the hardness are visible as expected from the grain orientation angles variations. The SEM observation of the microindents further illustrates the significant role of the grain boundaries in activating plastic deformation mechanisms (Fig. With the fabrication method developed, local variations in mechanical properties that directly depend upon grains' orientations can be incorporated into a 95 % dense alumina ceramic at the micrometer level. MASC-TGG therefore uniquely provides ceramics with locally tailored hardness or elastic modulus. The method presented here enables the creation of 95% dense alumina ceramics with a deliberate orientation of the constitutive grains by combining magnetically assisted slip-casting and templated grain growth. A composition compatible with TGG was used during MASC to fully enable the specificities from both techniques: the possibility to program local orientation of anisotropic particles in bulk 3D shapes from MASC and the ability to densify the assembly without pressure while producing highly aligned grains from TGG. The alignment of the grains is almost as good as in ceramics prepared by tape casting, the state-of-the-art method, with a Full-Width at Half Maximum of the grain orientation distribution of 10°. But MASC-TGG is the only method that can achieve a similar control over arbitrary alignment directions. The control of the local texture is translated into a local anisotropic mechanical response, both in elasticity and in hardness. Samples made with a periodically varying grain orientation present an analogous variation of the local hardness. These variations can be further modulated by adapting the grain size and aspect ratio through the sintering conditions and the addition of dopants. To conclude, the combined use of MASC and TGG opens the possibility for locally programming the grain orientation in ceramic materials and thus to deliberately tune their local mechanical properties. These local variations of mechanical response are expected to translate into unusual macroscopic behavior as found in biological samples, through various phenomena such as crack arrest and twisting. With the increasing number of studies revealing the unique and exquisite microstructures of hard biological composites and minerals, often associated with outstanding properties, MASC-TGG finally provides tools to further explore how biological design principles could be transposed into ceramics. Further development of the process can be foreseen, such as the tailoring the final microstructure in terms of grain size and aspect ratio, density and local orientation. In addition, the scalability and the lesser efforts of the fabrication should be emphasized. Because it hinges on slip casting and pressure less sintering, two already industrial-scaled processes, MASC-TGG could be directly used for the fabrication in series of unusual ceramics. This local texturing can also be exploited beyond mechanics. Virtually any property that depends on the presence of a preferred orientation can be locally controlled with this technique and imply effective repercussions on the bulk macroscopic functionalities. Magnetic functionalization of the template particles. Anisotropic alumina platelets (Ronaflair White sapphire, Merck, Germany), used as the template particles for the grain growth, were magnetized following the procedure published elsewhere Preparation of the suspension for casting. The isotropic alumina nanopowder (TM-DAR, Taimei, Japan, average particle size 180 nm) was first dispersed in deionized water at 50 vol% solid loading and maintained at pH 4 (HCl 1 mM, Sigma Aldrich, Germany). Mechanical vibrations and addition of small amounts at each time were required to reach this high solid loading. After de-agglomerating overnight using ball-milling with 3-and 5mm diameter alumina balls, magnetized platelets were added to the suspension to achieve the ratio nanoparticles:platelets of 90:10. Deionized water was added to adjust the total solid content back to 50 vol%. Before casting, the suspension was ultrasonicated (UP200S, Dr Hielscher) for a few minutes only at a power of 20% to ensure good dispersion, quickly degassed under vacuum, and kept under magnetic stirring until use. Due to the sensitivity to drying of highly concentrated suspensions, the recipient should be kept closed when not in used. Casting. The porous molds were prepared in advance using gypsum (Boesner, Switzerland). These molds were cast and dried at 60°C at least one day. For cylindrical specimens, the gypsum was made flat by passing a razor blade at the surface. For specimen with a surface topography, the gypsum piece was scratched and cut until the desired surface was obtained. A plastic tube was then attached on top of the gypsum and maintained using parafilm foil to prevent leakage. This mold was then fixed on top of a stepper motor (Conrad, Switzerland) and positioned as close as possible to a neodymium magnet (Supermagnete, Switzerland) in an area where the magnetic field strength was at least 50 mT. The magnet was attached to a mixer that rotated at a frequency of 1 Hz at least. For periodically-textured specimen, the stepper motor was controlled by a LabView program sending a step function with tunable frequency and amplitude to tune the time τ and the angle step θ ! . After complete removal of the water through the pores of the mold, which typically takes 3 hours, the mold with the sample was dryed overnight before unmolding. Sintering. The dried samples were sintered in air in a furnace (Nabertherm, Switzerland) with a dwell time of 1 hour, a heating rate of 2.5 °C min -1 with the cooling left unregulated. Except for the study of the grain growth, the sintering temperature used was 1600°C. Characterization of the microstructure. The density of the sintered specimen was measured using a conventional Archimedes set-up in water. To ensure efficient water infiltration through the pores, vacuum was applied for a few hours. The grain sizes where determined in the samples with horizontal alignment. Cross-sections were polished, debris removed in an ultrasonic bath, coated with 5 nm of platinum and observed by scanningelectron microscopy (LEO 1530, Zeiss, Germany). Image analysis using Image J was used to measure the grain sizes over at least 100 grains per specimen. For the periodic specimen, brittle fracture of the cross-section were directly sputtered and visualized in SEM to reveal the local 3D orientation of the grains as shown in Figure Measure of the pitch in function of the thickness. The pitch of the various structures in function of the thickness was measured based on optical micrographs taken with incident light. The pictures where then converted to grey scale using Image J and direct measurement was done with the same software. The theoretical fits for the pitch were done using the equations 5 & 6. Macroindentation was performed using a Vickers indenter (MXT-a, Wolpert, Germany). The values were averaged over 10 measurements. The elastic modulus was measured using the ultrasonic method in pulse echo in reflection at 5 MHz (longitudinal probe V1091 5MHz, shear probe V157-RM 5MHz, couplant SWC-Shear Wave Couplant, 072PR-20-E, General Pulser Receiver, Controltech, Switzerland) on discs of 3-mm thickness L and polished to ensure flat surface. The time-of-flight tof was recorded using an oscilloscope. The Young's modulus was calculated using ! , with ρ the density, and V ! and V ! the longitudinal and transverse wave velocity, respectively, and V = !! !"# . In-situ micro indentation was performed using the Alemnis SEM indenter (Alemnis, Switzerland) with a Berkovitch tip at 1N force and using a LabView-controlled position. The ceramic sample was initially fixed on the SEM stub and polished using broad-ion-beam (Hitachi IM4000, Japan) for 2.5 hours (6kV, deviation angle C3, Argon) to ensure a very flat surface. and black square with rocking curve), using tape-casting 