The propagation of the Lamb modes along a-SiC/ZnO thin supported composite structures was simulated for different ZnO and a-SiC layer thicknesses and electrical boundary conditions. The phase and group velocity, the field profile and the electroacoustic coupling coefficient dispersion curves of the Lamb modes travelling along the composite plate were calculated for different layers thicknesses. Zero group velocity (ZGV) points were identified which group velocity vanishes while the phase velocity remains finite, at specific layers thickness values. ZGV resonators (ZGVRs) were designed that consist in only one interdigital transducer (IDT) and no grating reflectors at its sides. The finite element method analysis was performed to investigate the strain, stress and internal pressure the a-SiC/ZnO plate experiences when subjected to an external uniform differential pressure in the 1 to 10 kPa range. The ZGVR pressure sensitivity, i.e. the relative frequency shift per unit pressure change, was found to be mostly affected by the change in the membrane thickness induced by the pressure. A pressure sensitivity of 9 ppm/kPa, in the 4 to 10 kPa range, was predicted for the a-SiC(1μm)/ZnO(1μm) ZGV-based pressure sensor. The feasibility of high-frequency micropressure sensors based on a-SiC and ZnO thin film technology was demonstrated by the present simulation study. The acoustic waves that propagate in finite-thickness isotropic homogeneous plates are divided into two classes: Lamb waves and shear horizontal (SH) plate waves. These waves are decoupled and can be distinguished into symmetric and anti-symmetric modes, S n and A n , where n is the mode order; an infinite number of S n and A n modes exist in a plate. The Lamb modes are elliptically polarized in that they show two particle displacement components, U 1 and U 3 , parallel and orthogonal to the wave propagation direction x. U 1 lies in the plane that contains the wave vector k: its depth profile is symmetric with respect to the mid-plane of the plate for symmetric modes while it is antisymmetric for the antisymmetric modes. U 3 , the shear vertical component, is perpendicular to the plate surface: its depth profile is antisymmetric to the mid-plane of the plate for the symmetric modes, while it is symmetric for the antisymmetric ones The phase and group velocity dispersion curves of the Lamb modes propagating along the bare amorphous SiC (a-SiC) thin plate were calculated using the Disperse code , is zero, as opposed to the cases of the backward-wave motion (v gr and v ph have opposite sign) and forward-wave motion (v gr and v ph have equal sign) which correspond a negative and positive power flow, respectively. The middle of the membrane was chosen to be the zero depth (rather than the surface) in order to emphasize the symmetry with respect to the plate midplane. For the S 1 mode, U 1 is symmetric around the mid-plane of the plate while U 3 is antisymmetric; for the A 2 mode, U 3 is symmetric while U 1 is antisymmetric with respect to the mid-plane of the plate. U 1 and U 3 are normalized to the U 1 value at the plate surface The phase and group velocity dispersion curves of the ZnO/a-SiC composite plates were calculated by the software DISPERSE The mode shape of the ZGV2 , ZGV5 and ZGV8 for the 3-5 composite plate is shown in figures 5a-c as an example. The middle of the composite membrane, 8 μm thick, was chosen to be the zero depth in order to emphasize the plate asymmetry with respect to its midplane. The acoustic field profile of the ZGV2 still shows some peculiarities typical of the first anti-symmetric mode S 1 . The field profile of the ZGV5 and of the ZGV8, have the characteristic shape of a higher order mode but it is artificial to identify a similarity with a symmetric or anti-symmetric mode. The electroacoustic coupling coefficient K 2 is a measure of the IDTs electrical to acoustic energy conversion efficiency in piezoelectric materials. In the ZnO/a-SiC composite plates, four electroacoustic coupling configurations can be obtained by placing the interdigital Transducers at the substrate/film interface (sTf) or at the film surface (sfT), further including a floating metal electrode opposite the IDTs (sTfm and smfT), as shown in figure 2 ) of the four configurations. The smfT and sTfm configurations provide a k eff 2 much higher than the sfT and sTf configurations; f s and f p are the series and parallel frequencies of the ZGVR extracted by the admittance frequency spectrum (the frequencies corresponding to the maximum conductance and maximum resistance The acoustic energy of a ZGV mode is concentrated under the IDT but, if an external pressure is applied that induces the bending of the membrane, the resonator frequency is expected to change. The investigation of this feature can be exploited for sensing applications or for evaluating the resonator stability under variable environmental pressure. By following the calculation procedure outlined in reference 14, we investigated the major factors determining the pressure sensitivity of the ZGVR based on mode 2 of the 1-1 composite plate for the smfT configuration: the 1-1 plate was chosen as it corresponds the highest K 2 , according to figure Figure The eigen-frequency study of the ZGV2 for the 1-1 composite plate was performed for three perturbed conditions: 1. the IDT wavelength was assumed to be equal to under the hypothesis that the IDT is positioned onto the free surface of the piezoelectric layer, and that the wavelength is not affected by the S xx a-SiC ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ; the two layers thickness and material constants are assumed to be unaffected by the applied differential P. 2. The thickness of each layer was assumed to be equal to and The wavelength and the materials constants are assumed to be unaffected by P. 3. The two layers elastic constants and mass density were changed according to their pressure dependence and the thickness of each layer and the wavelength were assumed to be unaffected by P. The a-SiC and ZnO pressure derivatives of the elastic constants was used to calculate the w-ZnO relative mass density change ρ 0 ρ ⁄ caused by the applied pressure P, where ρ and ρ 0 are the pressure-perturbed and unperturbed mass density, B (142.6 GPa) and B' was used to evaluate the pressure derivative of the a-SiC mass density, with f = 0.5 • {( V 0 V ⁄ ) The pressure derivatives of the mass density for both the ZnO and a-SiC layers were also calculated by 3D FEM stationary study. The ZnO and a-SiC mass density, as a function of P int , was deduced by the plate volume change V 0 /V pert = ρ/ρ 0 , being L x , L y and L z the equilibrium membrane sides along the axis system, V 0 = L x• L y •L z the unperturbed volume, V pert = V 0 • (1 + S xx ) • (1 + S yy ) • (1 + S zz ) the perturbed volume. The a-SiC and ZnO mass density evaluated by the two methods for different pressure values are very close, as shown in figure As an example, figure The ZGV2 absolute admittance vs frequency curves of the 1-1 plate, for the sfT configuration; the pressure is the running parameter. The non-linear behavior of the ZGVR-based pressure sensor, shown in figure In reference 21 a fully implantable wireless pressure sensor is presented that works in the 0 to 26.66 kPa pressure range and shows a sensitivity of about 12 ppm/kPa. The sensor device consists in a 5.3 by 4 mm thin quartz diaphragm on which a one-port SAWR has been implemented that works at about 868 MHz. Since the total space occupied by an implantable sensor also includes the antenna, it is important to minimize its size. The small size of the sensor based on ZGV2 1-1, as well as its compatibility with integrated circuit technology and its sensitivity to low pressures, make it a suitable candidate for the design of implantable devices. In reference 22 the effect of the diaphragm shape (circular and rectangular) on the pressure sensitivity of an AlN/SOI-based SAWR sensor was investigated in the 0 to 1724 kPa pressure range, and an improved sensitivity from 0.0055 to 0.025 ppm/kPa was found. This result suggests us to study the effects of the membrane shape on the pressure sensitivity of the ZGV-based sensor, as well as the optimization of the IDT design parameters, also including the presence of reflectors to compensate a possible deviation of the theoretical thicknesses from the calculated ones. The propagation characteristics of the ZGV Lamb modes along c-ZnO/a-SiC composite plates have been modelled for different ZnO and a-SiC layer thicknesses. The phase and group velocity, and the K 2 of four coupling configurations have been theoretically studied specifically addressing the design of enhanced-coupling, microwave frequency electroacoustic devices that are reliable to fabricate by conventional sputtering technologies and microlithography technique. Quite good K 2 corresponds to both the qS 0 and the ZGV2, for the same-thickness plate, but the former has a resonant frequency significantly lower than that of the ZGVR, and requires a larger device area including the IDT and two reflectors. The pressure sensitivity of the ZGV2 resonator was studied for the 1-1 plate subjected to a uniform differential pressure varying in the 1 to 10 kPa range. A ZGVR sensitivity of about 9 ppm/kPa was predicted in the 4 to 10 kPa range where the relative frequency change vs the pressure curve can be linearly fitted. The present study was performed to demonstrate proof of concept of ZGVRs in pressure sensing applications. The c-ZnO/a-SiC-based ZGV2 sensors are proven to achieve remarkable performances (high sensitivity and enhanced coupling efficiency) that are important prerequisite for the design of future devices to be used in the context of chemical, biological and physical quantities detection. Further studies are in progress to improve the device performances, based on the IDT design parameters (such as single electrode and multiple-split electrodes) and the membrane shape.