A universal mechanism to generate chiral hinge states in the ferromagnetic axion insulator phase is proposed, which leads to an exotic transport phenomena, the quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE) on some particular surfaces determined by both the crystalline symmetry and the magnetization direction. A realistic material system Sm doped Bi2Se3 is then proposed to realize such exotic hinge states by combing the first principle calculations and the Green's function techniques. A physically accessible way to manipulate the surface QAHE is also proposed, which makes it very different from the QAHE in ordinary 2D systems. The bulk-boundary correspondence Similar to the ordinary TI Compared to helical hinge states, chiral hinge states are even more stable, which requires no symmetry to protect them. Similar to the chiral edge states in the 2D quantum Hall systems The above argument can be made more general. In quantum electrodynamics, Lorentz invariance allows, in addition to the Maxwell term, a topological term of the form θ 4π E • B, where the coupling strength θ is called the axion field To calculate the hinges states, we adopt an approximation where the low-energy physics of Sm doped Bi 2 Se 3 can be modeled by the tight binding Hamiltonian for the pure Bi 2 Se 3 together with a magnetic exchange field acting on the p-orbitals of both the Bi and Se atoms. Moreover, we generalize the recursive Green's function method where x, y, z form the local right handed coordinate system and v i , g i are vectors defined in pseudo-spin space. Both the velocity and g-factor vectors for the (100) and (010) surfaces of Sm x Bi 2-x Se 3 can be obtained by the corresponding surface calculations based on the effective tight binding Hamiltonian with their values listed in Table. I. Then the mass associated with that particular surface Dirac equation can be expressed as Bearing in mind the fact that the magnetization lies in ab plane and using velocity v and g-factor g listed in Table . I, we can express m as a function of magnetization direction θ as m 010 = -0.3140|M |sin(θ + π/3) and m 100 = -0.3410|M |sin(θ -π/3), which are plotted in Fig. The mass term vanishes at θ = π/3 for the (100) surface and θ = 2π/3 for (010) indicating the surface topological transitions at these two angles, after which the hinge states moved from one hinge to another. As we discussed above, the chiral hinge states can only exist when the two nearby surfaces have the mass terms with opposite signs as indicated by the green area in Fig. In the first row of Fig. The existence of chiral hinge modes will cause quantum anomalous Hall effect on the surfaces of the Sm x Bi 2-x Se 3 . The experimental setup can be schematically plotted in Fig. In conclusion, we proposed in the paper that Sm doped Bi 2 Se 3 single crystal is a magnetic axion insulator and provides an ideal material platform to realize helical hinge states on the particular hinges of the crystals. Such nontrivial hinge states demonstrate that the magnetic axion insulator can also be viewed as higher-order topological insulators with the new type of bulk-boundary correspondence described in the paper. The surface QAHE is the most striking observable effect caused by the chiral hinge states in Sm doped Bi 2 Se 3 single crystal. where the diagonal block The tight binding Hamiltonian is obtained from the maximally-localized Wannier functions constructed by wannier90 For simplification, H IR is used to denote hoppings between interface layer and ULs, LLs H P , in block tridiagonal form, is to denote Hamiltonian of ULs, where Σ R is the self-energy depicting comprehensive interactions between interface layer and ULs, LLs. Within the approximation of PL, Σ R has a simple form as where g R0R0 and g R 0 R 0 is the "surface" Green function of ULs and LLs, respectively. Because H P and H N are all in triangular diagonal form, g R0R0 and g R 0 R 0 can be solved by the standard recursive schemes G II (k z , ω + iη) = [(ω + iη) -H II -Σ R ] -1 , (B.11)