Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is the only known material aside from graphite with a structure composed of simple, stable, non-corrugated atomically thin layers. While historically used as lubricant in powder form, h-BN layers have become particularly attractive as an ultimately thin insulator. Practically all emerging electronic and photonic device concepts rely on h-BN exfoliated from small bulk crystallites, which limits device dimensions and process scalability. Here, we address this integration challenge for mono-layer h-BN via a chemical vapour deposition process that enables crystal sizes exceeding 0.5 mm starting from commercial, reusable platinum foils, and in unison allows a delamination process for easy and clean layer transfer. We demonstrate sequential pick-up for the assembly of graphene/h-BN heterostructures with atomic layer precision, while minimizing interfacial contamination. Our process development builds on a systematic understanding of the underlying mechanisms. The approach can be readily combined with other layered materials and opens a scalable route to h-BN layer integration and reliable 2D material device layer stacks. Scalable manufacture remains a central challenge in the application of two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs). In recent years, major advances have been made regarding chemical vapour deposition (CVD) of 2DLMs such as graphene (Gr) Here, we focus on addressing this challenge of reliably integrating CVD h-BN into 2DLM heterostructures for scalable manufacture. This demands new holistic process development, not only growth of large h-BN mono-layer crystals, but also their viable, clean transfer and device interfacing for which we take high-mobility Gr channels as application relevant model system to assess quality. We investigate h-BN growth and transfer in unison, in particular in the context of the choice of growth catalyst since both processes critically rely on h-BN interactions with the catalyst. Strong metal/h-BN interactions are preferable for applications where the h-BN remains on the metal, such as for magnetic tunnel junctions. Based on an understanding of the growth process, we present a CVD process to achieve large monolayer h-BN domains with lateral sizes exceeding 0.5 mm. Importantly we show that as-grown h-BN mono-layers can be easily and cleanly transferred using an entirely delaminationbased approach, which also enables the reuse of the substrate. We demonstrate sequential pickup to create h-BN films of controlled layer thicknesses and graphene/h-BN heterostructures, while minimizing interfacial contamination and showing high device performance. Our work opens a pathway to integrate CVD h-BN in high quality 2DLM heterostructures. Fig. If not stated otherwise, all SEM images are taken immediately after growth with around 30 min or less atmospheric exposure for transfer. This is important as the secondary electron (SE) contrast for h-BN mono-layers can change on Pt, as we will discuss below. Further details are given in the Experimental Section. The first exposure in SSG (Fig. Upon further exposure, these merge into a continuous h-BN mono-layer film. The h-BN monolayers thus grown can then be delaminated directly from the Pt, which can be reused for further growth (see SI, Fig. It remains unclear from previous literature on Pt catalysed h-BN CVD whether growth occurs isothermally or via precipitation on cooling. As well as revealing the presence and evolution of h-BN on the Pt surface, we are also able to monitor the chemical state of the Pt catalyst with in situ XPS. Fig. The results for CVD of h-BN on Pt are consistent with a first-order kinetic growth model previously introduced for other transition metal catalysts, which takes into account precursor and elemental flux balances. Fig. We note that the Pt surface roughness is not significantly altered by this crystallisation, with an average roughness measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) of Ra = 5.3 nm for the poly-crystalline and Ra = 4.7 nm for the crystallized foil (see SI, Fig. There are a number of reports on thermal recrystallization of Cu foils for improved graphene CVD, using extended thermal pre-treatment Having established the rationale for the catalyst foil crystallisation step, we now consider each subsequent step in the SSG process (Fig. Following homogenization (see Fig. A combination of characterization techniques is used to assess the quality of the h-BN films. Fig. The SEM images of h-BN flakes shown so far (Figs. The observed intercalation at the interface between h-BN and Pt is an indication of their weak interaction, and a key motivation of our work. Here, we introduce a dry transfer approach to transfer h-BN grown on Pt, as schematically shown in Fig. In line with previous experiments on delamination of Gr from Cu, The given method of dry transfer is not limited to monolayer transfer, but can also be used for the assembly of 2DLM stacks. After picking up the first h-BN layer, the same PVA/h-BN stack can be used for repeated exfoliation of further 2DLM layers. This is performed by simply stamping the stack onto another as-grown 2DLM on its growth substrate (Fig. Cu (Gr between h-BN and SiO2) was also fabricated and an optical image of the result is shown in Fig. In order to assess the quality of the stacks and to confirm their structure, we employ Raman spectroscopy. The Raman spectrum of h-BN is characterised by the E2g peak at ~1370 cm -1 , which due to its non-resonant nature is very weak. The fabrication of high quality Gr/h-BN heterostructures has been a significant challenge even when relying entirely on exfoliation. The sheet conductivity of a representative CVD h-BN/exf-Gr field effect transistor (FET) device (where the Si substrate acts a back gate) is shown in Fig. Improving current 2DLM integration strategies requires careful consideration of the growth catalyst. Here, we demonstrate that Pt is a suitable weakly interacting catalyst that enables not only h-BN growth with mono-layer control and crystal sizes in excess of 0.5 mm, but also direct transfer by delaminating as-grown layers to achieve clean processing. We establish that h-BN grows isothermally on Pt within the given CVD parameter space, driven by a local B and N supersaturation at the surface, and that when the precursor flux is removed the h-BN layer starts to dissolve. We find that initial B dissolution and decoration of Pt GBs leads to significantly accelerated Pt crystallisation. These insights allowed us to devise an integrated CVD growth process, that we referred to as SSG, which based on two coupled borazine exposures not only transforms poly-crystalline Pt foils into a dominant (111) orientation but enables independent control of h-BN nucleation and domain expansion, i.e. the CVD of highly crystalline mono-layer h-BN. We have demonstrated a delamination transfer method that makes use of the weak Pt/h-BN interaction, to directly delaminate the as-grown films from the catalyst. We thereby preserve the catalyst for regrowth and can achieve a clean transfer process. This approach allows the precise control of the thickness of the h-BN layer, something that has not been achieved for exfoliated h-BN, but is critical to many applications. Scalable manufacture, especially of clean 2DLM heterostructures, has been a main bottleneck for the whole field. While further process optimization is still required, our study opens a viable pathway towards achieving this elusive goal. All samples are grown in a custom-built Laser CVD reactor. An 808 nm continuous wave (CW) IR Laser with a maximum power of 60W is used for heating. It is positioned outside of the CVD chamber. The light is coupled into the chamber through a laser window. In order to achieve a homogeneous beam profile, a beam shaper is used that creates a top-hat (instead of Gaussian) profile at the focal point, which has a size of 5 mm x 5 mm. Due to very localized heating, only the sample itself is significantly heated, thus the system under discussion falls in the category of cold-wall reactors. We measure the temperature using an IR pyrometer with a wavelength of 1.6 μm, a focal spot diameter of 3 mm and the emissivity is set at 0.25. If not specified otherwise, the Pt foil (25 μm, 99.99%, Alfa Aesar) is mounted on a tantalum (Ta) foil (25 μm, 99.9%, Goodfellow), which acts as the susceptor, enabling homogenous heating across a larger area than the size of the beam at the focal point. The Ta susceptor is clamped using sapphire in a custom-made mounting stage, and the Pt foil does not come into contact with anything but the susceptor, thus avoiding contamination and thermal dissipation. After loading the sample into the chamber, it is pumped down to a base pressure of less than 2 x 10 -6 mbar before starting growth. The pressure is measured using a full range pressure gauge consisting of Pirani and cold cathode gauges for different pressure regimes. All gases except borazine are injected into the chamber using mass flow controllers. The flow of borazine (>97%, Fluorochem) is controlled using a manual leak valve. Peeling transfer As the carrier layer for exfoliating the h-BN post-growth, we use a solution of 5g PVA (Mw 9000-10000, 80% hydrolized, Sigma Aldrich) and 1g glycerol as a softener (>99%, Sigmal Aldrich) in 100ml of de-ionized (DI) water. In the first step, we drop-cast the solution on the sample and dry at 80oC for 20 min. Then, the stamp/h-BN film is peeled off using tweezers, stamped onto the target substrate at 125oC, and annealed for 5 min. In the case of multilayer h-BN or h-BN/graphene heterostructures, the target substrate is another CVD grown 2DLM sample and the peeling process is repeated. In the final step, the stamp with the 2DLM layer is put down onto the substrate of choice and the carrier layer is dissolved in DI water at 50oC for at least 3h. The samples are spin-coated with Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, 495k) at 3000rpm for 40s then baked at 180 oC for 1.5 min During the actual transfer process, NaOH solution (1M, a.q.) is used as electrolyte, and the sample (h-BN coated with PMMA) is used as the negative electrode and a Pt wire as the positive electrode. The typical settings are ~4.5V and ~0.3A. PMMA supported h-BN fully delaminates from Pt within 5 minutes. The sample is then rinsed in DI water three times, with each rinse lasting ~45 minutes, and then transferred onto the desired substrate. Raman measurements were performed with a Renishaw inVia confocal Raman Microscope. 514 nm of 532 nm lasers were used depending on equipment availability. Spectra were taken with a 50x objective lens. A step size of 2 μm was used for all maps. The SEM images were taken in the FEI Magellan SEM using an acceleration voltage of 1 kV. The TEM images (FEI Osiris TEM) were taken with an acceleration voltage of 40kV. The knock-on damage of h-BN is minimized under such a low acceleration voltage. The samples are transferred using bubbling transfer in this case, as direct peeling requires PVA dissolution in DI water to release the h-BN film and the water's high surface tension is likely to damage the suspended h-BN. For the bubbling transfer only low surface tension solvents are used to release the h-BN. In-situ XPS measurements were performed at the BESSY II synchrotron at the ISISS end station of the FHI-MPG. The setup consists of a reaction cell (base pressure ≈ 10 -8 mbar) attached to an analyzer with a differentially pumped electrostatic lens system (Phoibos 150 NAP, SPECS GmbH). Continuous monolayer CVD h-BN on Pt was picked up/delaminated from Pt using the peeling procedure described above. The sample is then used to pick up Gr, which was prepared in advance by mechanical exfoliation from a bulk crystal onto a SiO2/Si wafer. For heterostructure assembly, the PVA/h-BN layer is pressed onto the wafer with Gr at 30 oC and then peeled off. This stack is then stamped onto another wafer at a temperature of 130 oC. The sample is heated at 130 oC for 5 min, before dissolving the PVA film in DI water. In order to probe the electronic transport properties of the heterostructure we fabricate fourterminal transport geometries following an established method. Four-terminal transport measurements are performed in a Lakeshore Cryogenic probe station at a pressure of ~4x10 Figure During all our growth experiments the Pt foil was placed on a Ta foil, which acted as the susceptor for the laser. It spread the thermal energy and thus allows us to achieve homogeneous heating of the Pt sample, which is bigger than the laser spot size of about 5 mm x 5 mm. The result of heating the sample directly is shown in Fig. This results in inhomogeneous growth, which motivated the application of a susceptor for uniform heating. here are measured with the same photon energy (and thus flux) to ensure that any charging affects both spectra in a similar way, such that their relative peak positions should not be altered. Indeed, the relative B1s and N1s positions match closely with those previously reported. There may also be shifts be related to changes in the interaction between h-BN and the Pt substrate with temperature and gas environment, but these are not readily disentangled from the observed charging effects. In order to check, whether the h-BN is dissolved into the bulk during the homogenization step in SSG, we performed a series of experiments with the goal of growth by precipitation. Samples were grown at high temperature (Tgr = 1275 oC) following the SSG procedure. After SEM analysis the same samples were loaded again into the reactor and annealed at a lower temperature (Tpr = 950 oC) without any precursor. After this step, smaller secondary nuclei are formed in addition to the previous ones. We attribute this to growth by precipitation, due to supersaturation achieved by lowered solubility. These secondary nuclei are not formed during initial SSG, as the samples are quenched. The fact that growth can take place by precipitation shows that both boron and nitrogen, even in small amounts, are absorbed into the bulk during SSG. This also explains why in our experiments repeating the cycle of homogenization and domain expansion multiple times (i.e. repeating the steps III -V from Fig. In previous literature the growth of Gr was tuned by repeatedly growing and dissociating asgrown domains. 