Delafossites like CuGaO2 have appeared as promising p-type semiconductor materials for opto-electronic applications mainly due to their high optical transparency and electrical conductivity. However, existing synthetic efforts usually result in particles with large diameter limiting their performance relevant to functional electronic applications. In this article, we report a novel surfactant-assisted hydrothermal synthesis method, which allows the development of ultrafine (~5 nm) monodispersed p-type CuGaO2 nanoparticles (NPs). We show that DMSO can be used as a ligand and dispersing solvent for stabilizing the CuGaO2 NPs. The resulting dispersion is used for the fabrication of dense, compact functional CuGaO2 electronic layer with properties relevant to advanced optoelectronic applications. As a proof of concept, the surfactant-assisted hydrothermal synthesized CuGaO2 is incorporated as a hole transporting layer (HTL) in the inverted p-i-n perovskite solar cell device architecture providing improved hole carrier selectivity and power conversion efficiency compared to conventional PEDOT:PSS HTL based perovskite solar cells. The extraordinary characteristics of organic-inorganic lead halide perovskites, such as high light absorption The implementation of p-type metal oxides as HTLs, such as NiOx and CuOx Delafossites is one of the few categories of p-type transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) that combine high electrical conductivity and optical transparency Thus, delafossites have been proposed as functional materials for various advanced electronic applications, including p-n junc on transparent electronics, photo and electrochemical catalysis, such as water splitting and reduction of CO2, and different types of solar cells Specifically, the delafossite CuGaO2 shows a wide optical band gap in the range of 3.4-3.7 eV To date, solid state reactions and vacuum-deposition have been extensively applied for the synthesis of CuGaO2 In this work, we show one step synthesis of pure phase, ultrafine CuGaO2 nanocrystals with average size ~5 nm and with uniform size distribution. The high quality CuGaO2 nanocrystals were fabricated using a cost-effective, low temperature surfactant-assisted hydrothermal method, only after 4 hours of reaction in a stainless steel sealed autoclave. The ultra-low NPs average size enables the formation of compact films, with high electrical conductivity, optical transparency and low surface roughness. The nanoparticulate CuGaO2 functional layers are used as HTLs between the ITO and CH3NH3PbI3 in a p-i-n perovskite solar cell architecture. The corresponding perovskite solar cells exhibit excellent hole carrier selectivity, high Voc= 1.09 V and power conversions efficiency of 15.3 %, which is around 40 % higher compared to the PCE achieved in PEDOT: PSS-based solar cells. We conducted preliminary experiments with the aim to obtain CuGaO2 NPs with dimension in the nanometer range, high purity and uniform morphology, which are essential properties for functional electronic applications. More specifically, the concentration of the precursors and reducing agent, the addition of surfactant, the pH of the solution and the reaction temperature and time (data not shown) were examined in detail. The optimum conditions are equal to those reported in the experimental section. Briefly, the addition of pluronic P123 (EO20PO70EO20) block copolymer as surfactant was found to be beneficial for the synthesis of CuGaO2 NPs, as it can decrease the surface energy and temperature of crystallization and control the size and morphology of NPs. High reaction temperature (> 260 o C) and time (more than 4 hours) were found to lead to the formation of large NPs size (> 100 nm). A similar trend was also observed with the increase in precursor's concentration, in accordance to literature data The wide-angle XRD pattern of CuGaO2 displays several broad Bragg diffraction peaks, which can be assigned to the hexagonal structure of CuGaO2 (ahex = bhex = 2.97 Å and chex = 17.17 Å, JCPDS card no 41-0255), Fig. The observed wide optical band gap implies a high optical transparency of the prepared NPs in the desired wavelength range. Fig. We have shown above that pure phase ultrafine CuGaO2 spherical NPs are formed by following the proposed surfactant-assisted hydrothermal synthesis. The small particle sizes generally enable the formation of dense, compact films with low surface roughness, which are crucial parameters for p-i-n perovskite solar cell application. Furthermore, to avoid the agglomeration of the NPs the selection of an appropriate solvent is of utmost importance. In the present study, DMSO was used concurrently as a ligand and dispersing solvent, stabilizing the CuGaO2 NPs. DMSO is an aprotic solvent with high polarity, the absence of hydrogen bonds between DMSO molecule favor the formation of colloidal NPs with minimal aggregation; this is because the oxygen and sulfur atoms in DMSO can coordinate to metal ions on nanoparticles surface The CuGaO2 NPs dispersion was spin coated on glass/ITO substrates, followed by thermal annealing at 300 o C for 20 min in ambient atmosphere resulting in the formation of a 15 nm thick film (as described in experimental section). The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) profile of the CuGaO2 nanoparticles showed a weight loses of ~2.2 % in the 105-300 o C temperature range, corresponding to the liberation of residual solvent. Then, a weight loss of about 1.7 % was observed up to 600 o C, possibly due to the dehydration and/or dihydroxylation of the CuGaO2 surface (Fig. These results indicate that our proposed surfactant-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of CuGaO2 NPs can be successfully applied for the fabrication of high quality thin films suitable for advanced optoelectronic applications. As a final step, for evaluation of the novel synthesized CuGaO2 based electronic layers, we fabricated complete p-i-n perovskite solar cells, with the structure: ITO/CuGaO2-NPs/CH3NH3PbI3/PC[70]BM/Al) as shown schematically in Fig. Furthermore, the relatively increased grain sizes of CH3NH3PbI3 photoactive layer (Fig. Specifically, as shown in Fig. NPs into p-i-n perovskite solar cells, an increased PCE of 15.3 % compared to that achieved with PEDOT:PSS (9.3 %) is achieved. The CuGaO2 HTL based perovskite solar cells exhibited a Voc equal to 1.09 V which is much higher compared to that achieved using conventional PEDOT:PSS HTL (Voc of 0.89 V). The improved PCE is attributed to (i) the quality of ITO/CuGaO2 NPs bottom electrode as confirmed above by the efficient quenching of the photoluminescence of CH3NH3PbI3 films, (ii) the observed enhanced crystallinity and absorption characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3 photoactive layer when fabricated on top of ITO/ CuGaO2 NPs, (iii) the enhanced Voc due to proper energy level alignment of CuGaO2, with respect to the perovskite's VB edge and (iv) due to the low leakage current density. The Fig. A novel one-step synthesis of p-type delafossite CuGaO2 nanocrystals by a pluronic surfactant-assistant hydrothermal method is reported. The reaction proceeds under low temperature (220 o C) and within a short reaction time (4 h). By the proposed synthetic route, the size of the NPs was fully controlled and the formation of CuGaO2 NPs with diameter of ~5 nm was achieved. A detailed physicochemical characterization of the CuGaO2 NPs is reported including X-ray diffraction, EDS analysis and electron microscopy studies which confirm the high purity and the small grain composition of the CuGaO2 NPs. We have shown that the proposed synthetic route can be used to produce a stable dispersion of CuGaO2 NPs in DMSO with high purity and crystallinity. The optoelectronic measurements confirmed the high transparency (wide optical band-gap) and conductivity of the CuGaO2 interlayer. DMSO was subsequently used as a ligand and dispersing solvent for stabilizing the CuGaO2 which were successfully used as HTL in p-i-n perovskite solar cells. 