Understanding the interplay between nematicity, magnetism and superconductivity is pivotal for elucidating the physics of iron-based superconductors. Here we use neutron scattering to probe magnetic and nematic orders throughout the phase diagram of NaFe1-xNixAs, finding that while both static antiferromagnetic and nematic orders compete with superconductivity, the onset temperatures for these two orders remain well-separated approaching the putative quantum critical points. We uncover local orthorhombic distortions that persist well above the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition temperature Ts in underdoped samples and extend well into the overdoped regime that exhibits neither magnetic nor structural phase transitions. These unexpected local orthorhombic distortions display Curie-Weiss temperature dependence and become suppressed below the superconducting transition temperature Tc, suggesting they result from a large nematic susceptibility near optimal superconductivity. Our results account for observations of rotational symmetry-breaking above Ts, and attest to the presence of significant nematic fluctuations near optimal superconductivity. Iron pnictide superconductors are a large class of materials hosting unconventional superconductivity that emerges from antiferromagnetically ordered parent compounds [Fig. Although C 4 → C 2 symmetry-breaking is typically associated with the structural transition at T s , there are numerous reports of its observation well above T s and in overdoped compounds Ideally, when the system becomes orthorhombic, two different in-plane d-spacings corresponding to different in-plane lattice parameters can be resolved; on the other hand, when there are only local orthorhombic distortions, the d-spacing distribution only broadens while the average structure remains tetragonal [Fig. In this work, we use high-resolution neutron diffraction and neutron Larmor diffraction to map out the phase diagram of NaFe 1-x Ni x As Our results are reported using the orthorhombic structural unit cell with lattice parameters a ≈ b ≈ 5.56 Å and c ≈ 7.05 Å for NaFeAs Figure Re-entry into the paramagnetic state in NaFe1-xNixAs with x = 0.012 For the x = 0.012 sample, magnetic order onsets at T N ≈ 19 K and becomes strongly suppressed upon entering the superconducting state below T c and re-enters into the paramagnetic state without any long-range order below T r ≈ 10 K [Fig. As can be seen, magnetic order remains long-range along all three high-symmetry directions (with spin-spin correlation lengths exceeding 100 Å) for the x = 0.012 sample near optimal superconductivity, before disappearing near x = 0.015. These wave-vector scans also confirm the complete disappearance of long-range magnetic order below T r . For comparison, we note that magnetism in electron-doped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 (∼6%) Having established the evolution of AF order and its interplay with superconductivity in NaFe 1-x Ni x As, we examined the Ni-doping evolution of the nematic order in NaFe 1-x Ni x As. To precisely determine the evolution of the orthorhombic distortion, we used high-resolution neutron diffraction and neutron Larmor diffraction to investigate the temperature evolution of the orthorhombic lattice distortion (Supplementary Figs. whereas the superconducting order parameter itself remains essentially unchanged due to tiny values of δ 0 (see eq. ( We emphasize that the local orthorhombic distortions we uncovered in the tetragonal phase of NaFe 1-x Ni x As are distinct from the phase separation into superconducting tetragonal and antiferromagnetic orthorhombic regions found in Ca(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 under biaxial strain Given that the orthorhombic distortion with Curie-Weiss temperature dependence arises from local orthorhombic distortions, an alternative way to characterize such distortion is broadening of d-spacing distribution width ∆d/d (see Methods section). In Figs. In NaFe 1-x Ni x As, the orthorhombic distortion and the structural phase transition temperature are δ ≈ 1.7 × 10 -3 and T s ≈ 58 K for x = 0 Theoretically, a determinantal quantum Monte Carlo study of a two-dimensional sign-problem-free lattice model reveals an Ising nematic QCP in a metal at finite fermion density Our discovery of local orthorhombic distortions exhibiting with Curie-Weiss temperature dependence across the phase diagram of NaFe 1-x Ni x As results from the proliferation of nematic fluctuations and large nematic susceptibility near the nematic QCP. Quenched disorder that are always present in such doped materials act to pin the otherwise fluctuating local nematic domains, resulting in static (or quasi-static) local orthorhombic distortions that can lead to rotational-symmetry-breaking observation seen with multiple probes Elastic neutron scattering experimental details. Elastic neutron experiments were carried out on the Spin Polarized Inelastic Neutron Spectrometer (SPINS) at the NIST Center for Neutron Research (NCNR), United States and the HB-1A triple-axis spectrometer at the High-Flux-Isotope Reactor (HFIR), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), United States. We used pyrolytic graphite [PG(002)] monochromators and analyzers in these measurements. At HB-1A, the monochromator is vertically focused with fixed incident neutron energy E i = 14.6 meV and the analyzer is flat. At SPINS, the monochromator is vertically focused and the analyzer is flat with fixed scattered neutron energy E f = 5 meV. A PG filter was used at HB-1A and a Be filter was used at SPINS to avoid contamination from higherorder neutrons. Collimations of 40 ′ -40 ′ -sample-40 ′ -80 ′ and guide-40 ′ -sample-40 ′ -open were used on HB-1A and SPINS, respectively. To measure the structural distortion in NaFe 1-x Ni x As (x = 0.012) at SPINS, we changed the collimation to guide-20 ′ -sample-20 ′ -open to improve the resolution and removed the Be filter. Our measurement was carried out nominally around a weak nuclear Bragg peak Q = (2, 0, 0), but the measured intensity at this position mostly come from higher-order neutrons [Q = (4, 0, 0) for λ/2 neutrons and Q = (6, 0, 0) for λ/3 neutrons]. While we do not resolve two split peaks in the orthorhombic state, clear broadening can be observed. Typical scans along the [H, 0, 0] direction centered at Q = (2, 0, 0) are shown in Supplementary Fig. Inelastic neutron scattering experimental details. Our inelastic neutron scattering experiment was carried out on the HB-3 triple-axis spectrometer at HFIR, ORNL, United States. Vertically-focused pyrolytic graphite [PG(002)] monochromator and analyzer with fixed scattered neutron energy E f = 14.7 meV were used. A PG filter was used to avoid higher-order neutron contaminations. The collimation used was 48 ′ -40 ′ -sample-40 ′ -120 ′ . Using inelastic neutron scattering we studied the neutron spin resonance mode Larmor diffraction experimental details. Our neutron Larmor diffraction measurements were carried out at the three axes spin-echo spectrometer (TRISP) at Forschungs-Neutronenquelle Heinz Maier-Leibnitz (MLZ), Garching, Germany. Neutrons are polarized by a super-mirror bender, and higher-order neutrons are eliminated using a velocity selector. We used double-focused PG(002) monochromator and horizontal-focused Heusler (Cu 2 MnAl) analyzer in these measurements. Incident and scattered neutron energies are fixed at E i = E f = 15.67 meV (k i = k f = 2.750 Å-1 ). The detailed principles of neutron Larmor diffraction has been described in detail elsewhere For an ideal crystal with d-spacing described by a δ-function, P is independent of φ tot with P (φ tot ) = P 0 . P 0 accounts for the non-ideal polarization of the neutrons and can be corrected for by Ge crystal calibration measurements. In real materials due to internal strain, sample inhomogeneity or in the case of iron pnictides, a twinned orthorhombic phase, the d-spacing should instead be described by a distribution f (ǫ), with ǫ = δd/d. δd is the deviation from the average d-spacing d. P (φ tot ) is then described by Thus, P (φ tot ) can be regarded as the Fourier transform of the lattice d-spacing distribution f (ǫ). By measuring P (φ tot ), it is possible to resolve features with a resolution better than 10 -5 in terms of ǫ, limited by the range of accessible φ tot . The distribution of d-spacing f (ǫ) is commonly described as a Gaussian function with full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) FWHM , also denoted as ∆d/d in the rest of the paper. Eq. 3 then becomes In iron pnictides with a non-zero nematic order parameter, due to twinning f (ǫ) becomes the sum of two Gaussian functions. Assuming the two Gaussian peaks have identical FWHM ǫ FWHM , Eq. 4 becomes where r and (1-r) denotes the relative populations of the two lattice d-spacings a and b, and ∆ǫ = 2(a-b)/(a+b) = 2δ When δ is too small to be directly resolved by Larmor diffraction, P (φ tot ) can be well described by either Eq. 4 or Eq. 5. In such cases, we either extract ∆d/d from Eq. 4 (Fig. A key feature of Eq. 5 is an oscillation in P (φ tot ), which can be seen in raw data in Supplementary Figs. Magnetic susceptibility and electrical resistivity measurements. To ensure that T r for NaFe 1-x Ni x As (x = 0.012) is well inside the superconducting state, we show in Supplementary Fig. The temperature and doping dependence of the in-plane electrical resistivity ρ(T ) were measured using the standard four-probe method, the results are normalized to ρ(200 K) and summarized in Supplementary Fig. Coexistence of superconductivity with lattice nematicity. Here we first consider the case without any longrange magnetic order, as is realized in NaFe 1-x Ni x As for x > 0.012. In that case, the effective Landau free energy can be written in terms of only the superconducting order parameter ∆ and the orthorhombicity δ ≡ (a -b)/(a + b): Here we assume that the superconducting order parameter transforms under the tetragonal point symmetry, i.e. it does not break the C 4 rotational symmetry of the lattice. Since the lattice-nematic order parameter breaks this symmetry, the coupling to superconductivity is quadratic in δ. Above, the coefficient C is in fact the elastic shear modulus C 66 , which is the inverse of the nematic susceptibility. The latter has a Curie-Weiss behavior (see Fig. Here C (0) 66 is the "bare" value of the shear modulus in the absence of the nematic transition. Note that the above formula can been derived rigorously from an effective model of the lattice orthorombicity δ coupled to an electronic nematic order parameter Minimizing this effective action with respect to the two order parameters ∂F/∂∆ = 0 = ∂F/∂δ, we obtain in the mixed state with T < {T s , T c } non-zero values of both parameters: where ∆ 0 = α/β and δ 0 = |C|/D are the values of the order parameters in the absence of coupling between them. In the coexistence phase, the free energy becomes: where F (0) SC = -α|∆ 0 | 2 /4. Note that for the coexistence phase to be stable, the last term in the above expression must be positive, which is only possible if 4γ 2 βD < 1, or equivalently, βD > 4γ 2 . There is no perceptible change in the superconducting transition temperature below T s , implying |∆| ≃ |∆ 0 |. Substituting this into Eq. ( By contrast, the suppression of the orthorhombicity below T c is substantial: δ ≈ 0.5δ 0 (see Figs. in other words, we can approximate the denominator in Eqs. ( Coexistence of three phases. Below x > 0.012, NaFe 1-x Ni x As has a long-range antiferromagnetic (AF) order, and the free energy in Eq. where we have included phenomenological coupling constants μ and w. The sign of w is positive, in accord with our experimental observation that AF order and superconductivity compete with each other (see Figs. 2(g)-(h) in the main text). The sign in front of μ on the other hand is negative, indicating magneto-elastic coupling that favors the coexistence of magnetism and orthorhombic distortion. Because of this coupling, it is clear that δ will acquire an additional component proportional to M 2 inside the AF phase: Because M 2 and |∆| 2 repel each other via the last term in Eq. ( Working with the full free energy in Eq. ( As a parenthetical remark, we note that the term -μ|δ| • M 2 the free energy may appear surprising at first sight, as one might have expected that lattice distortion and magnetization should couple biquadratically. The reason for the linear coupling is because the stripe AF order in the iron pnictides breaks the lattice C 4 symmetry, as does