Superconductors have been being applied to a variety of large-scale power applications, including magnets, electric machines, and fault current limiters, because they can enable a compact, lightweight and high efficiency design. In applications such those mentioned above, superconducting coils are always a key component. For example, in a superconducting electric machine, the superconducting coils are used to generate the main flux density in the air gap, which is significantly important for the energy conversion. It is the performance of the superconducting coils that plays an essential role in determining the performance of the device. However, the performance of a superconducting coil is limited by its critical current, which is determined by temperature and the magnitude and orientation of the magnetic field inside the superconductors. Hence, in-depth investigations to estimate the critical current of the superconducting coils are necessary before manufacturing. Available transient simulation models to estimate the critical current are through the H-and T-A formulations of Maxwell's equations. Both methods consider the same current ramp-up process occurring in experiments. Besides these transient models, static simulations can also be used: a modified load-line method and the so-called P-model, which is based on the asymptotic limit of Faraday's equation when time approaches infinity. To find the best way to calculate the critical current, the four methods are used to estimate the critical current of a double pancake superconducting coils and results are compared with experiments. As a conclusion, T-A formulation, P-model, and the modified load-line methods are recommended for estimating the critical current of the superconducting coils. The unique properties possessed by (RE)BaCuO (RE=rare earth) coated conductors, high current carrying ability, relatively high operational temperature, and good in-field performance, have broadened the approaches to design magnets and electric machines. Many improvements have been made in (RE)BaCuO conductors, resulting in better conductor quality and longer available length. Currently, the production capacity of (RE)BaCuO has reached 1000 km/year and its critical current at 77 K, self-field is around 100-200 A with 4 mm width and 200-600 A with 12 mm width; all over the world there are more than 12 companies which produce (RE)BaCuO superconductors By applying (RE)BaCuO conductors to large scale power devices, a compact and light weight design with a higher current or higher magnetic field capacity than conventional materials can be achieved. For example, a 10 MW superconducting direct-drive wind generator can have a double torque-to-mass ratio and a quadruple torque-to-volume ratio, compared to the permanent magnet generators at the same rating due to higher magnetic field is produced Numerically, the finite element method (FEM) based on H-formulation has been used for modelling the critical current of pancake coils. M. Zhang et al. To speed-up the computation time of dynamic problems considering large number of turns, H. Zhang et al. V. M. R. Zermeno et al. In the engineering field, the well-known load-line method is used to estimate the critical current when the superconductor is applied to cables The objective of this paper is to investigate the critical current of a superconducting coil with large number of turns by using the above mentioned models, to compare the available models for this coil in terms of computation efficiency and accuracy with respect to experiment results, and to suggest the most efficient way to estimate critical current. The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the 2D models are briefly introduced. In section 3, the anisotropic field dependence of the critical current of the tape is described and the measurements of the critical current of a 244-turn double pancake racetrack coil are summarized, followed by the comparison and discussion of the models in section 4. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in section 5. In order to simplify the geometry, the racetrack pancake coil is modelled in 2D infinitely long model The governing equation of the H-formulation is derived from Faraday's law and Ampere's law and it directly solves the magnetic field components H=[Hx,Hy] in 2D geometry in x-y plane. With non-magnetic subdomains, such as the superconductor and air, the corresponding partial differential equations are described by (1) where Hx, Hy represent the component of magnetic field in x and y directions. The current density and electric field have only z-component, denoted by Jz and Ez, μ0 is the permeability of vacuum, and t is time. To describe the constitutive relation of materials, the E-J relation is expressed as follow, (4) where ρ represent the resistivity of materials. Vacuum is described by insulator with zero conductivity, and the resistivity of the superconducting material, ρsc, is given by the E-J power law where E0 is the critical electric field, which is 1 μV/cm, and n is a parameter indicating the sharpness of the transition from superconductor to the normal state, Jc is the critical current density, Bx and By are the two components of the magnetic field density in x and y directions. The critical current is determined based on the choice of critical current Ic criteria, which can vary accordingly to the application. The two different criteria are (i) MAX criterion, Ic is the current at which the voltage drop per unit length has reached the critical electrical field in at least one turn. (ii) SUM criterion, Ic is the current at which the sum of the voltage drop in each turn, divided by the coil's length, reaches the critical electrical field. In this paper, only the SUM criterion is applied to estimate the critical current of the coil to match the experiment conditions. To implement this in the program, the average electrical field in each superconductor is multiplied by each turn's length, and then the sum of all the products is divided by the total coil's length. When this value reaches the critical electric field, the critical current is determined. In a 2D geometry in x-y plane, the T-A formulation uses two state variables: the current vector potential T, which only has x component, Tx, and the magnetic vector potential, which only has z component, Az, when the thickness of the superconducting layer in the x direction is ignored. The current vector potential is calculated in the superconductor, while the magnetic potential is calculated in the whole region. The governing equations in the two regions are described by The current density distribution Jz in the superconductor and the magnetic flux density Bx are exchanged by the two formulations, where Bx represents the component of magnetic field density in the x direction. Then the same process to determine the critical current of the coil is used as the H-formulation. In the P-model, the parameter t disappears as the model assumes that the magnetic flux density and current density have reached the steady state with dc excitations when t goes to infinity. This model introduces a parameter P to rewrite the E-J power law, Eq. ( The introduction of parameter P avoids the direct solution of the nonlinear E-J relationship for the superconductor. In the cross section of each conductor, P is uniformly distributed and is given by (13) ) ( ) The termination of the program is made based on the SUM criterion, the same as H-and T-A formulation. The load-line method assumes uniform current density distribution inside the superconductor layer. According to Eq. ( The anisotropy of the tape's critical current under an applied field will greatly influence the critical current. Hence, we first measured the lift factor of a short sample as a function of the orientation and magnitude of the applied field. The lift factor is defined as the ratio of the critical current at a certain orientation and amplitude of the magnetic field and temperature to the critical current at 77 K with self-field. The tape we used to wind the double pancake racetrack coil is 4 mm in width and the minimal critical current of the tape along overall length is 100 A according to the manufacturer's specification. The measured angular and field dependence of the superconducting tape in liquid nitrogen is shown in Fig. With the 1 μV/cm criterion, the critical current in liquid nitrogen cooling is 48.7 A. For the case of cryogenfree cooling, due to the weak thermal coupling between the copper plates and the superconducting tapes, the coil has already reached instability (thermal runaway quench) before the criterion. Hence, we use the fitting curve value to estimate the critical current with criterion 1 μV/cm, which is 45.8 A (this is not visible in Fig. The tested V-I curves of the whole double-pancake coil, the bottom coil and the top coil, as shown in Fig. A. Current density and magnetic field distribution To simulate the above mentioned double pancake coil in Comsol, the local Jc(Bx,By) dependence of the tape is needed as input of the calculation. Local Jc(Bx,By) means the dependence of the critical current density on the local magnetic flux density, resulting from both the applied external field and self-field. This can be extracted from the experiment data shown in Fig. The main differences of the four models, besides the stationary or transient studies, are the following: in the H-formulation and P-model, the current density distributes along the tape's width and thickness; in the T-A formulation the current density distributes along the tape's width, since the tape's thickness is neglected; the modified load-line method assumes uniform current density distribution within the tape's cross section. Correspondingly, the local magnetic field and critical currents vary for the four models. The magnetic field distributions and the average J/Jc of each turn of the double pancake coil calculated by the four models are compared in Fig. Form Fig. As illustrated by Eq. ( As presented above, the models agree with experiments within 5%-19%, and they all overestimate the critical current. The fact that the modified load-line method has 'better' agreement should be taken cautiously, because there are other factors that can lead to this. One possible reason is that in this simulation a fixed n-value is used for the superconductors, while in reality it changes with the amplitude and the orientation of the magnetic field, n(Bx,By). A more important factor, however, is the tape uniformity. Currently, the uniformity of the properties of commercial available superconductors along length depends on manufacturing process This work is dedicated to comprehensively compare available numerical models, H-formulation, T-A formulation, P-model, and modified load-line method, to estimate the critical current of a double pancake racetrack coil with more than 200 turns. By implementing the characterization of the short sample into the simulation models, the critical currents are calculated. In order to evaluate the calculated critical currents, a double pancake coil was manufactured and tested at 77 K both in liquid nitrogen bath and by cryogen-free cooling method. The critical current by the cryogen-free cooling is 1.4% smaller with criterion of 0.1 μV/cm and 6.0% smaller with 1 μV/cm compared to that in liquid nitrogen bath. In particular, the n-value at a criterion of 0.1 μV/cm changes from 33.3 to 22.1, due to different cooling conditions. It is suggested to operate the coil at a relatively smaller current by the cryogen-free cooling than by the liquid nitrogen bath cooling. Compared to experimental results, the four models overestimated the critical current of the coil, within 19% when the n-value ranges from 15 to 40. This deviation is very likely caused by the varying n-values, length uniformity of critical current in field and angular dependence, manufacturing process as well as the different cooling efficiency between the short sample and the whole superconducting coil. The attributes of the four methods are listed in Table Furthermore, consistent with the measurement, all four models show that the top coil of the double pancake superconducting coil reaches its critical current earlier than the bottom coil due to the anisotropy of the critical current in field. Last not the least, with the 1 μV/cm criterion, the innermost turns of the top coil are already over critical current. Therefore, it is better to determine the critical current by the 0.1 μV/cm criterion to ensure safe operation of the double pancake coil with large number of turns.