When the Mott insulating state is suppressed by charge carrier doping, the pseudogap phenomenon emerges, where at the low-temperature limit, superconductivity coexists with some ordered electronic states. Within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity, the nature of the pair-density-wave order in cuprate superconductors is studied by taking into account the pseudogap effect. It is shown that the onset of the pair-density-wave order does not produce an ordered gap, but rather a novel hidden order as a result of the interplay of the charge-density-wave order with superconductivity. As a consequence, this novel hidden pair-density-wave order as a subsidiary order parameter coexists with the charge-density-wave order in the superconducting-state, and is absent from the normal-state. One of the most remarkable features in cuprate superconductors is the presence of the pseudogap in the temperature range above the superconducting (SC) transition temperature T c but below the pseudogap crossover temperature T * 1-3 . In particular, the experimental results from the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) observations indicated that this pseudogap can be identified as being a region of the self-energy effect in which it suppresses the spectral weight of the lowenergy quasiparticle excitation spectrum Despite the general consensus about the existence of the CDW order in cuprate superconductors Our present study of the physical origin of the hidden PDW order in cuprate superconductors is based on the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity > of the t-J model in the charge-spin separation fermion-spin representation, which have been derived within the framework of the full charge-spin recombination as where the bare electron excitation spectrum x cosk y , t and t are the nearest-neighbor (NN) and next NN electron hopping amplitudes in the t-J model, respectively, Z is the number of the NN or next NN sites on a square lattice, and μ is the chemical potential, while the electron self-energies Σ 1 (k, ω) in the particlehole channel and Σ 2 (k, ω) in the particle-particle channel originated from the interaction of electrons with spin excitations have been evaluated in terms of the full chargespin recombination, and are given explicitly in Ref. 36. In the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity, the electron self-energy Σ 2 (k, ω) describes a coupling of the electron pair interaction strength and electron pair order parameter, and in the static limit, it thus is defined as the momentum dependence of the SC gap where the energy spectrum ε 0k and the momentum dependence of the pseudogap ∆PG (k) have been obtained explicitly in Ref. 36. With the help of the above single-particle diagonal Green's function (1a), we can obtain the quasiparticle excitation spectrum I(k, ω) ∝ n F (ω)A(k, ω), with the fermion distribution n F (ω) and the electron spectral function A(k, ω) = -2ImG(k, ω). This quasiparticle excitation spectrum therefore describes the energy and momentum dependence of the ARPES spectrum We are now ready to discuss the physical origin of the PDW order in cuprate superconductors and of its connection with the interplay between the CDW order and superconductivity. In the above discussions, the quasiparticle excitation spectrum I(k, ω) is obtained in terms of the electron spectral function, and therefore the essential behavior of the quasiparticle excitations in cuprate superconductors is completely determined by the electron spectral function [then the single-particle diagonal Green's function (1a) and the related electron self-energy (2)]. However, we find that these single-particle diagonal and off-diagonal Green's functions in Eq. ( where the dispersions of ε k and ε 0k , the SC gap ∆s (k), and the pseudogap ∆PG (k) are given explicitly in Eqs. (1) and ( In the framework of the equation of motion, the time-Fourier transform of the single-particle diagonal and offdiagonal Green's functions G(k, ω) and † (k, ω) of the Hamiltonian (3) satisfies the following equations 42 , However, it is clear from these equations that for obtaining the single-particle diagonal and off-diagonal Green's functions G(k, ω) and † (k, ω), we need to introduce another two Green's functions, which therefore describe the CDW and PDW states, respectively. After a straightforward calculation, we find that the time-Fourier transform of the CDW and PDW Green's functions G CDW (k, ω) and † PDW (k, ω) satisfies the following equations Substituting these CDW and PDW Green's functions in Eq. ( From the above discussions, we therefore confirm that the single-particle diagonal and off-diagonal Green's functions G(k, ω) and † (k, ω) in Eq. ( In the normal-state, the SC gap ∆s (k) = 0, and then the phenomenological Hamiltonian (3) is reduced as, where the Hamiltonian (7) consists of the CDW part only with the momentum dependence of the CDW gap ∆PG (k). In this case, only one basic low-energy excitation for the CDW quasiparticle emerges as the propagating mode. In particular, the single-particle Green's function G(k, ω) of the Hamiltonian ( 