We present exact solutions of an energy spectrum of 2-interacting particles in which they seem to be relativistic fermions in 2+1 space-time dimensions. The 2×2 spinor equations of 2-interacting fermions through general central potential were separated covariantly into the relative and center of mass coordinates. First of all, the coupled first order differential equations depending on radial coordinate were derived from 2×2 spinor equations. Then, a second order radial differential equation was obtained and solved for Coulomb interaction potential. We apply our solutions to exciton phenomena for a free-standing monolayer medium. Since we regard exciton as isolated 2-interacting fermions in our model, any other external effect such as substrate was eliminated. Our results show that the obtained binding energies in our model are in agreement with the literature. Moreover, the decay time of an exciton was found out spontaneously in our calculations. Since its invention of monolayer form As direct-gap semiconductors Although there are much experimental studies focusing on measurement of exciton binding energies for monolayer TMDs Another research group obtained a different formulation of relativistic equation Since we focus on the exciton interaction energy, bound-state equation of relativistic 2-Dirac particles is very important One can use equations in We first start from two-body Dirac equation in (3+1) dimensions (1) γ (1) μ iħ ∂ (1) μ - Since the Dirac matrices have been chosen as γ 0 = σ 3 , γ 1 = iσ 1 and γ 2 = iσ 2 satisfying Dirac algebra and two-body Dirac spinor is defined by Eq. 2 as follows; ( Eq. 1 is reduced to (2+1) dimensions. Thus, we could obtain a coupled equation set from Eq. 1 where D i = D i (r,R, R 0 ). The explicit form of D i is given by the following expression. Here, D i 's where i=1,2,3,4 are the spinor components and we use relative (r) and center of mass (R) coordinates explicitly. Then, we introduce the (2+1)-dimensional center of mass and relative variables with the following expressions. 1) , y (1) , t (1) ) 2) , y (2) , t (2) ) Here, m 1 and m 2 are the masses of particles where X 1 and X 2 are the magnitudes of position vectors of corresponding particles in 2+1 dimensions, respectively. Writing positions of particles in terms of center of mass and relative coordinates and partial derivative of X 1 and X 2 give us the following equations. where μ = 0, 1, 2 and For central interaction; the components of vector potential are taken as follows A 0 = V (x 1x 2 ) , A 1 = 0, A 2 = 0. We can apply a method of separation of variables in terms of relative and center of mass coordinates provided that a central potential is taken into account; V ≡ V (r). In our calculations, we assume that the center of mass does not carry a momentum because we take k as k=0. Therefore, one can write set of equation in terms of relative coordinates. In the second part of calculations, we reorganized the coupled equation set by inserting Eq. 5 and definition of D i , we obtained the following equations. In order to write the coupled equation set in an explicit form, we use both and definitions and obtained the following explicit equation set in polar coordinates. In addition, we multiply the Eq. 6 by e iΦ and the Eq. 9 by e -iΦ on the left side. For the Eq. 7 and Eq. 8, the phase terms (e iΦ and e -iΦ ) are required to be positioned in front of the operators paving the way that an additional term is included in front of the corresponding operator. By conducting these, we end up with the following equations; where Ψ g (r, Φ) = Ψ g (r) e ijg Φ (g = 1, 2, 3, 4) . Since the Φ is a cyclic coordinate, we derive a coupled first order 4-differential equations by using this property. Then, multiplying the Eq. 12 by By pursuing above mathematical procedures and substituting Ψ g (r, Φ), we obtained the following equations for general central potentials. where . From Eq. 16 and Eq. 17, we rewrite Ψ + (r) and Ψ -(r) in terms of Ψ 0 (r) . Inserting these expressions into the Eq. 19, we obtain a radial second order differential equation which contains general central potential. Since the exciton is composed of an electron and hole, the interaction between them can be written in terms of Coulomb potential. In addition, these particles (an electron and a hole) posses very small masses. Therefore, we can neglect the M 2 1 and M 2 2 in our equations. Here we defined a new dimensionless variable; z = iwr 2αc for V t (r) = -2 α r . Then, the solution of simplified Eq. 20 becomes a HeunC(α 1 , β, γ, δ, η ,z) function. In this function, frequency relation is found by using δ = -(n + β+γ+2 2 )α 1 expression. The following parameters; where The explicit expression of w (n,j) allows us to obtain interaction energy of an exciton. This expression covers actually all the energy levels (n) where the particles might be and spin value of interacting particles. For clarity and quantification, a detailed table (Tab. I) is composed of these variables. Our calculations are very close to results found in literature In this work, we found a general definition of interaction energy for 2-interacting fermions. First, we had examined two Dirac particles interacting with their central potential before we derived two-body Dirac equation in (2+1) space-time geometry. For solution of this equation, we separated center of mass and relative coordinates by using explicit form of the equation. Then, we obtained 1 st order coupled radial differential equation set. Since the masses (M 1 and M 2 ) of an electron and a hole are very small, we neglected M 2 1 and M 2 2 values in our equations. The solution of 2-interacting fermions in our model indicates that one can obtain general definition for an interaction energy including quantum numbers. We apply our model to an exciton and found its binding energy which is very close to results found in literature. Moreover, since we work in 2+1 dimensions, our results do not include any other effects for a monolayer medium. Finally, we calculated the decay time of an exciton (∼ ps) directly because the interaction energy in our calculations possesses imaginary part. IV. DERIVATION OF COMPLETE 2 nd ORDER EQUATION