Recent STM experiments and theoretical considerations have highlighted the role of interactiondriven orbital selectivity in FeSe, and its role in generating the extremely anisotropic superconducting gap structure in this material. We study the magnetic excitation spectrum resulting from the coherent quasiparticles within the same renormalized random phase approximation approach used to explain the STM experiments, and show that it agrees well with the low-energy momentum and energy dependent response measured by inelastic neutron scattering experiments. We find a correlation-induced suppression of (π, π) scattering due to a small quasiparticle weight of states of dxy character. We compare predictions for twinned and untwinned crystals, and predict in particular a strongly (π, 0)-dominated response at low energies in untwinned systems, in contrast to previous itinerant theories. Among the various iron-based superconductors (FeSC), the compound FeSe has been in the focal point of research recently. Although the bulk material has a rather low critical superconducting transition temperature T c of approximately 8 K 1 , there are many ways to enhance T c . Intercalation with various other atoms and molecules yields T c near 40 K It is generally believed that an understanding of the properties of bulk FeSe may lead to a clarification of the various routes to T c enhancement and possibly enable further improvement. Recent advances include the determination of the structure of the magnetic phase that forms upon application of pressure For clues to the reasons for suppression of magnetic order, as well as the origin of unconventional superconductivity in FeSe and related materials, an important measurement is inelastic neutron scattering (INS), which probes elementary spin excitations via the imaginary part of the dynamical spin susceptibility χ (q, ω) From a theoretical standpoint, the lack of magnetic order had been discussed even before these measurements appeared, in terms of frustration among various possible magnetically ordered states in extended quantum spin models The current authors performed a random-phaseapproximation (RPA) study of the magnetic susceptibility of the paramagnetic system Certain features of the experiment were not matched perfectly in Ref. 43, however: the low-energy, high temperature excitations near (π, π) were found to be somewhat incommensurate, in contrast to the results of Ref. 34. In addition, the low temperature, low energy (π, π) fluctuations were gapped in experiment, whereas they had significant weight down to the lowest energies in the calculation. Finally, the prediction for the structure of the superconducting gap given in Ref. 43, based on a calculation of the spin fluctuation pairing interaction within the same framework, was not borne out by a recent highresolution quasiparticle interference experiment by Sprau et al. The traditional RPA approach to calculating spin excitations with perfectly well-defined electronic dispersions may indeed be expected to encounter difficulties in systems with strong correlations, particularly for the iron chalcogenides In this work, we revisit the calculation of Ref. 43, and examine the physical magnetic susceptibility in presence of interactions measured by neutrons, incorporating now the orbital selective quasiparticle weights found in the recent studies of Refs. 30, 31, and 59. We find that the earlier low-energy discrepancies with the INS experiments are repaired without further fine tuning, and propose therefore that an itinerant approach, properly accounting for Fermi liquid renormalizations, is indeed the most complete theory of the FeSe nematic state, reproducing the features that seemed to be restricted to localized spin models. In addition, we perform calculations appropriate both for twinned samples and for untwinned ones. We predict that the effect of orbital selective quasiparticle weight is to strongly suppress the spin excitation intensity at q = (0, π) compared to (π, 0). Finally, we explore the consequences of the quasiparticle weights for other low-temperature properties such as the neutron spin resonance in the superconducting state. In this work, we use a tight-binding parametrization proposed for FeSe earlier where c † σ (k) is the Fourier amplitude of an oper- ator c † i σ that creates an electron in Wannier orbital with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓} and t k is the Fourier transform of the hoppings. Specifically, we use the hoppings given in Ref. Note that in the kinetic energy of this model we have also included spin-orbit coupling of type S z L z , which gives rise to imaginary hopping elements onsite between different orbitals. Details of the corresponding elements have been discussed in Ref. 66 and the consequences of such a term, namely the splitting of the two hole-like bands along the line Γ-Z in the Brillouin zone have been discussed earlier where The Fermi surface and the density of states of this model are illustrated in Fig. with quasiparticle weights Z in orbital and we have introduced the (coherent) Green's function in band space as Gμ (k, Note the Green's function G, which we refer to as renormalized or incoherent because the quasiparticle weight factors Z < 1 are included, does not include the actual incoherent spectral weight, such that the resulting total electron density is not calculated consistently. We note further that the self-energy in general also exhibits a nonzero imaginary part which is expected to grow quadratically with the energy measured from the Fermi level. Our parametrization is therefore simply a phenomenological ansatz that agrees with the low energy properties of the spectral function Ã(k, ω) = -1/π Im G (k, ω n ) of the real material We include local interactions via the standard Hubbard-Hund Hamiltonian where the parameters U , U , J, J are given in the notation of Kuroki et al. Within the current ansatz, two-particle properties are renormalized in similar ways; for example, the orbital susceptibility in the normal state is where we have adopted the shorthand k ≡ (k, ω n ) and defined the abbreviation . The internal frequency summation can be performed analytically and we calculate χ0 1 2 3 4 by integrating over the full Brillouin zone. Actually, it is easy to see, that one can calculate the susceptibility χ 0 1 2 3 4 using a fully coherent Green's function (without the quasiparticle weight prefactors in Eq. ( i.e. the quasiparticle weights just enter as prefactors and suppress certain orbital channels, thereby altering the momentum structure of this quantity straightforwardly. This leads to a relative suppression of the susceptibility in the d xy channel compared to the d yz channel with the quasiparticle weights employed 59 as also found in recent DMFT investigations on FeSe Turning now to the consequences of the low-energy parametrization, it has been discussed previously , thus the resulting differences in the susceptibility between the X and Y points from a conventional coherent calculation are weak as well Employing now the quasiparticle weights as deduced from a calculation of the superconducting order parameter We stress that the actual numbers for Z l written above are subject to large uncertainties, and will depend also to some extent on the initial bare band. However, it appears clear that the d xy -dominated (π, π) scattering needs to be suppressed, and that additional (compared to a nematic but fully coherent scenario) anisotropy in the quasi-particle weights between d xz and d yz is also necessary for explaining both the normal state QPI and the superconducting gap structure within a modified spinfluctuation theory. In this paper, we focus primarily on the set of Z 's given above that provided the best fit to the superconducting gap in Ref. 30, as a consistency check. However it is clear that a range of such choices is consistent with the data in Refs. 30 and 31. To give a rough idea of what Z's are possible for FeSe within the current framework, we have compared the calculated superconducting gap with the experimental error bars from Ref. 30, varying each Z independently. Fig. Interactions (Eq. ( The interaction matrix Ū s in orbital space is composed of linear combinations of U, U , J, J and its form is given, e.g., in Ref. 77. The total physical spin susceptibility is then given by the sum Similarly, the spin fluctuation pairing interaction is obtained from the usual expressions The orbital-dependent quasiparticle weights Z l have direct consequences for the QPI and single-particle observables such as the spectral function, Ã(k, ω). For example, in Fig. Focusing first on the dispersion of the spin excitations relevant for twinned systems along the high symmetry directions of the Brillouin zone, for a direct comparison with Ref. 34, we show in Fig. Turning next to the constant energy cuts relevant for twinned crystals, we show in Fig. Turning next to the scenario of orbital selectively, we show in the lower row of panels in Fig. There are important effects of the orbital dependent quasiparticle weights Z l manifesting themselves clearly in the untwinned (non-C 4 -symmetrized) case, related to the surprisingly large Z xz -Z yz splitting reported by Sprau et al. The dispersion of the magnetic excitations comparing the results for the detwinned and twinned cases are shown in Fig. The shift in the momentum structure of the spectral weight between the coherent and less-coherent cases can be quantified in momentum integrated spin fluctuations separating fluctuations at (π, 0) (stripe X), (0, π) (stripe Y) and (π, π) (Néel), and is displayed in Fig. In the superconducting state, we calculate the BCSsusceptibility tensor by assuming an order parameter that is diagonal in band space. For this purpose, we use the result of a calculation of the symmetry function g(k) on the Fermi surface from the solution of the linearized gap equation The corresponding expression for the susceptibility tensor is then 81 where the normal Green's function reads and the anomalous Green's function is given by In Fig. Iron selenide is a fascinating system where nematicity, magnetic fluctuations, and significant electronic correlations conspire to produce unusual superconductivity in a compensated metal with tiny Fermi surface pockets of varying orbital character. The small energy scales and orbital mixing make the compound a significant challenge for both theory and experiment. Since the discovery of new cold vapor deposition methods allowed for the growth of high-quality stoichiometric crystals several years ago, theories have been gradually improved as higher resolution experiments were performed. Recently, several theories Recent alternative theoretical works have discussed other possible causes for an unusual momentum dependence of the effective interaction that ultimately gives similar results for the superconducting gap. Kang et al. All these itinerant approaches propose fits to the gap anisotropy, but since full calculations of the dynamical susceptibility are not always presented, it is not clear what predictions they would make for the relative intensities of (π, 0) and (0, π) excitations. We therefore propose this as a good test to distinguish between the various theoretical models. We note that the strong-coupling theory of the "nematic quantum paramagnet" put forward in Ref. 45 reaches similar conclusions to ours regarding the (π, 0)/(0, π) anisotropy. Some degree of anisotropy would generally also be obtained within the framework of Ref. 85, which makes the basic assumption of stronger fluctuations at (π, 0). Since the publication of Ref. 30, new experiments have both confirmed and challenged some aspects of our description. The quasiparticle interference experiment of Ref. 31 shows that the momentum dependent renormalization of interactions is present already in the nematic normal state above T c , and is remarkably consistent with the Z -factors determined by fit to experiment on the superconducting gap structure. The Y electron pocket, which should have little coherent spectral weight in our analysis since it consists entirely of d xy and d xz weight, has proven nearly impossible to observe in either ARPES On the other hand several ARPES experiments have found less d yz weight on the Γ-centered hole pockets than expected in the current renormalized band structure Above, we reviewed a theory of the low-energy bandstructure and interactions that accounts only for the coherent part of the quasiparticles near the Fermi level, with strongly reduced xy and xz quasiparticle weights, which earlier had been shown to account well for the structure of the superconducting gap and normal state quasiparticle interference. In this work, we have calculated the expected inelastic neutron scattering intensity for FeSe within this framework, considering both the set of Z 's taken from Ref. 30, as well as a set corresponding to more moderate correlations. Both are consistent with the low energy, low-temperature neutron data, as well as with the superconducting gap anisotropy within experimental error bars. As expected, the strong decoherence of the d xy states at the Fermi level dramatically suppresses (π, π) excitations at low energy, leading in fact to a spin pseudogap roughly consistent with experiment. In addition, we have made predictions for untwinned crystals appropriate for when such experiments become feasible. The very striking aspect of the theory is that the low-energy spin excitation intensity at (π, 0) and (0, π) becomes extremely anisotropic, with (0, π) fluctuations essentially eliminated. That this is not the case for the standard RPA ap- proach without such quasiparticle renormalizations was pointed out earlier in Ref. 45, which obtained similar results to the present work regarding this point within a strong-coupling picture. This agreement suggests that our renormalized multiorbital Fermi liquid shares features in common with the nematic quantum paramagnetic state described in that work, which was inspired in turn by explanations of the lack of long-range magnetic order in FeSe relying on frustration of various competing magnetic states In addition, we have discussed the results of several other itinerant approaches to FeSe, all of which have proposed slightly differing accounts of how the observed gap anisotropy arises. That this is possible follows from the fact that our approach is essentially equivalent to a kdependent renormalization of the pairing interaction, in particular one which suppresses (π, π) and (0, π) fluctuations and thereby the pairing amplitudes in these directions. Other approaches can in principle construct effec- tive interactions for fully coherent quasiparticles where the required momentum dependence arises from a redistribution of orbital character in the nematic phase, or from highly anisotropic nematic spin fluctuations. At present, measurements of the superconducting properties, given apparent disagreements among ARPES measurements, are probably not sufficient to enable one to differentiate among the theories. We have therefore proposed here that inelastic neutron scattering measurements on untwinned FeSe will be a fundamental and useful experimental probe addressing this question directly. The orbitally selective spin fluctuation approach, with values of quasiparticle weights Z determined by fits to both superconducting state B. Spin excitations in the normal stateFor the calculation of the spin excitations, we assume local repulsive interactions described by the usual Hubbard-Hund Hamiltonian,