Cryogenic rejuvenation in metallic glasses reported in Ketov et al 's experiment (Nature(2015)524,200) has attracted much attention, both in experiments and numerical studies. The atomic mechanism of rejuvenation has been conjectured to be related to the heterogeneity of the glassy state, but the quantitative evidence is still elusive. Here we use molecular dynamics simulations of a model metallic glass to investigate the heterogeneity in the local thermal expansion. We then combine the resulting spatial distribution of thermal expansion with a continuum mechanics calculation to infer the internal stresses caused by a thermal cycle. Comparing the internal stress with the local yield stress, we prove that the heterogeneity in thermo mechanical response has the potential to trigger local shear transformations, and therefore to induce rejuvenation during a cryogenic thermal cycling. Glasses are solid materials, disordered at small scale, but homogeneous and isotropic at large scales. It has been understood for some time, however, that their elastic properties are not uniform if they are computed on mesoscale. This heterogeneous elasticity has been characterized by a number of simulations of model glasses, more or less realistic, and also by a variety of experimental tools Recently, it was discovered that an alternative to this mechanical rejuvenation could be obtained, in some metallic glasses (MGs), by thermal cycling towards low temperatures In this work we take an alternative route that bridges the gap between molecular dynamics and experiments, by using the molecular dynamics simulations to obtain quasi equilibrium properties and assessing the importance of the induced mechanical stresses by using a con-tinuum description. Our first step is to quantify the heterogeneity in thermal expansion. We therefore present the first quantitative study of the local thermal expansion in a model metallic glass, putting the thermoelastic properties of glasses on the same footing as their elastic properties. We use the resulting spatial distribution of the thermal expansion as an input in a continuum model that allows us to estimate the magnitude of the stresses generated by differential thermal expansion. These stresses are finally compared to the local yield stresses that must be overcome in order to trigger plastic activity. Our main conclusion is that, while the differential thermal expansion is indeed capable of generating plastic activity and thermal rejuvenation upon cryogenic cycling, the effect is unlikely to be observable at the scale of molecular dynamics simulations. The thermal expansion coefficient quantifies the volume strain caused by a change in temperature, and can be written for a macroscopic system as where v is the volume strain induced by the temperature change ∆T . In metallic glasses, its order of magnitude is around 10 -5 K -1 In order to define a local thermal expansion coefficient, we use the coarse graining approach originally proposed by Goldhirsch and Goldenberg The same approach was used previously to define local elastic constants, with results consistent with those obtained with different methods. The approach starts with the definition of a meso scale displacement field u(r, t) where u i (t) is the displacement of atom i at time t, starting from a reference position, and φ(x) is the coarse graining function, in this paper we choose a Gaussian φ(x) ≡ 1 v ef f e -r 2 2σ 2 , with σ the coarse graining scale and v ef f = (4πσ 2 ) 3/2 . The local strain is calculated, under the assumption of small deformations, as ij (r) = 1 2 (u(r) j,i + u(r) i,j ). We obtain the local thermal expansion coefficient (LTEC) from the local volumetric strain as where α(r) is the LTEC at position r, and v (r) is local volumetric strain caused by the temperature change ∆T . We apply this procedure to a model metallic glass Cu 50 Zr 50 described by an embeddedatom method(EAM) potential ducted by an open source classical MD software: LAMMPS In the following we will be particularly interested in discussing the possibility that the stress field induced by the heterogeneous thermal expansion induces shear transformations (ST), i.e. localized irreversible plastic events that are recognized as the elementary building blocks of plasticity in amorphous materials When the metallic glasses are heated, due to the heterogeneity of LTEC, internal stresses are generated by the mismatch in the local thermal deformation. Extracting these thermal stresses directly from molecular dynamics simulations is not easy, in particular as the system can also evolve during thermal cycling due to local, thermally activated processes that have no relation to the differential thermal expansion. In order to estimate the role of the latter, we will adopt an alternative approach based on the assumption that the material remains a linear elastic one and can be described, at the coarse grained level, using continuum theory, as previously demonstrated in experiments With these assumptions, the effective external stress generated by the local thermal expansion is K∆T α(r)δ ij where K is the bulk modulus, ∆T is the temperature change and α(r) is the LTEC at location r. δ ij the Kronecker symbol. At mechanical equilibrium, the elastic stress would balance the thermal stress σ ij as using small deformation conditions and linear elasticity, the equations for the displacement field are where u i is the i component of the displacement field at location r. Since the thermal expansion external force is a conservative vector field, we search the solution for u i in the where Φ is the potential field. Equation 5 can be simplified as Integrating in a finite system with periodic boundary conditions, equation 6 can be written as where ᾱ ≡ α(r)dV V . Equation 7 can be solved numerically using as an input the LTEC obtained from the MD simulations, and the resulting elastic stress can be calculated from the potential field Φ(r). We characterize the resulting stress tensor using the von Mises stress where σ i are the eigenvalues of the tensor. As shown in Fig. If the internal stress is larger than the local yield stress, we expect that thermal cycling will trigger plastic activity. In order to estimate the corresponding density of events, we first need to estimate the distribution of the local yield stresses in the material. We employ the method described by Patinet and coworkers The von Mises stress just before the first jump in the stress strain curve is used to define a local yield stress. The coarse graining function implicit in this approach is a discontinuous one, which separates the affinely deforming medium from the rearranging sphere. In order to match this approach with the one used in computing the local thermal expansion, which uses a continuous coarse graining function, we impose that the second moment of the two coarse graining functions are matched. This is achieved for r c ≈ 2σ. In the following, we use r c = 10 Å, comparable to the coarse graining size σ = 5 Å used to obtain the thermal internal stress in the previous section. The probability distribution function of the yield stress, shown in Fig. Again we use this distribution for convenience, without any particular theoretical justification. Knowing the probability distribution of the yield stress and the one of the thermal stress, and assuming that these two quantities are statistically independent, we can estimate the probability that the thermal stress triggers a local plastic event within the coarse grain size, p(σ th > σ y ): Θ(x) is Heaviside function, p(σ th , σ y ) is the joint probability of the thermal stress and yield stress within coarse grain size. We assume that the thermal stress and yield stress are The parameters of the Lomax distribution p L for the thermal stresses and of the hyperbolic distribution p H for the yield stresses, for samples with different thermal histories. And β and λ are fitted in Fig. Using the parameters extracted from simulation data, we can then estimate this probability numerically. The results are shown in table I, and discussed in the following section. The probability obtained in table I is small. On the scale of a simulation box that contains a few thousands atoms (or equivalently, a few hundred possible shear transformations), the chance of actually observing a plastic event triggered by thermal stresses will be negligible. On the other hand, this probability will be significant on the macroscopic scale of an experiment. More precisely, if we consider a sample divided in n potential shear transformation sites, the probability of observing at least one shear transformation in this sample during one temperature cycle is P act = 1-(1-p(σ th > σ y )) n , which we will refer to as the activation probability. This probability becomes larger than 90% for n ≈ 5000. This corresponds to a system of lateral size that can be roughly estimated to 10 nm, assuming that the system is made of non overlapping zones that can undergo independent shear transformations. An important question concerns the robustness of our results with respect to the particular choice of coarse graining size. While our initial choice was motivated by the typical scale for different coarse grain size, the dash line is guided for the eye, and the value is the mean of three coarse grain size which equals 1.31 × 10 -6 Å3 . The sample quench rate is 10 9 K/s. of shear transformations in metallic glasses, it remains somewhat arbitrary. Moreover, it is seen in figure The second important factor is of course the amplitude ∆T of temperature cycles. Following equation 7, the internal thermal stress increases in proportion of the amplitude of the temperature cycle and the local yield stress is insensitive with temperature at low temperature, thus p(σ th > σ y ) would increase with the temperature amplitude, so that one could expect to amplify the effect by increasing ∆T . However, when the temperature increases, thermal relaxation will come into the picture and eventually dominate the structural evolution. Aging effects would then hide the rejuvenation effect caused by thermal expansion heterogeneity, and large thermal cycling would induce an aging effect 