Poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is widely used to build optoelectronic devices. However, as a hygroscopic waterbased acidic material, it brings major concerns for stability and degradation, resulting in an intense effort to replace it in organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices. In this work, we focus on the perfluorinated ionomer (PFI) polymeric additive to PEDOT:PSS. We demonstrate that it can reduce the relative amplitude of OPV device burn-in, and find two distinct regimes of influence. At low concentrations there is a subtle effect on wetting and work function, for instance, with a detrimental impact on the device characteristics, and above a threshold it changes the electronic and device properties. The abrupt threshold in the conducting polymer occurs for PFI concentrations greater than or equal to the PSS concentration and was revealed by monitoring variations in transmission, topography, work-function, wettability and OPV device characteristics. Below this PFI concentration threshold, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OPVs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) are impaired largely by low fill-factors due to poor charge extraction. Above the PFI concentration threshold, we recover the PCE before it is improved beyond the pristine PEDOT:PSS layer based OPV devices. Supplementary to the performance enhancement, PFI improves OPV device stability and lifetime. Our degradation study leads to the conclusion that PFI prevents water from diffusing to and from the hygrosopic PEDOT:PSS layer, which slows down the deterioration of the PEDOT:PSS layer and the aluminum electrode. These findings reveal mechanisms and opportunities that should be taken into consideration when developing components to inhibit OPV degradation. Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are an emerging technology and potential low-cost solution to solar energy conversion. The light-weight and flexible carbon-based semiconductors used in their fabrication have high absorption coefficients, can be solution-processable, and do not require high-temperature processing. Consequently, OPVs and other organic material based electronic devices can be manufactured in bulk using limited material and well-established manufacturing techniques, i.e. ink-jet printing, spin-coating, spray deposition, electrospinning and roll-to-roll processing. PEDOT:PSS is a low-cost, commercially available and environmentally benign polymer blend that is widely used in The film morphology is also sensitive to processing conditions. For instance, annealing has been shown to increase the conductivity and work-function of PEDOT:PSS films by removing residual water content and enlarging the PEDOT-rich domains. How co-solvents and post-treatments enhance conductivity has been the subject of much debate. Kim et al. proposed that polar solvents with a high dielectric constant such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N, N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) or tetrahydrofuran (THF) reduce the Coulombic interaction between the positively charged PEDOT and the negatively charged PSS through strong screening. Inganäs and co-workers suggested that high-boiling-point solvents like glycerol or sorbitol act as plasticisers, improving inter-chain interactions by reorienting the conducting polymer chains. Whilst progress is being made, high temperature vacuum processing and post-deposition annealing are usually required. This is not compatible with the solution-processable, largearea, high-throughput and cost-effective targets of OPVs. The absorption of water by the hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS alters the morphology and, as a result, the electronic properties in a manner unfavourable for charge extraction, as in OPVs for example, the work-function is moved towards the vacuum level when PEDOT:PSS is exposed to moisture. Conducting layers gain a growing importance for OPVs and the success of the technology relies not only on their optical and electronic properties, but also on their relative lack of sensitivity to O 2 and H 2 O. If this could be achieved with a conjugated system, it would relax the need for encapsulation, and thereby facilitate the fabrication of solar cells matching the technology targets. processing properties orthogonal to water and oil based materials, which is of interest from multilayer structuration to running chemical reactions. 110 In our OPV work, fluorination was shown to alter not only the work-function of the HEL but also the layer refractive indices, which led to an improvement in charge extraction and photogeneration, respectively. In the present work, we investigate the optoelectronic and topographical properties of the PEDOT:PSS with different PFI concentrations. Then, we show that the work-function, among threshold corresponding to [PFI][PSS]. To demonstrate this, we fabricate and characterise OPVs with poly(3hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl): [6,6]-phenyl-C 61 -butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM). A degradation study is performed in accordance with the ISOS-L-1 protocol. Information on the materials and the preparation of solutions and films can be found in the Experimental Section of the electronic supplementary information (ESI). where [PFI]≈[PSS], e.g. 1:6:6, which is confirmed below with other characterisation techniques. The largest difference in transmittance occurs between the thin film with no additive and that with the highest concentration, 1:6:0 and 1:6:30, respectively. This difference also increases with wavelength. The maximum difference is about 2 % at 800 nm. At 500 nm, the difference in transmittance between the lowest and highest PFI concentration thin film is reduced to approximately 1 %. This is illustrated in the inlay of Fig. In aqueous solutions, PFI and PSS compete to stabilise and dope the PEDOT polymeric chains. Takahiko Sasaki and coworkers used scattering techniques to reveal that PEDOT:PSS forms micelles with a PEDOT crystalline core that grows when subject to solvent treatments, both pre and post thin film deposition. 69 Such morphology changes can alter the topography of the HEL, which in turn can influence OPV performances. The Fourier transformed and radially integrated topographic images in Fig. In Fig. To gain further insight into the composite films, wetting properties were investigated using a contact angle goniometer (Section ESI-1.3.4 †). The contact angle measurements are dis- The relative fraction of PSS replaced by PFI is redistributed between the vicinity of the PEDOT and the surface of the film. Consequently, the contact angle is maintained at a constant value. As the PFI to PSS ratio increases, the added PFI does not find enough room around the PEDOT cores and starts to populate the surface of the film. Naturally, the contact angle is then strongly affected until the PFI molecules saturate the interface leading to a plateau that is visible in the contact angle and the adhesion energy. These are 33.5° and 132.0 mN/m for 1:6:13.4, and 35.9° and 130.3 mN/m for 1:6:30, respectively. A contact angle variation can influence the morphology and thickness of the active layer. The remainder of the study focuses on P3HT:PC 61 BM bulk heterojunction OPVs fabricated with PEDOT:PSS:PFI composite HELs. Information on the materials can be found in Section ESI-1.1. † The chemical structures of the photoactive materials are presented in Fig. The flat band energy level diagram presented in Fig. 113,125 Fig. Fig. Fig. It is also noticeable that at low but not null additive amount, the decrease in device performance is associated with an S-kink in the J-V characteristic which reduces the FF. The origins of S-kinks are usually considered to be due to at least one of the following: i) interfacial dipoles or defects, ii) charge carrier mobility imbalance and iii) energy barriers. We next investigated the effect of PFI on the stability and burn-in of organic solar cells. To provide a more reliable product, manufacturers tend to complete a burn in step on electronic devices presenting a fast initial failure. In this context, the OPV initial and fast degradation is referred to as "burn-in" time. It is often characterised by a drastic and almost exponential PCE decay, which is followed by a slower and more linear deterioration of the device power conversion efficiency. Identifying the physical mechanisms involved in the degradation during the device early stages of operation is essential but made difficult by the fact that the burn-in magnitude and duration vary from one OPV system to another. 147-151 Fig. As for the pristine HEL based device, the J SC then continues decreasing almost-linearly to lose ~ 20 % of the initial value after 24 h of operation. For higher PFI amounts, the J SC initial sharp decay becomes barely noticeable and its amplitude is only of the order of a few percent. As the PFI molecules saturate the HEL interface when [PFI]>[PSS], the variation of J SC over time is mostly characterised by the relatively linear slow decay. This slow decay is of the order of 0.0797  0.0004 mA.cm -2 /h, i.e. less than 1 % per hour. For these PFI composite HEL devices, the initial degradation mechanism is apparently still on-going after this 24 h operation which is in strong contrast with devices based on pristine PEDOT:PSS HEL. In Fig. Finally, Fig. In contrast, the devices containing PFI experience a shorter burn-in time of about 30 min which is associated with a PCE decrease a lower amplitude and ranging only from 7 to 12 %. For the first 30 min of operation, a 10 % decay occurs with the 1:6:1.0 devices, which is followed by a 5 % recovery. It is unusual for a post burn-in region but it is consistent with the FF and V OC behaviour of the low PFI concentration devices. After 4 h operation, PCE decreases again, but rather slowly: it only loses 11 % of its initial value after 24 h of operation with an average loss rate of 0.30 %/h. At this low PFI concentration, the S-kink disappearance compensates and partially hides the burn-in mechanism. At high PFI concentration and for the first 30 min of operation, both 1:6:13.4 and 1:6:30.0 devices present an early fast degradation of ~ 11 and 8 %, respectively. It is followed by an almost linear degradation of -0.80 %/h, as expected from a post burn-in regime. Noticeably, the burn-in region presents a much smaller relative amplitude as the PFI additive amount is increased in the HEL. The 1:6:13.4 devices present a 31 % PCE decay within 24 hours of operation, in comparison to ~ 27 % for the 1:6:30.0 devices. At these PFI concentrations, the fluorinated additive molecule reduces the relative amplitude of burn-in region by up to ~140 and 167 %, respectively. Incidentally, it is also noticeable that the devices fabricated with the fluorinated additive in the HEL systematically present lower standard variations of the PCE, FF and J SC . The previous literature suggests the existence of a work-a b c d function gradient in accordance with a concentration gradient in the PEDOT:PSS:PFI films, and that PFI mainly resides at the surface of the HEL. The S-kink in the J-V characteristics at low concentrations of PFI severely reduces the FF and thereby the device efficiency (PCE). As previously mentioned, the appearance of this feature usually results from interfacial dipoles or defects, a charge carrier mobility imbalance and/or energy barriers. Wagner et al. showed that the inter-diffusion of metals into organic semiconductors can act as recombination centres and result in S-kinks. Other factors, which can influence charge carrier transport, include, but are not limited to, the active layer composition, morphology and thickness. An alternative explanation is that, while characterising the devices, there is a progressive increase in the HEL conductivity and/or formation of a dipole layer at the interface due to the PFI molecules. This could occur through the water molecules brought in by the hygroscopic sulfonic acid groups altering the HEL morphology and counteracting the disruptive charge transport at low concentrations of PFI between the PEDOT grains. As with the V OC (Fig. The most likely explanation is that the hydrophobic property of the fluorinated chains confirmed in Fig. These measurements show that for P3HT:PCBM OPVs, it is the PEDOT:PSS layer that is largely responsible for the burn-in of un-encapsulated devices, i.e. the fast device degradation mechanism is related to the hygroscopic nature of the HEL. We stress that the acid nature of the HEL is not in it-self a concern as by adding PFI molecules in the HEL, the number of sulphonic acid groups is increased, whilst still providing higher PCE and slower device degradation. In the HEL herein investigated, the PFI prevents H 2 O molecules diffusing to and from the HEL, and altering the properties thereof. Noticeably, altering water molecules mobility could also neutralise the sulphonic group contribution to the device degradation. The mechanisms that are usually seen as responsible for the decrease in OC and FF concern the active layer and more importantly the back electrode. Fig. Indeed, McGehee and co-workers showed that, by replacing the back electrode, one could almost recover the entire loss of V OC and FF for P3HT:PCBM photovoltaic cells. 26 Furthermore, in their study the degradation was shown to be faster at the edges than through large pin-holes except when the cathode extended beyond the boundary of the active cell. Therefore, not only the PEDOT:PSS degrades itself, 104 The results herein presented are then also consistent with the literature showing that the OPV efficiency is sensitive to the aluminium thickness and/or deposition rate. As illustrated in Fig. PEDOT:PSS is known to influence the degradation of a b organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices, leading to intense efforts to replace it. Our results show that by mediating moisture PEDOT:PSS is largely responsible for the burn-in of P3HT:PCBM OPVs and that using polymeric fluorinated additives is a promising strategy to solve hydroscopic HEL limitations. PEDOT:PSS impacts the degradation of organic solar cells by capturing and releasing moisture, which alters the properties of both the HEL and the Al top cathode. By investigating the PFI concentration effects on optical transmission, topography, work-function, surface wettability by contact angle and environmental scanning electron microscopy, we identify [PFI]≈[PSS] as the PFI concentration threshold above which changes in the HEL properties occur. Below this concentration threshold, OPV devices exhibit poor device performance with a noticeable S-kink in the J-V curves, resulting from poor charge extraction. Above this threshold, the device performance recovers and even outperforms the pristine HEL based devices. This results from the fluorinated additive allowing the HEL to reach favourable build-in electric field distributions and reduced interfacial charge recombination, i.e. faster charge extraction. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the fluorinated additive can be used to decrease the amplitude of the device burn-in. This is achieved thanks to its superior wetting properties preventing moisture from diffusing to and from the hygroscopic HEL, which protects the HEL and Al top electrode from deteriorating. By inhibiting the hygroscopic properties of PEDOT:PSS, the fluorinated molecule improves OPV reproducibility, stability and lifetime. From these findings arises an HEL fluorination strategy applicable to a wide range of OPVs devices using PEDOT:PSS. The degradation mechanisms herein reported should be taken into account to help manage hygroscopic properties and to engineer conducting polymer materials that can help extend the lifetime of organic solar cells. for P3HT:PCBM device characteristic s at 0, 0.5 and 24 hours. PFI loading of PEDOT:PSS expressed in weight ratio 1:6:x.