This brief presents a technique for compensating the temperature coefficient (TC) of a bandgap reference (BGR) using temperature characteristics of transistor's current gain β. As a comparison, three BGR circuits built with Si BJTs and SiGe HBTs are implemented to demonstrate the proposed TC curvature compensation technique. Measured average TC of the HBT proposed BGR is 23ppm/oC and 39 ppm/oC over the commercial (0~70°C) and space (-260~125°C) temperature ranges, respectively. With the proposed PSRR improvement technique, the BGR reaches PSRR of -50dB at 1MHz, and -38dB at 1GHz, respectively. Bandgap reference (BGR) circuits have been widely used in IC designs since they were introduced by Widlar Nowadays, BGRs are facing increasing challenges for ultrawide temperature applications such as space applications and precise analog circuit designs such as high resolution data converters Figure where VBE is a negative TC parameter, VT is equal to kBT/q, which is a positive TC parameter; and λ is a scaling factor for optimizing the compensation. kB is Boltzmann factor and q is electronic charge. The two transistor sizes in the circuit have a ratio of c, which leads to a slight difference ΔVBE. ΔVBE is equal to ln(c) k B T⁄q. Then Eq. 1 can be rewritten as: Assuming VBE is a linear term and by adjusting the ratio of c we can compensate the TC of the BGR independently such that its temperature compensated output VREF versus the temperature should be a horizontal straight line. However, the measurement results of a traditional first order BJT BGR shows that the slope of the BGR's output is nonzero versus temperature, as shown in Fig. The TC of VBE has been studied extensively, such as in where VG is the bandgap voltage of silicon, μ is the charge carrier mobility, and Tr is a reference temperature. It is evident from this expression that the VBE contains several temperature dependent parameters. Mobility μ increases with increasing temperature in the low temperature regime because impurity scattering is reduced as the carriers gain more energy and have higher velocity at higher temperatures. However, if temperature further increases, μ will decrease due to (phonon) scattering. A simulation result of mobility versus temperature for different doping levels is shown in Fig. The 1 st order temperature compensation is widely adopted for commercial (0~70oC) applications with low temperature fluctuations. However, in special fields, like military and space exploration, the temperature can vary between -200 to 125oC, where high order compensation becomes indispensable. There are several ways to cancel the higher order terms of VBE. The approach adopted in this brief is to utilize the current gain β of bipolar transistors. β is a temperature dependent coefficient and is nonlinear, which can be used to compensate the higher order terms in VBE. Current gain β can be expressed as follows, WB is base width. Dpe and Dpe are diffusion constants of holes in the emitter and electrons in the base, namely: Lpe is hole path length in the emitter and Lnb is electron path length in base. p ne n pb ⁄ is minority carrier concentration ratio. where NCE, NVE and NCB, NVB are effective densities of states in conduction and valence bands of emitter and base semiconductors, respectively. NB and NE are base and emitter doping level. Substituting the above parameters into Eq. 4, we obtain the relationship between β and T as follows: The current gain β is a temperature dependent parameter that follows an exponential rule, namely it contains higher order TC terms, according to Eq. 5. By taking a Taylor series expansion we find: The Taylor series coefficients c0 c1 ... cn can be adjusted by changing the circuit's parameters and partially compensate the higher order terms in Eq. 2. Furthermore, β is also affected by ∆E G ; that is, different types of material will lead to different temperature characteristics. This is the reason that Si based BJTs and SiGe based HBTs have opposite temperature characteristics. To demonstrate BJT and HBT's β temperature dependence characteristics, two types of BGRs, Si based BJT and SiGe based HBT, were built, simulated and tested on a 0.18μm SiGe BiCMOS process. The β versus 1/temperature relationships of Si and SiGe transistors are shown in Fig. The measurement results are very close to the simulations and calculations based on the theory. The polarity of BJT's and HBT's ∆E G are different, according to Eq. 5. By tracing back from the measurement results in Fig. BJT can be calculated, which are approximately 70 and -25m eV, respectively. On the contrary, SiGe HBT's β ∞ and ∆E G are obtained from Fig. The crucial point of the high order temperature compensation is to utilize β's TC to compensate the terms in VBE. Fig. Two current sources I1 and I2 are proportional to absolute temperature (PTAT) sources, therefore the reference voltage VREF is given by In summary, the proposed curvature compensation circuit is given in Fig. The BGR circuit is powered by power regulators or directly tied to the power supply, which is sensitive to power supply variations. The output of the power supply can vary significantly and may couple unwanted signal or noise, both of which may affect the output of BGR. Conventional BGR designs often use cascode transistors to separate the circuit from power supply, which provides some power supply rejection. However, cascode structures consume more headroom, which is not suitable for low power, low voltage applications. We propose a simple way to reduce the The proposed BGR circuit with PSRR improvement and curvature compensation techniques is shown in Fig. Die photo of the proposed BGRs chip is shown in Fig. The trace with circle marker in Fig. This work also adds a very simple circuit to 2 nd order HBT BGR that improves the performance of PSRR by more than 15 dB compared with the other two BGRs. Since we did not use any op-amps in this circuit, the PSRR remains at very low level even dealing with very high frequency. 2 nd order HBT BGR measurement results show that the power supply rejection ratios are -64 dB under 3.0 volt supply voltage at 1 MHz, and -42 dB at 1 GHz, respectively. Fig. In this work, we analyzed the temperature dependence of bipolar transistor's VBE, and discussed the deficiency of the 1 st order compensated BGR due to the VBE temperature dependence. We then utilize the curvature cancellation technique by means of BJT or HBT's current gain β. The temperature dependence of β was derived. Three BGRs are implemented using Si BJT and SiGe HBT in this work, and the measurement results demonstrate that even with different temperature dependence of the β, i.e., positive or negative, as long as it contains higher order terms, it can be used to compensate the 1 st order BGR's TC, and thus improve the BGR's temperature compensation performance. Our HBT-based BGR shows better temperature independency than BJT BGR. A PSRR improvement circuit is developed for the 2 nd order compensation BGR, which improves the PSRR performance by more than 30dB. We would like to thank Dr. Guofu Niu from Auburn University for many valuable discussions. * All measurement results are obtained without trimming.