In search for a new generation of spintronics hardware, material candidates for room temperature quantum spin Hall effect (QSHE) have become a contemporary focus of investigation. Inspired by the original proposal for QSHE in graphene, several heterostructures have been synthesized, aiming at a hexagonal monolayer of heavier group IV elements promoting the QSHE bulk gap via increased spin-orbit coupling. So far, the monolayer/substrate coupling, which can manifest itself in strain, deformation, and hybridization, has proven to be detrimental to the aspired QSHE conditions for the monolayer. For stanene, the Sn analogue of graphene, we investigate how an interposing buffer layer mediates between monolayer and substrate in order to optimize the QSHE setting. From a detailed density functional theory study, we highlight the principal mechanisms induced by such a buffer layer to accomplish quasi-freestanding stanene in its QSHE phase. We complement our theoretical predictions by presenting the first attempts to grow a buffer layer on SiC(0001) on which stanene can be deposited. Quantum spin Hall (QSH) systems are twodimensional bulk non-conducting materials featuring topologically non-trivial conducting edge modes, whose stability against external perturbations is ensured by time reversal symmetry An initial plausible way of increasing the bulk gap is to enhance the spin-orbit coupling strength of the constituting atoms. Within the group-IV elements, freestanding honeycomb-like structures made by Si, Ge, and Sn atoms, dubbed silicene, germanene, and stanene, respectively, were estimated in theory to exhibit gaps up to 100 meV By contrast, a constructive effect of the substrate is * Electronic address: domenico.disante@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de observed for bismuthene on SiC For silicene and germanene, several studies report on attempts of reducing the interaction with the substrate For buckled geometries, as it is also the case for stanene, a concomitant staggered potential (Semenoff mass For our theoretical study of stanene on buffered SiC(0001) we employ state-of-the-art first-principles calculations based on density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) Each atom from group III and V can saturate three dangling bonds from the SiC surface, either from Si atoms of the Si-terminated SiC or from C atoms from the C-terminated SiC, as shown in Fig. The large structural reconstructions enforce a folding of the electronic states into the supercell Brillouin zones, which map onto the primitive 1 × 1 Brillouin zones as sketched in Fig 1a . It is usually simpler to achieve a transparent physical description in the latter setting, where the unfolded band structure readily compares with the freestanding models when the symmetry breaking induced by the reconstruction is weak. The unfolding procedure we adopt in this work follows the lines described in Refs. 50, 51. For the experimental realization of a buffer layer we use n-doped (0.01-0.03 Ωcm) Si-terminated 4H-SiC(0001) wafer pieces. To prepare an atomically smooth, wellordered substrate surface on large-scales, the wafer pieces undergo a dry-etching process in a helium diluted hydrogen atmosphere with a flow of 2 standard litre per minute at 950 mbar and temperatures around 1200 • C for roughly 10 minutes. Subsequently, the H-terminated SiC(0001) samples Prior to the epitaxial growth of Al, the H termination of SiC(0001) has to be removed. This is achieved by heating the substrate to ∼ 620 • C with a subsequent cooling to ∼ 350 • C in the Al beam of the effusion cell, to form the Al √ 3 × √ 3R(30 • ) lattice, as shown in Fig. We consider Al, Ga, In, and Tl as group III elements of the periodic table, which all share the same s 2 p 1 valence electronic configuration. It has been shown that Al and other group III atoms can saturate the (111) surface of a silicon crystal, inducing a √ 3 × √ 3R(30 • ) reconstruction The sp 3 orbitals of Al on SiC host the three valence electrons. The fourth one is empty and of sp z -type character and gives rise to an antibonding in-gap state. The resulting band structures for this type of buffer layers on SiC (Si-face) are shown in Fig. In Fig. The energy position of the antibonding buffer level, and in turn the excitation gap, affect the strength of the hybridization when we add the stanene monolayer on top: The larger the gap of the SiC+buffer system is, the more strongly the buffer (conduction and valence) states hybridize with SiC. This implies that for a large ∆, the corresponding buffer states penetrate more pronouncedly into the bulk, and their surface localization is reduced. Stanene will hence be less affected in this situation. In the opposite case of a narrow gap, with buffer states situated at low energies, these have more weight at the surface and we expect sizable interaction effects between the buffer and stanene. A further important consequence is that top and bottom Sn atoms of the buckled inversionbreaking geometry have significantly distinct energy levels, as they are differently exposed to a strong interface potential. In Sec. IV we are going to show explicitly that this directly translates into the presence of a staggered a) tion gaps in the stanene band structure. At the same time we see a distribution (spread) of stanene character over the Al/SiC electronic states. When the distance becomes smaller than the critical value d cr ⇠ 3.2 Å, we observe a sudden change of the Z 2 topological invariant from 1 to 0 (Fig. A change in the topological invariant can only occur through an inversion of the bulk gap In the next Section, we will establish an analogy with the topological transition as described by the Kane and Mele model After a general paragraph on the Semeno↵ mass term, we will discuss how the conclusions reached for group III will turn from unfavourable to favourable regarding the topology in the case of group-V bu↵ers. In this section we give a rundown of the fundamental aspects of the Kane and Mele model where the first is a nearest neighbor hopping term on the honeycomb lattice and the second a mirror symmetric SOC one (here ⌫ ij ûz = (2/ p 3)( d1 ⇥ d2 ) where d1,2 are potential term We now analyze the behavior of stanene, in particular its geometrical and its topological properties, when deposited on the group-III buffer layer. For the sake of clarity, we derive most of the following conclusion by focusing on the specific case of the Al-buffer on SiC. The main purpose is to understand the physical mechanisms behind the interaction between stanene and the buffered substrate. With this in mind, we monitor the evolution of the electronic band structure of stanene as its bonding distance is artificially tuned from an unrealistically large value down to the equilibrium one d eq ∼ 2.9 Å (see Fig. A change in the topological invariant can only occur through an inversion of the bulk gap In the next section, we will establish an analogy with the topological transition as described by the Kane and Mele model Interpreted within the framework of the Kane and Mele model where the first is a nearest neighbor hopping term on the honeycomb lattice and the second a mirror symmetric SOC one (here ν ij ûz = (2/ √ 3)( d1 × d2 ) where d1,2 are unit vectors along the two bonds from site j to site i, and ûz is a unit vector perpendicular to the stanene plane), and s are the Pauli matrices for the electron spin. The third term is a nearest-neighbor Rashba coupling due to a perpendicular electric field or to an interaction with a substrate and the last term sets the staggered potential (Semenoff mass) λ v (ξ i = ±1 depending on the sublattice). The latter differentiates the on-site energies of the two atoms constituting the bipartite honeycomb lattice. Without the Rashba term, the momentum-space Hamiltonian assumes the form with x = k x a/2 and y = √ 3k y a/2 (a being the hexagonal unit cell lattice constant, i.e. ij = a/ √ 3), Γ 1 = σ x ⊗s 0 , Γ 2 = σ z ⊗ s 0 and Γ 5 = σ y ⊗ s z three of the five Dirac matrices with σ i describing the sublattice degree of freedom and The two ↑and the two ↓-eigenvalues with smaller and larger splitting, respectively, give perfect account of the four bands visible in the actual DFT calculation (Fig. Let us note that the inversion of sublattice character is well defined only at the K and K points, where the Kane-Mele Hamiltonian is diagonal in the original basis. A suitable definition of the character over the whole Brillouin zone can be obtained by rotating the Kane-Mele Hamiltonian at each k-point in the basis of the eigenvectors of (2) calculated at λ SO = 0. At the Γ point, for instance, the Kane-Mele model is made of two identical 2×2 blocks, with ±λ v on the diagonal and 3t between the A and B sites. Going away from the Γ point and continuing to use the "bonding"-"antibonding" basis defined above, the SOC acquires off-diagonal elements which mix the "bonding"-"antibonding" eigenvectors approaching K and K leading to the inversion at the topological phase transition. So far we have discussed the qualitative correspondence between the Kane-Mele model and the DFT results. Now, we make a more quantitative comparison by estimating the Semenoff mass and SOC term via a fit of the DFT eigenvalues at the K point with the analytic expressions given in Eq. 3. For the Al buffer, at d eq , we extract a difference between the p z onsite energies of the top-and bottom-Sn atoms of 2λ v = 0.098 eV. The highest levels belong to the bottom Sn-atoms, that feel the buffer layer stronger than the top ones and are hence pushed up in energy. In the Kane-Mele Hamiltonian λ SO represents a non-local term which accounts for the coupling of orbitals with parallel spin on the same sublattice. However, a finite buckling angle introduces a non-vanishing local contribution to the SOC Let us briefly comment on the quantitative estimate of the Semenoff mass: an alternative way of extracting the staggered potential is from the difference of the p z -local levels of the two sublattices via a Wannier projection of the DFT band-structure. In order to get a satisfactory agreement with DFT, the projection must contain all the p-orbitals of tin as well as orbitals from the buffer atoms. This means that the resulting Wannier Hamiltonian is defined on a much larger Hilbert space than the one of the Kane-Mele model, which assumes one single orbital per site. To directly connect to λ v , one would have to further downfold the Wannier Hamiltonian onto a p ztype low-energy model. A direct projection onto such a minimal model, however, turns out to yield a poor correspondence with the DFT bands. Furthermore, there is another argument in favor of an extended local basis, namely that this allows to disentangle hybridization effects stemming from the buffer. As described above, we adopt the simpler procedure based on the fit of the DFT eigenvalues at the K point to the analytic results of Eq. 3. In the previous analysis, we have neglected the Rashba coupling in Eq. 1. The presence of a finite λ R mixes the ↑and ↓-blocks of the Hamiltonian breaking the conservation of the z-component of the spin. Moreover, a chiral spin-texture appears around the K point. We checked that this effect is negligible, as shown in the inset to FIG. Fig. Equipped with the microscopic understanding gained in the previous section of the mechanism responsible for the topological transition in stanene on the buffer layer, we shall now address the key question of our study: how to realize quasi freestanding topologically non-trivial stanene. From our analysis of group III, we have learned that the buffer in-gap states have to stay as far as possible away from E F and, at the same time, the Semenoff mass term must be minimized. To limit the detrimental effect of these antibonding states, the corresponding bonds ought to be saturated. Two more valence electrons in buffer exactly serve this purpose, offered by the p-shell of group-V atoms. In Fig. Before moving to the analysis of the resulting electronic properties, we turn our attention to the nature of the bonding between stanene and the buffer layer. To this purpose, in Fig. Our calculations reveal that P and As buffer-atoms on C-terminated SiC are ideal templates to host stanene in the QSH phase. The high electronegativity of carbon plays an important role. The resulting strengthening of the bonding of the buffer atoms to the substrate, and in turn of the hybridization between the in-gap bands and the continuum of SiC electronic states, sets favourable conditions for a topological ground state. We predict stanene to be a QSH on Bi as well, but it is likely that Bi on SiC prefers the 2/3 coverage, as recently reported in the case of bismuthene/SiC Having assessed the possibility to achieve a topological ground state for stanene, an important issue is yet to be addressed. It is known that freestanding stanene as predicted in Ref. 8 is not dynamically stable in the low-buckled (LB) geometry of interest here The substrate engineering based on our buffer strategy turns out to be decisive to stabilize stanene in the LB configuration. As shown in the central and rightmost panels of Fig. The stabilization of the ZA phonon mode via interaction with the buffer is a result of the very nature of this mode, which in atomically thin systems involves a vertical bending of the layer, i.e. a flexural mode in the direction of the substrate. We cannot exclude at this point a highbuckled (HB) configuration of stanene, since it has been reported that for freestanding tin and lead monolayers, a metallic HB phase is energetically favourable against the LB one Through a systematic first-principles analysis we have unveiled the mechanisms underlying the delicate QSH formation in stanene grown on a SiC(0001) substrate, and how these growth conditions can be fundamentally improved by an appropriate buffer between substrate and monolayer. We followed the guiding principle that a technologically relevant substrate is crucial for any future integration of QSH systems in novel spin-based devices. SiC distinguishes itself as one of the most promising substrate candidates, we have accomplished a substrate engineering mechanism that employs a buffer layer for the saturation of the substrate dangling bonds. We have further revealed the microscopic processes that are deleterious to the formation of the topological phase, owing to the electronic hybridization between the substrate and the stanene monolayer. Combining these insights, we predict a stable QSH phase of stanene in the four cases of group-V buffered SiC. By analyzing the hybridization between the stanene layer and the buffer, and by mapping the full ab-initio Hamiltonian onto a generalized effective Hamitonian including a staggered potential (Semenoff mass term), we show that some buffer layers are more suitable than others to protect the QSH formation in the monolayer. The strategy we follow then is to minimize the detrimental staggered potential by choosing such atoms which have their bonding and antibonding states energetically far away from the chemical potential. This leads us to concrete suggestions for promising buffer materials, in particular the use of group-V elements (P and As). Note that our theoretical study only establishes a lower bound to the potential range of parameter space in which the QSH phase in stanene might be stabilized by proper substrate engineering. This is because our DFT approach utilizes the GGA approximation, which, due to the prohibitive size of the reconstructions we considered, would be extremely time-consuming to replace it by alternative procedures. The use of GGA suggests that a ∼ 20% underestimation of the antibonding states energy position is possible (see Fig. 