We report a plasmon-polaron mode of a 2D electron gas occupying surface states of a 3D topological crystal. This new, low-frequency, acoustic plasmon mode splits-off from the conventional spin-plasmon mode as a result of strong interactions of the surface electrons with bulk phonons. We show that, like in the case of the conventional spinplasmon, the scattering of this mode is strongly suppressed in some regions of the phase space. This signature of the topological protection leads to an Umklapp-free mode dispersion at the Brillouin zone boundary. Such a plasmon polaron mode has indeed been recently observed in the topological metal Be 2 Se 3 . Topological insulators (TI) are novel systems, with topologically protected metallic helical electronic surface states, characterized by suppressed back scattering, and Dirac-like linear dispersions at the center of the Brillouin zone. Like any normal (topologically trivial) insulator, TI has bulk and surface phonon modes We employ the random phase approximation (RPA) to describe the surface collective electronic modes, and account for the phonon contributions through the Fröhlich electron-phonon-electron term, included in the effective, background dielectric function. We show that, in addition to the conventional spin-plasmon, there exists a second, low frequency, collective, polaron-like mode. By calculating explicitly the scattering of this mode with a periodic perturbing potential of the crystal lattice, we show that its backscattering is strongly suppressed, and that this suppression results from topological protection. Finally, we show that the recently observed collective mode on the surface of the strongly doped topological metal Be 2 Se 3 has all signatures of such a spin-plasmon polaron The plasmon problem in a TI was considered , where σ x and σ y are Pauli matrices acting in the space of the electron spin projections, and the helical eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian is e ik⋅r f k / S (S is surface area), and the spinor part of it is where φ k is the polar angle of the vector k, and the electron energies are E k = v F k . The expectation value of the electron spin is therefore f k σ f k = ẑ× k (where ẑ is the vector perpendicular to the 2D gas). Using the RPA, it was shown that the condition for existence of a the plasmon is where V q 2D = 2πe 2 / qε eff . For a single subband, the relevant situation here, we have where n k is the Fermi -Dirac occupation number. Eq. ( The 2D electron gas resides on the surface of the topological metal (insulator with partially filled conduction band). Thus, the Coulomb interaction must be modified to include contributions from both electrons and phonons in the bulk of the topological insulator. The shielding of Coulomb electronic interactions is now controlled by an effective ε eff , defined by the following expression (exact in RPA) where electrons in the TI bulk, and the acoustic phonon dispersion is given (approximately) by The second term in the square bracket of Eq. ( It is straightforward to show that for q >> k F , Eq. ( where the ratio of the Coulomb interaction energy to the kinetic energy is r s = e 2 /ε !v F . Eq. ( ), which according to Eq. ( The analysis above shows that there exist two modes of the 2D electron gas on the surface of a TI. One is the conventional 2D spin plasmon, as discussed just below Eq.( (3). experimental data for Be 2 3 in the topological, and the red circles in the normal states Fig. One of the most important discoveries in Ref. where A q is a normalizing factor. In this situation, we can apply a perturbation theory for the degenerate plasmon eigenstates at the M-point on the edge of the BZ: q M and q M -G , (see Fig. where a gap of the size 2Δ opens at the edge of BZ for non-vanishing matrix element Inserting an identity operator I = k k ∑ k and Eq. ( It can be easily shown using Eq. ( where C is a constant. Configuration of plasmonic vectors in the first BZ. q M -G represents the backwards scattered plasmon-polaron state from the initial state q M at the M-point to the M-equivalent point on the other side of the BZ. Since, according to Eq. ( and θ is the angle between q M and q M -G . Since θ = π, according to Fig. Note, that by crystal symmetry Δ' = q M V q M +G must vanish similarly, since the final state in this forward scattering q M +G is also at the M--equivalent point. Thus, both the backwards and forward scattering of the polaron--plsmon are suppressed, and this important result is a direct consequence of the helical character of the electronic states. This result can be confirmed by noticing that Δ given by Eq. ( Φ(q,θ ) can be numerically evaluated as a function of the scattering angle, and we have done this for parameters of the polaron mode in Be 2 Se 3 . Fig. where ! ! ω 0 2 =κ (m+ M)/mM and ! ! Ω 2 =κ / M , and ! ω 0 2 > Ω 2 . To see the correspondence with our nonlocal theory, we write a hydrodynamic analog of Eq. ( which, with the help of Eq. ( In conclusion, we have shown that a 3D topological crystal supports a lowfrequency plasmon-polaron mode of its surface 2D electron gas. As a result of strong interaction of the 2D electrons with bulk phonons, the plasmon mode existence condition yields two collective modes: the conventional, gaples spin-plasmon, and the lowfrequency acoustic, plasmon-polaron. Due to large phase space separation of these modes (except for very small momenta), there is little interaction between the modes. Since the 2D electron gas is topologically distinct from the bulk, its dynamics is affected by phonons, but in contrast to topologically trivial situations, only through their contributions to an effective dielectric response of the environment as seen by the surface electrons. We show that, not unlike in the case of the conventional spin-plasmon, the scattering of this mode is strongly suppressed in some regions of the phase space, which leads to an Umklapp-free mode dispersion at the Brillouin zone boundary. The low-lying plasmon mode, with an Umklapp-free behavior has indeed been recently observed in the topological crystal Be 2 Se 3 .