The origin of nematicity, i.e., in-plane rotational symmetry breaking, and in particular the relative role played by spontaneous unidirectional ordering of spin, orbital, or charge degrees of freedom, is a challenging issue of magnetism, unconventional superconductivity, and quantum Hall effect systems, discussed in the context of doped semiconductor systems, such as Ga1-xMnxAs, CuxBi2Se3, and Ga(Al)As/AlxGa1-xAs quantum wells, respectively. Here, guided by our experimental and theoretical results for In1-xFexAs, we demonstrate that spinodal phase separation at the growth surface (that has a lower symmetry than the bulk) can lead to a quenched nematic order of alloy components, which then governs low temperature magnetic and magnetotransport properties, in particular the magnetoresistance anisotropy whose theory for the C2v symmetry group is advanced here. These findings, together with earlier data for Ga1-xMnxAs, show under which conditions anisotropic chemical phase separation accounts for the magnitude of transition temperature to a collective phase or merely breaks its rotational symmetry. We address the question to what extent the directional distribution of impurities or alloy components setting in during the growth may account for the observed nematicity in other classes of correlated systems. As noted by Recent comprehensive studies of (In,Fe)As and (In,Fe)As:Be grown by low-temperature molecular beam epitaxy (LT-MBE) In this paper we report on a series of experiments carried out for recrystallized films of Fe-implanted InAs, which reveals a hitherto unobserved character of the distribution of magnetic ions in a semiconductor host and the associated magnetic properties. With the aid of ab initio computations we identify microscopic mechanisms accounting for the observed anisotropic nanoscale chemical phase separation, and we explain surprising properties of magnetic anisotropy and AMR, making use of the AMR theory developed here for the C 2v symmetry group up to eighth order. In more general terms, we discuss how the sign and magnitude of the charge transfer energy specifying a particular magnetic impurity in a given host A. Growth of (In,Fe)As layers Implantation of Fe ions into a (001) InAs wafer is carried out at an energy of 100 keV to a fluence of 1 × 10 16 cm -2 . During implantation, the wafer is tilted by 7 • with respect to the ion beam to avoid channeling effects. According to the stopping and range of ions in matter (SRIM) simulation code The results of structural and chemical nanocharacterization by electron microscopy of our (In,Fe)As layers, collected in Figs. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) measurements have been employed to obtain information on the Fe depth profile of as-implanted and laser treated samples. Three different sample regions have been chosen to check layer homogeneity (Fig. The recrystallization of the Fe-rich nano-region and of the InAs matrix is investigated by Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS)/channeling spectrometry. In particular, the channeling effect appears if the film is fully recrystallized and pseudomorphic with the InAs substrate. During the RBS measurement, a collimated 1.7 MeV He + beam with a 10-20 nA beam current is applied, and the scattered ions are collected at a backscattering angle of 170 • . The channeling spectra are recorded by aligning the InAs [001] axis parallel to the impinging He + beam. The selected RBS spectra are plotted in Fig. Interestingly, the Fe-doped layer quality after regrowth compares favorably to the quality of the virgin InAs wafer. To quantify the crystalline quality, χ min , the ratio of the backscattering yield between the channeling and the random spectra, is calculated. Values of 7% and 5.4% are obtained for the PLM regrown Fe doped InAs and the reference InAs substrate, respectively. This crystalline quality is comparable to homogeneous epitaxial films of dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMSs) prepared by the same approach, e.g. (Ga,Mn)As and (Ga,Mn)P In summary, the nano-lamellae length determined by TEM matches the Fe distribution width measured by SIMS. In addition, according to the Rutherford backscattering spectrometry, no interstitial atoms are present in the Fe-doped region. Rutherford backscattering spectrometry random (R) and channeling (C) spectra for virgin InAs (squares and circles, respectively), an as-Fe-implanted InAs (triangles) and pulsed laser melting treated (solid lines) samples. One recrystallized film has also been probed by means of room-temperature conversion electron Mössbauer spectroscopy (CEMS). The spectrum [Fig. The hyperfine parameters of the first distribution are close to those of FeAs All magnetic measurements are carried out using about 20 cm long and 1.5 mm wide silicon strips to support the investigated specimen in the magnetometer's sample chamber. The adequate experimental code for minute signals measurements Magnetic-field-dependent hysteresis loops at various temperatures of the Fe-implanted InAs sample, studied according to an experimental procedure developed previously The coercivity behavior, together with the temperature dependence of magnetization after zero-field cooling and field-cooling processes under different fields and temperature cycling presented in Figs. To quantify this model we adopt the previous ab initio methodology In the second part of the calculations, we use the optimized reconstructed (001) InAs surface as an input for the (In,Fe)As calculations. We fixed 10 ML from the bottom of the slab, and allowed to relax 6 ML from the top of it. Two indium atoms were substituted by the two Fe atoms at the second top layer of the slab at the nearest-neighbor position. The Fe-coverage of the layer was equal to 1/8 ML. We find out that the energy of a Furthermore, as shown in Fig. where E is the total energy for slabs containing one surface Fe cation dimer, no Fe, and one Fe atom, respectively. The pairing energy is found to be E d = -1.16 eV per supercell containing 128 cations and 128 anions. Hence, our results show that the surface Fe ions prefer to be close to each other by occupying neighboring In sites at the [1 10] crystallographic direction at the (001)InAs surface. C2v SYMMETRY GROUP The presence of spatially oriented Fe-rich nanolamellae lowers the film symmetry to the C 2v point group, which should be reflected in anisotropy of transport properties. While substantial conductivity of InAs wafers precludes meaningful magnetoresistance studies of our implanted and recrystallized (In,Fe)As layers, such measurements were successfully performed for MBE-grown highly conducting (In,Fe)As:Be films inserted between thin InAs buffer and cap layers deposited onto semiinsulating GaAs substrates Due to spin-orbit coupling, the magnitude of tensor components describing charge and heat transport depends on the orientation of carrier spin polarization vector P with respect to symmetry axes and the direction of charge or heat current. In magnetic materials P is usually collinear with the magnetization vector M whereas, in non-magnetic cases with the direction of an external magnetic field H. In general, the spin-orbit phenomena compete with effects of the Lorentz force and Landau quantization as well as with spin effects, such as spin disorder scattering present also in the absence of spinorbit interactions. Of course, the magnitude of all these phenomena is modified by correlation effects, and the implementation of the group theory should consider the existence of spontaneous symmetry breaking in collective phases. We consider the longitudinal AMR and the planar Hall effect (PHE), i.e., the transverse AMR of thin ferromagnetic films as a function of the in-plane directions of magnetization M and electric current i 15,42,43 but the formalism is valid also for non-magnetic materials by replacing the direction of M by the direction of the in-plane component of the magnetic field H. In this geometry, spin-orbit effects usually account for non-zero AMR and PHE. Both AMR and PHE are described by in-plane resistivity tensor components symmetric in magnetization, ρ ij ( α) = ρ ij (-α), where the subscripts i, j ∈ (1, 2) ≡ (x, y) correspond to two orthogonal axes of the crystal under considerations, and α = (α 1 , α 2 ) = (cos θ, sin θ) is a unit vector in the M direction in the same reference frame. In general, the in-plane resistivity tensor ρ ij ( α) can be expanded into MacLaurin's series, According to Onsager's relations ρ ij ( α) = ρ ji ( α) in our case and, thus, it is symmetric under any interchange of the indices k, l, ... . The longitudinal resistance, for the in-plane current i directed along the unit vector β = (β 1 , β 2 ) = (cos φ, sin φ) in the same reference frame, is given by, (3) whereas the planar Hall effect by, where β = (-sin φ, cos φ) is a unit vector perpendicular to i. We derive formulas for the longitudinal and transverse resistances (up to the eighth order) for the case of thin films possessing the C 2v point group symmetry, as implied by the presence of Fe-rich lamellae oriented along the [1 10] in-plane direction. As detailed in Appendix, the longitudinal resistance assumes the form, where the angles (θ, φ) are defined in reference to the [110] crystallographic direction (see Fig. Now we introduce angle φ between the directions of the magnetization M and the current i. The configuration involving θ and φ angles is commonly used in experimental setups. The coordinate system and the definitions of particular angles are presented in Fig. The dependence of ρ L and ρ P H on θ at given φ corresponds to the "crystalline" AMR, whereas on φ at given θ to the "noncrystalline" AMR. We consider two cases, when the current i is parallel to [110] and [ 110] axes, respectively. Furthermore, we compare our findings to experimental results reported in Ref. 11 for (In,Fe)As:Be films grown by MBE on semiinsulating GaAs substrates. When current is parallel to the [110] axis then φ = θ (see Fig. which we use to describe experimental results reported in Ref. When current is parallel to [ 110] then φ = θ +π/2, and hence, the longitudinal magnetoresistance has the form In this case we have fitted our model to 70 data points reported in Ref. We also present the results for the planar Hall effect for the same two current orientations: when the current is parallel to [110] crystallographic direction then ρ P H (φ = θ) = ρ xy , and if the current is directed along [ 110] then ρ P H (φ = θ + π/2) = -ρ xy (see Eq. 8). The fitted curves are presented in Fig. [110], and i [ 110] are S 2 = -1.8 × 10 -3 %, S 4 = S 6 = S 8 = 0, and S 2 = 2.5 × 10 -3 %, S 4 = 0.3 × 10 -3 %, S 6 = S 8 = 0, respectively. In both cases an angle-independent parameter has been added to the fits, which does not result from the symmetry consideration, as according to the formula for ρ xy in Eq. A3, there is no such a term. It may arise from an experimental off-set. Furthermore, while-as expected-the signs of ρ P H (φ = θ) and ρ P H (φ = θ+π/2) are reversed, the absolute values of the PHE signals are not equal indicating the existence of certain differences in details of Fe distributions in the two studied devices. As could be expected, no evidences for Fe aggregation was found for (In,Fe)As samples obtained by LT-MBE We claim, however, that the distribution of Fe cations in Be-doped (In,Fe)As epitaxial films 10 is similar to that found in our recrystallized (In,Fe)As samples, i.e., it assumes the form of spatially oriented Fe-rich nanolamellae presented in Figs. It might appear that the presence of spatially oriented ferromagnetic Fe-rich nano-lamellae should lead to strong and nematic crystalline magnetic anisotropy. Actually this is not the case, as ferromagnetism originates from cubic zinc-blende Fe-rich nano-regions. Since in the cubic case the [110] and [ 110] crystal axes are equivalent, no differences in the behavior of M (H) are expected for the magnetic field H oriented in either of these two in-plane directions, as observed [Fig. First, (Ga,Mn)As and (Ga,Mn)As:Be are p-type, in which valence band holes mediate ferromagnetic coupling between spins localized on randomly distributed Mn ions We argue that the above differences result from the opposite sign of the charge transfer energy E ct in these two classes of magnetic semiconductors. Because of the intraion exchange coupling among d electrons, this energy, i.e., the position of the TM acceptor state with respect to the top of the valence band, is negative for Mn in GaAs but positive for Fe in InAs The aforementioned formation of interstitial donors occurs also in the case of (Ga,Mn)As and (Ga,Mn)As:Be but involves primarily Mn acceptors Having elucidating the origin of nematicity, i.e., of the rotational symmetry breaking D 2d → C 2v in (In,Fe)As and (Ga,Mn)As we address the question of to what extent chemical phase separation might account for the nematic characteristic of other systems. In particular, we consider the case of unconventional superconductors and III-V semiconductors in the quantum Hall effect regime. Interestingly, lamella-like structures of Fe-rich K x Fe 2 Se 2 extending along [1 10] and [110] directions, and surrounded be an Fe-poor K x Fe 2-y Se 2 matrix with a different crystal structure were identified by nanocharacterization tools These lamellae are formed by chemical phase separation It was also shown that interactions between impurities intercalated into the van der Waals gaps of Bi 2 Se 3 result in the formation of impurity stripe domains It can be expected that anisotropic chemical phase separation revealed here for (In,Fe)As is an immanent property of epitaxial growth of zinc-blende alloys, though its experimental relevance will, of course, depend on alloy components and growth parameters. We note that a highly anisotropic ripple structure was found in GaAs with vacancies, and assigned to the anisotropy of surface diffusion along [1 10] and [110] directions 57 , the mechanism that may contribute also to the anisotropic phase separation reported here. Epitaxy-induced anisotropy in the angular distribution of alloy components, impurities or defects-acting often together with structural inversion asymmetry-lowers rotational symmetry of epilayers and quantum wells to C 2v . This leads to apparent nematicity that can manifest itself as, for instance, a difference in the magnitude of in-plane longitudinal resistance measured along the [110] and [1 10] directions, ρ xx = ρ yy . An interesting question arises on whether this quenched anisotropy, or rather spontaneous symmetry breaking by a charge density formation, accounts for ρ xx = ρ xx revealed in Ga(Al)As/Al x Ga 1-x As quantum wells under quantum Hall effect conditions Our results show that particular patterns in the quenched distribution of alloy components or dopants hosting correlated carrier or spin systems may either stabilize a spatially non-uniform collective phase with high critical temperature (e.g., In 1-x Fe x As and K x Fe 2-y Se 2 ) or account only for the presence and orientation of the two-fold easy axis in a collective phase that exists independently of phase separation (e.g., Ga 1-x Mn x As and probably Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 and Ga(Al)As/Al x Ga 1-x As quantum wells). From another perspective, these findings, together with previous demonstrations of self-organized assembly of periodically distributed TM-rich nanocolumns embedded in the TM-poor host, the case of epitaxial Ge 1-x Mn x 60,61 and Zn 1-x Cr x Te films The non-vanishing coefficients in Eq. 2 and the relations between them are given in Tables I-V. They have been determined by considering symmetry properties of ρ ij . In particular, due to symmetries described by σ xz , σ yz only coefficients with an even number of indices i, j, k, l, ... equal to 1 and even number equal to 2 do not vanish. Accordingly, the resistivity tensor in question can be expressed as 0 = 0.055%, C 2 = -0.034%, C 4 = -0.0007%, C 6 = -0.002%, C 8 = 0.008%, are more realistic. The two largest correspond to the two-and eight-fold contributions, in agreement with the previous conclusion