Recently observed 4π periodic Andreev bound states in three dimensional Dirac materials are attributed to convnetional superconducting pairing. Our alternative explanation in terms of a novel form of parity breaking pseudo-scalar superconducting order can be sharply diagnosed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation rate. The left-right symmetry breaking of the pseudo-scalar superconductivity can be directly probed as an anti-peak structure below TC in sharp contrast to the conventional Hebel-Slichter peak. Recently discovered three dimensional Dirac materials (3DDMs) -Na3Bi Superconducting state can be achieved by applying pressure Alternative explanation can be put forward in terms of novel forms of superconducting order which is permitted by the symmetries of Dirac equation. Recent theoretical studies of induced superconductivity in a 3DDM using proximity effect It was noticed Nuclear magneitc resonance (NMR) relaxation rate The minimal model for a superconducting 3DDM is Dirac Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian The notation (ˇ) stands for matrices in Nambu space, and the (ˆ) indicates the matrix structure in orbital-spin space. The normal-state Hamiltonian matrix describes massive Dirac electrons, with chemical potential μ and mass m . Here γ i (i = 1‚2‚3) are 4 × 4 Dirac γ matrices where τ i (σ i ) denote the 2 × 2 Pauli matrices in orbital (spin) space. In proximity of a conventional s-wave superconductor with a 3DDM, Green's function method and tunnelling formulation give rise to an uncoventional multicomponenet order parameter. The Fierz decomposition where σ μν = iγ μ γ ν (μ‚ν = 0‚1‚2‚3) . Apparently, the induced superconductivity in a 3DDM has sixteen possible channels categorized as scalar ∆ s , (four) vector ∆ μ , tensor ∆ μν , pseudo vector ∆ 5μ and pseudo scalar ∆ 5 states. All these various channels have different spin, momentum and orbital symmetry which are not independent. They must fullfill the fermionic anticommutation property of the pairing potential. The scalar, pseudo scalar order paramerters have both even momentum dependence and are spin-singlet, while the matrix structure in the space of Lorentz indices (spin and orbital space) are different. As indicated in Eq. ( The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate for a two band superconductor The indices α and α′ represent band labels. The f(ω) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. S G and S F are spectral representation of the normal and anomalous Green's functions and are given by, with fermionic matsubara frequency ω n = πT(2n + 1) n ∈ z and The Hebel-Slichter peak just below TC in a superconductor stem from the seconed term in Eq. ( Among the 16 possible superconducting pairing channels induced in the 3DDM, ∆ s , ∆ 0 , ∆ 5 and ∆ 50 have even momentum dependence and hence survive the momentum integration. Therefore these terms have nonzero contributions to the coherence effect in NMR rate. All odd momentum dependence have null contribution under momentum integration. Hence we are left with, ∆ ̂s=∆ s l, ∆ ̂0=∆ 0 γ 0 γ 0 =τ z ⊗ l, ∆ ̂5=∆ 5 γ 5 γ 5 =-τ y ⊗ l, (7) ∆ ̂50 =∆ 50 γ 50 γ 50 =iτ x ⊗ l. Since these four pairing potentials are odd under the spin exchange From the explicit representation of gamma matrices in Eq. ( The sign reversal associated with pseudo-scalar pairing relies on two facts: (i) odd mirror parity of the pseudo-scalar pairing. (ii) The complex conjugation inherited from the condensate structure of the anomalous Green's functions. Indeed the complex conjugation rests on the very basic facts that the Cooper pairs carying charge 2e are constructed from a given state and its charge conjugate which then brings in the complex conjugation. This is therefore a unique ability of NMR that can probe a combined effect of complex conjugation and mirror-parity. Hence, the NMR relaxation rate is able to realize the breaking of mirror symmetry (as it happens in pseudo scalar superconductor). Note that this is a unique capability of NMR as compared to closely related probes such as ultrasonic attenuation and electromagnetic absorption. Since the ultrasonic and electromagnetic absorption rates do not directly couple to condensate, they are not sensitive to left-right breaking character of the pseudo-scalar order parameter. In this work we considered the sixteen possible superconducting order parameters in a three dimensional Dirac material. The generic superconducting order encoded in a 16 × 16 matrix can be decomposed into various channels with definite transformation properties under rotations. Among them a topologically non-trivial superconducting order is the pseudo-scalar one. This corresponds to a pairing order parameter that changes sign in the mirror. The nontrivial topology of this pairing protects the ensuing Majorana zero modes. These Majorana zero energy states are responsible for the 100% Andreev reflection at zero energy which is equivalent to 4π periodic Andreev bound states observed in superconducting 3DDM Our explanation of the 4π periodic Josephson effect in terms of pseudo-scalar superconductivity 