Understanding magnetic interactions in the parent compounds of high-temperature superconductors forms the basis for determining their role for the mechanism of superconductivity. For parent compounds of iron pnictide superconductors such as AFe2As2 (A = Ba, Ca, Sr), although spin excitations have been mapped out throughout the entire Brillouin zone (BZ), measurements were carried out on twinned samples and did not allow for a conclusive determination of the spin dynamics. Here we use inelastic neutron scattering to completely map out spin excitations of ∼100% detwinned BaFe2As2. By comparing observed spectra with theoretical calculations, we conclude that the spin excitations can be well described by an itinerant model with important contributions from electronic correlations. It is well-known that high-temperature superconductivity in copper oxides and iron pinctides arises from electron and hole-doping of their antiferromagnetically order parent compounds In this Letter, we report inelastic neutron scattering measurements of spin excitations in uniaxial-strain detwinned BaFe 2 As 2 To resolve this problem and completely determine the intrinsic spin-wave spectra of detwinned BaFe 2 As 2 , we carried out inelastic neutron scattering measurements on an assembly of mechanically detwinned BaFe 2 As 2 single crystals, with pressure ranging from Figures To further test if the Heisenberg Hamiltonian The anisotropy calculated from the Heisenberg Hamiltonian is much larger than experimental results at most energies, because spin excitations arise only from (1, 0) in this picture. Figures To correctly capture the Goldstone mode in the magnetic channel when entering the AF phase (where we neglect the spin-rotation-symmetry-breaking effects of spinorbit coupling, that manifest only at energies less than ∼30 meV Figures While the standard RPA-approach is known to yield a too small spectral weight (that translates to a too small fluctuating moment) compared to experiments, we achieve qualitative agreement for the shape of the magnetic excitation spectrum by employing a phenomenological renormalization factor z, as can be seen in Fig. There is, however, evidence from work on another correlated itinerant system In addition spin waves, the spin-excitation anisotropy ψ(E, T ) above T N in uniaxial-strained BaFe 2 As 2 Figures 4 summarize the temperature and energy dependence of ψ(E, T ). Figure In the paramagnetic phase, MF+RPA calculation gives qualitatively similar results as DFT+dynamical meanfield theory (DMFT) calculations with describing the hopping of electrons and a local orbital splitting in the xz, yz manifold to model the effect of uniaxial strain on the electronic spectrum. The interaction of the electrons is described by a local Hubbard-Hund Hamiltonian, The hopping elements t μν ij are taken from Mean-field theory for stripe-SDW state Following and neglect spin-off diagonal mean-fields, i.e., c † kμσ c k νσ = 0 for σ = σ . We note that we chose a spin-quantization axis z = a, such that the ordered magnetic moment is aligned with the a axis (Fe-Fe direction) of the crystal. The prefactor N denotes the number of unit cells. The fields n μν 0 describe a band renormalization and orbital hybridization, while M μν 1 describes the magnetic order with ordering vector Q 1 = (π, 0), corresponding to antiferromagnetic arrangement of spins in the a-direction, and ferromagnetic alignment along the b direction. Both n μν 0 and M μν 1 as well as the chemical potential are determined self-consistently, where the average • • • on the right hand sides of Eq. (S5) and Eq. (S6) is computed from a thermal state of the mean-field Hamiltonian H MF = k,μ,νσ Ψ † kμ h μν (k)Ψ kν . The Bloch-Hamiltonian h μν (k) with k in the reduced Brillouin zone (rBZ) reads as where the basis is defined by the spinor We have introduced further auxiliary quantities to ease the notation, where δ μν denotes the Kronecker symbol with respect to orbital indices and δμν = 1 -δ μν filters out the orbital off-diagonal components. We note, that repeated indices are not summed over. Quantities in Eqs. (S8)-(S9) with a single orbital index refer to the diagonal element of the corresponding matrix, e.g., n μ 0 = n μμ 0 . Objects with a bar, such as nν 0 , are defined as, e.g., nν 0 = μ =ν n μμ 0 . The bare dispersion enters through ξ μν (k) = ε μν (k) -δ μν μ 0 , where μν (k) is obtained from the Bloch Hamiltonian entering H 0 + H δ . To connect to neutron-scattering experiments, we define the time-ordered (with T τ the imaginary-time ordering operator) Matsubara spin-spin correlation function with the ith component (i = x, y, z) of the Fourier transformed electron-spin operator for the 1-Fe unit cell given as We note that we work with a coordinate system, where z = a, such that the transverse susceptibility defined below probes spin excitations perpendicular (i.e., in the xy plane of our coordinate system) to the ordered moment along, which is aligned along a. The longitudinal component probes spin excitations parallel to z. Performing an analytic continuation iω n → E + iη, with η → 0 + , we arrive at the energy and momentum dependent susceptibility tensor χ ij (q, E). We also note that the Lande factor g = 2. We work with units where the Bohr magneton μ B = 1, then the imaginary part χ (q, E) has units [1/eV]. Unpolarized neutron-scattering experiments allow to probe the energy and momentum dependent imaginary part of the spin susceptibility. As the spin response is dominated by the transverse (with respect to the z = a spin-quantization axis) response, we will focus on the transverse channel in the following. The averaged susceptibility is defined as Imχ αβ (q, E) (S12) where we neglected the longitudinal χ zz (q, E) contribution that is gapped in the collinear AF ordered state with moments aligned along z. The Matsubara correlation function corresponding to the transverse susceptibility is given by with the electron spin-raising and lowering operators In the following we briefly describe the RPA formalism to extract the spin excitations of the SDW phase. We note that for a vanishing mean-field magnetic order-parameter, the formalism turns into a glorified version of the standard multiorbital RPA in the paramagentic state. It proves useful to introduce a correlation function with two independent momenta q, q as To take into account virtual Umklapp scattering processes in the computation of the RPA susceptibility, we then define a generalized correlation function where for l = 0, Q 0 = (0, 0), and for l = 1, Q 1 = (π, 0). The correlation function thus becomes a 2 × 2 matrix in 'Umklapp space'. In the presence of stripe-SDW, the orbital-to-band matrix elements entering the components of the bare matrix-valued particle-hole propagator become where [l1,l2,l3,l4] l,l denotes a restricted sum over l-index tuples contributing to the l,l component of the particle-hole propagator. The non-interacting correlation function can then be written as and the prime on the sum denotes a k summation over the corresponding rBZ. The RPA equation for the transverse correlation function in the magnetic phase reads where the vertex [U ] ν1ν2 ν3ν4 that describes the orbitally dependent interaction of electrons with spin fluctuations is given by In a condensed matrix-notation following the conventions given above, we can write the solution to this linear equation as After analytic continuation, the physical transverse susceptibility in the RPA approximation is now given by To account for the effect of moderate correlation effects, we include a phenomenological dynamical self-energy of the form Σ μν (k, iω n ) = (1-1/z)iω n δ μν , 0 < z ≤ 1 in the electronic Greens function. The z-factor simulates both a reduced quasiparticle weight as well as a uniform band-renormalization of the quasiparticle states. We argue here, as is done in the microscopic justification of Fermi liquid theory, that the vertex that describes the coupling of quasiparticles to an external magnetic field is renormalized by a corresponding factor z -1 , originating from screening due to the incoherent part of the electronic spectrum where χ+-(q, Ẽ) is a susceptibility obtained for T = T /z, Ẽ = E/z and [ Ũ ] = z[U ]. This can be read as follows: for a fixed set of parameters T , [ Ũ ] we compute the RPA approximation [ χ+-](q, Ẽ) as a function of Ẽ. We can then use z as a fitting parameter to match the experimentally observed bandwidth for magnetic excitations. At the same time, however, the spectral weight is multiplied by a factor 1/z. Once the fitting-parameter z has been fixed by comparison to experiment, we can relate the temperature and interaction parameters from our calculation to the 'true' parameters T and [U ]. For the calculations in the magnetic state presented in the main text, we used T = 0.01 eV and Ũ = 1.02 eV (with J = Ũ /4). The physical values for a given z-factor are then obtained as T = z T , U = Ũ /z. While we thereby can achieve agreement with the shape of the experimentally obtained spin-wave spectra, the spectral weight of our renormalized RPA calculation still comes out too small. The evolution of the spin-excitation spectrum with increasing interaction for vanishing orbital splitting is shown (with z = 1) in Fig. To explore the parameter dependence of our results, we have looked at how the local susceptibilities change, as the renormalization parameter z changes. We plotted the results in Fig. Taking into account the longitudinal component, the formula for χ (q, E) is modified as where the different numerical prefactors for transverse and longitudinal contributions are a consequence of our conventions. We note that in a paramagnetic state (neglecting spin-orbit coupling) we would have χ+-(q, E/z) = 1 4 χzz (q, E/z), such that χ (q, E) = 1 z χzz (q, E/z). The RPA-result for χzz (q, E/z) is obtained from an equation analogous to Eq. (S24), where the both the bare susceptibility and the interaction vertex have to be adapted to the case of longitudinal excitations. In Fig. For our time-of-flight neutron scattering experiments at MERLIN spectrometer, incident beam was set to be perpendicular to the sample surface and most area of the device and the spring washers were covered by neutron absorbing B 4 C. The horizontal slit of neutron beam was set to 27 mm, to reduce the background arising from incoherent scattering and multiple scattering. At T = 7 K, the incident neutron energies were set to E i = 80, 250, 450 meV to cover spin waves in the energy range of E ≈ 0 -320 meV. Local dynamic susceptibility χ (E) and magnon dispersion Dynamic susceptibility χ (Q, E) can be calculated directly from background-substracted magnetic scattering signal obtained on a time-of-flight spectrometer. By comparing it to the incoherent scattering of a standard vanadium sample, χ (Q, E) can be normalized to absolute intensity (with the unit of barn -1 sr -1 eV -1 ). Note that neutron scattering only probes transverse response that perpendicular to the momentum transfer Q, making the measurements of all components for χ (Q, E) complicated. In previous studies concerning the dynamic susceptibility of iron pnictides, χ (Q, E) was usually assumed to be isotropic in spin space (though it is inaccurate especially for low energy part) where (γr e ) 2 = 0.2905 barn sr -1 , k i , k f are incident and outgoing wave vectors, respectively, q is reduced wave vector and F (Q) the magnetic form factor for Fe 2+ . The raw data shown in Fig. However, as we have shown in Fig. Momentum cuts is usually not as effective as energy spectra in determining magnon dispersion especially for flat band top. The magnon dispersion shown in Fig. 