In this work we studied the influence of particle size and agglomeration in the performance of solid oxide fuel cell cathodes made with nanoparticles of La 0.8 Sr 0.2 MnO 3 . We followed two synthesis routes based on the Liquid Mix method. In both procedures we introduced additional reagents in order to separated the manganite particles. We evaluated cathodic performance by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy in symmetrical (CATHODE/ELECTROLYTE/CATHODE) cells. Particle size was tuned by the temperature used for cathode sintering. Our results show that deagglomeration of the particles, serves to improve the cathodes performance. However, the dependence of the performance with the size of the particles is not clear, as different trends were obtained for each synthesis route. As a common feature, the cathodes with the lowest area specific resistance are the ones sintered at the largest temperature. This result indicates that an additional factor related with the quality of the cathode/electrolyte sintering, is superimposed with the influence of particle size, however further work is needed to clarify this issue. The enhancement obtained by deagglomeration suggest that the use of this kind of methods deserved to be considered to develop high performance electrodes for solid oxide fuel cells. Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFCs) have risen as one of the most efficient energy conversion technology devices, due to their extremely high efficiencies and the possibility of using different fuels such as hydrocarbons or hydrogen 1M stoichiometric nitric solutions for LSM were prepared by dissolution of Sr(NO 3 ) 2 , La(NO 3 ) 3 .6H 2 O and C 4 H 6 MnO 4 .4H 2 O in pure water by the Liquid Mix technique. The solution was de-hydrated with a 24 hours thermal treatment at 100°C. The resulting material was manually milled and then, de-nitrated at 500°C for 10 hours. The LSM compound was finally obtained by calcination at different synthesis temperatures (ST) to obtained several particle sizes in the precursors. We note this material as precursor LSM_LM. Alternatively, another procedure was followed in order to obtain separated by adding of NaCl after the de-nitration process, preventing agglomeration in the precursor powder. It was added in a 1:4 relation and mixed with the de-nitrated powder in a ball miller for 1 hour. After that, a final thermal treatment was made at ST between 500oC and 1000oC. The NaCl was removed by several dissolution cycles in pure water. This material will be referred from now on as LSM_NC. To reach the same objective, addition of Ammonium Nitrate was made in a 1:10 relation after milling. This materials were mixed in a ball miller for 1 hour. The Ammonium Nitrate evaporated during the calcination at ST = 700oC. This material will be named LSM_AN. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed with a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer with a PIXcel3Dt detector using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056Å). Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) measurements were made using a SEM FEI Quanta 200 and a SEM Carl Zeiss NTS Supra 40. Gadolinium-doped ceria (GDC) electrolytes were prepared from commercial CeO 2 -20mol% Gd 2 O 3 powders (NexTech Materials) by uniaxial pressing at 200 MPa and sintering at 1350°C for 2 h, obtaining 0.5 mm thick samples with a relative density higher than 96%. All LSM precursor powders were made into an ink with commercial Decoflux TM (WB41 Zschimmer and Schwarz) polymerical solution in 1:2 (material:decoflux) mass proportion. The ink was smeared on the electrolyte as thinly as possible with a brush and dried at 50°C in air for about 20 min. Then, the cathodes were fired at temperatures (TT) between 1000°C and 1300°C for 1 h for the cathode-electrolyte sintering, in order to obtain cathodes formed by particles of different diameters. The area specific resistance (ASR) of the cathodes was obtained in symmetrical [LSM/GDC/LSM] cells from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, using a Gamry 750 potentiost-galvanostat-impedance analyzer with Ag paste as current collector. Measurements were performed at zero bias with an amplitude of 20 mV. The porcentual error for ASR reaches a maximum of 5%, much below the size of the points used to display the values in the figures. The following paragraph summarizes the nomenclature of the materials used as precursors for the cathode and for the cathodes themselves. Precursors: -Synthesized by Liquid Mix: LSM_LM -Synthesized by Liquid Mix with the adding of NaCl: LSM_NC -Synthesized by Liquid Mix with the adding of Ammonium nitrate: LSM_AN Cathodes will be named as "synthesis procedure"_"ST"_"TT". The synthesis procedure stands for LM, NC, AN for Liquid Mix, Liquid Mix+NaCl and Liquid Mix+Ammonium Nitrate, respectively. ST is the synthesis temperature and TT is the temperature of the thermal treatment used for cathode-electrolyte sintering. Figure While analyzing the previous results, it has to be considered that even though we have obtained cathodes formed with particles of sizes ranging between ~90 nm and ~ 2000 nm, the surface of those particles is not largely exposed to the atmosphere, as evidenced by the high degree of agglomeration shown in figure Figure Figure The previous method (Using NaCl as a deagglomerating Agent), was used to obtain deagglomerated particles. Also, it has been explored an alternative method to obtain disperse nanoparticles but using an organic compound as a deagglomerating agent. Ammonium Nitrate was chosen because this compound can be completely removed after calcination at 700oC. Figure Figure Table The ammonium nitrate helped to obtain a disperse powder and in turn a cathode in which agglomeration can be controlled by the TT and showing the best performance. As a counterpart, the presence of a minor intermediate compound, identified as Mn 2 O 3 has been detected. Figure This section summarizes and compares the results obtained from all methods to gain insight that can be used in future studies or for applications. Results show that cathodes formed by larger particles presented the lowest ASR for all methods. Figure The results presented for cathodes using NaCl (fig. The performance dependence with the particle size of the cathodes is different in each method, thus not allowing to draw a single conclusion for all methods. However, we can see that in the (Liquid Mix + Ammonium Nitrate) method, which is the one displaying an optimized cathodic performance, the dependence with d is less pronounced as compared with the other two methods. Figure In summary, the dependence of the SOFC cathodic performance of LSM nanoparticles has been studied, focusing on two factors: the degree of agglomeration of the particles and the particle diameter. The results allows to conclude that deagglomeration of the particles is beneficial for cathodic performance, as the largest ASR was shown by the cathode synthesized by Liquid Mix, which is formed by highly agglomerated particles. Thus, precursors in which particles are separated should be used in order to prevent agglomeration during the cathodeelectrolyte sintering. The enhancement achieved by deagglomeration can even overcome the eventual negative effect of a small amount of undesired impurities, as also shown by the experiments. As for the synthesis method, the cathode displaying the best performance is the one made with particles obtained by the Liquid Mix method, adding Ammonium Nitrate as a deagglomerating agent. However, as minor impurities identified as Mn 2 O 3 were observed, further work is needed in order to improve this method. Regarding the effect of particle diameter, no clear dependence has been observed. The cathodes with larger particle sizes are those with the best performance, apparently in contradiction with previous works in which nanostructuring is shown to improve cathodic performance for other materials such as cobaltites. However, the larger particles are obtained by comparatively higher temperatures for the thermal treatment for cathode adherence. Thus, and also considering that this trend was observed for all three methods, even in the one in which particles are highly agglomerated, we believe that the responsible for the optimized behavior is not the size of the particles, but the better cathode-electrolyte adherence. In any case, it is clear that much work is needed to elucidate this point. The overall conclusion is that the best method to obtain LSM nanostructured cathodes is the (Liquid Mix + Ammonium Nitrate), with a cathode sintering at TT ~ 1300oC. However, the dependence with the sintering temperature is less significant in this method than in the other two.