Low-dimensional layered materials have attracted tremendous attentions due to their wide range of physical and chemical properties and potential applications in electronic devices. Using first-principles method taking into account the quasiparticle self-energy correction and Boltzmann transport theory, the electronic transport properties of ZrSe3 monolayer are investigated, where the carrier relaxation time is accurately calculated within the framework of electron-phonon coupling. It is demonstrated that the high power factor of the monolayer can be attributed to the grooved bands near the conduction band minimum. Combined with the low lattice thermal conductivity obtained by solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation, a considerable n-type ZT value of ~2.4 can be achieved at 800 K in the ZrSe3 monolayer. With the world's increasing demand for energy, a compelling need exists for high performance thermoelectric materials which can directly convert waste heat into electrical power. The thermoelectric conversion efficiency is usually determined by the figure-of-merit 2 ZT S T ’ü│ ’ü½ ’ĆĮ , where S is the Seebeck coefficient, ’ü│ is the electrical conductivity, T is the absolute temperature, and ’ü½ is the sum of the electronic ( e ’ü½ ) and lattice ( l ’ü½ ) thermal conductivity. To achieve a high ZT value, a thermoelectric material requires large power factor ( 2 S ’ü│ ) and/or low thermal conductivity. During the past two decades, various effective strategies have been applied to improve the efficiency of thermoelectric materials Among various low-dimensional systems, two-dimensional layered materials can be prepared via liquid phase or mechanical exfoliation of their bulk structures which are typically consist of stacked layers In this study, the electronic, phonon, and thermoelectric transport properties of ZrSe3 monolayer are investigated by using first-principles calculations and Boltzmann transport theory. We shall see that the thermoelectric performance of the system exhibits strong anisotropy, and an n-type ZT value as high as 2.4 could be achieved at 800 K at moderate carrier concentration. Such superior thermoelectric performance can be traced back to the grooved bands near the conduction band minimum. The electronic properties of ZrSe3 monolayer have been investigated within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) where m ’üź k is the energy eigenvalue of band m and wavevector k, and v ’üĘ q is the frequency of a phonon mode at wavevector q and polarization v. ( , , ) ’üĘ q are respectively the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distribution function, in which the temperature (T) and chemical potential (╬╝) dependence are included. The EPC matrix element is defined as are the wavefunction and self-consistent potential, respectively. In order to achieve converged carrier relaxation time, the EPC calculations have been performed by using coarse grids of 8 8 1 ’é┤ ’é┤ k-points and 4 4 1 ’é┤ ’é┤ q-points, and then interpolated with dense meshes of 96 96 1 ’é┤ ’é┤ k-points and 48 48 1 ’é┤ ’é┤ q-points. For the phonon transport calculations, the harmonic and anharmonic properties are investigated by using the finite displacement method as implemented in the Phonopy package As discussed above, the monolayer ZrSe3 is expected to be obtained by mechanical cleavage or liquid phase exfoliation of its bulk counterpart. The top and side views of the monolayer are shown in Figure ) ) Here e is the electron charge, T is the absolute temperature, ’üŁ is the chemical potential (corresponds to the carrier concentration), N k is the total number of Figure ). According to the Mott relation, the Seebeck coefficient can be written as ) and mobility, respectively that the absolute values of the Seebeck coefficients exceed 250 ╬╝V/K for both 300 and 800 K, as previously found in many good thermoelectric materials Fig. 2.9 10 cm ’ĆŁ ’é┤ ), the power factor of ZrSe3 monolayer can reach ) at 300 K (800 K), which are higher than those of many good thermoelectric material such as Bi2Te3 We now move to the discussion of the phonon transport properties of the ZrSe3 monolayer. In the phonon dispersion relations shown in Figure Due to the same reason, we see in Fig. It is thus reasonable to ignore the effects of EPC on the lattice thermal conductivity of ZrSe3 monolayer. With all the electronic and phonon transport coefficients obtained, we can now predict the thermoelectric performance of ZrSe3 monolayer. Figure 2.9 10 cm ’ĆŁ ’é┤ ( 12 2 3.8 10 cm ’ĆŁ ’é┤ ), a maximum ZT value of ~2.4 (~0.7) can be obtained at 800 K (300 K). As can be seen from Fig. x-direction increases almost linearly with the temperature, which suggests that enhanced thermoelectric performance may be realized in the ZrSe3 monolayer if it is operated in the high temperature region. In summary, we present a comprehensive theoretical study on the thermoelectric properties of ZrSe3 monolayer within the framework of DFT. It is found that an indirect band gap of 1.63 eV can be obtained by considering the quasiparticle self-energy correction. Detailed analysis of the band structure in the whole Brillouin zone reveals that the grooved conduction bands can lead to strong anisotropy of the electronic transport properties of the n-type system. In particular, a high Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity can be simultaneously achieved in the x-direction. Moreover, it is found that the heat transport in the ZrSe3 monolayer is almost entirely contributed by the surface Se atoms. The relatively large bond length of Zr-Se1 and Zr-Se2 chains greatly limit their contribution to the heat transport, which directly leads to the low lattice thermal conductivity of the system. As a result, a maximum ZT value of ~2.4 can be realized at 800 K along the x-direction, suggesting the tremendous advantages of utilization of groove-like band structure in potential thermoelectric materials. Table 