The dynamics of transient current distributions in superconducting YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ thin films were investigated during and immediately following an external field ramp, using high-speed (real-time) Magneto-Optical Imaging and calculation of dynamic current profiles. A number of qualitatively unique and previously unobserved features are seen in this novel analysis of the evolution of supercurrent during penetration. As magnetic field ramps up from zero, the dynamic current profile is characterized by strong peaks, the magnitude of which exceed the conventional critical current density (as determined from static current profiles). These peaks develop close to the sample edges, initially resembling screening currents but quickly growing in intensity as the external field increases. A discontinuity in field and current behaviour is newly observed, indicating a novel transition from increasing peak current toward relaxation behaviour. After this transition, the current peaks move toward the centre of the sample while reducing in intensity as magnetic vortices penetrate inward. This motion slows exponentially with time, with the current distribution in the long-time limit reducing to the expected Kim-model profile. The field and current profiles of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) and other superconducting samples are well understood for different magnetic states and histories under static conditions 1-10 . However, many of the most interesting magnetic effects in superconductors are transient and occur at extremely high speed: the spectacular dendritic flux avalanches appear to occur nearly instantaneously -their actual speed could be between 5 km/s 11 and 180 km/s 12 ; while smaller localised flux jumps can occur over time-scales less than 0.1 s 13 . The final penetration depth of flux into YBCO films has been shown to be dependent on the ramping rate of applied field In order to investigate such transient and dynamic events in superconductors, new high-speed magnetic measurement techniques are required. Most local magnetic measurements on superconductors are carried out using various scanning techniques 16 , which are fundamentally limited in speed due to their scanning mechanism 17 . On the other hand, laser pulsed magneto-optical imaging is able to obtain pairs of images with nanosecond-scale variable delay 12 , but it cannot record continuously in order to fully investigate superconducting magneto-dynamics. More recently, the high-speed magneto-optical video (MOV) technique has been developed in order to continuously record changes in the magnetic state of superconducting samples at rates up to 30 kHz In this work, we investigate the behaviour of magnetic flux and current in YBCO thin films in a dynamic, time-dependent manner as the external field is varied. This is achieved by quickly ramping the applied magnetic field from one state to another and observing the resulting local changes in field in the sample using real-time MOV. We then investigate the evolution of the current distribution as the field changes, using a Biot-Savart inversion procedure We find that during initial flux penetration the current distribution does not show any plateau-like features (as would be expected for a static current distribution The behaviour of field and current is radically different once the external field becomes stable. Current relaxation after a change in field/current conditions has been investigated over longer time-scales The shape of the current profile finally settles to a distribution resembling that predicted by the Kim model where J c0 is the zero-field critical current and B 0 is a magnetic field constant. YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ films were produced by pulsed laser deposition described in refs 28, 29, and given the square shape by ion beam etching using the procedure described in ref. 22. These films have measured critical current density of 3.5 × 10 10 A/m 2 at 77 K The magneto-optical indicator films used consist of a thin single-crystalline layer of Faraday-active bismuth-substituted yttrium iron garnet on a transparent gadolinium gallium garnet substrate A map of the current density at each time-step was calculated using an inverse Biot-Savart procedure on each frame of the video Magneto-optical video showing the dynamic behaviour of field and current in the films was captured under various non-constant field conditions. Figure The edges of the sample cannot be directly observed in a magneto-optical imaging experiment since the physical sample is obscured from view under the microscope by the indicator film. However, since the first non-zero currents arise due to screening of the very small initial field, we take the edges to be within a distance λ from the outermost points at which current is first seen above the noise level. Here λ is the effective penetration depth for YBCO thin films, which is ~180 nm for our samples The time-evolution of current density at several fixed points along the central line is plotted in Fig. The evolution of the current profile across the film is seen to occur in two distinct stages, which we label "ramping" and "relaxation", with an intermediate "transitional" stage in between. The following subsections describe each stage in more detail. The first stage occurs during field ramping, which happens over the first 14 ms as the external field is increasing steadily. In this stage, most of current in the sample flows close to its edges. The evolution of the current profile in the ramping stage is shown in Fig. Since the external field ramps continuously from zero, there is a finite time in which the film is in the Meissner state below its first critical field. Thus, the first currents to flow in the film are Meissner screening currents at the edges of the film within a width of the order of the effective penetration depth. Within the first few milliseconds, these screening currents increase in magnitude as the external field increases, while the peak in current distribution shifts slightly inward. This shows that currents are no longer confined to the penetration depth and vortex entry has begun. After 6 ms, as the applied field continues to increase, a long tail is seen in the current distribution from this peak to the sample centre. This tail in current represents a screening of the horizontal component of the field which has curved around the sample due to the high demagnetising factor of our YBCO films. At this time Meissner currents flow throughout the sample, except in the peak region, where larger currents occur. The ramping stage is seen in Fig. Figure where f is the flux front position, a is the sample half-width and . This equation is valid throughout the penetrated region (f ≤ x ≤ a, measured relative to the sample centre), taking x positive for simplicity. Applying this to our samples for maximum ramp rate and f ≥ 0.9a (up to 10% depth) and taking the J c value of the film at 10 K as 10 12 A/m 2 (see the typical values measured for a similar film in Fig. The relaxation stage is defined as the stage when the external field has reached its stable value, which occurs after about 30 ms for our measurements During the relaxation stage, the position p of the current peak is seen to move toward the centre of the sample, with a sloped plateau between this peak and a shoulder, whose onset remains close to the initial peak position at the sample edge. The plateau can be clearly distinguished after 30 ms and has a very steep gradient toward the sample edge. This gradient decreases fairly linearly with time until about 80 ms, after which the shape of the plateau region is more stable, but the current density throughout continues to decrease with time. Analysis of the plateau was carried out over the left side of the central line, since the right side is influenced by a defect in the top right corner. The inward speed of the current peak decreases exponentially until it settles at a final position, as shown in Fig. where t is the time after field switched on, and p 0 , τ and A are the fit parameters. Both fitting curves in Fig. The evolution of the supercurrent distribution in this stage is due to the dynamic effect of vortices moving inward in response to the large field gradient, though their motion is damped due to pinning. During the relaxation stage, the current density at each point relaxes over time toward a stable value, as seen in Fig. The current relaxation behaviour is made clearer by considering the magnitude of the current peak, since the field near the flux front is always small and fairly constant. This magnitude has a decreasing trend with time, asymptotically approaching a value which is taken to be close to J c0 . This relaxation was expected to be monotonic, but two "bumps" are unexpectedly observed in the graph. These bumps are reproduced at every position measured, with the current density noticeably increasing universally between 72 and 82 ms and between 90 and 116 ms. These bumps may be due to oscillations in induction due to the flux wave phenomenon, which has been observed in the transient dynamic regime after switching on a magnetic field smaller than the order-disorder transition field Transitional Stage. One may clearly see that the evolution of current in the sample is vastly different during the relaxation stage as compared to the ramping stage. However, the current evolution begins to show features of the relaxation stage before the external field has reached a stable value. Hence we define a brief transitional stage during which the evolution of current in the sample shows features of both the ramping and relaxation stages. During this transitional stage, the current peak begins moving away from the sample edge and its magnitude no longer increases, as seen in Fig. Over this time interval, the peak current stops its initial increase, with a stationary point seen in Fig. This transitional behaviour may be due to an intrinsic transition in the film occurring when the transient overcritical currents are no longer sustained by increasing field and therefore slowly dissipate due to vortex motion. At this point, the sample response to field ramping shifts from increasing screening-like currents which peak at the film edge toward an inward shifting of the peak current position. However, this internal factor may also be combined with the instrumental factor that the external field does not simply ramp linearly to its maximum value, but instead slows down after ~16 ms to avoid overshooting the set value Evidence for a transition is also found in Fig. These two time-points of abruptly changing flux front and current peak behaviour are marked as dashed lines in Fig. We have presented a novel investigation of the dynamic behaviour of field and current in YBCO thin films under a time-varying external field, using high-speed MOI. As a result, we provide in-depth analysis of the evolution of current density during flux penetration. The experimental data shows a large overcritical peak in the dynamic current density profile very close to the sample edge, which appears within 2 ms of application of field. This deviates strongly from the current plateaus commonly seen in films under static fields. This peak increases in magnitude during the increase of external field, which we label the ramping stage. It is worth noting that previous magneto-optical measurements of YBCO strips We have identified a novel transition in penetration behaviour, which is seen as the external field stabilises to its maximum value. The transition is evidenced by discontinuities in peak current position and flux front velocity. At this time, the current peak stops increasing in magnitude and begins to move toward the sample centre. After this transition, the current distribution relaxes toward equilibrium; the current peak approaches a final position closer to the sample centre, slowing exponentially and gradually reducing in intensity toward the static critical current level. A plateau of current forms during this time. It is initially very steep, but the gradient reduces over time. The final current distribution qualitatively resembles a Kim profile Therefore the accepted picture of the one-dimensional current distribution predicted by the Kim model can be seen as a limiting case which holds for static current distributions with a time-stable external field. In addition, the previously reported relaxation of current toward this stable state Scientific RepoRts | 7:40235 | DOI: 10.1038/srep40235