Identification of the electronic state that appears upon doping a Mott insulator is important to understand the physics of cuprate high-temperature superconductors. Recent scanning tunneling microscopy of cuprates provides evidence that a charge-ordered state emerges before the superconducting state upon doping the parent compound. We study this phenomenon by computing the charge response function of the Hubbard model including frequency-dependent local vertex corrections that satisfy the compressibility sum-rule. We find that upon approaching the Mott phase from the overdoped side, the charge fluctuations at wave vectors connecting hot spots are suppressed much faster than at the other wave-vectors. It leads to a momentum dependence of the dressed charge susceptibility that is very different from either the bare susceptibility or from the susceptibility obtained from the random phase approximation. We also find that the paramagnetic lightly hole-doped Mott phase at finite-temperature is unstable to charge ordering only at zero wave-vector, confirming the results previously obtained from the compressibility. Charge order is driven by the frequency-dependent scattering processes that induce an attractive particle-hole interaction at large interaction strength and small doping. Immediately following the discovery of cuprate hightemperature superconductors, and the suggestion by Anderson of the importance of the proximate Mott insulating phase 1 , the study of hole-doped Mott insulators became a central theme of research. Early Hartree-Fock studies of the holedoped Mott insulators provide evidence of charge order, often accompanied by spin order, so-called stripes, 2-5 which survives even in presence of frustrating long-range interactions By contrast, two STM studies have focused on lightly hole-doped compounds (p 1/8) Ca 2-x Na x CuO 2 Cl 2 58 and Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ Dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) An alternate approach to charge instabilities goes beyond uniform phase separation and searches for finite-wave vector divergences or other anomalies of the density-density response function calculated in the normal phase. The response function is given by the second derivative of the free energy with respect to a conjugate field (scalar potential for densitydensity response function) and it is positive, due to the convexity of the free energy, for a thermodynamically stable system. Therefore, a sign change of the response function indicates that the normal phase is unstable. In an interacting system, the response function takes into account that propagating particles and holes interact not only with the medium through their self-energy cloud, but also with each other with an amplitude called the full vertex function. The retarded part of that vertex originates from the exchange of other excitations, such as particle-hole (p-h) excitations. This vertex function is a complex function with, in general, non-trivial momentum/frequency dependence. It is not taken into account in any mean-field theory, while it plays a crucial role in driving charge instabilities Starting from the prototypical Hubbard model for the cuprates, we show that in the hole-doped system, the spatially local part of the irreducible vertex in the charge channel becomes attractive for a range of low-frequencies. This behavior starts at interaction values comparable with the elec- tronic bandwidth of the system and becomes more prominent at larger interactions. A real charge instability occurs only for interactions larger than what is required to drive a Mott transition at half-filling. This indicates that the charge instability is an instability of the doped Mott insulator, and not of the Slater antiferromagnet. We present the model and method in section II. The singlesite DMFT results for the compressibility are recovered in section III. Section IV describes the unusual structure of the frequency-dependent vertex in the charge channel, in particular that it can become attractive. This sets the stage for the calculation of the physically observable susceptibilities in section V. After concluding remarks, details of the calculation for the susceptibilities in various approximations are given in appendix A. Appendix B shows the results for the compressibility at lower interaction strength and higher temperature. It is shown in detail in appendix C that the compressibility obtained from single-site DMFT is identical to that deduced from the zero-wave vector density-density response function at zero Matsubara frequency, in other words that the compressibility sum-rule is satisfied. We consider the Hubbard model on the square lattice with U the onsite Coulomb interaction and appropriate hopping parameters for cuprates, i.e, t = -0.3t, t = 0.2t the second and third nearest-neighbor hopping amplitudes, t being the nearest-neighbor hopping We first present the DMFT results, which are in qualitative agreement with previous DMFT results obtained at t = t = 0 No charge instability is predicted by approximations with a static irreducible vertex, such as the random phase approximation (see appendix A 2). Hence we go beyond these approximations to obtain a reliable calculation for U > U c . In a diagrammatic approach, the full vertex function can be decomposed into the irreducible vertex function and the generalized bubble susceptibility (see appendix A). One can diagonalize the irreducible vertex in spin space to exploit the conservation of spin in two-body scattering processes and rewrite it in the charge and magnetic channels, defined as Γ c(m),irr = Γ ↑↑,irr + (-)Γ ↑↓,irr . In a normal system, there is a range and a characteristic relaxation time, beyond which Γ c/m,irr becomes negligible. Hence, the spatially local part of the irreducible vertex function, Γ irr loc (ν n ) ωmω m , is the dominant part. DMFT gives an accurate estimate of its dependence on three frequencies, ν n the center of mass bosonic frequency and ω m , ω m the fermionic frequencies. In an interacting system, the electron spectral function demonstrates a coherent (quasi-particle) peak and high energy incoherent (Hubbard) satellites. Upon increasing U , the spectral weight is transferred from the coherent peak to incoherent satellites. Thus, the irreducible vertex function contains two sets of scattering processes: (i) the scattering of the coherent part with itself (ii) the scattering of the incoherent part with itself and with the coherent part. The latter contribution is smooth and possibly featureless at low U , but increases and requires frequency dependence upon increasing interaction strength, leading to the nontrivial frequency dependence of Γ c,irr for U ≥ W . Figure In the non-perturbative regime at larger interaction strengths, U ≥ W , the irreducible vertex in the charge channel gradually changes, as illustrated in Fig. It is worth mentioning that, for (U, T ) considered here and finite doping where there is no particle-hole (p-h) symmetry, the irreducible charge vertex does not show the divergence due to a vanishing eigenvalue of the impurity susceptibility At larger U = 12t, the sign change of the irreducible charge vertex includes the very low frequency region, as can be seen from the right-hand panel of Fig. From the irreducible vertex in the charge channel, we can compute the charge susceptibility. Then, instead of differentiating n(μ), we compute the compressibility from the densitydensity correlation function, χ c ph , using the compressibility sum rule (with In general sum rules in approximate theories can be violated. For instance, this happens The density of the self-consistent impurity depends on μ explicitly and implicitly through the hybridization function, ∆(μ), hence, the impurity compressibility is given by (∂n/∂μ) ∆ + (∂n/∂∆) μ (∂∆/∂μ) Before we continue, we comment on how the negative eigenvalues of the impurity suscptibility influence the charge fluctuations. In previous studies of the half-filled p-h symmetric system (t = t = 0), the appearance of negative eigenvalues of the impurity susceptibility upon increasing U was interpreted as an indication of the suppression of charge fluctuation Using an expression of the generalized susceptibility in terms of its eigenvalues ( i ) and its eigenvectors (|i ), the above equation can be rewritten as It is argued that 1 β ωm m|i 2 is in general not small, hence, obtaining a decreasing charge susceptibility upon increasing U requires that some eigenvalues become negative Figure Finally, it is worth mentioning that the largest eigenvalue of the (dimensionless) matrix When it is a real number, it measures the distance from a continuous phase transition. With a static vertex function, as in the RPA approximation, the Stoner factors in the magnetic and charge channels are purely real. However, the eigenvalue problem that needs to be solved to search for an instability is a non-Hermitian eigenvalue problem in general. Nevertheless, the susceptibilities are always real. While our numerical results show that the Stoner factor in the magnetic channel is always real and increases with increasing U , eventually approaching unity, in the charge channel it is real only for U < W . For U > W , the eigenvalues appear mostly in complex conjugate pairs, with large real and imaginary parts, in particular at low doping. Therefore, in this regime, the Stoner factor is not well defined and cannot serve as a probe of an instability. The appearance of the complex conjugate pairs might indicate a tendency towards short-range charge orders, but further investigation is required to be conclusive. In summary, we have calculated the dressed charge susceptibility of strongly correlated metals to investigate possible charge instabilities. We verified that even for strong interactions, the compressibility sum-rule is satisfied consistently with the Φ-derivability of DMFT. Our results showed that the momentum-dependent dressed charge susceptibility of a doped Mott insulator has a completely different peak structure than what an RPA analysis would predict. This is a consequence of the complicated frequency dependence of the irreducible vertex function. Indeed, the charge susceptibilities with wave vectors connecting hot spot decrease faster than at the other wave vectors upon approaching the Mott phase. Furthermore, the phase transition of a lightly hole-doped Mott insulator occurs at the q = 0 wave-vector in agreement with the DMFT compressibility studies. Although the single-band Hubbard model does not show any charge instability with a finite momentum, including more degrees of freedom, such as Oxygen p orbitals, may change the physics. In Ref. 56, finite momentum instabilities were found. It may also be that the q = 0 instability corresponds, in a more realistic model to an intra unit cell charge pattern Here, G(K) is the dressed particle propagator, K ≡ (k, iω m ) denotes momentum/energy three-vectors (the lattice is twodimensional), N is number of k-points and β = 1/(k B T ). In Eq. (A1) the bosonic variable Q ≡ (q, iν n ) is always inactive in the multiplication, or conserved during the scatterings within each channel. Eq. (A1) is the common part of the response to an external field and solely depends on the electronic structure of the system. An observable response function, on the other hand, is obtained by closing the external legs of Eq. (A1) using appropriate oscillator matrix elements, O(Q) and O(-Q), which depends on the field wavevector and frequency. where φ R1 (r) the atomic orbital residing at the lattice point R 1 . In a correlation-driven phase transition, it is the full vertex function, [Γ c(m),f (Q)] K,K , that causes a singular or discontinuous response. It consists of all connected diagrams. Some of these diagrams are two-particle fully irreducible. Other diagrams are reducible, i.e., cutting two Green function lines separates the diagram into two pieces. Indeed, each diagram is either fully irreducible or reducible in exactly one channel (particle-hole ph, particle-hole transversal ph, and particleparticle pp), so 85 Here, Λ c(m) and Φ c(m) l denote, respectively, the fully irreducible vertex in all channels and reducible vertex in l channel. Moreover, one can define the irreducible diagrams in a certain channel l as Γ c(m),f = Γ c(m),irr l . For example, for the ph channel Having the irreducible vertex in a given channel l, the reducible one can be obtained from the Bethe-Salpeter equations (BSE) as 98 The irreducible vertex function can be evaluated using various quantum many-body approaches. In general, [Γ c/m,irr (Q)] K,K depends on the the transferred momentum/frequency in a scattering process, Q, and on the incoming momentum/frequency variables. The out-coming variables are determined by conservation laws. [Γ c/m,irr (Q)] K,K describes the irreducible interaction of the two elementary excitations. The spatially local part of the irreducible vertex function in channel l, Γ c/m,irr loc,l (ν n ) ωmω m , can be calculated in framework of the DMFT approximation Hence, the resulting full vertex depends on three frequencies but only one momentum (transferred momentum). This approximation captures the dynamics of the screening effects, which plays a significant role in correlated electron systems. 101 Focusing on the particle-hole channel, the DMFT approximation for the irreducible vertex Γ c(m),irr ph on the lefthand side of Eq. (A5) implies the momentum dependence of the reducible vertices in the transverse particle-hole, Φ c(m) ph , and particle-particle channels, Φ c(m) pp , are neglected (see Eq. ( We employed the exact diagonalization (ED) technique to solve the DMFT equations and to calculate the irreducible impurity vertices. The latter calculation is very expensive and grows very fast with the number of bath levels in the ED method. Furthermore, calculating the dressed susceptibility requires Γ c/m,irr loc (ν n ) ωmω m calculated on a large number of fermionic Matsubara frequencies. For instance, for compressibility calculations, we took 512 positive frequencies. Hence, we only consider three bath levels, n b , to calculate the irreducible impurity vertices. We checked that the results do not change when increasing the number of bath level by performing calculations with five bath levels, n b = 5, for some interaction strengths and doping levels, albeit on a much smaller frequency range. For instance, Fig. Calculations with a dynamical irreducible vertex function, as in the ladder dynamical vertex approximation, differ from those done in RPA with a static vertex. In RPA, the irreducible vertex is approximated with a static, though screened, interaction which is smaller than the bare one and remains repulsive. It is parametrized by a screened Hubbard interaction U s . With a static vertex, the summation over internal frequencies can be done and hence in RPA the internal bubble susceptibilities are replaced by This makes the instability eigenvalue problem a realsymmetric one ? . Furthermore, while [ χ0 ph (Q)] ωm,ωm has both real and imaginary parts, the RPA susceptibility, χ 0,ph RP A (Q), is purely real. To gain insight into the problem, consider the prediction of RPA when dressed propagators are used. The left panels of Fig. In RPA, the charge susceptibility is small and the leading instability occurs in the magnetic channel with wave-vectors (1, 1-δ)π/a and (1-δ, 1)π/a, where δ is small and vanishes at half-filling. The density is given by where the first line is for the impurity and the second line is for the lattice. Since the DMFT self-consistency equation is, the density on the impurity is equal to the density on the lattice for all values of the chemical potential and (∂n/∂μ) T will be identical in the two cases. However we can also obtain (∂n/∂μ) T from the susceptibility on the lattice, using the irreducible particle-hole vertex. That quantity is calculated from correlation functions on the impurity by inverting the Bethe-Salpeter equation. Remembering that the chemical potential is spaceindependent and imaginary-time independent, the susceptibility that is needed on the lattice to compute (∂n/∂μ) T is a special case of the susceptibility considered in the previous section, namely where [Γ irr σσ,σ σ (ν n = 0)] ω,ω is the irreducible particle-hole vertex, which we is momentum independent since it comes from a calculation on the impurity. Summing over wave vector on both sides of the equation and using the notation this gives the following closed equation that can be solved by considering ω m , ω m as matrix indices and inverting: If instead of the above approach, we compute the derivative of the impurity Green function g σ (iω m ) (taking into account the fact that the hybridization function depends on μ as well) and use the self-consistency equation Eq. (C2), we find the same equation as above with the following two replacements and G loc σ (iω m ) and g σ (iω m ) are in fact equal because of the selfconsistency equation Eq. (C2). By contrast, for Eq. (C6) to be an equality, we have to take the functional derivative with respect to g σ (iω m ) on the physical branch when Σ σ (iω m ) is not single-valued. That Σ σ (iω m ) can be multi-valued has been documented The first derivative of the free energy is related to the Green's function as follows where F denotes free energy density and μ the chemical potential. The second derivative of the free energy with respect to the chemical potential gives the electron compressibility. To obtain an integral equation for the charge susceptibility, we apply a perturbation φ(11 ) = -μδ rr δ τ τ + (where we have used the compact notation 1 ≡ (r, τ )) and calculate the response in the DMFT approximation. The dimensionless thermodynamic derivative of interest is (with (r 1 , τ 1 ) = (r 1 , τ + 1 )) where we used the identity G σ (13; φ)G -1 σ (31 ; φ) = δ 11 and a summation over repeated indices is assumed. The propagator has the following form where Σ is the self-energy and the inverse should be understood as a matrix inversion in space and time coordinates. The field couples to the electron density and therefore it appears only on diagonal elements of Eq. (C10). The inverse propagator depends on the field explicitly and implicitly through the dependence of the self-energy on the propagator. From Eq. (C9) and Eq. (C10), one can see that the explicit field dependence contribution at the derivative is given by where we used the identity ∂G -1 σ (33 ; φ)/∂φ(22 In the DMFT approximation, the self-energy is fully local, i.e., Σ DM F T σ (11 ) = Σ σ (11 )δ rr . In other words, the DMFT self-energy is only a functional of the local propagator , where G loc denotes the local propagator G loc,σ (τ, τ ) = (1/N ) r G σ (rτ, rτ ). Employing the fact that the DMFT self-energy is a functional of G loc , the derivative of the self-energy with respect to the field can be written as where Diagrammatically, Γ σσ;σ σ is obtained by removing one internal line from the self-energy in all possible ways. The complete equation for the susceptibility then takes the form Setting r 1 = r 1 on the left-hand side, the derivative of n and the above derivative become the same. Then, iterating the resulting equation gives the BSE used in this study. So far we were working with the lattice model. Now, we follow closely the analysis of Ref. The bath parameters are determined self-consistently. The impurity Green's function is 11 , (C15) where ∆ denotes the hybridization function determined through the self-consistency relation which is solved in the imaginary-time independent case, i.e. for every Matsubara frequency. We leave the two imaginary times 1 and 1 free in Eq. (C15), but since the derivative we are interested in is for φ equal to the chemical potential, which is independent of imaginary time, the derivation goes through if the self-consistency Eq. (C16) depends only on imaginarytime difference. Note that the inverse should be understood as a matrix inversion in imaginary time coordinates (indices are not bold anymore). Furthermore, we have g σ (12)g -1 σ (21 ) = δ 11 . The impurity Green's function depends on φ explicitly and implicitly through the hybridization function. Then the variation of the impurity density with respect to the field is given by (with 1 = 1 + ) ∂g σ (11 ) ∂φ( The self-energy and the hybridization function are functionals of the Green's function. For strong interactions, these functionals change from a non-perturbative functional at low frequency to a perturbative functional at high frequency, i. e., Σ ≡ Σ per [g] or Σ ≡ Σ non-per [g]. This causes an ambiguity in defining the vertex functions in Eq. (C18) and Eq. (C19) when one frequency is on the perturbative branch of the selfenergy (or hybridization function) and the other frequency is on the non-perturbative branch. Nevertheless, our numerical verification of the compressibility sum-rule confirms that Eq. (C18) and Eq. (C19) remain valid, at least in the range of parameters considered here. Further progress requires evaluating the derivative of the hybridization function with respect to the field. This can be found from the self-consistency condition, i. e., The derivative of F σ (φ, ∆(φ)) with respect to the field at constant hybridization function can be written as follow, using Eq. (C18), where we have used Eq. (C19). To show that the Eq. (C17) for ∂n/∂μ on the impurity is identical to the q = 0 susceptibility on the lattice, note that the second term in Eq. (C17) can be rewritten using Eq. (C22) where 1 11 σ;44 σ = δ σσ δ 1,4 δ 1 4 . Therefore, the Eq. (C17) for ∂n/∂μ on the impurity can be rewritten as follows, using Eq. (C23) and Eq. (C27) ∂g σ (11 ) ∂φ( P. W. Anderson, Science 235, 1196 (1987). 2 K. Machida, Physica C: Superconductivity 158, 192 (1989).