Since 2014 the layered semiconductor SnSe in the high-temperature Cmcm phase is known to be the most efficient thermoelectric material. Making use of first-principles calculations we show that its vibrational and thermal transport properties are determined by huge non-perturbative anharmonic effects. We show that the transition from the Cmcm phase to the low-symmetry P nma is a second-order phase transition driven by the collapse of a zone border phonon, whose frequency vanishes at the transition temperature. Our calculations show that the spectral function of the in-plane vibrational modes are strongly anomalous with shoulders and double-peak structures. We calculate the lattice thermal conductivity obtaining good agreement with experiments only when non-perturbative anharmonic scattering is included. Our results suggest that the good thermoelectric efficiency of SnSe is strongly affected by the non-perturbative anharmonicity. We expect similar effects to occur in other thermoelectric materials. Thermoelectric materials can convert waste heat into useful electricity 1,2 . The thermoelectric efficiency of a material is measured by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = S 2 σT /κ, where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ the electrical conductivity, T the temperature, and κ = κ e + κ l the thermal conductivity, constituted by electronic κ e and lattice κ l contributions. The thermoelectric efficiency can be thus enhanced by decreasing the thermal conductivity while keeping a high power factor S 2 σ. Materials have been doped SnSe is a narrow gap semiconductor that crystallizes at room temperature in an orthorhombic P nma phase. At T 800 K The most interesting thermoelectric properties appear in the high-temperature Cmcm phase, where the reduction of the electronic band gap increases the number of carriers providing a higher power factor, while the thermal conductivity remains very low The group/subgroup index of the Cmcm/P nma transition is 2, making a displacive second-order transition possible In this work we calculate the free energy Hessian matrix using the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) Φ and (4) Φ are third-and fourth-order nonperturbative force-constants obtained as quantum averages calculated with ρ R,Φ : . The Oppenheimer potential V at the minimum: , can be interpreted as the static limit of the physical phonons The calculated temperature dependence of ω 2 Y1 is shown in Fig. We do not see this sudden appearance of the instability, the Y 1 mode is always unstable at the harmonic level even exchanging b and c (see Supplementary Material). Figure The obtained transition temperature strongly depends on the exchange-correlation functional and the volume. Within LDA T c ranges between 168 K with theoretical lattice parameters and 616 K with experimental lattice parameters 10 (see Table Harmonic and anharmonic phonons in the Lorentzian approximation (Ωμ(q)). The length of the bars corresponds to the linewidth (full length of the line is the full width at half maximum). The calculations are done within LDA in the experimental structure using Φ at 800 K and Ωμ(q) at 800 K. In order to estimate the role of the thermal expansion, we calculate the stress tensor including vibrational contributions at the anharmonic level following the method recently developed by Monacelli et al. Peaks in σ(q, ω) represent phonon excitations observed experimentally. Replacing Π μ (q, ω) → Π μ (q, Ωμ (q)) in Eq. ( Fig. In highly anharmonic materials Φ by (3) φ , the anomalies of these modes become weaker (see Supplementary Material). This underlines that in the Cmcm phase the third-order derivatives of V are not sufficient to calculate the phonon linewidths and that higher order terms are important, which are effectively captured by Φ. In Fig. Φ). For comparison we also calculate κ l substituting Φ by (3) φ . The calculation is performed solving the BTE assuming the single-mode relaxation time approximation (SMA), whose validity was confirmed against a more accurate iterative method In conclusion, our first-principles calculations show that the vibrational properties of SnSe in the Cmcm phase are dominated by huge non-perturbative anharmonic effects. We show how the collapse of the Y 1 mode φ (P) and non-perturbative Φ (NP) at 800 K TOFCs using the SMA compared to the experiments by Ibrahim et al. is responsible for the second-order phase transition between the high-symmetry Cmcm and the low-symmetry P nma phase. The calculated transition temperature is volume and functional dependent. The spectral functions of in-plane modes are characterized by very anomalous features, with shoulders and double peaks, clearly deviating from the standard Lorentzian-like shape. These results will eventually be crucial to interpret future INS experiments for the high-temperature phase. The calculated in-plane thermal conductivity is in good agreement with the experiments by Ibrahim et al. The authors acknowledge fruitful discussions with O. Delaire. Financial support was provided by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (FIS2013-48286-C2-2-P), the Department of Education, Universities and Research of the Basque Government and the University of the Basque Country (IT756-13). U.A. is also thankful to the Material Physics Center for a predoctoral fellowship. Computer facilities were provided by the Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), the Spanish Supercomputing Network (FI-2017-2-0007) and PRACE (2017174186). H. J. Goldsmid, Introduction to thermoelectricity, Vol. 121 (Springer, 2010).2 K. Behnia, Fundamentals of thermoelectricity (OUP Oxford, 2015).