The paper addresses a common assumption of elastoplastic modeling: that the recoverable, elastic strain increment is unaffected by alterations of the elastic moduli that accompany loading. This assumption is found to be false for a granular material, and discrete element (DEM) simulations demonstrate that granular materials are coupled materials at both microand macro-scales. Elasto-plastic coupling at the macro-scale is placed in the context of thermomechanics framework of Tomasz Hueckel and Hans Ziegler, in which the elastic moduli are altered by irreversible processes during loading. This complex behavior is explored for multi-directional loading probes that follow an initial monotonic loading. An advanced DEM model is used in the study, with non-convex non-spherical particles and two different contact models: a conventional linear-frictional model and an exact implementation of the Hertz-like Cattaneo-Mindlin model. Orthotropic true-triaxial probes were used in the study (i.e., no direct shear strain), with tiny strain increments of 2 × 10 -6 . At the micro-scale, contact movements were monitored during small increments of loading and load-reversal, and results show that these movements are not reversed by a reversal of strain direction, and some contacts that were sliding during a loading increment continue to slide during reversal. The probes show that the coupled part of a strain increment, the difference between the recoverable (elastic) increment and its reversible part, must be considered when partitioning strain increments into elastic and plastic parts. Small increments of irreversible (and plastic) strain and contact slipping and frictional dissipation occur for all directions of loading, and an elastic domain, if it exists at all, is smaller than the strain increment used in the simulations. We use discrete element (DEM) simulations to address the micro-scale nature of elastic and plastic deformation in granular materials, and to determine possible coupling of the plastic and elastic responses and its micro-scale origins. The term "elastic-plastic coupling" is used to describe a dependence of the elastic moduli on alterations in a material's internal fabric that are brought about by irreversible processes that accompany plastic deformation The remainder of this Introduction briefly presents the concepts of thermomechanics that permit a distinction between elastic and reversible deformation increments in coupled materials. The Introduction also explains the role of DEM simulations and the manner in which they are used in the paper, and it briefly describes the two models of contact friction that are used in the simulations. Section 3 focuses on tiny increments of loading and characterizes the micro-scale processes that occur during these increments. The section also presents methods for measuring the small coupling strain increments that are the difference between the elastic and reversible increments. Similar methods are applied in Section 4 to multidirectional probes that determine the constituent parts of the incremental strain -elastic, reversible, plastic, irreversible, and coupled -that result from small loading increments. We find evidence of such elastic-plastic coupling and of the contact-scale dissipation that can enable this coupling, particularly in certain directions of loading. The results are verified for the two models of contact interactions between particles. In this section, we define the elastic and reversible constituents of strain increments, their plastic and irreversible counterparts, and a coupled part that differentiates them. These definitions are presented in the context of continuum thermomechanics The cumulative elastic strain can, in principle, be measured as the strain that is recovered upon fully unloading the material to an unstressed reference configuration The second law holds that θdS ≥ dq or θds (i) = θ dS -dS (r) ≥ 0 The Helmholtz free energy density F is defined by the transformation F = U -θS. Henceforth, we consider only isothermal conditions (dθ = 0), such that dF = dU -θdS which is a measure of dissipation for isothermal conditions. The free energy is assumed a function of the elastic strain ε (e) and a set of K internal variables α k , k = 1, 2, . . . , K, that are necessary to fully depict the current state (see with summation over the i, j, and k components. The accumulated total strain ε ij is the sum of elastic and plastic parts, ij , the latter, in principle, being the unrecovered strain of a deformed material after it is unloaded to the unstressed reference condition. Combining Eqs. ( as in the latter being the dissipation inequality. A stress increment dσ ij is the sum of parts attributed to changes in the elastic strain components and to changes in the internal variables, (e) ij ∂ε (e) kl dε (e) kl + ∂ 2 F ∂ε (e) ij ∂α k dα k ∂G ∂σ ij Total strain Elastic + plastic strains dε In this separation of the total strain increment, proposed by Hueckel, Maier, and Nova the first constituent on the right is the reversible part of the strain increment, dε (r) ij , so named because it would be reversed by a reversal of the stress increment, dσ ij ↔ -dσ ij in the absence of any change in the internal condition of the material, as expressed with the α k variables. The coupled constituent dε (c) ij is the portion of the elastic increment attributed to alterations of the elastic moduli that accompany irreversible processes, processes that are brought forth by changes in the internal variables: a coupling of the elastic moduli to the plastic deformation. Changes of the internal variables are hidden during standard laboratory tests of granular specimens, as they are the consequence of micro-scale phenomena such as crack growth within the grain fragments, asperity fracture at the inter-granular contacts, slip and micro-slip softening of the contact response, and the general rearrangement of particles that accompanies contact slip and micro-slip. Although hidden in laboratory tests, these micro-scale processes are exposed (and can be tracked) in particle-scale numerical simulations. Notably, processes that would otherwise change the internal variables α k can be momentarily frozen in simulations, producing a constrained equilibrium state that is nearby a preceding unconstrained state Equation ( in which the elastic-plastic coupling part dε (c) ij is a part of the elastic increment, and the irreversible increment dε (i) ij is the part of the total increment dε ij that, in the absence of changes dα k , is not reversed by a reversal of the stress increment dσ ij Discrete particle (DEM) simulations were used to measure strain increments for different directions of loading and to decompose an increment of total strain into the various parts from which it is derived: the reversible, irreversible, elastic, plastic, and coupled parts. We also used simulations to gain an understanding of the underlying micro-scale mechanisms that contribute to bulk deformation and of contact-scale frictional dissipation. Because micro-scale information and more general boundary conditions are accessible with DEM simulations, they can expose granular behavior in ways that are not easily achieved with laboratory testing. Specifically, four advantages of DEM simulations were exploited in our simulations: 1. After a granular assembly has been created and loaded to a given state, this state and all of its micro-data (particle positions, contact forces, Jäger-equivalent contact history, etc.) can be saved. This saved state -which Alonso-Marroquín [2] calls a numeric "clone" -constitutes a consistent reference state for subsequent loading probes that precisely captures (to within machine precision) the essential micro-scale condition of the system. 2. In performing loading probes, DEM codes permit control of any combination of six components of the stress and strain tensors or any six linearly independent combinations of stress and strain -loading conditions that would require multiple sample preparations and even different testing apparatus in a physical laboratory 3. One can extract the bulk elastic energy and the bulk frictional dissipation from their micro-scale origins within a material (Section 3.1). The "stored" energy is computed at each inter-particle contact, and the total contact energy of all contacts is a direct measure of the Helmholtz energy F and any incremental change dF . Micro-scale contact frictional dissipation can also be obtained from these probes. Dissipation in granular materials can result from frictional slip, frictional micro-slip, plastic deformation of the particles, particle fracture, and viscous drag of the particles as they move through (or relative to) a pore fluid. Our focus is on the slow, quasistatic loading of uncemented dry materials at low confining pressure (the mean stress, defined as the negative of 1/3 of the first stress invariant) and with durable particles, for which frictional contact slip and micro-slip are the dominant dissipation mechanisms. As such, viscous damping is kept as small as is necessary to maintain computational stability, so that dissipation results solely from frictional slip and micro-slip at the contacts (Section 3.1 and Appendix B). Although simulations offer these advantages, the results depend, however, upon the model that is ascribed to the individual contacts, an issue that is addressed in our study. The deformation of a granular material with durable grains depends upon the material's contact-scale behavior, and two contact models are used in this study: a standard linearfrictional contact model and a Hertz-Mindlin model, which we will call the Cattaneo-Mindlin contact. The purpose is to ascertain the bulk incremental behavior and its relation to the particular contact model. Both models are elastic with respect to movements that are normal to the particles' surfaces: the first model has a linear force-displacement relation for normal movements; the second has a non-linear Hertz-type relation. Moreover, because the contact loads and indentations are small, the contact zones are finite but small, and the behavior of a single contact is unaffected by the loading of more distant contacts on the same particle (see For tangential movements, the standard linear-frictional model uses a linear force-displacement relation, with elastic "spring" stiffnesses k n and k t in the normal and tangential directions. The behavior is entirely elastic when |f t | < μf n , where f n and f t are the normal and tangential forces, and μ is the contact friction coefficient. Contact behavior can become partially or wholly plastic (i.e., with slip) when the friction limit is reached, |f t | = μf n , and the frictional loss (energy dissipation) can be computed for a sliding contact. Details of this model's incremental behavior are given in Appendix A. A second set of simulations used a more realistic contact model having a Hertz-like and elastic normal contact stiffness and an exact representation of the corresponding inelastic tangential response. Hertz contact is recognized as an improved representation of elastofrictional particle interaction, but because of its coding complexities and computational demands, a faithful implementation of Hertz contact, which should include micro-slip, is rarely fulfilled in DEM simulations. Two isotropic elastic spheres, when pressed together, touch within a circular contact patch between the particles' two surfaces. The corresponding inelastic tangential force-displacement behavior is modeled with Cattaneo-Mindlin theory Because micro-slip and dissipation can occur inside this slip cone, the contact can exhibit plastic and incrementally nonlinear behaviors when the tangential force is less than the friction limit (when |f t | < μf n ). This response is akin to elasto-plastic strain hardening at the contact scale. The resulting incremental contact behavior can be elastic, micro-slip, or full slip, depending upon the direction of loading. More commonly, approximate implementations of the Hertz contact simply use a tangential stiffness that is proportional to the normal force and not upon the directions of the normal and tangential movements The two contact models can be summarized in the context of a thermomechanic framework. Elastic energy is stored within the contacts and frictional dissipation is produced by slip and micro-slip, and both incremental consequences of the stress-work σ ij dε ij can be audited throughout a DEM simulation. Besides the shapes of the particles and their arrangements (i.e., the material's internal geometric fabric), the internal condition of a material with simple linear-frictional contacts is additionally described by the current normal and tangential forces at each contact. A material with Cattaneo-Mindlin contacts requires this information and more, including the full Jäger equivalent-loading information of each contact (Appendix A). All of this information can be stored in DEM files, so that each probe in a series of probes can retrieve the information, and that each probe is initiated from the same internal condition. non-convex sphere-cluster particles (po = 100 kPa). Stress probes in Sections 3 and 4 were initiated from a strain of 0.3%. We used a series of slow, quasi-static DEM simulations to study the incremental response of a granular assembly. The assembly was a cubical box filled with 10,648 smooth non-convex sphere-cluster particles and contained within periodic boundaries. The particles' shape, sizes, and arrangement were calibrated to simulate the behavior of a fine-grain poorly-graded medium-dense sand (Nevada Sand Although it is inconsistent with the quasi-static hypothesis, DEM results can depend upon the loading rate -an unfortunate dependence which is infrequently discussed in a candid manner in the DEM literature. To mitigate such rate dependence, a slow loading rate and other measures were taken, assuring that the simulations were nearly quasi-static. Because of their importance in the current study, computational essentials are detailed in Appendix B, which also describes quantitative indicators verifying the quasi-static nature of the simulations. Figure DEM simulations were used to explore micro-scale conditions at the contacts and to quantify the elastic, plastic, reversible, irreversible, and coupled parts of strain increments. To these ends, we conducted three types of stress and strain probes: (1) loading-retrogression pairs, (2) loading and reversible loading pairs, and (3) loading-unloading pairs. The three types of probes are illustrated in Fig. The initial, reference states for the probes were established with drained monotonic constant-p triaxial compression, in which the mean stress p was maintained constant during axial (x 1 direction) loading (Fig. was used with all three types of probes and in various loading directions. Halving or doubling the strain increment or strain rate had minimal effect on the results (Appendix A). Type Probe pairs Fig. Loading & unloading A-B reference loading increment The loading phase of these probes was begun from an initial probe state (the increment AB in Fig. Figure During the loading probe, the material dilated slightly, at rate dv/|dε 11 | = 0.12. By post-processing the micro-scale data, the condition of each Cattaneo-Mindlin contact -elastic, micro-slip, or full slip -was determined during loading and retrogression (see Section 1.3 and Appendix A). Nine transitions are possible among these three contact conditions, and the table in Fig. Considering the small magnitude of the strain increment (|dε 11 | = 2×10 -6 ), these results suggest that a zone of purely reversible response (or a cone, in the sense of Darve To better understand the degree of irreversible behavior during the retrogression probe, we also audited energy changes, measuring the increments in work density attributed to elastic deformations at the contacts and to dissipative, frictional micro-slip and slip at the contacts. For the loading probe, the increment of stress-work density σ ij dε ij was a positive 0.82 p dε 11 (p being the mean stress of 100kPa, and dε 11 being the positive increment 2×10 -6 ); and since deformation was precisely reversed during the retrogression probe, the corresponding increment was a negative -0.82 p dε 11 . During the loading probe, frictional contact dissipation was 0.79 p dε 11 , accounting for about 96% of the stress-work, the remaining 4% being a small change in the contacts' elastic energy. Although frictional contact dissipation was less during the reversal probe (about 0.13 p dε 11 ), the frictional dissipation was still quite substantial, about 17% of the stress-work, while the elastic energy was reduced by -0.95 p dε 11 . In short, the material exhibited frictional dissipation in the form of contact slip and micro-slip during both loading and retrogression, even with the very small strain increment of 2×10 -6 . With Type 2 probes, we determined the amount and direction of the reversible and irreversible parts of a strain increment, using a technique pioneered by Calvetti and his co-workers The results for a probe of constant-p triaxial compression are presented in Table With the final variant of probes, we used conventional pairs of loading and unloading increments, producing a tiny closed path in stress-space (Fig. Reversible, dε (r) ij -2.94×10 -7 2.00×10 -7 Irreversible, Elastic, dε (e) ij -2.57×10 -7 2.37×10 -7 Plastic, Coupled, Total, dεij -20.00×10 -7 2.31×10 -7 and Similar results were also obtained in simulations using the simpler linear-frictional contact model (see Figs. A.11a and A.11b). Table Similar to Fig. Irreversible Coupled Total Probes Strain -0.71×10 -7 0.33×10 -7 0.85×10 -7 elastic and slip modes between loading and retrogression (strain-reversal). Only four transitions are applicable between the two modes, and three of these occurred. For example, of the 11.1% of contact that were sliding during loading, about 10% (= 1.1%/11.1%) continued to slide during the strain-reversal probe. As with the more complex Cattaneo-Mindlin contacts, some contacts continued to slip during a reversal of strain. Types 2 and 3 probes were also performed with linear-frictional contacts. The results of loading and retrogression (Type 2) probes are shown in Table The results discussed above are exclusively for axisymmetric triaxial conditions, in which the initial probe state was established with constant-p triaxial compression (ε 11 < 0) and in which the subsequent triaxial probes were conducted with equal lateral strains, dε 22 = dε 33 . We now consider multi-directional (i.e., true-triaxial) probes that began from initial probe states that were established, as in the previous section, with constant-p triaxial compression. One set of probes was conducted within the deviatoric pi-plane of isochoric or isobaric strain increments; another set of probes was of generalized triaxial loading within the Rendulic plane of volumetric and deviatoric strain increments. With each series of probes (in the pi-plane or Rendulic plane), we conducted over 50 probes in different directions, and both Types 2 and 3 probes were used to measure the elastic, plastic, and coupled parts of the total strain increment for each probe direction. Figure Each closed line in Fig. The significance of elastic-plastic coupling during deviatoric (pi-plane) loading is also shown in Fig. of coupled and reversible parts relative to the total strain increment. The results for different directions θ of the total increment dε ij demonstrate that elastic strains are not entirely reversible, particularly for probe directions that are oblique to the initial loading direction (θ = 0 • ), as these oblique directions produce significant coupled increments. To place the results of Section 3 in the context of those in Fig. In Fig. Note also that the plastic envelope is not a straight line emanating from the origin in a single flow direction. That is, plastic strains are not of the form g ij f kl dσ kl for some yield direction f kl and flow direction g ij . This aspect of the incremental behavior was noted in the simulations of Finally, we note that the locus of plastic increments dε (p) ij does not pass through the origin, as the locus of plastic increments dε (p) ij envelops the origin, and some plastic deformation occurs with all loading directions (as with vanishing elastic range plasticity models A separate series of over fifty probes was conducted with different combinations of deviatoric and volumetric strain increments under axisymmetric triaxial conditions. The results in Fig. The simulation results in this section are for the assembly with Cattaneo-Mindlin contacts at the initial probes state of strain ε 11 = -0.3%. We conducted similar simulations with the assembly having linear-frictional contacts, and the results were qualitatively similar in every respect. Results at other strains are reviewed in the next section. Coupled strain, dε (c) Irrev. strain, dε (i) Rev. strain, dε (r) Total strain, dε dε (c) dε (r) Volume compression, 10 (dε 11 + dε 22 + dε 33 ) Deviatoric strain, 10 Coupled strain, dε (c) Plas. strain, dε (p) Elas. strain, dε (e) Total strain, dε dε (c) dε (e) dε (p) dε Volume compression, 10 Figure We now consider the evolution of the reversible, irreversible, and coupled parts of a strain increment, from the start of triaxial loading until a compressive strain of 1% and larger. We conducted Types 2 and 3 stress probes, similar to those described above, at several stages of the constant-p triaxial compression (as in Fig. Figure In regard to deviatoric probes in direction θ = 0 • , the behavior was almost entirely reversible (and elastic) at the start of loading, with irreversible increments that were nearly zero. Irreversible (and plastic) strain increments increased with increasing axial deformation and dominated the loading behavior at cumulative strains greater than 0.1%. Volume change was contractive at the start of loading and transitioned to dilative behavior at strain 0.2% (Fig. Although it is small for probes of continued triaxial compression, Fig. 2 , is significant for this probe direction and accounts for 15-20% of the total transverse strain for axial strains greater than 0.2%. Bulk deformation of a granular material produces contact frictional dissipation in the form of slip and micro-slip at the inter-particle contacts. The aggregate effect of this contactscale dissipation is stress-work expended in plastic deformation and in irreversible alterations of the particle arrangements and contact conditions. When a strain increment is reversed, dε → -dε, or when a stress increment is reversed, dσ → -dσ, the contact movements are not necessarily reversed, and some contacts that were undergoing slip or micro-slip during a forward increment continue to slip during the reversed retrogression or unloading increment. That is, frictional contact dissipation and irreversible deformation occur during both forward and reversed increments, and if a strictly elastic region of loading exists at all, it is smaller than the strain increments of 2 × 10 -6 that were used in our simulations. In the context of thermomechanics, granular materials are coupled materials in the sense that increments of elastic strain are altered by changes in the elastic moduli that occur concurrently with the loading increment and are associated with irreversible micro-scale changes within the material. The difference between the conventional elastic (recoverable) strain increment and the reversible part of the increment is a coupling part dε (c) . This coupled part is small during conventional triaxial loading conditions and might escape notice in a laboratory setting or even in DEM simulations, but the coupled increments are quite large for other loading directions and produce a significant difference between the elastic-plastic and reversibleirreversible partitions of a total strain increment. Our measurements of the reversible, irreversible, and coupled parts of strain increments were obtained through rather extraordinary intervention: by suppressing the slip and microslip that would otherwise occur at the contacts, as in All of the forgoing conclusions apply to simulations with either of two contact models: with the simple linear-frictional model and with the more complex Hertz-type Cattaneo-Mindlin model. Although we have described behavior that is complex and inconsistent with simple constitutive models, the simulations do show that the bulk large-strain behavior of granular materials during monotonic loading is somewhat insensitive to the details of the contact model, provided that the simulations include a common friction coefficient. Our study was limited to behavior that followed an initial monotonic drained triaxial compression, and this work could certainly be extended to more general loading paths: other proportional loading paths, paths involving principal stress rotations, and cyclic paths. The results suggest, however, that granular behavior is even more complex than previously thought and that granular materials should be treated as coupled and thoroughly inelastic. resenting the normal components of compressive contact force and displacement, and f t and ξ representing the tangential displacement and force. (In a three-dimensional setting, f t and ξ are vectors that lie in the contact's tangent plane.) The behavior of the linear-frictional model is entirely reversible for points within the contact yield cone having its apex at the f n -f t origin (e.g., the behavior is reversible at points "A" in Figs. A.11a and A.11b). When the frictional limit is reached (points "B") and |f t | = μf n , slip can commence and the zone of incremental reversibility is a semi-space inside of the yield cone. In the force-space of Fig. A.11a, the reversible and irreversible ("slip") conditions are represented by small arced arrows (actually, filled cones in 3-space) that show the corresponding ranges of the force increments. In the strain-space of Fig. A.11b, reversible and irreversible (slip) increments are shown in a similar manner, but the orientation of the yield boundary (cone) has slope μk n /k t , where k n and k t are the linear contact stiffnesses in the normal and tangential directions. The increment of frictional energy dissipation during a small tangential movement ∆ξ is computed as the incremental difference of the work done by the tangential force, f t • ∆ξ, and the change of elastic energy of the contact, ∆[(f t ) 2 /2k n ]. The simple linear-frictional contact yields a small-strain bulk shear modulus that is independent of the mean stress -a condition that poorly represents the behavior of most geomaterials. For this reason, a generalized Cattaneo-Mindlin contact is considered a better representation of the particle interactions The incremental force-displacement relation of the Cattaneo-Mindlin contact is quite complex and depends on the history of both normal and tangential movements. Mindlin and Deresiewicz The computation of frictional contact dissipation is also straightforward with a Cattaneo-Mindlin contact, provided that the contact is in full frictional slip (points "D" in Fig. and then computed the inner produce of the irreversible increment and the tangential force to find the increment of dissipation: To find the incremental reversible tangential movement ∆ξ (r) in Eq. (A.1), which represents the response to the increment of tangential force ∆f t in the absence of micro-slip, we used Walton's solution for the tangential contact response of rough (zero-slip) spheres 2 ) Γ( where Γ(•) is the gamma function. In this manner, we tracked the frictional dissipation of each Cattaneo-Mindlin contact so that the total contact frictional dissipation and total contact elastic energy of the assemblies could be computed. Note that the elastic (reversible) movement ∆ξ (r) depends upon the contact radius a and hence upon the indentation ζ and normal force f n . Discrete element simulations were conducted with a cubical assembly of 10,648 particles contained within periodic boundaries. The simulations were intended to produce a modest fidelity to the bulk behavior of sands at low confining stress. Because sphere assemblies produce unrealistic rolling between particles and have a low bulk strength, we used a bumpy, non-convex cluster shape for the particles: a large central sphere with six smaller embedded outer spheres in an octahedral arrangement (Fig. To create assemblies with a range of densities, we began with the particles sparsely and randomly arranged within a cubic periodic cell. With an initial low inter-particle friction coefficient (μ = 0.20), the assembly was isotropically reduced in dimension until it "seized" when a sufficiently complete contact network had formed. A series of 25 progressively denser assemblies were created by repeatedly assigning random velocities to the particles of the previous assembly and then further reducing the cell's dimensions until it, too, had seized. The 25 assemblies had void ratios ranging from 0.781 to 0.586 (solid fractions of 0.561 to 0.664). The single assembly used in the paper had void ratio 0.690 (solid fraction 0.592) and approximates the behavior of Nevada Sand at a relative density of 40%. After compaction, the assembly was allowed to quiesce with friction coefficient μ = 0.40, which was then raised to μ = 0.55 for the subsequent loading simulations. The particles are durable (non-breaking) and interact only at their contacts. Two contact models were used in the simulations: linear springs with friction, and a Hertz, Cattaneo-Mindlin model, as described in Section 1.3 and Appendix A. The Cattaneo-Mindlin model was a full implementation of a Hertz-Mindlin contact between elastic-frictional bodies. We used the Jäger algorithm, which can model arbitrary sequences of normal and tangential contact movements As has been noted by Alonso-Marroquín et al. Several performance parameters were used to verify the quasi-static and rate-independent nature of these probes. The inertial number I = ε m/(pd), a relative measure of loading and inertial rates, was about 1 × 10 -11 , signifying nearly quasi-static loading During stress relaxation with zero strain rate, the stress changed at a rate of less than 4% of that typically measured during the incremental stress probes that were used in this study. The strain increment of 2 × 10 -6 and strain steps of 1 × 10 -8 entailed 200 steps. Although small fluctuations were noted in the first few steps, the advance of stress and strain were fairly uniform within the 200 strain steps. Moreover, the envelopes in Figs. 