In the present work, the effect of different nanofiller (BaTiO3, CeO2, Er2O3 or TiO2) on blend solid polymer electrolyte comprising of PEO and PVC complexed with bulky LiPF6 have been explored. The XRD analysis confirms the polymer nanocomposite formation. FTIR provides evidence of interaction among the functional groups of the polymer with the ions and the nanofiller in terms of shifting and changing peak profile. The highest ionic conductivity is ~2.3×10 -5 S cm -1 with a wide electrochemical stability window of ~3.5 V for 10 wt. % Er2O3. The real and imaginary part of dielectric permittivity follows the identical trend of the decreasing value with increase in the frequency. The particle size and the dielectric constant shows an abnormal trend with different nanofiller. The ac conductivity follows the universal power law. An effective mechanism has been proposed to understand the nanofiller interaction with cation coordinated polymer in the investigated system. The demand of miniaturized power supply with desirable properties in electrochemical devices has been rapidly increased since last two decades. Out of a large number of electrochemical energy storage devices, rechargeable lithium ion batteries are most intensively studied for portable electronic gadgets. The frequent use of those devices gears the researchers toward the remarkable development of secondary rechargeable battery with high capacity, light weight and lower cost in contrast to primary batteries. As, the electrolyte is an essential component in lithium ion battery as it separates both electrodes (anode and cathode), controls the number of charge carriers and permits their movement during charging/discharging process. Ionically conducting polymer system with polymer as separator/electrolyte are of intense interest due to their multiple applications, including super capacitors, fuel cell, solar cells, electro chromic windows, and Li ion batteries The first report on ionic conduction was given by P. V. Wright The commonly used host polymer for preparation of polymer nanocomposite films (PNCs) is PEO PMMA PEO has high molecular weight and ionic conductivity of the order of 10 -7 S cm -1 because of the lone pair of electrons in its backbone with a lithium salt. The low conductivity of pure PEO is due to semi crystalline nature at ambient temperature which restricts the ion motion. But above the melting temperature crystalline to amorphous region transition occurs which enhances the conductivity. The movement of charge carriers (cation/anion) occurs in amorphous phase supported by the segmental motion of polymer host. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is chosen as a secondary polymer, it acts as a mechanical stiffener in the electrolyte due to its immiscibility. The use of PVC as the blend is attributed mainly to the presence of lone pair electrons at the chlorine atom where the inorganic salts can be solvated. The addition of salt in polymer matrix enhances the conductivity via interaction with polymer host. The low lattice energy salt with small polarizing cation and the large anion of delocalized charge is chosen in order to meet the desirable requirement. LiPF6 is a better choice among the tried alkali salt due to larger anion size (~2.8 Å), weak Li + ---PF6 -interactions, low ion pair formation ability, good solubility, highly electropositivety, flame retardant, low cost and good environmental impact Incorporation of the nanofiller helps in inhibiting the recrystallization of the polymer and decrease the glass transition temperature of the composite polymer electrolyte and hence enhanced conductivity is achieved The present paper report is mainly concerned with the effect of various nanofiller having a different particle size and the dielectric constant on the polymer blend electrolyte. To obtain the insights in the above said parameters different characterization techniques such as; X-Ray diffraction, FTIR, FESEM, Impedance study are performed. The impedance data is transformed into the dielectric data to understand the effect of the dielectric constant of nanofiller in enhancing the overall dielectric constant of the whole polymer matrix. Also, the ionic transference number and the electrochemical stability window was obtained using i-t characterization technique and the linear sweep voltammetry respectively. The SPEs system involved the use of poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly (vinyl chloride) (PVC) with average molecular weights of 1×10 6 (Sigma Aldrich), and 6×10 4 respectively. LiPF6 was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Titanium oxide (TiO2), Barium Titanate (BaTiO3), Cerium oxide (CeO2) and Erbium oxide (Er2O3) were acquired from Sigma Aldrich. Anhydrous tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as solvent purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Table All the solid polymer electrolyte (SPEs) samples were prepared using universal solution cast technique. A snapshot of the technique is shown in the flowchart (Fig Li + = No.of monomer unit in half a gram of PEO No. of LiPF 6 molecular in half a gram of salt × wt.of PEO was taken wt. of salt taken The preparation of SPEs involves the dissolution of PEO, PVC in tetrahydrofuran (THF) solvent at 40 °C and then polymer solutions were mixed/stirred for several hours to form the polymer matrix of electrolyte system. After complete dissolution of the polymer, an appropriate amount of LiPF6 was added to the polymer blend matrix and the mixture was stirred continually for good polymer salt complex system for 12 hr. Later in polymer salt complex various nanofiller is added in polymer salt system and were stirred up to 8 hr. in order to obtain a homogeneous solution. The final solution was sonicated for 30 minutes, then poured in glass petri dishes and left for drying by solvent evaporation at room temperature in a vacuum oven. The resultant films formed were kept for further characterization. The samples are designated as PP (pure polymer blend), PPL (pure polymer with LiPF6 salt), PPLB (with BaTiO3 nanofiller), PPLC (with CeO2 nanofiller), PPLE (with Er2O3 nanofiller), PPLT (with TiO2 nanofiller). Some most intrinsic properties of various procured nanofiller are also tabulated in table X-ray diffraction (XRD) is the most useful method for the determination of crystal structure and crystallinity of the materials. The X-ray diffraction studies were performed with 2θ ranging from 10° to 50°. The X-ray source is Cu-Kα radiation with wavelength λ=1.54 Å. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was used to characterize the morphology of the solid polymer electrolytes using Carl Zeiss product. Films were gold coated and examined under high vacuum. FTIR spectroscopy was carried out on all solid polymer electrolyte films using the Bruker Tensor 27 (Model: NEXUS -870)) in absorbance mode over the wavenumber region from 600 to 4000 cm -1 with a resolution of 4 cm -1 . Impedance measurements of the solid polymer electrolyte films were carried out using CHI 760 Electrochemical Analyzer over a frequency range between 1 Hz to1 MHz at room temperature. Each sample was sandwiched between two stainless steel (SS) electrodes and an AC signal of 50 mV was applied for measurement. The intercept between the semi-circle at high frequency and tilted spike at low frequency were taken as the bulk resistance (Rb). The ionic conductivity (σ) value was obtained using equation 2: Where t is thickness (cm) of polymer film, Rb is bulk resistance () and A is area (cm 2 ) of working electrode. The stainless steel/polymer electrolyte/stainless steel (SS|PE|SS) symmetric cells were used in the transference number measurements similar to those described in the preceding paragraph. Ion transference numbers of the solid polymer electrolytes were determined by DC Polarization technique using equation 3 & 4: and It and Ie are the total and residual current respectively The voltage stability of solid polymer electrolyte films was obtained using the linear sweep Voltammetry technique, and cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed at a scan rate of 10 mV/s in CHI 760. The real (Z′) and imaginary (Z′′) parts of the complex impedance were used to express the real (ε′), imaginary (ε") parts of permittivity, ac conductivity and real and imaginary part of the modulus (M). The XRD patterns of the pure polymer blend (PP) and PPL, PPLB, PPLC, PPLE, PPLT are depicted in Figure [120] at 18.34° and [032]+[112] at 23.66° The LiPF6 exhibits two strong peaks at 21°-26° and minor peaks at 42°, 51°, 57° Further addition of nanofiller may alter the polymer amorphous content due to the formation of the cation-nanofiller and the polymer nanofiller interaction. The addition of nanofiller in polymer salt matrix indicated backwards shift in PVC and PEO peaks toward lower angle side (2θ =13.88°, 16.68°) confirming the effect of nanofiller on PS complex. The addition of nanofiller has brought noticeable changes in the peaks with a shift in position and broadening. The shift of PEO peak toward lower angle side on the addition of Barium Titanate nanofiller suggests an increase in d-spacing of host PEO. This provides direct evidence of the presence of strong interaction between nanofiller and polymer salt complex. Figure On the other hand, Fig. shows the energy level of those counts. This result can be used as evidence to confirm the existence of nanofiller in the electrolyte membrane after the stirring, mixing and drying processes. FTIR spectroscopy was used for investigating the microscopic details of SPEs and was expected to provide interactions such as polymer ion interaction, ion-ion interaction and polymer ion filler interaction. Figure FTIR spectral absorption modes of the host polymer (PEO) shows clear evidence of interaction of electron donor group of the polymer chain with cation. The shift in the position of COC stretching mode at 1048 and 1113 cm -1 towards lower wavenumber side confirms the presence of strong interaction with salt (Table Figure The free FP6 -anion has 15 vibration modes and can be represented as: Of these modes, ʋ1(a1g), ʋ2(eg) and ʋ5(t2g) are Raman active, ʋ3(t1u) and ʋ4(t1u) are IR active, while the t2u is inactive where ʋ1 = 741, ʋ2 = 567, ʋ3 = 838, ʋ4 = 558 and ʋ5 = 470 cm -1 The effect of various nanofiller on the vibrational mode of PF6 -mode is visible in Fig 8 The typical vibrational mode of PF6 -anion in SPEs films have been observed in wavenumber region ~830-850 cm -1 and this shows asymmetry in peak as clearly visible in PS film (Figure and The deconvoluted pattern of SPE films with different filler concentration is shown in figure It is fairly known that peak at lower wavenumber is attributed to free ions and at higher wavenumber is due to ion pairs For the pure PEO polymer broad band observed between 2840 cm -1 and 2980 cm -1 is attributed to symmetric/asymmetric stretching mode of CH2. However, band splitting is seen as in figure Complex impedance spectroscopy is a useful technique in analysing the electrode electrolyte interface properties in determining equivalent circuit and circuit parameters. For pure polymer blend semicircle nature of curve is obtained with a diameter Rb extending along the real axis from the origin as in Figure The identical trend is obtained for all nanofiller dispersed polymer electrolyte films. In ideal situations, the impedance plot in low-frequency regions is expected to show straight line parallel to the imaginary axis. However, the doublelayer capacitive effect resulting as result of the blocking electrodes results in a semi-circular arc. The intersection of impedance spectra with the real axis represents bulk electrolyte resistance (Rb) for transportation of Li ions. At low frequencies, there is sufficient time to accumulate the space charge across the electrode electrolyte interface that results in an enormous increase in the measured capacitance An electrical equivalent circuit shows a parallel combination of constant phase element (CPE) and a resistance connected in series with another constant phase element (CPE). Former one represents the bulk properties of solid polymer electrolyte sample and later one double layer between electrode/electrolyte interfaces (as shown in inset). The presence of a CPE in the material sample reveals the multiphase character comprising of a microstructure having both crystalline, amorphous and a mixture of the two phases in the PS complex film and experimental pattern is in good agreement with each other that validate the authenticity of the investigation. Change in fitting parameters with various nanofiller shows a change in electrical properties due to their different particle size and Scherer length as evidence from the XRD. The parameters given in Table The ionic conductivity is one of the most important performance measures for SPEs and furthermore, a proper analysis of ionic conductivity data can reveal details about the conduction mechanism. The electrical conductivity of the SPEs films has been calculated from the complex impedance spectrum given in equation 2. The intercept of the high frequency semi-circular arc or spike with the real axis gives an estimate of the bulk d. c. resistance (Rb) Although the nanofiller content was kept constant (10 wt. %) in this study but from their different particle size and dielectric constant value it is expected that it may affect the polymer salt matrix differently. Although the dielectric constant is higher (~1700) for the BaTiO3 the large contrast in the dielectric constant of the polymer and nanofiller results in the inhomogeneity of the polymer nanocomposite matrix and that does not enhance the conductivity so much which shows a negative effect. The dielectric constant of Er2O3 is lowest (~12) among all but has highest ionic conductive that may be due to homogeneity in the electric field of both polymer and nanofiller owing to the small difference in the dielectric constant An excellent correlation of maxima in the fraction of free ion variation and conductivity with nanofiller content is in support of our scheme (Figure Where n is a fraction of free ion involved in ionic transport, q is ionic charge and μ (ion mobility) is strongly influenced by polymer chain segmental mobility. As q and μ are constant for a particular matrix so conductivity only depends on the number of free charge carriers as studied in followed section The desirable property of a solid polymer electrolyte is high ionic conductivity (σ) which is directly linked with number density (n), mobility (μ) of charge carriers and diffusion coefficient (D) for any plastic separator stands for electrolyte cum separator. Transport of lithium ions gives rise to conduction on the application of external potential. As from conductivity results it is observed that conductivity increases with addition of salt in pure polymer blend and further addition of nanofiller leads to enhancement with maxima for erbium oxide nanofiller. This enhancement in conductivity may be attributed to the increase of mobility or number density of charge carriers Both parameters depend on the number of free charges as ion pair formation or association may reduce the above number and mobility. As diffusivity is quite tedious to calculate experimentally, so impedance study directly provides this value using ionic conductivity. So it becomes important to study the number density of mobile ions and their mobility for performance and development of a good solid polymer electrolyte. Here the above parameters are calculated using the FTIR spectroscopy as proposed by Arof et al., The variation in conductivity can be related to the number density (n), mobility (μ) and diffusion coefficient (D) of charge carriers in the electrolyte. Diffusion is said to occur when ion jumps from one site to neighbouring coordinating site by exchange of position. FTIR deconvolution was done to determine the percentage area of free ion and ion pair and the areas are plotted as a function of various nanofiller (Figure In eqn (8 a), M is the number of moles of salt used in each electrolyte, NA is Avogadro's number (6.02×10 23 mol -1 ), VTotal is the total volume of the solid polymer electrolyte, and σ is dc conductivity. In eqn (8 b), e is the electric charge (1.602×10 -19 C), k B is the Boltzmann constant (1.38× 10 -23 J K -1 ) and T is the absolute temperature in eqn (8 c). η is viscosity in eqn (8 d) and r is radius of diffusing species (0.6 Å for Li). Table The reduction in viscosity further supports our achievement of highest conductivity and number of free ions for erbium oxide nano filler based solid polymer electrolyte Dielectric analysis of solid polymer electrolyte materials is desirable to investigate in detail the transport of ion and are explained in terms of the real and imaginary parts of complex permittivity (ε * ). The complex dielectric permittivity (real part of dielectric permittivity ε′ and imaginary part of dielectric permittivity ε′′) is plotted against the frequency in the range 1 Hz to 1 MHz for different nanofiller. The dielectric permittivity describes the polarizing ability of a material in the presence of an applied external electric field. As permittivity is a function of frequency so it is a complex quantity shown below (eq 9): The real part of dielectric permittivity (ε′) is proportional to the capacitance and measures the alignment of dipoles, whereas the imaginary part of dielectric permittivity (ε′′) is proportional to conductance and represents the energy required to align the dipoles. Here ε' is related to the stored energy within the medium and ε" to the dielectric energy loss of energy within the medium. The real and imaginary parts of the dielectric permittivity are evaluated using the impedance data by eqn 10 a & b : where Co (=εrA/t) is the vacuum capacitance, εr is the permittivity of free space and ω is the angular frequency. The complex dielectric permittivity (dielectric constant ε′ and dielectric loss ε′′) as a function of frequency with different nanofiller in log-log scale are shown in Figure BaTiO3> CeO2> no filler (polymer salt)> pure polymer blend. The polymer-ion-nanofiller interaction as evidenced by the FTIR weakens the polymer-ion and ion-ion interactions. This alteration enhances the polarization ability of the whole polymer matrix which leads to high dielectric constant. Now, in the high frequency window both ε′ & ε′′ exhibits the dispersion and is attributed to the bulk dielectric properties of the present system. The dielectric analysis was explored further in terms of the particle size and dielectric permittivity. In the present investigation, although the nanofiller content was fixed at 10 wt. % but they possess different particle size and dielectric constant. As the dielectric constant of the whole polymer matrix was three to four orders higher than the pure polymer salt system at a low frequency that indicates that the nanofiller strongly affects the polymer chain arrangement. The dielectric constant values are plotted against the crystalline size and the εr. From the figure 14 a it is observed that the both L and εr shows an atypical trend with the dielectric constant. The dielectric constant was higher for the Er2O3 nanofiller while its crystalline size is almost half than of BaTiO3 which has a high dielectric constant (Figure The low frequency response is coined by electrode polarization (EP) effect which is due to the formation of electric double layer capacitances due to free charge build up at the electrolyte/electrode interface. While the higher frequency region prevents the dipole structures to get sufficient time for fast response in changing ac electric field and hence there is a decrease in a number of dipoles which contribute to EP. This prevents the diffusion of ions in the direction of the field and results in a decrease in dielectric constant (ε′). Figure Figure In case of ionic conductors, at low frequency region EP is reflected by a significant increase in the dielectric loss i.e.ε " spectrum. At low frequency side of spectra low value of M ′ is observed and a non-linear behavior is seen with increase in the frequency. At low frequencies the observed values of dielectric permittivity do not refer to the bulk of the material; this is related to the so-called "interfacial polarization" dominant in these composites polymeric materials. To avoid contributing of the interfacial polarization, the modulus formalism can be used for analyses of the dielectric behavior of solid polymer electrolytes and is represented in terms of complex modulus (M * ) which is an inverse of the complex permittivity (ε * ) calculated using the formula shown below (equation 11 a & b): Where M ′ and M " are the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric modulus. At low frequency imaginary part of modulus, spectra show zero value which indicates the negligible electrode polarization due to lack of restoring forces leading the mobility of charge carriers under the action of an induced electric field and supports the long-range mobility of charge carriers The AC electrical measurements (AC conductivity) of PEO/PVC based solid polymer electrolyte were obtained at a frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz at room temperature. The frequency variation of real part of conductivity is shown in Figure Where ω is the angular frequency, ε o is the dielectric permittivity of the free space and ε " represents the dielectric loss. The conductivity for pure polymer blend is very low as observed in figure σ ′ and σ dc are the AC and DC conductivities of electrolyte, while A and n are the frequency independent Arrhenius constant and the power law exponent, respectively. Basically, ion migration at low frequency is faster and jump from one available site (ether group) to another in the host polymer matrix when the frequency is lower than the hopping frequency (ωp). The low frequency results in long relaxation time, and ion contribution is seen in dc conductivity. Two competing hopping processes are observed at high frequency: (i) jumping of ion back to its initial position (correlated forward-backward-forward), i.e., unsuccessful hopping and (ii) the neighbourhood ions become relaxed with respect to the ion's position (the ions stay in the new site), i.e., successful hopping The real and imaginary part of capacitance is calculated using the following equation 14 a-b. Where, Z′ and Z′′ are the real and imaginary part of the impedance, ω is the frequency. Here, C′ corresponds to the static capacitance of the system corresponding to electrode/electrolyte interface when measured at low frequency alternating current and C′′ corresponds to dielectric losses in the form of energy dispersion of the electrolyte. The variation of real and imaginary parts of the capacitance with the frequency for different nanofiller is shown in Fig. For systems under study, the value of capacitance at lower frequency changes with salt concentration and is highest for best conducting sample, i.e. With the increase in frequency, C′ sharply decreases with a saturation region above 10 kHz. The high value of capacitance at low frequency may be attributed to the contribution of more free ion in the system while at high frequency only the ions at electrode/electrolyte surface contribute For SPEs to be used in rechargeable battery applications, the principal charge carriers should be ions, and the fractional contribution of ionic conductivity to the total conductivity should be as close to unity as possible while the fractional contribution of the electronic conductivity should be negligibly small (close to zero). Therefore, it is necessary to determine the transference number due to ions and electrons. The transference number of an ion is the fraction of the total current that is carried by the respective ion across a given medium. The total effective ionic transference number of SPEs has been studied by separation of ion and electronic contribution. Variation of current as a function of time for the PS film and SPE films with different filler at room temperature are recorded as shown in Figure The current decays immediately and asymptotically approach steady state. The pattern shows two current one is initial current known as total current (it) and after that there is a sharp drop in the value of current with the passage of time. After some time current get a saturated and same trend of constant current is obtained for all the samples. The two processes of migration of ions under the influence of an external field and diffusion due to concentration gradients are hostile, and therefore after sufficiently long time, an establishment of steady state is reached. Initially in SPE membrane high current is attributed to migration of both electrons and ions while current after cell polarization due to blocking electrodes (SS) is attributed to movement of electrons only, known as residual electronic current (ie). The initial decrease in current until the saturation state is primarily due to the formation of the passivation layer on electrodes. Now, a concentration gradient of ions develops and opposes the applied current by diffusion of ions. As the polarization builds up because of the applied voltage, the ions were blocked at the blocking electrode thereby blocking the ionic current (iion), and the final current comprises only the electronic current (ie). A large transference number also indicates a reduction in concentration polarization i t = i ion + i elec Therefore σ electronic = σ electrical × t electronic The working voltage or electrochemically stability window of the SPEs membranes has been studied by observing the variation of current and voltage (I & V) using LSV technique (Figure The irreversible onset of the current determines the electrolyte breakdown voltage, which reveals the electrochemical stability of the system where no oxidation or reduction takes place. It indicates a gradual increase in the magnitude of current with the rise in the applied voltage across the cells. Initially there is almost constant current through the electrodes, while after that with an increase of voltage applied across cell configuration there is a slow increase in current and at some voltage beyond some limit abrupt change occurs in current which gives the voltage window of the membrane. The voltage value is obtained by the extrapolating point of intersection of two extrapolated lines of the high-voltage linear current trace and the low-voltage zero current trace parallel to the X-axis. PS complex sample seems to influence the oxidation kinetics in the cell. The addition of filler in PS films gives a safe operating range with the majority of the lithium battery electrode couples. During the LSV, the working electrode is polarized and the onset of the current may be taken as the decomposition voltage of the given polymer electrolyte. Further, the absence of negative current also indicates that there was no decomposition on the working stainless steel electrode In addition, the electrochemical stability window was investigated by the cyclic voltammetry analysis also between voltage range -2.5 V to + 2.5 V. To achieve high energy density (E = CV 2 /2), the high value of capacity (decided by electrode material) and working voltage (depends upon stability window of the electrolyte) are required. Since E depends upon the square of the voltage, hence it becomes an essential and desirable parameter for material development and application purpose To understand the individual role of the polymer, salt and the nanofiller a scheme is proposed (Figure This makes the polymer matrix unstable and the more disturbance in the arrangement of the polymer chain enhance the free volume required for on migration or it can be said that amorphous phase gets improved that is necessary for a fast ionic conductor. Since, the coordinating sites are crucial for the ion migration so now cation get additional sites which make the swim of cation at a faster rate as earlier. The nanofiller addition provides a conductive path to the cation that supports the smooth transport and takes part in conduction. As, all nanofiller have a different particle size and the dielectric constant so they interact in a different manner with the polymer salt system. But, the overall contribution of all nanofiller is to modify the structure of the polymer chain and provide additional coordinating sites so that cation may easily jump from one to another coordinating site. Free standing polymer nanocomposite films comprising of (PEO-PVC)+LiPF6 with 10 wt. % nanofiller (BaTiO3, CeO2, Er2O3 & TiO2) have been prepared through solution cast technique. X-Ray diffraction results confirm the polymer nanocomposite formation. The FTIR study indicated clear evidence for polymer-ion, ion-ion, and polymerion-nanofiller interaction. The deconvoluted pattern of anion peak (PF6 -) evidences maximum number of free ion for Er2O3 nanofiller. Impedance spectroscopy results provide evidence of bulk conduction as the major electrical transport process and the highest conductivity is ~2.3 × 10 -5 S cm -1 for 10 wt. % Er2O3. Ion transport number (~0.99) results indicate the SPE films to be predominantly ionic with broad voltage stability window (~ 3.5 V). The number density (n), mobility (μ), diffusion coefficient (D) and viscosity (η) of the nanofiller doped samples were found to increase with nanofiller up to erbium oxide and beyond this for titanium oxide doped, values of these three parameters decreased. The dielectric spectroscopy provides crucial information of increase in three to four order of the dielectric constant as compared to nanofiller free polymer salt matrix and decrease with increase of frequency with highest at low frequency window due to electrode polarization effect. Finally, a scheme is proposed to supports the experimental evidences and facilitate easy understanding of the role of nanofiller. 