We demonstrate insights into the three-dimensional structure of defects in graphene, in particular grain boundaries, obtained via a new approach from two transmission electron microscopy images recorded at different angles. The structure is obtained through an optimization process where both the atomic positions as well as the simulated imaging parameters are iteratively changed until the best possible match to the experimental images is found. We first demonstrate that this method works using an embedded defect in graphene that allows direct comparison to the computationally predicted three-dimensional shape. We then applied the method to a set of grain boundary structures with misorientation angles nearly spanning the whole available range (2.6 -29.8 • ). The measured height variations at the boundaries reveal a strong correlation with the misorientation angle with lower angles resulting in stronger corrugation and larger kink angles. Our results allow for the first time a direct comparison with theoretical predictions for the corrugation at grain boundaries and we show that the measured kink angles are significantly smaller than the largest predicted ones. Identifying the position of every atom in a sample is the ultimate goal of structural characterization. Although transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has already reached the spatial resolution to allow resolving all atomic distances Defects in graphene, the 2D allotrope of carbon, are expected to corrugate the structure. Such corrugations have been studied previously through simulations Here, we show that it is possible to obtain the 3D shape of defected graphene directly already from two experimental images obtained at different tilt angles. We first demonstrate our approach with an embedded graphene defect, for which the corrugated structure obtained from the experimental data can be directly compared with the one obtained computationally through energy optimization. Then, we move on to study the corrugations caused by grain boundaries in polycrystalline graphene. Importantly, both grain boundaries themselves as well as corrugations even in the absense of defects have been shown to significantly influence the properties of graphene While tilting, we track the sample to stay in the vicinity of the defect, and when the necessary tilt angle has been reached, we zoom in again and record the second atomic-resolution exposure. Even with this approach, the atomic structure at the defect often changes between the two recorded atomic-resolution images. However, it is also possible to obtain pairs of images of different defect structures where the atomic structure remained unchanged. Areas covered by contamination in each image have been masked in order not to confuse the reconstruction algorithm and the images have been high-pass filtered. An example is shown in Figure The first task for our reconstruction algorithm is the identification of individual atoms within each of the experimental images. This is achieved through an iterative process, where a model structure is compared at each step with the experimental image through image simulation (see Methods). Initially, the model contains no atoms. At each step, an atom is either added, its position is adjusted, or it is removed from the model. This is carried out by selecting a random position and either adding an atom there, or if there is an atom within a distance of r cut ≤ 0. Material (Video 1) and the evolution of σ as a function of the number of steps is shown in Figure Next, the topology needs to be established in order to allow identifying the same atom in each of the model structures. In our approach, this process is automated through the implementation of just a few rules. Firstly, two neighboring atoms need to be close enough (within 2 Å) to allow bonding. Secondly, no more than three neighbous are allowed for each individual atom. Finally, the formation of three-membered carbon rings is prohibited. These rules are based on the obsersavation of previous atomic-resolution studies of the structure of sp 2 -bonded defective carbon networks Next, we use the two experimentally obtained STEM images of this structure. Figure Additionally, we tested our method with a small rotated grain (flower defect Since a total of four images could be obtained from one particular grain boundary (GB), we further test the method by performing multiple reconstructions from different pairs of images. All of the reconstructed GBs show very similar tendencies to an out-of-plane deformation at the defect locations (see supplementary information). The consistent results are another confirmation for the reliability of our method. After establishing the reliability of the method for resolving the 3D structure, we move onto the analysis of graphene grain boundaries. GBs are a challenge for computational techniques, because they join together two crystalline grains with different orientations, hence they can neither trivially be incorporated into a periodic super cell required for most computational techniques nor can their effect on the surrounding graphene lattice be easily estimated with calculations using non-periodic structures since often only a short piece of a GB is visible in atomic resolution images. We present results for several GBs spanning misorientation angles In Figure When each of the structural characteristics are plotted as a function of the misorientation angle (θ) (Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated a new approach to determine the 3D structure of defective graphene at the atomic resolution from only two scanning transmission electron microscopy images taken at different sample tilts (with a respective difference of ca. 20 • ). We first showed an embedded defect for which the results could be directly compared to the structure obtained through energy minimization. The comparison revealed excellent agreement, except for small local height variations due to noise in the experimentally obtained structure. We then applied the method to a set of grain boundary structures with misorientation angles nearly spanning the whole available range (2.6 -29.8 • ). The measured height variations at the boundaries reveal a strong correlation with the misorientation angle with lower angles resulting in stronger corrugation and larger kink angle (slope difference for the graphene grains on the different sides of the boundary). The largest measured kink angle was almost 40 • for a GB with 2.6 • misorientation. As far as we know, our results allow for the first time a direct comparison with theoretical predictions for the corrugation at grain boundaries. The measured kink angles are significantly smaller than the largest predicted ones Samples-For our experiments, we studied chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown graphene. We used commercially available graphene on TEM grids (Graphenea on Quantifoil R2/4), as well as self-grown CVD samples transferred to Quantifoil 0.6/1 grids. In order to have a high defect density in our samples, we kept the growth temperature low (T = 960 • C), the flow rate high (S F = 100 sccm) and the annealing time as short as possible by starting the growth when the growth temperature is reached. As precursor, we used ethane which further increases the nucleation density. Microscopy-Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) experiments were conducted using a Nion UltraSTEM100, operated at 60 kV acceleration voltage. Typically, our atomic-resolution images were recorded with 512 × 512 pixels for a field of view of 8 nm and dwell time of 32 μs per pixel using the medium angle annular dark field (MAADF) detector. Conjugent gradient energy minimization-In order to study the strain adaptation in each of the defects, a supercell of pristine graphene with the size of 72×62 nm consisisting of 173,000 atoms was created and the defect structure is incorporated into this supercell. LCBOP Simulator code STEM image simulation-Instead a multislice algorithm, which is typically used for quantitative STEM-simulations, we used a simplified method which works for single layer materials and is much faster. We approximate the potential of the 2D lattice by a zero-filled image with non-zero pixel values on the atomic positions. The simulation is obtained by convoluting this image with a (potentially aberrated) electron probe (see supplementary information for more details).