A recent study of Mejia-Rodriguez and Trickey [Phys. Rev. A 96, 052512 (2017)] showed that the deorbitalization procedure (replacing the exact Kohn-Sham kinetic-energy density by an approximate orbital-free expression) applied to exchange-correlation functionals of the meta-generalized gradient approximation (MGGA) can lead to important changes in the results for molecular properties. For the present work, the deorbitalization of MGGA functionals is further investigated by considering various properties of solids. It is shown that depending on the MGGA, common orbitalfree approximations to the kinetic-energy density can be sufficiently accurate for the lattice constant, bulk modulus, and cohesive energy. For the band gap, calculated with the modified Becke-Johnson MGGA potential, the deorbitalization has a larger impact on the results. Kohn-Sham density functional theory and/or the second derivative of ρ (∇ 2 ρ): Considering how constructing a functional using more ingredients brings more flexibility to it, MGGA functionals should be universally more accurate than LDA and GGA functionals. As with GGA functionals, a plethora of MGGA functionals have been proposed (see Ref. 11 for an exhaustive list) and among the recent ones, SCAN On the other hand, ∇ 2 ρ-MGGAs have the advantage to be explicit functionals of ρ such that the functional derivative leads to a true KS (i.e., multiplicative) potential, which is not the case with t KS -MGGAs. Also, except for the problems with the high derivatives of ρ mentioned above, a new self-consistent implementation of MGGAs should be easier for ∇ 2 ρ-MGGAs. Thus, from the fundamental and practical point of views, ∇ 2 ρ-MGGAs are still of interest and worth to be further considered as done in recent works. The structure of the paper is the following. Section II provides a brief description of the theory and the computational details. In Sec. III, the results obtained with the deorbitalized MGGAs are presented and discussed, while Sec. IV provides some analysis and Sec. V gives the summary of this work. In the KS-DFT method, 2 the noninteracting kinetic energy component of the total energy is given by T KS s = t KS d 3 r, where t KS is given by Eq. (1). Note that another common expression for the integrand in and leads to the same value of T KS s since the integral of ∇ 2 ρ is zero. For the development of fully OF DFT methods where C TF = (3/10) 3π 2 2/3 . With respect to the exact values (T KS s ), the TF functional leads to underestimations for atoms where s = |∇ρ| / 2 3π 2 1/3 ρ 4/3 is the reduced density gradient and F s is the kinetic enhancement factor for which many forms have been proposed in the literature (see Refs. 46, 48-50 for compilations) like, for instance, those that were obtained using the conjointness conjecture between the exchange and kinetic energy functionals. where t TF = C TF ρ ) and despite some attempts, The ∇ 2 ρ-dependent KED t OF that we will consider for a replacement of t KS in xc-MGGAs are now listed (more detail can be found in the respective references). GEA2L It is important to mention that for all considered OF KED, we chose to enforce the lower bound t W ≤ t. We also mention that the generalization of the OF KED formulas for spin-polarized systems is trivially given by with t[2ρ σ ] being the non-spin-polarized formula in which ρ is replaced by 2ρ σ . The MGGA xc-energy functionals that we will consider to test the accuracy of OF KED are MVS The calculations were done with WIEN2k, We start with the results for the equilibrium lattice constant a 0 , bulk modulus B 0 , and cohesive energy E coh of 44 strongly bound solids (listed in Table Compared to SCAN and TM, the deorbitalization procedure of MVS leads to changes in the MAE that are in general clearly larger. This is due to the analytical form of MVS that depends more strongly on the KED. For instance, for B 0 there is a decrease in the MAE that is in the range 3.2-5.9 GPa, while for E coh the MAE of the t OF -MVS can be decreased by 0. are completely different and of opposite sign. Figure Thus, in summary the performance of a xc-MGGA functional for strongly bound solids is modified the least when t KS is replaced by t GEA2L , t TW02L , t PC , t CR , or t PCopt . For SCAN and TM the performance is overall little affected by the deorbitalization using one these OF KED, but more for MVS. Although the goal of replacing t KS by t OF in a xc-MGGA was not to improve the agreement with experiment, we mention that it is sometimes the case. By looking at the MA(R)E in Table In their work, Mejia-Rodriguez and Trickey 22 reported changes (due to the deorbitalization) in the MAE for bond lengths of molecules that are below 0.002 Å with MVS, which is small. The change in the ME can be larger in some cases, since while the ME is -0.0016 Å with MVS, it increases to 0.0069 Å with MVS(PC), but is rather similar, -0.0025 Å, with MVS(PCopt). The deorbitalisation of SCAN leads to larger changes in the MAE of bond lengths (up to ∼ 0.01 Å), but not for the ME since the largest change is ∼ 0.016 Å, which is barely larger than for MVS. From these results on molecular bond lengths, t PCopt seems to be a more accurate OF KED than the others. This is in line with our observation that t PCopt is among the most accurate OF KED for the lattice constants of solids. Concerning the heat of formation, Turning now to weakly bound van der Waals systems, Tables The range of errors in the lattice constant obtained in typical performance tests of DFT functionals on van der Waals systems (see, e.g., Refs. 14, 84-87) is by far much larger than for covalent or ionic solids. Hence, for our systems it should be fair to consider that the performance of a t KS -MGGA (with respect to other functionals) is not really modified by its deorbitalization if the change in the lattice constant is, let us say, below something like (this may be a matter of personal taste) ∼ 0.1-0.15 Å for the rare-gas (a 0 ) and layered solids (c 0 ). With this criterion, the results show that the replacement t KS → t OF in SCAN and TM leads to acceptable changes in the lattice constant in most cases except maybe Kr. With MVS, however, the changes are two or three times larger and unacceptable since they may affect the performance of MVS with respect to other functionals. TABLE III. Equilibrium lattice constant c0 (in Å) and interlayer binding energy E b (in meV/atom) of layered solids. The values for the t OF -MGGA functionals are the difference from those obtained with the parent t KS -MGGA, e.g., c0(t OF -MGGA)-c0(t KS -MGGA). The intralayer constant a was not optimized, but kept fixed at the experimental value. For the rare gases, the OF KED that leads overall to the smallest perturbations for the deorbitalization of the xc-MGGAs seems to be t TW02L . Note that t CRopt shows rather strange results since it is the worst when used in MVS and SCAN, while it is the best for TM. In the case of the layered solids, a good choice for t OF is t GEAloc for MVS and SCAN, while with TM all t OF except t GEAloc are of similar accuracy. Turning to the electronic structure, Table From the statistics shown in Table Finally, we note that a reoptimization of the parameters α and β in a OF mBJLDA potential [see Ref. 32 for details] may possibly lead to a (partial) recovery of the performance of the original mBJLDA potential. However, we have not made any attempts since this is beyond the scope of this work. Relative error (in %) with respect to experiment Thanks to their additional dependency on t KS , t KS -MGGAs are more flexible than GGAs and, therefore, have the possibility to be universally more accurate. As shown above, a t KS -MGGA can be replaced rather efficiently (albeit not systematically) by a corresponding FIG. ∇ 2 ρ-MGGA, and in order to shed some light on the relation between t KS and ∇ 2 ρ, a principal component analysis 102,103 (PCA) of t TF , t W , ∇ 2 ρ, and t KS has been carried out. From the PCA, an approximation for t KS that consists of a linear combination of t TF , t W , and ∇ 2 ρ is obtained, and its accuracy reveals to which extent t KS can be represented by ρ and its first two derivatives. The 4 × 4 covariance matrix was calculated using uniformly sampled data from one representative of metallic (Cu), layered (graphite), and covalently bound (Si) systems, and diagonalized in order to get the eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors spanning the fourdimensional space of t TF , t W , ∇ 2 ρ, and t KS . In the next step, we neglect the eigenvector with the smallest eigenvalue, thereby obtaining the three dimensional representation which explains most of the variance in the data. Now, assuming that all points are on this three dimensional hyperplane, one can reconstruct an OF KED from the values of ρ (i.e., t TF ), ∇ρ (i.e., t W ), and ∇ 2 ρ, and the resulting linear combination is given by The coefficient in front of t TF is close to 1 as it should be in order to recover the homogeneous electron gas limit, while those in front of t W and ∇ 2 ρ show big differences from GEA2L [Eq. (5)]. However, it is worth mentioning that a negative coefficient in front of t W is found also in GEAloc 62 (-0.165) and in a KED expression derived for the Airy gas 63 (-1/9 ≈ -0.111). Figure In order to provide some insight into the results presented in Sec. III, Fig. where ε F,a x is the exchange energy density [defined by Eq. ( shows the isosurface of that delimits values larger than 0.03 (where actually ) and highlights the two types of regions just mentioned above. The case of graphite was also discussed in Ref. 104, where the electron density and reduced density gradient s in the region between the layers were studied in detail. It was shown that an increase of the interlayer distance leads to a rather large increase of s overall, thus explaining the overestimation of the interlayer distance for GGA functionals with a too strong enhancement factor. Figure In Sec. III, we also observed that an OF KED that is among the most accurate for a property calculated with the total energy, may be among the most inaccurate for the band gap, or vice versa. For instance, while t PCopt and t CRopt are not among the best KEDs for total-energy related properties of strongly bound solids, they are the most accurate for the band gap. Such contradictory results could seem quite puzzling at first sight, however this should be rather simple to explain in most cases. Taking LiH as an example, Fig. As discussed in previous works, Thus, from this detailed discussion about LiH it is rather clear that different mechanisms have to be invoked in order to explain the trends observed for the lattice constant (a total-energy related property) and band gap, such that opposite conclusions for these two types of properties can be obtained. In this work, the deorbitalization of several xc-MGGA methods, three energy functionals and one potential, has been investigated by considering properties of solids. The replacement t KS → t OF in xc-MGGAs affects the results to some degree which depends on both the xc-MGGA under investigation and the used approximation for the OF KED t OF . Concerning the energy functionals for the calculation of the lattice constant, bulk modulus, and binding energy, we have shown that the results are in general more sensitive with MVS than with SCAN and TM, which should just be the direct consequence of the analytical form of the functionals that depends more strongly on the KED in the case of MVS. With SCAN and TM, the replacement t KS → t OF with most OF KED does not change much the results for strongly bound solids, such that the performance of a xc-MGGA remains pretty much the same. For the weakly bound rare gases, the change in the cohesive is usually large, while for the layered solids large changes in the interlayer distance are obtained with MVS. The deorbitalization of the mBJLDA xc-potential leads to appreciable changes in the band gap and only the OF KED t PCopt can be considered as a somehow reasonable replacement of t KS . Similarly as Mejia-Rodriguez and Trickey, tion is that deorbitalizing the mBJLDA potential leads to an increase of the MAE and MARE, no matter what OF KED is used. The deterioration is the smallest when t KS is replaced by t PCopt , and in this case the MAE increases from 0.47 to 0.67 eV and the MARE from 15 to 16%. This increase in the MARE is clearly negligible, but also quite acceptable for the MAE considering that most other potentials lead to larger MAE for this test set.