Controlling the interconnection of neighboring seeds (nanoflakes) to full coverage of the textured substrate is the main challenge for the large-scale conformal growth of atomic-thick transition metal dichalcogenides by chemical vapor deposition. Herein, we report on a controllable method for the conformal growth of monolayer MoS 2 on not only planar but also micro-and nanorugged SiO 2 /Si substrates via metal-organic chemical vapor deposition. The continuity of monolayer MoS 2 on the rugged surface is evidenced by scanning electron microscopy, crosssection high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, photoluminescence (PL) mapping, and Raman mapping. Interestingly, the photo-responsivity (~254.5 mA/W) of as-grown MoS 2 on the nano-rugged substrate exhibits 59 times higher than that of the planar sample (4.3 mA/W) under a small applied bias of 0.1 V. This value is record high when compared with all previous MoS 2 -2 based photocurrent generation under low or zero bias. Such a large enhancement in the photoresponsivity arises from a large active area for light-matter interaction and local strain for PL quenching, where the latter effect is the key factor and unique in the conformally grown monolayer on the nano-rugged surface. The result is a step toward the batch fabrication of modern atomic-thick optoelectronic devices. because of the indirect gap nature of tri-layer MoS 2 . Clearly, it is important to establish a synthesis method to produce monolayer MoS 2 on a large effective area, although reaction sources are rather limited in thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD). An alternative solution is to conformally grow monolayer MoS 2 onto rugged substrates. Rugged substrates not only offer more active areas but also increase light mater interaction through their improved light trapping capabilities, which can eventually enhance photocurrent generation in an optoelectronic device. However, it is highly unlikely to acquire a conformally grown monolayer MoS 2 film over a rugged substrate via a conventional CVD technique using solid-phase precursors such as MoO 3 , MoCl 5 , and S. In this article, we report a record enhancement in photocurrent generation in the conformal monolayer MoS 2 on planar, micro-rugged, and nano-rugged surfaces grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). Surprisingly, monolayer MoS 2 on the nanorugged surface shows 59 times higher photocurrent compared to the case on the planar surface. The multifold increase in photocurrent generation could be understood in terms of (i) enhanced optical absorbance due to large active area and improve light-matter interaction and (ii) local strain that induces significant photoluminescence (PL) quenching. The latter effect is especially unique in our approach that arises basically from suppression of exciton recombination upon the band structure modification, thereby boosting the collection of charge carriers. Our study implies that MOCVD is a feasible route to ensure the large-scale conformal growth of monolayer MoS 2 , which is important for realizing atomically thin, high-performance optoelectronic devices. In order to synthesize conformal monolayer MoS 2 on a large scale substrate, MOCVD was employed using molybdenum hexacarbonyl (Mo(CO) 6 ) and diethyl sulfide ((C 2 H 5 ) 2 S) as the precursors. Figures Interestingly, we found that the PL peak position varies depending on the underneath terraces. In particular, this PL peak roughly centers at ~668 nm for the flat surface of SiO 2 /Si substrate, but it is utterly blue-shifted to the wavelength of ~663 nm for the patterned surface in the nano-rugged specimen. For the micro-rugged sample, the mapping data reflect the gradual distribution of PL wavelengths in between the two extremes. While PL peaks are prominently located at the wavelength of 663 nm on the inward bending surface, they are scattered toward longer wavelengths on more localized planar portions without curvature. This wide distribution in the PL peak position can be interpreted by local strain induced by underneath scaffolds. The CPD contrast in the planar sample seems to be originated from the grain boundaries, as revealed in the TEM images (Figure The low-frequency PSD of the nano-rugged sample is larger than that of the planar sample, since the characteristic spatial frequency of the surface roughness is hundreds of nm, as shown in that also induces wide spectral distributions as shown in Figures The top and side views of our photo-response devices are schematically illustrated in Figure For comparison with the previous reports, the photo-responsivity, which is known as the key value for the assessment of the photodetector efficiency, was calculated using, 