We demonstrate a broad, flat, visible supercontinuum spectrum that is generated by a dispersion-engineered tapered photonic crystal fiber pumped by a 1 GHz repetition rate turn-key Ti:sapphire laser outputting ∼ 30 fs pulses at 800 nm. At a pulse energy of 100 pJ, we obtain an output spectrum ,that is flat to within 3 dB over the range 490-690 nm with a blue tail extending below 450 nm. The mode-locked laser combined with the photonic crystal fiber forms a simple visible frequency comb system that is extremely well-suited to the precise calibration of astrophysical spectrographs, among other applications. D OPPLER spectroscopy of stars using high-resolution astrophysical spectrographs enables the detection of exoplanets through measurement of periodic variations in the radial velocity of the host star Existing astro-comb architectures are based on near-infrared source combs (e.g. Ti:sapphire, Yb/Er fiber), so providing visible calibration light for an astrophysical spectrograph typically requires a nonlinear optical element to coherently shift and broaden the source comb radiation. Early astro-combs derived from Ti:sapphire source combs relied on second harmonic generation (Dated: A better alternative to frequency doubling is to pump a highly nonlinear photonic crystal fiber (PCF) with the source comb to take advantage of supercontinuum generation Beyond spectral bandwidth, another property that is desired for astronomical calibration applications is spectral flatness, i.e., low intensity variation across the band of the calibration source. Spectral flatness is valued because calibration precision is both shot-noise-and CCD-saturation-limited. Therefore the largest photoelectron count below CCD saturation per exposure provides the optimal calibration. This condition is best fulfilled for a uniform intensity distribution over all the comb peaks In the present work, we show that careful dispersionengineering of a PCF by tapering enables the production of a very broad, flat, and high-intensity optical supercontinuum spectrum from pump radiation emitted by a turnkey Ti:sapphire comb. Previous attempts to produce such a supercontinuum from a Ti:sapphire comb have reported relatively low spectral coverage (500-620 nm) and large intensity variations (∼ 10 dB) across the band In our application, we consider a PCF with a 2.8 μm core diameter and an 850 nm zero dispersion wavelength (NKT Photonics NL-2.8-850-02). The cross section of the fiber is shown in Figure To design a device capable of producing a flat visiblespanning spectrum when pumped with 800 nm femtosecond pulses, we model optical pulse propagation in the PCF by solving the generalized nonlinear Schrödinger equation (GNLSE) as outlined in Appendix A. In our design, we consider a specific taper geometry, as shown in Figure In addition, the effective area was evaluated for each PCF diameter according to the computed curve in terms of the normalized variables shown in the inset of Figure We design a taper geometry for our PCF with the following parameters: d 0 = 2.8 μm, d w = 1.5 μm, L 0 = 50 μm, L t1 = L t2 = 5.5 mm, L w = 900 μm and L 1 = 9.55 mm, as shown in Figure The pump radiation for the PCF is sourced from a taccor comb (Laser Quantum). This system is a turn-key 1 GHz Ti:sapphire mode-locked laser with repetition rate and carrierenvelope offset stabilization. The Ti:sapphire mode-locked laser is based on the technology described in Ref. By integrating the GNLSE (see Appendix A) with a fourthorder Runge-Kutta method, we investigate idealized pulse evolution in the tapered PCF assuming an initial Gaussian pulse shape of the form Here, T 0 is the pulse FWHM, P 0 ≈ 0.94E p /T 0 is the pulse peak power, and E p is the pulse energy. Figure 12 ≈ 1) across the whole spectral region containing significant optical power. Following the above design, the tapered PCF was fabricated from NL-2.8-850-02 fiber by M. Harju at Vytran LLC on a GPX-3000 series optical fiber glass processor using a heat-and-pull technique. Measurements from a micrograph of the fabricated device (Fig. We compared our measured and simulated output spectra for the tapered PCF (Fig. Despite the differences described above, the simulations The spectra were recorded with 100 pJ coupled into the tapered PCF. The bandwidth and flatness of the green and blue traces can be compared to the PCF output spectrum from the currently deployed astro-comb system qualitatively reproduce the trend in the visible region quite well: initial symmetric broadening is followed by a wide, flat spectral plateau forming to the blue side of the pump; also, at high pump powers, the blue-shifted radiation separates into a distinct feature with a spectral gap between the pump and the dispersive waves. Experimentally, E p ≈ 100 pJ is an ideal operating point for an astro-comb, because it produces the flattest spectrum. In a second test, we varied the input polarization using the half-wave plate at constant coupled pump power. The results are shown in Figure V. CONCLUSION Comparing the usable (visible) comb light from our new design to the previous-generation astro-comb, which was based on a different laser frequency comb and tapered PCF Our new astro-comb (employing the turn-key laser and tapered PCF described in this work) is expected to reach a radial velocity precision of < 10 cm/s (i.e., < 200 kHz in units of optical frequency) in a single exposure, required for detection of terrestrial exoplanets in the habitable zone around Sun-like stars. This is similar to results demonstrated in Ref. In addition to the calibration of astrophysical spectrographs used for Doppler velocimetry of stars, our tapered PCF design may find applications in optical coherence tomography (OCT) In summary, we demonstrated a tapered PCF that produces spectrally flat light almost spanning the entire visible range when pumped by a turn-key GHz Ti:sapphire laser. Our result represents a marked improvement in the amount of optical bandwidth available to calibrate a visible-wavelength spectrograph. This work also enables a simple visible frequency comb system without the need for spectral shaping. We describe the propagation of optical pulses in PCFs using the generalized nonlinear Schrödinger equation (GNLSE). Here, we work in the interaction picture and use a frequency domain formulation, following Ref. Table In terms of the GNLSE, the PCF is entirely described by D (ω), γ (ω) and R (t). The fiber material is fused silica, so we take f r = 0.18, τ 1 = 12.2 fs, and τ 2 = 32 fs as given in Ref. Note that in tapered geometries, both the dispersion operator and the frequency-dependent nonlinear parameter become functions of z as well, i.e., D (ω) → D (ω, z) and γ (ω) → γ (ω, z) We use a first-order measure g 12 to evaluate the coherence where • • • is an ensemble average over N propagations of the simulation. Each run of the simulation differs by some noise injected into the input field. We include only a shot noise seed and no spontaneous Raman noise, as shot noise has been shown to be the dominant noise process This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JLT.2018.2872423, Journal of Lightwave Technology. 0733-8724 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.