In the present study, we report the synthesis and characterization of a low-temperature solution-processable monodispersed nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) nanoparticles via a combustion synthesis using tartaric acid as fuel and demonstrate its performance as hole transport layer (HTL) for Perovskite Solar Cells (PVSCs). NiCo2O4 is a p-type semiconductor consisting of environmentally friendly, abundant elements and higher conductivity compared to NiO. We show that the combustion synthesis of spinel NiCo2O4 using tartaric acid as fuel can be used to control the NPs size and provide smooth, compact and homogeneous functional HTLs processed by blade coating. Study of PVSCs with different NiCo2O4 thickness as HTL reveal a difference on hole extraction efficiency and for 15 nm optimized thickness enhanced hole carrier collection is achieved. As a result, p-i-n structure of PVSCs with 15 nm NiCo2O4 HTLs showed reliable performance and power conversion efficiency values in the range of 15.5 % with negligible hysteresis. Over the last few years, a great deal of effort has been made to improve photovoltaic performance based on organic-inorganic lead halide perovskites, which has been reported to exhibit power conversion efficiencies (PCE) over 20 %. The combustion technique appears to be versatile and effective for the synthesis of high crystallinity solution-processed metal oxides thin films using low temperature. [36-39] Since it is an exothermic process, with a high heat release rate, the need for high temperatures is avoided and the production of high purity and homogeneous nanoparticles formation is simultaneously achieved. [40-42] For the production of metal oxides, liquid phase combustion synthesis has proven to be the most suitable, where usually metal salts (for instance nitrates) serve as oxidizers dissolved in saturated aqueous or alcoholic solutions in combination with organic fuels (e.g. urea, glycine, citric acid and others). [35,43,44] Upon heating gelation occurs and then combustion process starts resulting in the synthesis of the corresponding metal oxide. [33,45] The combustion synthesis of metal oxides exhibits great advantages comparing to other nanoparticle synthesis methods; namely, simple experimental setup, reduced number of post-processing steps, formation of nanoparticles without agglomeration, high purity of materials and precise control of particle's size and crystallinity by adjusting the processing parameters. [30,32,46-50] In general, the reaction mechanism of the combustion is affected by many factors such as the type of fuel, fuel-to-oxidizer ratio, ignition temperature and the H2O content of the precursor blend. [33,34,51,52] Nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) is a p-type transparent conductive oxide (TCO) semiconductor consisting of abundant and environmentally friendly elements (Co, Ni), with a relatively wide optical band gap (~2.1 -2.4 eV), deep-lying valence band (VB of 5.3 eV) that matches well with the VB of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite semiconductor and a much better conductivity than NiO and Co3O4 (at least two orders of magnitude higher). Up to now various low-temperature synthetic routes such as hydrothermal, coprecipitation, [61,62] and thermal decomposition of the precursors such as hydroxide nitrates [63,64] and hydrazine carboxylate hydrates, [65] have been developed for the synthesis of NiCo2O4. Moreover, nanostructured aggregates of NiCo2O4 have been synthesized by employing heterometallic alkoxide precursor in the presence of a supramolecular liquid. [66] However, the production of high purity and monodispersed nanoparticles with the above mentioned synthesis approaches has not been completely achieved. In this work, we present a one-step synthesis of low-temperature solutionprocessable nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) via combustion chemistry proposing for the first-time tartaric acid as a fuel and nitrate as an oxidizer agent. NiCo2O4 nanoparticles (NPs) with an average size of ~4 nm and narrow particle-size distribution were prepared using a cost-effective, low-temperature combustion synthesis method calcinated at 250 o C for 1 hour. Those ultrafine nanoparticles enable the formation of compact, very smooth, high electrically conductive and relatively optically transparent NiCo2O4 films, which were utilized, for the first time, as HTLs in a solution processed p-i-n perovskite solar cell (PVSC). The effect of NiCo2O4-HTL thickness on PVSC characteristics is also investigated. A comparative study of devices incorporating different thickness of NiCo2O4-HTLs reveal a difference in hole extraction efficiency. The photo luminance spectroscopy measurements on perovskite films shown a reduced electron-hole pair recombination for the optimized 15 nm thick NiCo2O4-HTL. Additional electro-impedance spectroscopy and Mott-Schottky measurements on PVSC confirm the better hole extraction inducing an enhancement in the PVSC characteristics and negligible PCE hysteresis. The corresponding PVSC exhibits a high FF ≈ 80 % and a reliable performance with PCE of 15.5 %. The results demonstrate the great potentials of applying the low-temperature combustion synthesis for fabrication of highly reproducible and reliable metal oxide NPs which can be used for the formation of HTLs in variety of solution processed printed electronic devices. Combustion synthesis has been applied recently for the low-temperature fabrication of metal oxide thin films. It is well documented in the literature that thin metal oxide films can be obtained at temperatures lower than bulk-like powders via combustion synthesis because of the enhanced gas transport mechanisms and the easier out-diffusion of volatile products. Thin films of NiCo2O4 NPs were produced on top of quartz and ITO substrates using the blade coating technique, applying the processing parameters as described in the Experimental section. Figure Complete p-i-n architectures of PVSCs were fabricated employing NiCo2O4 NPs thin films with three different thicknesses, 30, 20 and 15 nm. On top of each NiCo2O4 layer, a 230-nm-thick perovskite film was developed as described in Experimental section. The deposited perovskite film exhibits a low roughness of 5.4 nm (Figure Concretely, for the reversed sweep the Voc was increased from 0.90 to 0.99 V and the FF from 53.0 to 79.9 %, while the hysteric on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) for the 15-nm-thick NiCo2O4 layer is negligible. On the other hand, the short circuit current (Jsc) showed the lowest increase (~ 8%) for a forward sweep from 18.47 to 19.94 mA/cm 2 , compared to both Voc and FF. Consequently, the device consisting of a 15-nm-thick NiCo2O4 film exhibits a PCE as high as 15.5 % for the forward sweep. The PCE of devices with thinner NiCo2O4 layers was declined (not shown here) exhibiting high leakage current due to not fully covered ITO. To further understand the charge recombination processes during the hole transfer from perovskite to NiCo2O4 layer, we performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements under solar light and zero bias. Figure al. and thus higher photogeneration of electron-hole pairs as well as to the lower series resistance as shown in Table In conclusion, a low temperature combustion synthesis method, using for the first time a tartaric acid as a fuel, was successfully developed and applied for the fabrication of compact films of p-type NiCo2O4 NPs. The size of the NPs was fully controlled due to the usage of tartaric acid leading to the formation of monodispersed NiCo2O4 NPs with a diameter of ~4 nm. The combustion proceeds under low temperature (250 oC) and within a short reaction time (1 h), produce high quality, homogeneous NiCo2O4 NPs films with high electrical conductivity (~4 S.cm-1) and very low roughness (0.56 nm) functional layers were fabricated. The detailed physicochemical characterization of the NiCo2O4 NPs using X-ray diffraction, EDS and electron microscopy measurements confirm the high purity, crystallinity and small grain composition of the NiCo2O4. Furthermore, the proposed synthetic approach allowed the production of compact films using blade coating, which is a large-scale compatible technique appropriate for the development of printed electronic devices. The impact of NiCo2O4 HTL thicknesses on PVSCs characteristics were also investigated. The optimum thickness found to be 15 nm showing enhanced charge carrier collection and negligible J-V hysterics, compared to thicker films, delivering reliable p-i-n PVSCs with a PCE of 15.5 %. We believe that the proposed combustion synthesis method using a tartaric acid as a fuel can provide a route to produce highly reproducible metal oxides suitable for use in a range of advanced materials applications. Materials: Pre-patterned glass-ITO substrates (sheet resistance 4Ω/sq) were purchased from Psiotec Ltd, Pb(CH3CO2)2.3H2O from Alfa Aesar, MAI and MABr from Dyenamo Ltd, PC [70]BM from Solenne BV. All the other chemicals used in this study were purchased from sigma Aldrich. Pb(CH3CO2)2.3H2O:Methylamonium iodide (1:3) at 36 %wt in DMF with the addition of 1.5 % mole of methylamonium bromide (MABr). Characterization: Thermogravimetric (TGA) and Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA) were performed on a Shimadzu Simultaneous DTA-TG system (DTG-60H). 