Additional electromagnetic waves and additional boundary conditions (ABCs) in nonlocal materials attracted a lot of attention in the past. Here we report the possibility of additional propagating and evanescent waves in local anisotropic and bi-anisotropic linear materials. We investigate the possible options for ABCs and describe how to complement the conventional 4 Maxwell's boundary conditions in the situations when there are more than 4 waves that need to be matched at the boundary of local and linear quartic metamaterials. We show that these ABCs must depend on the properties of the interface and require the introduction of the additional effective material parameters describing this interface, such as surface conductivities. Optical fields in conventional local optical materials follow quadratic dispersion conditions, e.g. in vacuum. The k-vectors of the plane waves that compose these fields belong to quadratic surfacesspheres, hyperboloids, ellipsoids, i.e. such k-surfaces (or iso-frequency surfaces) are described by the second order polynomials in k-vector components for any frequency In this paper we first demonstrate that the additional waves may theoretically arise in local anisotropic or bi-anisotropic media and then discuss the corresponding ABCs for the boundaries of these media. We show that these ABCs must depend on the properties of the interface and require the introduction of the additional effective material parameters describing this interface, such as surface charges and conductivities, which correspond to the discontinuities of the normal components of fields and tangential components of the fields . We demonstrate that such interfaces can support electromagnetic surface waves that are composed from up to 8 evanescent waves in the interfacing media. Here we focus on bi-anisotropic quartic metamaterials with material relation of the form [15-20] where ̂, ̂, ̂, ̂ are 3x3 tensors characterizing dielectric permittivity, magnetic permeability and magnetoelectric coupling. The dispersion relation in such materials is given by the quartic equation [21] with 35 coefficients . In the sum the powers i, j, l, m run from 0 to 4 such that . We would like to start by demonstrating that even anisotropic local materials without magnetoelectric coupling can feature additional waves. Indeed, if for some direction in such a material, say for y-direction, the projection of D and/or B vectors are identically zero for any electric and magnetic fields E, H, then this should be expressed as and/or . In this circumstance any k-vector in this direction gives a solution of Maxwell's equation, since the corresponding system of equations reduces to 4 or 5 equations for 6 components of vectors E, H. For example, consider a material with material relation ̂ ̂ ̂ , where matrices ̂ and ̂ are given in Fig. [ ̂ ] and ̂ [ ̂ ] and we change from 0 to 1. For (red dots) there are 2 real roots, corresponding to waves propagating phase in the positive and negative z-directions, and 2 roots that are complex conjugated of each other, i.e. the related waves decay in the positive and negative z-directions, with no additional waves. For (blue dots) there are 4 waves all decaying in the positive z-direction, i.e. 2 additional evanescent waves. Now let us turn to a boundary between two quartic metamaterials ( ) and ( ) located in xy-plane at . Solutions of Maxwell's equations with different longitudinal kvectors in each material are linearly independent due to translational symmetry. For a fixed Eq.( for 8 unknown coefficients which are the amplitudes of the waves composing the field at the quartic boundary. We start by considering a boundary between two quartic media with matrices ̂ shown in Fig. The multitude of the possible solutions of Maxwell's equations which arise at the boundary of two identical media upon identical excitation means that the difference between these solutions