Entropy is a fundamental thermodynamic quantity that is a measure of the accessible microstates available to a system 1 , with the stability of a system determined by the magnitude of the total entropy of the system. This is valid across truly mind boggling length scales -from nanoparticles to galaxies 2,3 . However, quantitative measurements of entropy change using calorimetry are predominantly macroscopic, with direct atomic scale measurements being exceedingly rare 4 . Here for the first time, we experimentally quantify the polar configurational entropy (in meV/K) using sub-ångström resolution aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy. This is performed in a single crystal of the prototypical ferroelectric LiNbO 3 through the quantification of the niobium and oxygen atom column deviations from their paraelectric positions. Significant excursions of the niobium-oxygen polar displacement away from its symmetry constrained direction is seen in single domain regions which increases in the proximity of domain walls. Combined with first principles theory plus mean field effective Hamiltonian methods, we demonstrate the variability in the polar order parameter, which is stabilized by an increase in the magnitude of the configurational entropy. This study presents a powerful tool to quantify entropy from atomic displacements and demonstrates its dominant role in local symmetry breaking at finite temperatures in classic, nominally Ising ferroelectrics. While absolute entropy, a fundamental thermodynamic parameter, is difficult to experimentally measure macroscopically, a change in entropy (∆S = ∆Q rev /T), is usually measured using calorimetry, where ∆Q rev is the reversible heat supplied to the system at a constant temperature T 1, Ferroelectric materials have a spontaneous and switchable electrical polarization, which is a consequence of the lattice distortions in the crystal structure that break inversion symmetry To visualize the atom positions at the 180 • domain wall and also at the bulk domain, we imaged the electron transparent LiNbO 3 sample from the 1 100 crystallographic zone axis so that the Ising displacements lie in plane. While both bright field (BF) and annular dark field (ADF) STEM images were acquired (Figure The total polar displacements are calculated per unit cell, with respect to a mean unit cell calculated from the entire image (Figure Figure From the Ising and Néel displacements which we map in Figure To visualize the polar behavior away from the domain wall, we also imaged a section of the bulk domain, approximately 100nm away from the domain wall in Figure To understand the origin of the observed polar instabilities, we performed DFT calculations of phonons in the high symmetry phase of LiNbO 3 . In agreement with previous calculations we observed three unstable modes at the Γ point -A 2u and E u polar modes with polarization parallel and perpendicular to the [0001] direction respectively and the A 2g Raman mode (see Figure Moreover, we observe that the polar displacements along the Néel/Bloch direction (associated with the doubly degenerate E u mode), are unstable and the system can thus lower its energy with polar displacements perpendicular to the [0001] Ising direction. This can explain our experimental results, i.e. the presence of Néel and Bloch polarization directions at the domain wall where the Ising polarization amplitude is strongly reduced along the Ising direction. Besides that, within a bulk ferroelectric domain, the E u mode instability is suppressed by the A 2u mode condensation and the associated strain relaxation, however the energy land-scape is still sufficiently shallow to allow deviations of local dipole directions from the Ising 〈0001〉 axis. Thus while the A 2u mode is the dominant mode driving ferroelectricity, the instability from the E u modes makes it energetically favorable for the non-Ising fluctuations to arise from the ideal LiNbO 3 polar configuration, thus increasing disorder in the system. The resultant energy landscape related to the displacements of atoms strictly perpendicular to the 〈0001〉 Ising axis (E u mode) complies with SU(1) unitary group rotation symmetry resulting in the famous Goldstone sombrero potential shape with zero Ising component (Figure The standard accepted method for quantifying disorder is entropy. This can be succinctly expressed through the famous Gibbs-Boltzmann's formulation where S is entropy, N is the number of states, k b is the Boltzmann's constant, and ρ is the probability of a state. Thus a single-state system has zero entropy, while entropy increases with increasing disorder, or increasing number of states. In this work, we measure polar entropy through the quantification of the probabilities of the observed polar displacements (ρ) , where each possible displacement configuration is a single state. It can thus be deduced also that a monodomain system with a constant value of polar displacement has zero polar entropy. Experimental quantification of the probabilities (ρ) of polar displacements along the Ising and Néel displacement orientations in the bulk domain (representative image shown in Figure To measure the effect of the electron beam on the measured entropy, a series of Gaussian probability distributions were deconvolved from the experimentally measured displacements, and the resulting probability distributions that resulted in the lowest entropy value was chosen. Considering the deconvolution of the Gaussian probability distributions, we have calculated a standard deviation (σ) of 8.7 pm at the bulk domain and 11.7 pm at the domain wall for the microscope instability (detailed in section B). It should be noted that this σ is similar in magnitude to error distributions reported in previous STEM measurements of oxide displacements The resulting probability distribution after the deconvolution process is used to calculate the polar entropy contribution as a function of the possible Ising and Néel states. Figure This picture changes in the proximity of the domain wall (defined here as ≈ ±10nm across the wall -with the STEM image of the representative section shown in Figure Our results presented here are the first known experimental quantification of configurational entropy of polar displacements from atomic resolution position metrology. Theoretically predicted and experimentally measured entropy reveals a classical single crystal Ising ferroelectric, hiding considerable local intrinsic disorder that is present even in the bulk domain. This is despite LiNbO 3 having only a single symmetry allowed net polarization direction, large coercive fields for domain reversal, and a high Curie temperature indicating its stability at room temperature Following the preparation of electron transparent samples, we first imaged the LiNbO 3 foil with conventional TEM (CTEM) mode at a slight defocus to locate and identify the domain walls from their diffraction contrast. Following the identification of the domain walls, we subsequently used STEM imaging in a spherical aberration corrected FEI Titan 3 transmission electron microscope, corrected for upto third order spherical aberrations. Annular dark Field Scanning TEM (ADF-STEM) imaging was performed using Fischione detectors at a camera length of 145mm with an inner collection semi-angle of 32mrad, and an outer collection semiangle of 188 mrad. Bright Field Scanning TEM (BF-STEM) images were simultaneously collected with Gatan detectors with an outer collection semi-angle of 15mrad. Simultaneous BF-STEM and ADF-STEM imaging was performed with fast scan directions oriented at -5 • and 85 • with respect to the 11 20 crystallographic axis. The two image sets were combined and subsequently corrected post acquisition for scan drift using a previously developed procedure Entropy measurements are performed using STEM data acquired at both the domain wall and the bulk domain. Since the average pixel size for the experimental setup is approximately 10pm, and the approximate image size is approximately 2000 × 2000 pixels, a representative image can visualize a 400nm 2 area. Thus images captured at the domain wall with the domain wall centered in the image field of view, still have approximately 10nm of the domain on either side. Entropy calculations are performed on one full image, and thus domain wall entropy measurements also include contributions from approximately 10nm of the domain on either side of the boundary. On average, the BF-STEM images from our experimental conditions correspond to approximately 800 unit cells. The polar displacements at each of the individual locations were subsequently sorted into 0.1pm bins, from -50pm (minimum) to 50pm (maximum) of displacement magnitude -both for Ising and Néel displacements with a total of 1001 × 1001 possible displacement configurations. Thus, if a certain unit cell corresponds to an Ising displacement of 25.386pm, and a Néel displacement of -12.456pm, it will be assigned to the bin corresponding to the displacements of 25.3 to 25.4 Ising displacements, and -12.5 to -12.4pm of Néel displacements with one unit cell corresponding to one displacement observation. Following assignment of all the observed displacements for one full image into their respective bins, the total number of observations for each bin is divided by the total observations made for the entire image. This is the probability (ρ) of observing a displacement corresponding to that bin position. To quantify the effect of displacement bin size in estimating the entropy, we redid the calculations on one of the datasets -Ising entropy calculations at the domain wall with varying bin sizes from 0.1pm to 1pm as shown in Figure A shortcoming of this technique is however rooted in the fact that the measured entropy is a function of the total observed vibrational probability -which is a combination of the intrinsic disorder of the system itself, instabilities in the electron microscope, and induced entropy originating from the interaction between the crystal and the electron beam. While it is the intrinsic material entropy that we ideally want to measure, because of the two latter effects our measured entropy overestimates the entropy in the system. Since these measurements were performed using a single crystal of LiNbO 3 where there is a remnant intrinsic entropy even in the bulk domain, there is no reference lattice to measure the microscope instabilities. In fact even a reference lattice measurement may underestimate entropy -for example, SrTiO 3 , an ubiquitous oxide substrate is an incipient ferroelectric, with thin freestanding SrTiO 3 being a ferroelectric To estimate the contribution from measurement we assume that the instabilities can be expressed as a twodimensional Gaussian distribution with a σ x and a σ y . The same assumption was also made for electron beam induced atom vibrations -and this is justified since the Debye-Waller parameters for both Niobium and Oxygen ( u Nb = 0.3924 and u O = 0.5 Thus, the Gaussian function can be written as: This is a probability distribution, since: Since this is the microscope instability probability, the Gaussian is centered at μ x , μ y = 0, then Equation B1 can be expressed as: . Using the Boltzmann definition of entropy, and inputing Equation B4 in Equation 1 where ∆S e refers to the microscope contribution to measured entropy. Thus, as Equation B5 demonstrates, the total entropy increases monotonically with σ x and σ y . To obtain the intrinsic probability, a deconvolution of the measured probability distribution function with a Gaussian PDF is thus required. It can be easily deduced that the microscope contribution to the entropy is mathematically analogous to a blurring function commonly encountered in optics. Thus, the experimentally measured probability is the material probability convolved by a point spread function (PSF) of the instrumental vibrations, with the PSF assumed to be Gaussian in this case. To deconvolve the underlying entropy, we can thus use the Richardson-Lucy deconvolution to iteratively obtain the unblurred PDF Thus for a certain value of σ x and σ y , the deconvolved probability as a function of σ x and σ y can be expressed as where * is the complex conjugate of a function . Thus, the decrease in entropy ∆C as a result of the deconvolution : Since we do not possess a reference lattice from which a point spread function could be deduced, we measured ∆C σ x ,σ y for both Ising and Néel displacements in the bulk domain and at the domain wall. For Néel displacements in the bulk domain, the ∆C σ x ,σ y reaches a minima with a σ x = 3.6pm as demonstrated in Figure Extending the deconvolution to the proximity of the domain wall, we observe that the maximum decrease in entropy occurs for both Néel and Ising displacements when the measured probability distribution function is deconvolved with a Gaussian with σ = 11.7pm. It is interesting to note that the σ x and σ y is larger in the proximity of the domain wall, than in the bulk domain. However, since the experimental data for both regions was acquired back to back in the same experimental session -it is highly unlikely that the microscope is quantifiably less stable at the domain wall than at domain. Rather, any Gaussian features in the proba- Visually, we can understand the effect of the deconvolution by observing the σ x = 3.6pm and σ y = 8.7pm Gaussian distribution in Figure Similarly, plotting the effects of the σ x , σ y = 11.7pm Gaussian point spread function in the proximity of the domain wall, we find a marked sharpening of the deconvolved probability distribution function in Figure Thus, we observe around ≈ 25% reduction in the measured entropy due to the deconvolution. The entropy of displacements (S) were subsequently calculated from the deconvolved probability distributions as per Equation 1. First principles calculations were done using the density functional theory approximation as implemented in the ABINIT software package (v.8.4.3) (0, 0, 1 /2) Nb1 (0, 0, 0) O1 ( -1 /3, -1 /3 + x, 7 /12) O2 ( 1 /3 -x, -x, 7 /12) O3 (x, 1 /3, 7 /12) TABLE I. Calculated hexagonal co-ordinates of atoms of the primitive unit cell of paraelectric LiNbO 3 . The lattice parameters are a = 518pm and c = 1364.6pm. where x denotes the amplitude of the mode M. Similarly, performing calculations of energy changes induced by displacements involving not a single but two phonon modes allows to reconstruct the effective mode interactions that we take here to be of the form where x and y denote the amplitudes of the M 1 and M 2 modes. The interaction of local modes with strain is taken into account by fitting the dependences of elastic stresses on the mode amplitudes. Finally, the elastic energy produced by the deformations of the cell shape and volume is taken into account in the harmonic approximation. The elastic constants are computed from density functional perturbation theory. Note that in the case of the Eu mode, all the energy expansion coefficients are assumed to depend on the displacement direction in the (0001) plane, however the calculations show that such in-plane anisotropy can be safely neglected. In the described model, the short-range and long-range dipolar interactions between different modes are taken into account in the mean-field approximationthese energetic contributions essentially lead to renormalization of the κ M and f M 1 M 2 coefficients. To determine the most important low-energy atomic displacements patterns we further performed the density functional perturbation theory calculations so as to identify low frequency phonon modes for the obtained ground state. Four other domain wall regions (labeled as regions 2-5) in addition to the region imaged in the main text (Figure We roughly estimated the charge accumulation from the polar distortions to get an estimate in the energy magnitudes of electrostatic potential energy and the thermodynamic free energy decrease from the entropy. Charge calculations were performed by first estimating the Born effective charge tensors theoretically, with the calculated Born effective charges presented in Table where q x refers to the charge at a certain pixel, and r x y refers to the distance between distance between the x th and the y th pixel. The term 1 /2 prevents double counting the potential energy contribution between x and y, and y and x positions. The ε LiNbO 3 is 4.821 The electrostatic potential energy in the bulk domain from our calculations of polarization come out to be 0.37meV in the bulk domain and 0.45meV in the proximity of the domain wall. In contrast, the -T ∆S at 300K is -213meV at the bulk domain and -273meV in the proximity of the wall. Thus, the magnitudes are significantly different, and electrostatics would not prevent polar fluctuations. metrology, with the simulation parameters being enumerated in Table Fred C Adams and Gregory Laughlin. A dying universe: the long-term fate and evolution of astrophysical objects. Reviews of Modern Physics, 69(2):337, 1997. Enno Kätelhön, Stanislav V Sokolov, Thomas R Bartlett, and Richard G Compton. The role of entropy in nanoparticle ag-