We derive the effective Ginzburg-Landau theory for finite momentum (FFLO/PDW) superconductivity without spin population imbalance from a model with local attraction and repulsive pairhopping. We find that the GL free energy must include up to sixth order derivatives of the order parameter, providing a unified description of the interdependency of zero and finite momentum superconductivity. For weak pair-hopping the phase diagram contains a line of Lifshitz points where vanishing superfluid stiffness induces a continuous change to a long wavelength Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state. For larger pair-hopping there is a bicritical region where the pair-momentum changes discontinuously. Here the FF type state is near degenerate with the Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) or Pair-Density-wave (PDW) type state. At the intersection of these two regimes there is a "Super-Lifshitz" point with extra soft fluctuations. The instability to finite momentum superconductivity occurs for arbitrarily weak pair-hopping for sufficiently large attraction suggesting that even a small repulsive pair-hopping may be significant in a microscopic model of strongly correlated superconductivity. Several generic features of the model may have bearing on the cuprate superconductors, including the suppression of superfluid stiffness in proximity to a Lifshitz point as well as the existence of subleading FFLO order (or vice versa) in the bicritical regime. Periodically modulated superconductivity is a common theme in several fields that deal with quantum manybody physics; ranging from cold atoms and solid-state systems, to dense nuclear matter Lacking a clear microscopic origin of the PDW state Using a unified description of the full momentum dependence of the GL theory clarifies the interdependence of zero and finite momentum states. In particular, we emphasize that proximity to an FFLO state is quite generically expected to suppress the zero momentum superfluid stiffness, as a result of the GL free energy developing an additional minimum (minima) at finite momentum. Given recent observations of PDW order this may have implications on the general observation of low superfluid stiffness of the cuprate superconductors The paper is organized as follows. In Section II the pair-hopping model is described and the derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau theory is discussed. The mean-field phase diagram in terms of a single momentum dependent theory is considered in Section III. Proceeding in Section IV the corresponding BCS to BEC phase diagram (shown in Figure To keep the discussion as general as possible we consider a 2D continuous field theory with on-site s-wave pairing and pair-hopping with summation over repeated indices, and We define g pair = αg 0 as the strength of the pair-hopping interaction and g = g 0 (1 -4α) as the strength of zero momentum attraction. We consider α > 0, i.e. repulsive pair-hopping. Further, we consider a type II superconductor and ignore fluctuations of the gauge field. We consider the model (1)-( We address the model using a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation for a bosonic finite momentum pair field ∆(p, iΩ m ) with Ω m = 2mπ β , a bosonic Matsubara frequency, which couples bi-linearly to the electronic field (see Appendix A). Integrating out the fermions, and expanding to fourth order in the pair field, we write the partition function Z = Z 0 Tr e -βF (∆) in terms of the GL free energy functional (where the quartic term is written schematically, for details see Appendix A). Here T (p) = 1 -2α cos( λ 2 p x ) -2α cos( λ 2 p y ) and G(k, iω n ) = 1 iωn-ξ(k) , with fermionic Matsubara frequency ω n = (2n+1)π β , and dispersion We expand around the normal state of the dominant mode Q, ∆(Q) = 0, thus our theory will hold near T c . At this mode, the quartic term takes the form (In the case of expansion around two simultaneous modes additional interactions should also be included as discussed in Section V.3). Further, Γ -1 (p, iΩ m ) has a logarithmic UV-divergence which we regularize by introducing a high energy cut-off ε Λ = Λ 2 2m (we set ε Λ = 80ε F ). To characterize the phase diagram of the model we first study the GL free energy, F M , which is the static field (mean-field) version of (3). The interaction T (p) is FIG. where a ∼ ρ s , the superfluid stiffness, as discussed in Section V.1. (For convenience we have fixed the magnitude of the Q 6 term.) The theory ensures that u > 0, b > 0, but r, a, and c can have either sign. In minimizing the energy in terms of momentum, Q, and order parameter, ∆ Q , we can pick Q + (Q -= 0) without loss of generality The phase diagram in the (r, a, c) space is outlined in Figure To find the phase-diagram within the BCS to BEC crossover we go beyond mean-field theory by not only considering the Thouless criterion but also the condition for a fixed particle number where n F is the free fermion density and n B the contribution from pre-formed pairs (neglecting O(∆ 4 )). Thus, we solve for T c , μ c for a given g, α. In the weak coupling limit, g → 0, the pairs are loosely bound with n F n B , yielding the BCS expression μ = ε F , with ε F the bare Fermi energy. As the interaction increases, μ will become negative, with all fermions bound up in pairs (n F n B ), which in turn will condense, see Figure The details of the analysis concerns the general form of n B = -Tr Γ ∂Γ -1 ∂μ , which is determined by the analytical structure of the pair-propagator, Γ(p, z), representing the two-particle spectrum where we have expanded i = ± around the saddle point (p = Q + q), before performing the Matsubara sum over z = iΩ m . is the boson mass, reflecting the curvature at the saddle point. For the Q = 0 saddle point the mass is isotropic m ± B ∝ a -1 from (6); while for the Q + > 0 FF state the mass is anisotropic, with m - B ∝ (bQ 2 0 ) -1 and m + B ∝ (-4a -2cQ 2 0 ) -1 . To regularize the IR-divergence of the 2D bosonic occupation and emulate the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition [47], we follow Stintzing et al. Note that the lack of a Goldstone mode associated with reorientation of the modulation vector ensures that n B remains finite at finite Q. This is in contrast to rotational invariant models where n B diverges Using (9) will provide a valid description for the strong and weak coupling limit. For intermediate coupling, μ ∼ 0 and n B ∼ n F , this analysis could be improved upon by including interaction with scattering states The solution to For small g we see the expected BCS behavior T c ≈ 1. We now show that any finite α leads to an instability towards FF (a < 0). First, note that the existence of a Lifshitz point is equivalent to a diverging bosonic mass, or vanishing phase-stiffness (assuming finite κ Q ), which leads to increased fluctuation, and according to (9) T c → 0, which is clearly seen in Figure With α = 0 we find the expected m B → 2m. Instead, for α > 0 there is always a g = g c with a divergent mass, proving the existence of the Lifshitz point. g c (α) is shown as a blue line in Figure Here we discuss some experimental and theoretical implications of the pair-hopping model for systems without spin-population imbalance. To discuss the 2D superfluid (or phase) stiffness ρ s and the corresponding transverse penetration depth λ = d/4μ 0 e 2 ρ s (with d the thickness) we have to make an extrapolation into the ordered state. (As we focus in this work on behavior at T c , detailed calculations are left for subsequent studies.) Here we will consider only the isotropic case, i.e. the normal Q = 0 superconductor, where ρ s = a i |∆(T )| 2 , and focus on the behavior as a Lifshitz point is approached. Here a i and κ (see below) are as in However, since our model close to the Lifshitz point is in the BEC limit, it would not be expected to have a Fermi surface even in the normal state (in the some temperature range above T c ) in contrast to overdoped LSCO. The minimization of the GL free energy with respect to Q is equivalent to the condition that the supercurrent J = dF/dQ vanishes, as required by Bloch's theorem for ground state currents A phenomenological GL-model for LO/PDW order In the FF regime there is a 4-fold degeneracy between states at Q = ±Q 0 Q+ and Q = ±Q 0 Q-, also, at the proposed bicritical point there is degeneracy between SC and FF. With interactions of the form We will not discuss this in detail but only infer three important regimes (see Appendix B): (i) For Q → 0 we find γ(0, 0) = 2u(0), which implies that FF is stable for small Q, i.e. around the Lifshitz point. This also shows that near the super-Lifshitz point the transition is bicritical, as opposed to tetracritical. We have also checked that this holds for larger Q near T c . (ii) At strong coupling, μ < 0, the FF state is stable for small enough Q, determined by the binding energy of the pairs. (iii) Then we are only left with the possibility of forming an LO state in weak-coupling, μ > 0, for larger Q. In this case, the FF state depends on parameters in greater details. Extrapolating our model to T < T c we find an instability towards the diagonal LO state (PDW) ∆ Q = ∆ -Q , with Q = Q 0 Q+ (or equivalent). Also the LO-FF hybrid type state, ∆ Q+ = ∆ Q-, such that ∆( r) ∼ e iQxx/ √ 2 cos(Q y y/ √ 2) which breaks both time reversal and translational invariance, is stable (but subleading to LO) at low temperature. Additional states, e.g. checkerboard containing all four degenerate FF states are also possible . that may turn the 1st order SC-LO transition to a coexistence phase. We have seen how an arbitrarily weak repulsive pairhopping for sufficiently strong local attraction, g, leads to an instability from zero to finite momentum superconductivity. At weak pair-hopping, this is manifested as a dome of T c versus g ending at a superconducting Lifshitz point with a transition into a long-wavelength Fulde-Ferrell state. At larger pair-hopping, the dome is hidden under a bicritical transition where the system changes from SC with subdominant FF or LO order, to a state where the roles are reversed. At the intersection of Lifshitz and bicritical behavior, there is a "super-Lifshitz" point with extra soft fluctuations and distinct critical exponents. The Lifshitz transition forces the system to the strong coupling regime, μ < 0, with pre-formed pairs in the normal state, whereas the bicritical transition occurs in the weak to intermediate coupling regime, μ > 0. The explicit derivation of the GL theory of a finite momentum superconductor from a microscopic model also brings into focus the issue of stabilizing a superconductor with finite phase velocity[1] but zero current, consistent with meta-stability of the two (±Q) components of an LO/PDW state. Even for a system with population imbalance, the FFLO order is very delicate[1; Making connections to the cuprate superconductors it is natural to speculate (given recent evidence for PDW order Several features of the model remain to be explored further. This includes a more detailed study of the relative prevalence of the various FF/LO type states, and to include charge order that may additionally favor LO over FF. For this, extending the calculation into the ordered state by self-consistently solving for the pair-field will be necessary. This would also allow for a detailed study of the electromagnetic response of the model with interesting implications such as the anisotropic Meissner state expected in the FF/LO state as well as the interplay between SC and PDW order in the vortex state. The properties of a quantum Lifshitz point We anticipate that the onset of instability, in general, will occur at finite momenta Q, i.e. In Figure Γ -1 (p, iΩ m ) shows a logarithmic UV-divergence which we regularize by introducing a high energy cut-off ε Λ = Λ 2 2m . However, in 2D the instability to a superconducting state is in fact equivalent to the existence of a bound state Here ε Λ cancels exactly in Γ -1 (p, iω n ). In this work we keep the explicit cut-off, however we note that (A6) yields μ → -E B /2, in the strong coupling limit ( μ/T → -∞), i.e. we have to overcome the binding energy in order to break the pair. To investigate the possibility of other composite orders we include all anticipated modes, -Q, 0, Q, -Q, Q FIG. (where We find the following additional terms of the free energy (arising from u(p 1 , p 2 , p 3 )) where represented as Feynman diagrams in Figure inatorial factors arise from cyclic permutation and charge conjugation. However, for the second charge conjugation is included explicitly in (S7).) ) and (S8) we see that that (0, 0) = 2u(0), and correspondingly (Q, Q 0 ) > p u(Q)u(Q 0 ) holds for small lies that the FF state is stable for small Q. We can understand this from the proximity in parameter space rm state. Whereas FF corresponds to a small deformation of the SC, with locally preserved superfluid linear combination of the four FF states will have nodes in the real space pair wave-function and fails to age locally of the full condensation energy. coupling, μ < 0, where the binding energy of the pair, E b ⇠ |μ|, is much bigger than the modulation 2 , we anticipate the integrand of u and to be similar (i.e. for Q < Q c with Q c / p |μ|) . This was erically and indeed we find (Q, Q 0 ) > u(Q), thus FF is stable against forming nodes even in this case. en left with the possibility of forming a LO state in a weak-coupling system, μ > 0, at larger Q. We do tability towards LO at T c in the presented parameter regime. But, if we extrapolate below the critical e T < T c we find an instability towards the diagonal LO state (PDW) Q = Q , with Q = Q 0 Q+ or However, we are departing from the validity regime of this analysis by extrapolating below T c . One simple t would be to consider expanding around a saddle-point in the ordered phase. This is left for future works. At strong coupling, μ < 0, where the binding of the pair, E B ∼ |μ|, is much bigger than the modulation energy, ∼ Q 2 , we anticipate the integrand of u and γ to be similar (i.e. for Q < Q c with Q c ∝ |μ|) . This was checked numerically and indeed we find γ(Q, Q ) > u(Q), thus FF is stable against forming nodes even in this case. We are then left with the possibility of forming a LO state in a weak-coupling system, μ > 0, at larger Q. We do not find instability towards LO at T c in the presented parameter regime. But, if we extrapolate below the critical temperature T < T c we find an instability towards the diagonal LO state (PDW) ∆ Q = ∆ -Q , with Q = Q 0 Q+ or equivalent. However, we are departing from the validity regime of this analysis by extrapolating below T c . One simple improvement would be to consider expanding around a saddle-point in the ordered phase. This is left for future works. The contribution to the density of fermions from preformed pairs is given by which is determined by the analytical structure of the pair-propagator Γ(p, Ω), describing a two-particle spectrum , at all interaction energies, as well as a two particle continuum represented by a branch cut for Ω(p) > -2μ + p 2 i 4m i B . In the weak-coupling limit, where μ = ε F , this leads to relaxation dynamics due to decay of weakly bound pairs. Nevertheless, n B turns out to be negligible because of the high phase stiffness, or small bosonic mass, in accordance with the BCS results. However, in strong coupling limit μ → -E B /2, and the branch cut and pole becomes increasingly separated. Thus, the low energy physics is well described by only keeping the, now freely propagating, bound state and (C1) takes the form Here we expanded around a saddle point is the boson mass, reflecting the curvature at the saddle point. In the strong coupling limit one finds . At this point we run in to an expected problem, that there is no long range order superconductivity in 2D. This becomes apparent since the Bose-integral in (C2) diverges in 2D. There is however a transition in the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) sense, where the low energy state is one with quasi-long range order and a finite superfluid density. However the physics of the KT-transition is lost by resorting to the Gaussian approximation , where q 2 z = 2m z B T is the thermal expectation value of the momenta in the z-direction where we introduced the dimensionless momenta qi = q i / 2m i B T and the integration is done over a sphere of infinite radius. The second term, n B , vanishes for α = 0. But, even for finite α, this term can be neglected for small enough densities, mg 2πnBλ 2 α (where mg 2πnBλ 2 0.1, in this work). Thus, we find presented in From the divergence of the bosonic mass we anticipate a suppression of T c due to the increase of fluctuation. Indeed, from (C4) the divergence of mass is accompanied by a suppression of T c to zero. However, strictly speaking, for m B → ∞ the derivation of (C4) breaks down since the inclusion of higher order kinetic terms necessarily become of importance and will regulate the divergence of n B as m B → ∞ (for fixed T ). We employ the expansion 4 , where m B , c are evaluated at the stable point Q, and study corrections when m B → ∞ for two cases. (Here we neglect cross terms like bq 2 + q 2 -which do not change the result presented below. Also, note that b, c is not the same as in equation There is an anomalous time-dependent term η Q zq + , which arise in the expansion of Γ -1 for Q 0 > 0, Γ -1 (p, z) ≈ r Qκ Q z + a Q,i 2 q 2 i + η Q zq + , i = ±. The inclusion of this term shifts the location of the poles for finite q + and (9) would take the same form, but with κ Q → κ Q (1+q + η Q /κ Q ). We note that, approximately, the highest momenta of relevance in (9) is q 2 max ≈ T κ Q /a Q . From the simulations we have found q max η Q /κ Q 0.1 and this term was excluded. One interesting feature that can be seen from Figure 