Superconductivity in FeSe has recently attracted a great deal of attention because it emerges out of an electronic nematic state of elusive character. Here we study both the electronic normal state and the superconducting gap structure using heat-capacity measurements on high-quality single crystals. The specific-heat curve, from 0.4 K to Tc = 9.1 K, is found to be consistent with a recent gap determination using Bogoliubov quasiparticle interference [P. O. Sprau et al., Science 357, 75 (2017)], however only if nodes are introduced on either the electron or the hole Fermi-surface sheets. Our analysis, which is consistent with quantum-oscillation measurements, relies on the presence of only two bands, and thus the fate of the theoretically predicted second electron pocket remains mysterious. In cuprate and iron pnictide superconductors there are strong indications that pairing is magnetically mediated, i.e. by the exchange of spin fluctuations Unlike in pnictides, long-range magnetism is absent in FeSe, although strong magnetic fluctuations exist at low temperature Experimentally and theoretically, there is an emerging consensus for extremely anisotropic gaps in FeSe. Using low-temperature Bogoliubov quasiparticle interference and scanning tunneling microscopy (BQPI/STM), Sprau et al. Figures Figure A simple inspection of the data shown in Fig. Further evidence for the existence of nodes can be obtained by examining the field dependence of (T, H) ⌘ C e (T, H)/T in the mixed state depicted in Fig. , in nodal superconductors due to the Doppler shift experienced by the quasiparticles with momentum near the nodal directions. As illustrated in the inset of Fig. gμB , is estimated to be of the order of 18 T in FeSe. In the following we make a direct comparison of our heat capacity with that calculated from the BQPI/STM measurements. We use the data Sample 2 with a near zero value of 0 . In Fig. Here, we impose equal density of states on both bands as inferred from the quantum-oscillation data (see Supplementary Note 5), so that in principle there are no fit parameters. C e /T derived from the BQPI/STM gap structure reproduces our data very well, but only down to T /T c ⇡ 0.3. Below this temperature, the calculation underestimates the specific heat, reflecting the existence of low-lying nodal excitations in our crystals (see Fig. To improve the agreement at low temperature, we modify our fit of h,e ( ) to allow for the possibility of line nodes on either the hole or the electron band, as displayed in Figs 3d and 3g (red areas), respectively. In both cases, the calculation, shown respectively in Figs 3e-f and 3hi, is now in excellent agreement with our measurements over the entire temperature range. This provides another strong indication for the existence of line nodes in FeSe. This is also consistent with the recent calculations of Benfatto et al. The exact electronic structure in the nematic state of FeSe is still highly disputed. Theoretically one expects to have one hole and two electron bands In conclusion, we have reported a detailed study of the thermodynamic properties of FeSe single crystals. We consistently find a linear electronic specific heat C e /T for T << T c indicative of the bulk existence of line nodes. This nodal behavior is found to be quite robust and persists in samples with significantly depressed T c . Our results are consistent with a two-band scenario i.e. a Fermi surface that consists of one hole and one electron pockets only. The fate of the theoretically predicted second electron pocket remains unclear and must be related to the elusive nature of the nematic state.