Direct energy bandgap materials are crucial for the efficient optoelectronics devices. Therefore, the investigation of new direct gap materials is important. In the present work, two novel d-metal sulfides Sc2CdS4 and Y2CdS4 compounds are investigated by using the all electron full potential linearized augment plane wave method. Both the compounds show semiconducting nature and direct band gap with a value 1.886eV for Sc2CdS4 and 2.209eV for Y2CdS4, respectively. Strong hybridization between S-p and Sc/Y-d orbitals present among valence and conduction bands which is beneicial to electrical transport. Key optical parameters are calculated. The static value of the reflectivity R(0) and refractive index n(0) are vary inversely with the energy band gap (Eg). Both the compounds Sc2CdS4 and Y2CdS4 are P-type thermoelectric materials because the Hole carriers dominate the electronic transport. High optical and thermal response for all compounds reveals that they are potential candidates for optical and thermoelectric devices. Semiconductors with the band gap in the energy range~1.5eV are perfectly considered as ideal materials for the solar cell development with high proficiency The spinel materials X2YZ4, with both X and Y are (metallic elements) and Z belongs to (O, S, Se, Te) chalcogenides family, has motivated various researcher half metallicity nonlinear optical susceptibility Different physical properties of the d-metal sulfides Sc2CdS4 and Y2CdS4 have been calculated using the state of the art density functional calculations. The full potential scheme of linearized augmented plane wave plus local orbitals is used as implemented in the Wien2K computer package The The calculated electronic band structures of Sc2CdS4 and Y2CdS4 compounds are displayed in Fig. Despite no experimental value of the compounds is available in the literature, we believe that these values are more accurate and could be closer to the measured band gap of the materials. Therefore, from now on, only results obtained through Modified Becke-Johnson exchange (mBJ-GGA) potential are reported. The effective mass of the compounds is also calculated from the bands structure at the Γ symmetry point. From the Table The total and partial densities of states (DOS) of Sc2CdS4 and Y2CdS4 compounds are illustrated in The linear optical responses of the compounds were reported in the energy range from 0-15eV as presented in Fig. (in Ǻ) and optimize volume (in Ǻ 3