The quantitative characterization of the microstructure of random heterogeneous media in ddimensional Euclidean space R d via a variety of n-point correlation functions is of great importance, since the respective infinite set determines the effective physical properties of the media. In particular, surface-surface Fss and surface-void Fsv correlation functions (obtainable from radiation scattering experiments) contain crucial interfacial information that enables one to estimate transport properties of the media (e.g., the mean survival time and fluid permeability) and complements the information content of the conventional two-point correlation function. However, the current technical difficulty involved in sampling surface correlation functions has been a stumbling block in their widespread use. We first present a concise derivation of the small-r behaviors of these functions, which are linked to the mean curvature of the system. Then we demonstrate that one can reduce the computational complexity of the problem, without sacrificing accuracy, by extracting the necessary interfacial information from a cut of the d-dimensional statistically homogeneous and isotropic system with an infinitely long line. Accordingly, we devise algorithms based on this idea and test them for two-phase media in continuous and discrete spaces. Specifically for the exact benchmark model of overlapping spheres, we find excellent agreement between numerical and exact results. We compute surface correlation functions and corresponding local surface-area variances for a variety of other model microstructures, including hard spheres in equilibrium, decorated "stealthy" patterns, as well as snapshots of evolving pattern formation processes (e.g., spinodal decomposition). It is demonstrated that the precise determination of surface correlation functions provides a powerful means to characterize a wide class of complex multiphase microstructures. Random heterogeneous media are ubiquitous and arise in many applications in physics, materials science, biology, and geophysics. Examples of such media include composites There are a variety of two-point structural descrip- * torquato@electron.princeton.edu tors, including the two-point correlation function S 2 These surface correlation functions determine rigorous upper bounds on the fluid permeability k of porous media and mean survival time τ associated with diffusion-controlled reactions among traps. These twopoint "interfacial-surface" bounds have been shown to be much sharper than the so-called two-point "void" bound involving S 2 alone, reflecting the importance of surface correlation functions. For isotropic media in three-dimensional Euclidean space, these involve the following two key integrals: where F vv is just another way to write S 2 for the void phase if we focus on porous media, i.e., F vv ≡ S 2 , and φ 1 is the volume fraction of the void phase. A schematic plot of the correlation functions is shown in Fig. while the two-point "void" bound is where φ 2 is the volume fraction of the solid phase. Similarly, the analogous bounds on the mean survival time are given by and where D is the diffusion coefficient of the reactant. The fact that the key integrals in these bounds on the fluid permeability are the same as those for the mean survival time is more than a coincidence. Indeed, k is rigorously bounded from above in terms of τ for general media V (R) within a spherical observation window of radius R in d-dimensional Euclidean space R d is given by where is the autocovariance function associated with S 2 (r), and v 1 (R) is the volume of a d-dimensional sphere of radius R, and α(r; R) is the scaled intersection volume, the ratio of the intersection volume of two spherical windows of radius R whose centers are separated by a distance r to the volume of a spherical window. A two-phase system is hyperuniform with respect to volume-fraction variances if σ 2 V (R) decreases more rapidly than R -d for large R where is the autocovariance function associated with F ss (r). A two-phase system is hyperuniform with respect to surface-area variances if σ 2 S (R) decreases more rapidly than R -d for large R Similar to the two-point correlation function S 2 , surface correlation functions can be related to and obtained from the scattering intensity as well A two-phase random medium is a domain of space V ⊆ R d that is partitioned into two disjoint regions that make up V: a phase 1 region V 1 of volume fraction φ 1 and a phase 2 region V 2 of volume fraction φ 2 For statistically homogeneous media, the volume fraction for phase i is a constant. The two-point correlation function is defined as For homogeneous media, this quantity only depends on the relative displacement vector r ≡ x 2 -x 1 . The two-point correlation function simplifies as S 2 (x 1 , x 2 ) = S 2 (r). If the system is also statistically isotropic, then S 2 (r) depends only on the radial distance r = |r|. The interface indicator function is defined as The specific surface is the expected area of the interface per unit volume, and for homogeneous media is simply the ensemble average of the interface indicator function, i.e., The surface-surface correlation function measures the correlation between two points on the interface, and for homogeneous media is defined as The surface-void correlation function measures the correlation between one point on the interface and the other in the void phase, and for homogeneous media is defined as Higher-order surface correlation functions are similarly defined Closed-form expressions for the two-point surface correlation functions are very limited. The most notable one is for the model of overlapping spheres and where r = |r| is a radial distance, η = ρv 1 (a) is a reduced density and Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. Here, is the two-point correlation function for the "void" phase. These relations were first given by Doi Using the canonical function H n and where s = dη/a is the specific surface, δ is the radial Dirac delta function, and m is the sphere indicator function. The quantity h(r) is the total correlation function defined as h(r) = g 2 (r) -1, where g 2 (r) is the pair correlation function, and ⊗ denotes the convolution of two functions. The impenetrability constraint alone is not sufficient to specify the hard-sphere model; a hard-sphere system can be in equilibrium or be derived from an infinite number of nonequilibrium ensembles A. The small-r behavior of Fss and Fsv in general Debye and co-workers We restrict ourselves to the discussion of systems with interfaces that are differentiable everywhere. This assumption enables us to approximate the vicinity of a point on the interface with planes or spheres in the following discussion. The small-r behavior of the surface-surface correlation function is straightforward to obtain. First, randomly pick a reference point p 0 on the interface (with specific surface s for the entire system). Second, consider a concentric shell with radius r to r + dr around the reference point, then a local specific surface of the shell can be defined as dr → 0. The quantity F ss (r) is then the product of the specific surface s of the system and the average local specific surface over the interfaces (the local specific surface is defined at every point on interfaces, thus can be integrated to compute the average). We present a schematic plot that elucidates the derivation in Fig. For d = 2, following the same method we have Since the zeroth-order approximation of F ss (r) is divergent as r → 0, we will not discuss higher-order finite correction terms here The determination of the small-r behavior of the surface-void correlation function is more involved. Again, we randomly pick a reference point p 0 on the interface. Next consider a "test" sphere of radius r centered at the reference point. We denote by P sv (p 0 ) the following conditional probability: given a point p 0 on the interface, the probability that a uniformly and randomly placed vector r emanating from p 0 lands in the void phase. The quantity F sv (r) is then the product of the specific surface of the system s and the average of P sv (p 0 ) over the interfaces, i.e., F sv = s P sv (p 0 ) . Since it is more convenient to illustrate the basic idea behind the computation in two dimensions and the result can be easily generalized to three dimensions, a schematic plot that elucidates our approach is illustrated in Fig. Average out this quantity on interfaces, we get the final result where 1/r c (p 0 ) is the average of 1/r c (p 0 ) on interfaces. Following the same procedure in three dimensions, we find Thus we have However, in three dimensions, the curvature varies when the normal plane rotates, and hence here 1/r c (p 0 ) is to be interpreted to be the mean curvature at the point. One should also notice that 1/r c (p 0 ) is a signed quantity in general, although we only illustrate the positive situation in Fig. where B( d-1 2 , 1 2 ) is the beta function. Using this approach, the connection between the small-r behavior of F sv (r) and mean-curvature interfacial growth problems Remarks: Note that when the "test" sphere of p 0 intersects with the nondifferentiable singularities, such as edges or corners, the derivation above breaks down. Thus, Eqs. ( Here we remark on phase-interchange relations involving the surface-void correlation function F sv . For a twophase medium, since the sum of indicator functions for phase 1 and phase 2 is unity everywhere, we have Furthermore, if the two phases are statistically the same, these surface-void correlation functions are constants which is a remarkable relation given that it applies to complex microstructures with such symmetries. This will be verified in Sec. VII. Despite the fact that surface correlation functions contain crucial microstructural information, the technical difficulty involved in computing them has been a stumbling block in their widespread use. Methods have been devised to compute the surface correlation functions for dispersions of spheres that rely on dilating the interfaces FIG. 3. An illustration of the previous algorithm that computes Fss(r), where is the dilation thickness. Then Fss(r) is computed by S2(r; )/ 2 as → 0. Here we describe efficient general algorithms that enable the precise determination of the surface-surface correlation function F ss (r) and the surface-void correlation function F sv (r) for most situations that one may encounter in simulations and experiments. We consider d-dimensional statistically homogeneous and isotropic two-phase systems within a cubic fundamental simulation cell of side length L under periodic boundary conditions. We also assume that the interfaces are differentiable almost everywhere with exceptions for corners and edges only. The idea behind the algorithm is that one can reduce the complexity of the problem by extracting information from a cut of the d-dimensional statistically homogeneous and isotropic system with a m-dimensional subspace (m = 1, 2, . . . , d -1) Using this simple observation, the calculation of the surface-surface correlation function F ss (r) consists of the following steps: 1. Generate a straight line parallel to one of the edges of the box at a random position. 2. Find all the intersection points (P 1 , P 2 ,...P n ) with interfaces of the system along this straight line. Store their positions x 1 , x 2 ...x n . 3. Find the normal vectors at each intersection point and the angles (the acute one) between the straight line and these norm vectors θ 1 , θ 2 ...θ n . Compute 1/ cos θ 1 , 1/ cos θ 2 ...1/ cos θ n . 4. Bin the distance between every pair of intersection points (suppose the size of each bin is L bin ). Add 1/(cos θ i cos θ j ) to the corresponding bin. The calculation of the surface-void correlation function F sv (r) consists of the following steps: 1. Generate a straight line parallel to one of the edges of the box at a random position. 2. Find all the intersection points (P 1 , P 2 ,...P n ) with interfaces of the system alone this straight line. Store their positions x 1 , x 2 ...x n . 3. Find the normal vectors at each intersection point and the angles (the acute one) between the straight line and these norm vectors θ 1 , θ 2 ...θ n . Compute 1/ cos θ 1 , 1/ cos θ 2 ...1/ cos θ n . 4. Generate t random points along the straight line. Determine whether each point is in the void phase or not. Suppose Q 1 , Q 2 ,...Q m are the points in the void phase, store their positions y 1 , y 2 ...y m . 5. Bin the distance between every pair of P i and Q j (suppose the size of each bin is L bin ). Add 1/ cos θ i to the corresponding bin. 6. Normalize the value in each bin by dividing 2tL bin . 7. Repeat the process from the beginning. A schematic plot that elucidates our new algorithm is shown in Fig. For a d-dimensional system consisting of N particles (or voxels), the complexity for generating a single sampling line is O(N 1/d ). Computing each pair of intersection points on the line requires O(N 2/d ). The number of sampling lines is usually a preset number, and thus the overall complexity for computing surface-surface correlation function is O(N 2/d ). By a similar analysis, we know the complexity for computing surface-void correlation function is O(N 1/d ). Note that our algorithms are as efficient as the approximation method used in reconstructions Three-dimensional overlapping sphere systems provide an excellent benchmark to test our algorithm, since the surface correlation functions are known exactly; see Eq. ( Unlike continuous-space microstructures (e.g., overlapping spheres), where we know surfaces exactly, images of heterogeneous materials are necessarily digitized, which presents algorithmic challenges to identify surfaces and normal vectors. We devote this section to the discussion of how to apply the aforementioned algorithm to this practical setting. Considering that experimental images are generally gray scale, we first discuss the case in which the two-phase medium is obtained from a level cut of a digitized scalar field F (x) in R d A. Two-phase Media Obtained From Level Cuts of Scalar Fields Suppose we set a threshold F 0 to convert a scalar field F (x) to a two-phase medium: regions that satisfy F (x) > F 0 constitute phase 1, and regions that satisfy F (x) < F 0 constitute phase 2. The phase indicator function I(x) for phase 1 is given by where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. The interface between two phases is simply the contour defined by F (x) = F 0 . For any point on the contour, the normal vector is defined by the gradient of the scalar field, i.e., ∇F (x). The algorithm can be implemented in essentially the same way as discussed in Sec. IV, but must be specialized to digitized two-phase media. In order to locate points of intersection of the line with interfaces, we need to find where F (x) -F 0 changes sign along a straight line, and then interpolate the position of the point. The gradient at the point can be computed approximately by the finite differences of its neighboring pixels. However, the most significant difference between dealing with continuous models and digitized media is that the number of sampling straight lines one can afford is bounded by the resolution in the later case. Indeed, for an n × n image, one can only sample at most O(n) times if the sampling straight lines are lined up with the grid. Thus the resolution of the image is crucial to obtain reliable results. Here we use Gaussian random field To begin, consider the simple situation illustrated in Fig. FIG. 7. An illustration of the sampling scenario. The unit circle is the interface and the solid straight line samples along the direction that is perpendicular to itself by varying x. The integral correctly gives the surface area of the lower left quarter of the circle. Notice that although the integrand 1/ cos θ is divergent at x = 0, it is still integrable because the probability of hitting the vicinity of the singularity is proportionally infinitesimally small. However, it is easy to see that the variance of 1/ cos θ is divergent since the integral of 1/ cos 2 θ diverges, which implies that large deviations can result when estimating the mean of 1/ cos θ. However, the simulation results suggest that increasing the number of sampling lines still reduces the fluctuations from the expected value, and a large sampling number yields good estimates, as one can see in Fig. However, in the case of digitized media, one cannot increase the sampling number arbitrarily. On the other hand, the probability of hitting the vicinity where θ ≈ π/2 can be rounded to a relatively large fraction due to the finite resolution. For example, a curved interface can align parallel to the sampling line after the digitization. The consequence is that we are more likely to encounter large deviations, as one can see in Fig. The bias induced by this method is usually small and insignificant, but with this small compromise, one can significantly reduce fluctuations (see a detailed analysis in Appendix C). To demonstrate the effect of applying thresholds to digitized media, we take the lowest resolution representation (1000 × 1000) of the Gaussian random field in the last subsection and recompute F ss with a threshold δ = 100. The result is shown in Fig. We complete our discussion of two-phase media by discussing the case in which all of the information provided about the system is a binary digitized medium. Due to the jagged interface geometry, the transition from one phase to another is sharp and there is no easy way to estimate the direction of the norm vector as we did in the case of Gaussian random fields by computing the gradient of the scalar field. Here we propose a straightforward method to deal with this situation. We first convert the two-phase medium to a coarse-grained scalar field, then convert it back to a two-phase medium by thresholding. In this way we can again use the algorithm introduced in Sec. V. A. We follow the procedure described in Refs. where {C} represents the parameters of the kernel. One of the most common choices of kernels is the Gaussian filter, where b is a length parameter that controls the size of the "influence" region of the filter. By taking a level cut of the scalar field at a threshold F 0 , we can then convert the scalar field back into a two-phase medium. The threshold F 0 is chosen to retain the original volume fraction of phase i. We include an example of overlapping spheres in two dimensions processed by this method. We prepare a digitized realization of 10,000 overlapping disks under periodic boundary conditions at a particle-phase volume fraction φ = 0.677. The resolution is chosen to be that the side length of a pixel is 1/120 of the diameter D of the disk. We apply the Gaussian filter mentioned above for different values of b and compute the corresponding F ss of the converted scalar fields. A comparison of a portion of the system before and after applying the filter (b = 0.042D) is shown in Fig. In this section, we compute the surface correlation functions of several particle systems, including overlapping spheres, hard-spheres in equilibrium and decorated "stealthy" patterns. Given our abilities to compute the surface-surface correlation function, we can calculate local surface-area variances through Eq. ( We further compare the surface-area variance σ 2 S (R) with the volume-fraction variance σ 2 V (R) of hard spheres in equilibrium in three dimensions at different packing fractions. The variances are again computed using Eqs. ( In this section, we go beyond the analysis of wellknown sphere models and extend the application of our algorithm to other important disordered patterns encountered in the physical and biological sciences. Specifically, we focus on time-dependent pattern formation processes that are governed by the Cahn-Hilliard equation and the Swift-Hohenberg equation. These patterns have recently been shown to be hyperuniform and could have important applications in material science The Cahn-Hilliard equation was introduced to describe phase separation by spinodal decomposition One important feature of the Cahn-Hilliard equation is that the system will enter a "scaling regime" after some time, and the system will remain statistically the same after scaled by a growing characteristic length. This provides an indirect way to check our algorithm on digitized media. We can compute the surface correlation functions at different times and then an appropriate scaling enables them to collapse onto a single curve. The rescaled surface-surface and surface-void correlation functions at different times are shown in Figs. 17 and 18 for critical and off-critical quenches. The curves for different times do collapse onto each other, as expected, further justifying the accuracy of our algorithm. Note that although the two systems shown in Fig. The Swift-Hohenberg equation was developed to study Rayleigh-Bénard (RB) convection in hydrodynamics and later it became a subject of interest on its own in pattern formations Here we compute and compare two surface-surface correlation functions for two patterns generated under different k 0 , namely k 0 = 0.7 and k 0 = 0.32π in the same way in the authors' previous paper We also evaluate the local surface-area variances in these systems using F ss and Eq. In this paper, we developed efficient general algorithms that enable the sampling of the surface-surface correlation function F ss (r) and the surface-void correlation function F sv (r) with heretofore unattained precision. Our algorithms have advantages over the traditional "dilation" method We also showed that the extracted surface correlation functions can be used to compute accurately the surface-area variance, a quantity that can be a more sensitive measure of microstructural fluctuations compared to the volume-fraction variance. Through examples of spinodal decomposition patterns, we showed that surface correlation functions contain information that supplements that of S 2 , and the small-r behavior of F sv (r), which is determined by the mean curvature of the system. In two dimensions, the total curvature of a closed simple curve is a constant 2π, implying that when the system approaches a percolation threshold, the absolute value of the mean curvature will drop dramatically due the formation of large clusters. This observation suggests that the surface-void correlation function F sv (r) may aid in detecting the onset of continuum percolation, which is an interesting topic for future exploration. We also showed how surface-surface correlation functions can be used to determine the hyperuniformity of two-phase media using patterns generated by the Swift-Hohenberg equation as examples. Lower-order correlation functions have been successfully used to infer the physical properties of random media as well as to reconstruct them. This bodes well for their use in machine learning in the area of material optimization A sample Matlab program that enables one to compute the correlation functions F ss , F sv and F vv for three dimensional digitized media can be downloaded at Ref. Since the surface-surface correlation function discussed in Sec. III is only approximated to the zerothorder, we focus our attention here to the surface-void correlation function of systems with singularities. We include results for certain specific cases, namely, twodimensional systems that all singularities are corners and three-dimensional overlapping spheres. For two-dimensional systems that all singularities are corners, suppose the angle formed by a corner to the solid phase is θ, one can show that the F sv (r) for small r can be written as where Ω is the set of all the points on the interfaces that are differentiable, and ρ c is the density of corners in the system. One interesting implication of this formula is that the expression of the surface-void correlation function for packings of equilateral polygons is the same as the expression for packings of their inscribed circles. Singularities in three dimensions are much more complex to analyze. Here we only take overlapping spheres as an example. Surprisingly, this is a nontrivial model of a heterogeneous material, since the lack of spatial correlation implies that the particles may overlap to form complex clusters, and leave many nondifferentiable edges in the system. Using the same geometric approach in Sec. III, by naively plugging in a as r c in Eq. ( where a is the radius of spheres and s = 3ηe -η /a is the specific surface of overlapping spheres ). (A3) FIG. 22. An illustration of evaluating the two-body correction to the small r behavior of Fsv(r), where the upper left sphere is the "invading" sphere and the sphere in dotted line is the "test" sphere. The extra negative term -3sηr/8a implies that we have overestimated the probability of falling into the void phase P sv by neglecting the fact that another sphere (see the upper left sphere in Fig. When the "invading" sphere overlaps with both the "test" sphere and the interface it can be difficult to evaluate the extra surface area of the "test" sphere covered by the "invading" sphere. Luckily, since the volume of the shell is 4πa 2 r, which is already first order, we can approximate the interface around the reference point as a flat plane that divides the "test" sphere into two hemispheres. By symmetry we know the extra surface area covered on average is just 1/2 of the total surface area covered by the "invading" sphere on average. Suppose the distance between the center of the "invading" sphere and the reference point is d, then the surface area of the spherical crown that is covered is ). (A4) Letting d = a + x, the fraction of surface area of the "test" sphere that is covered by the "invading" sphere is Then on average the total fraction that is covered by the "invading" sphere is Finally, by symmetry, we know the correction term to F sv (r) is -sπa 2 rρ/2 or -3sηr/8a, as in Eq. (A3). This correction term will disappear in the dilute limit, since spheres will not overlap with one another. One can carry out the same analysis for impenetrable spheres, but the calculation will be much more involved. In this case, the other sphere can only approach from the void phase, and the nonoverlapping condition will restrict its direction to a small range, which will in the end make the correction term of the order O(r 2 ) as long as g 2 (D + ) is not a delta function, where D is the diameter of a sphere. Thus our general formula will apply to hard spheres in equilibrium or random sequential addition (RSA) packings of sampling and e stands for a given error. To do so, first we can sort 1/ cos θ such that 1/ cos θ i ≥ 1/ cos θ i+1 for i = 1, 2, ..., N -1. Define T = min{j| The reason why Eq. (B4) has this scaling behavior is because cos N -2 φ is effectively zero when φ is larger than 1/ √ N . One can continue this process and it is easy to see that the major contribution to the summation in Eq. (B2) comes from the first a few terms. Thus one can see that by increasing N one can significantly reduce the chance of getting an abnormal peak in the simulation, which is why the results in Fig. The suppression of abnormal peaks by using a threshold δ can also be deduced from Eq. (B2). Since now 1/ cos θ is bounded, it requires at least N (π/2 + e)/δ terms to have the inequality in Eq. (B1), which means the leading N (π/2 + e)/δ terms in Eq. (B2) vanish, leaving the probability significantly smaller than the case without a threshold (actually by Hoeffding's inequality the probability will decrease exponentially). We test this idea on two models: overlapping spheres and Gaussian random fields. In the former case, we consider the same system in Sec. IV, while restricting ourselves to a relatively small amount of sampling lines (10,000) and compare the computed F ss with different thresholds δ = 10, 100, 1000, and ∞ (no threshold). The result is shown in Fig. 