As a demonstration that second-order nonlinear optical microscopy is a powerful tool for rice grain science, we observed second-harmonic generation (SHG) images of amylosefree glutinous rice and amylose-containing nonglutinous rice grains. The images obtained from SHG microscopy and photographs of the iodine-stained starch granules indicate that the distribution of starch types in the embryo-facing endosperm region (EFR) depends on the type of rice and suggests that glucose, maltose, or both are localized on the testa side of the embryo. In the testa side of the embryo, crystallized glucose or maltose are judged to be detected by SHG. These monosaccharides and disaccharides play an important role, as they trigger energy in the initial stage of germination. These results confirm SHG microscopy is a good method to monitor the distribution of such sugars and amylopectin in the embryo and its neighboring regions of rice grains. Rice is an important food. The endosperm of rice is mostly composed of starch, which is an energy source for most organisms. A previous study using sum ⋆ Goro Mizutani: mizutani@jaist.ac.jp frequency generation (SFG) microscopy reported the starch distribution in the cross section of a glutinous rice grain. The SFG signal is enhanced in the crush cell layer, which is an ∼100 μm wide zone between the endosperm and the embryo Cells in the crush cell layer and the size of the starch granules are smaller than those in the center of the endosperm However, the origin of the SFG enhancement in the crush cell layer Optical second harmonic generation (SHG) occurs in non-centrosymmetric media within an electric dipole approximation, and its frequency is double that of the incident one. Hence, optical SHG microscopy can map asymmetrically oriented structures. The monosaccharide α-D-glucopyranose is a constituent unit of saccharide chains in starch. Since its structure is non-centrosymmetric, it displays a nonzero secondorder nonlinear susceptibility and SHG activity. The anisotropic hydroxide and hydrogen bonds of aligned water have been reported as the origin of SHG in glucose and amylopectin hydrates Starch, which is comprised of various components such as amylopectin and amylose, exhibits SHG activity Generally, a starch iodine reaction is an easy and useful method to observe the starch distribution. However, the sample may permeate, resulting in an irreversible change. Although the method of F. Vilaplana et al. can quantify amylopectin and amylose in starch Second-order nonlinear optical microscopy is a non-destructive method. Amylopectin in starch generates an SHG signal due to macroscopic asymmetry Herein, SHG images of a typical nonglutinous rice cultivar Koshihikari, which includes both amylose and amylopectin, and a typical glutinous rice cultivar Shintaishomochi, which includes only amylopectin, are obtained using SHG microscopy with a femtosecond pulse laser and a morphological analysis. The comparison of the two cultivars confirms that amylose does not affect the experimental results. To our knowledge, previous research has not directly compared these two cultivars, demonstrating that SHG microscopy is a powerful tool to evaluate the distribution of sugars and amylopectin in the embryo and its neighboring regions of rice grains. In the experimental setup (see Fig. The SHG signal was identified from the difference in the intensity distributions between 400 and 438 nm. There are two possible origins for the 400 nm signal in an image with a 400 nm wavelength bandpass filter. One is an SHG signal. The other is multiphoton excited fluorescence. In the latter case, the sample is excited by a multiphoton transition and emits luminescence pulses at a photon energy lower than the multiphoton energy. If the signal is dominated by the latter, observation wavelengths of 400 and 438 nm should provide similar results, and the images for both B.P.F.s should be similar, because the spectra of multiphoton-excited fluorescence should be continuous near the two-photon wavelength In this study, the maximum incident light energy density per unit area on the sample was 0.4 nJ/μm 2 . No damage was observed at this incident light energy density. When observing starch by a scanning type SHG microscopy First, the grain cross section of ungerminated brown rice was observed. Figures Cisek et al. The images in Figs. 2(e) and 3(e)). In the crush cell layer, the SHG signal is enhanced in the glutinous rice (Figs. SHG signals along the testa edge of the embryo exhibit a very strong intensity (Figs. 2(e) and 3(e), empty red arrow heads). To further investigate the strong SHG signals from the testa edge of the embryo in Figs. 2(e) and 3(e), the outer walls on the testa side of the embryo of the two brown rice grains were observed from the outer side (Figs. We also examined the SHG response of testa powder taken from the rice grains by a commercial "rice huller", which removes only the testa and a part of the embryo. The starch iodine reaction confirms that the peeled powder lacks starch. However, the peeled powder shows an SHG response (data not shown). We put three doses of the peeled powder of 2.5 mg each into 50 mL of water, N, N -dimethylformamide (DMF), and ethanol, stirred them well for 5 min, and filtered them. Three residues on the filter paper were collected and dried for 24 h. Table A previous study on the cross section of a glutinous rice grain around the crush cell layer between the endosperm and the embryo reported an enhanced SFG signal at wavenumbers of 2920 and 2970 cm -1 of the IR light There are two possibilities for the enhanced second-order nonlinear effect. One is the high density of amylopectin near the crush cell layer. The other is the highly oriented amylopectin near the crush cell layer. The iodine starch reaction (Fig. On the other hand, the nonglutinous rice does not show SHG near the crush cell layer (Figs. In fact, we measured the vibrational spectrum of a cross section of a rice grain with the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), but the factor analysis of the infrared spectra of amylose, amylopectin, and rice starch was unsuccessful. FT-IR is a general method to distinguish between molecular species, but it is unsuited to identify starch types 2PEF images of chromophores in a young leaf tissue have been reported We considered three possible origins of the SHG spots in Figs. 2(e), 3(e), 4(c) and 5(c) at the ends of the embryos: (i) amylase, (ii) crystals of glucose, maltose, or both, and (iii) leucoplasts. (i) Amylase may be stored in the aleurone layer of ungerminated rice grains α-Amylase reagent has a detectable SHG signal. Because α-amylase forms a single crystal in the P2 1 2 1 2 1 space group The SHG observations in Table When the rice seed absorbs water during germination, the water passes through the seed coat covering the boundary between the embryo and endosperm (Figs. 4(a) and 5(a), near the black arrows) to reach the crush cell layer. The water subsequently passes through the absorption cell layer of the scutellum and moves to embryonic tissue Finally, although our measurement indicates that the reagent of α-amylase is SHG active, it is assumed that the amount of α-amylase present in the ungerminated rice grains is too small for SHG detection because α-amylase in rice is synthesized only during the seed germination process The SHG images are obtained from ungerminated glutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Shintaishomochi) and nonglutinous rice (Oryzaglutinosa cv. Koshihikari). The observed enhancement effect of the SHG in the crush cell layer of the glutinous rice is consistent with the enhancement effect of SFG in the previous study This study examined typical rice species. As the results demonstrate that SHG can monitor the distribution of sugars and amylopectin in the embryo and neighboring regions of rice grains, we plan to investigate more varieties to verify whether the tendencies observed here apply to rice in general. The authors declare no competing financial interest.