The Hall-Petch effect has been described for the past sixty years as a dependence of the strength of polycrystalline metals on the inverse square-root of grain size d. The value of the coefficient of the dependence has been the subject of discussion throughout. Here, we find what factors in the experiments determine its values. A metaanalysis using maximum-likelihood methods is reported of the literature values of the coefficient in sixty-one datasets. Weak dependence is found on composition and bulk strength. Clear dependence is found on the elastic anisotropy of the different metals and on their stacking fault energies. Surprisingly, no dependence is found on plastic strain, and the strongest dependence is found on the average grain size of each study. Combining these effects accounts for the reported values of about 80% of the sixty-one coefficients. The grain-size dependence and the bulk strength dependence indicate that the Hall-Petch coefficient is an artefact arising from incorrect fitting of the data. Moreover, the grainsize dependence implies a minimum strength described by a simple inverse 1/d or a lnd/d function, which arises theoretically from considerations of dislocation curvature. The Hall-Petch equation expressing the inverse-square-root dependence of yield or flow strength of polycrystalline metals on the grain size was first proposed in 1951 by Hall (1) In this expression, Y is the yield strength, but the equation has been used as often to describe the flow stress at a given plastic strain, (P), and in what follows we will not need to distinguish yield stress and flow stress The values of the parameter k for different metals have been of great interest throughout this period. Experimentally, values reported in the literature even for the same metal are often very scattered. Many authors have proposed theories consistent with the inverse square-root of d in Eq.1 and capable of explaining the experimental values of k. See, e.g., the early review of Li and Chou In two previous papers, we have challenged Eq.1 Our conclusions are that there is a clear dependence of k on anisotropy, and on stacking-fault energy, and that there is no evidence of a dependence of k on plastic strain. We find weak dependence on composition (purity) and bulk strength. Surprisingly, since the dependence of  on dISR in Eq.1 is already given explicitly, there is a strong dependence of k on dISR. That is, the coefficient k is not a constant as it should be, but as the function k(d) it conceals within itself much of the true functional dependence of  on d. These outcomes of the meta-analysis of course have implications for theories of Eq.1, discussed in Section 4. We apply meta-analysis to the sixty-one values of k. While commonplace in social sciences and medicine, meta-analysis is relatively unusual in materials science and metallurgy (but see Deville et al. We assembled a body of data consisting of data-sets that were fitted with Eq.1 by their authors or subsequently. Citations, references and search engines led us to more data, as did helpful input from colleagues. We included more recent data when we found it, but our emphasis was on the early data that contributed towards the establishment of Eq.1. All the data-sets that we found, we use; that is, there has been no selection. The sixty-one that we use are distinguished from the unknown number in the literature only by the random accidents of the search processes. There is therefore no risk of selection bias (see Appendix). Different authors gave more or less information on specimen characterisation, measurement techniques, and errors, but in any case such information was not used by the original authors to correct in any way the data values fitted with Eq.1 nor the parameter values obtained from the fits. Consequently, it would be inappropriateit would risk biasto use any such information here. We work with the raw data. Comparing the values of k across many studies requires considering several major factors which are expected from theory to affect values of k. Data from both tension experiments and indentation hardness testing are used. We divide the hardnesses by a factor of 2.8 for comparability with the tension data, and attribute the nominal value of plastic strain pl = 0.2 to these datasets. A number of different metals are used. All of the theories of Eq.1 predict that kHP will depend on the elastic moduli cIJ of the metal and on its Burger's vector b. We normalise stresses for different metals by dividing by the Young's modulus to give elastic strains. Similarly the grain sizes are normalised to the size of the crystal unit cell, by dividing the values given by the lattice constant of each metal. (This may be taken as a proxy for normalising to the Burgers vector, which would introduce uncertainties as to the appropriate projections of the vector onto relevant slip planes, etc.) For details of the normalisation see Ref. In Ref. In a standard analysis of experimental results, data is obtained as a function of experimental parameters in the light of theory. There will be a predicted functional dependence and perhaps quantitative predictions of coefficients, and it is to test and refine these predictions that the experiments are performed. Meta-analysis proceeds differently. We have a set of reported data, here, values of k, and potential factor values, constituting a large matrix of numbers. The objective is to establish correlations within this matrix. The most powerful way to do this is factor analysis but for our purposes here it is preferable to use a less powerful but more transparent technique. We begin by inspecting the properties of the 61 normalised values of k. They have a mean of 0.155, but a wide distribution of values from -0.001 to 0.998 (Fig. The kurtosis (fourth moment over second moment) is 11 and the skewness is 3, compared with the values 3  0.5 and 0  0.3 expected for a Gaussian distribution of 61 numbers For log10k, the mean is -1.02, variance 0.214, kurtosis 7.5 and skewness -1. Thus the distribution of the data is far from normal or lognormal. Least-squares fitting methods assume that the residuals rithe scatter of the data around the fitted modelare Gaussian-distributed, independently drawn from an identical normal distribution (i.i.d.). When that is not so, as here, least-squares methods discard much of the information in the data, and it is preferable to use other methods which make use of more of the information. We use Maximum Likelihood methods. For accessible introductions to these methods, see e.g. Testing with dummy datasets. We begin by testing the statistical methods against dummy datasets, as a benchmark. Suitable dummy datasets may be constructed as (i, ki) where i are random numbers in the range 0 to 1, and ki are the Hall-Petch parameters (i = 1 to 61). Using a least-squares procedure to fit these dummy data to ax + b, we expect, within error, a = 0 and k b  where k = 0.155 is the mean value of our collection of k values. One such dataset gives a = -0.056  0.098, b = 0.182  0.054, as expected within error (Fig. , and restore the average values after fitting. This gives the same result for a, with b =   a k  0.027 and the offdiagonal terms in the correlation matrix are now zero. In this way, we created 500 such dummy datasets. The 500 values of a averaged to -0.002 and the standard deviation of the values of a was 0.055 (Table Given the presence of excess kurtosis, the few datapoints at values of k up to 1 are heavily distorting the least-squares fits. A common procedure in such cases is to eliminate these datapoints, as outliers, and fit to the remaining points which have a much narrower normal distribution. It is better to exploit all the information in the data using the Maximum Likelihood method, as any probability distribution function (pdf) may be used as best fits the data. For any pdf P(x) for the residuals ri, the likelihood of each datum ki is P(ri), and the likelihood of the dataset under the model is Residuals are functions of the parameters a and b of the model, and for a normal distribution of residuals centred on zero, the standard deviation  of the Gaussian pdf is the third parameter of the model. Values of L can be very large or very small, and have no intrinsic meaning. It is more convenient to sum the natural logarithms of P(ri) to calculate the log-likelihood, lnL. This is then maximised with respect to a, b and . Doing this with the single dummy dataset mentioned above, we get a = -0.056, as above, and  = 0.29 which is not an error estimate for a or b but describes the variance ( 2 ) of the data with respect to the model. The log-likelihood is lnL = 10. Error estimates for a and b can be found by varying each individually while leaving the other as a free fitting parameter and looking for a reduction in lnL of 0.5. Here that gives a  0.096 in agreement with the least-squares method as expected for a Gaussian pdf. Changes in the fitted model that give increases in lnL of more than 2 or 3 are what matter, as this is equivalent to 4 -6 in classic least-squares methods. Accordingly, we calculate lnL with other pdf's. Given the large kurtosis, we are interested in fat-tailed distributions compatible with a significant proportion of apparent outliers in the dataset. The Lorentzian is suitable. The maximum of lnL is found to be 56.5 for a = -0.018  0.024, with width  = 0.034. Thus a is found to be significantly closer to zero, by a factor of about three, than by the least-squares model (Fig. Other fat-tailed pdfs give similar results. We can attribute the outliers to a broad Gaussian pdf and the other data points to a narrow one about the line y = ax + b, so that we have a double-Gaussian pdf, referred to below as DG. Then, as well as looking for the values a, b and the -values of the two distributions, we look for the fraction f of the broad pdf and the fraction (1f) of the narrow pdf that maximizes lnL. Fitting with the two extra parameters, the width of the second Gaussian and the value of the fraction f, we obtain a = 0.010  0.025, f = 0.142  0.050, and the standard deviations of the narrow and broad distributions are 0.067 and 0.80 respectively. That is, about one seventh of the data belong to the broad distribution, and the others form a distribution sharper by a factor of more than two than the single Gaussian PDF gave. The value of lnL is 61. Each extra fitting parameter requires an increase in lnL of 1 to offset it (this corresponds to the Akaike information criterion Alternatively, we can consider that each datum has a probability f of being an outlier in this sense, and that the outliers have a flat distribution over a range of k values of width g, hence a flat pdf of magnitude fg -1 over the range. Then (1f) of a sharp Gaussian distribution (the GF pdf) is added. Now, maximization of lnL yields a = 0.011  0.025, f = 0.158  0.056 and lnL = 68.5 (Fig. Table ML/MS G ML Lor ML DG ML GF P(ri) Similar results are obtained by fitting to values of log10ki (Fig. What we have established in this Section is that the Maximum Likelihood methods are about four times more sensitive than the least-squares method for exposing a correlation or lack of correlation between the data, the experimental values of k, and the abscissa or factor against which they are plotted. The key benchmark is the variance of the fitted values of the slope, a. Using least-squares fitting, a slope a of 0.096 (on a plot where the abscissa values have been normalized to the range 0-1) is not significant. Using Maximum Likelihood methods, this criterion is sharpened to about 0.024. Of these methods, the flat distribution for the outliers with a Gaussian for the bulk of the data is the most probable model. There is a consensus among the methods that about 15% of the data, or ten of them, are outliers. The GF pdf gives the highest likelihoods. The ki and the log10ki give very similar results, except that the outliers are probably over-reported in the log10ki analysis. The thin solid lines are the least-squares fits, the thick chain-dotted green lines are the fits using the Lorentzian pdf and the thick dashed red lines are the fits of the GF model. The next step is to plot the data against the various physical factors reported by the original authors and to fit with ax + b as for the dummy datasets of the previous Section. For comparability, the range of each factor is rescaled to the dimensionless range 0-1. The resulting slope a for each factor is given in Table To plot the data against plastic strain pl, we deleted three datasets for brass, for which we could not find information on the strain. The fits to the remaining 59 values of k are shown in Fig. Compared with the null hypothesis of Section 2.3.1, i.e. the hypothesis that there is no effect of these factors on the Hall-Petch parameter k so that random ordering would give the same results as ordering the k values by these factors, all six of these models are supported by the data. That being so, we should suppose they all represent effects that apply in all Hall-Petch experiments, so we should test the effect of these factors acting together. The ten or so outliers may be the result of other large, rare perturbations but the factors for these have not been identified. It is worth considering how this would work in the ideal case. Suppose that these six factors are the only factors determining k, that they are wholly independent, and that their linear (ax + b with b = 0) contributions to k simply sum. Then in the fits to single factors so far discussed, the other five factors contribute both the intercepts b and the scatter which gives the uncertainties in a. If we suitably scale all six factors and add their contributions to k, the intercept b should decrease to zero and the uncertainties in a should decrease; a itself should increase. Keeping the abscissa normalized to the range 0 to 1, with all six factors included, the slope a should be within error equal to the highest values of k not belonging to outliers, i.e. about 0.18 or more if some of the outliers are brought within the main distribution when all factors are considered. The remaining outliers will be the result of other large, rare perturbations due to unidentified factors. and 20 and multiplied by 13 respectively to get , p and . The combined abscissa is C C + d dISR +  pl + p p +  0 +   -1 . For comparison with the foregoing singlefactor fits and plots, we rescale this new abscissa again to the 0-1 range. In order to include all sixty-one data, the missing values for plastic strain (brass), anisotropy (Ti) and the stacking fault energy (Cr) were allocated mid-range values (in italics in the Supplementary Information). The results of fitting to this dataset are given in Table The slope a is increased, and, most significantly, the lnL increases sharply to 88. This is a much better model than any of the six factors taken alone. Table We may expect reduced weightings of factors which are interdependent or correlated. For example, strain causes strain-hardening which increases strength. Equally, correlations with no physical significance will arise from experimenters' deliberate or chance choicesfor example, it is possible that only metals with small stacking-fault energies were studied at high strain. If two factors are interdependent or correlated, their slopes in Figs The last row of Table Several points stand out among the data in Table The weightings of the four factors purity, bulk strength, anisotropy and stackingfault energy swing violently according to which of them are included in or deleted from the analysis. These factors are closely related, that is, there are strong correlations among them. The bulk strength is clearly the least meaningful. Deleting it affects the AIC rather little, and in the last column its weight has an error nearly as large as the value. However, the methods here are not powerful enough to determine from this cluster of factors what are the real factors. Anisotropy, however, is clearly not ruled out, with its relatively large weighting and small error in the final column. The weights for grain size in Table The models with the highest lnL are the combined fits with variable weightings of all six parameters of the last column of Table .) .This is in direct contradiction of Eq.1, in which the effect of dISR on  is supposed to be entirely in the denominator. That the bulk yield or flow stress, 0, should play a role is also in direct contradiction of Eq.1 in which it is only added to the Hall-Petch effect. Considering only the factor dISR, we have, To see the effect of the strength, 0, consider a family of curves Y = 0 + ad/d on a loglog plot with ad constant and 0 varied). The position of the elbow between the part of the curve with a slope near -1 at small d and the part with a slope near 0 at large d (i.e. around d ~ ad /0) moves to smaller d as 0 is increased, at one decade per decade. A similar family of curves Y = 0 + k dISR has the corresponding elbows move to smaller d at two decades per decade. Consequently, if data obeying the former are fitted with the latter family of curves, to keep the elbow in the right place to fit the data, it will be necessary to increase k at one decade per decade of 0. That is, the coefficient will increase linearly with 0, as observed here. So both of these effects, the dependence of k on dISR and on 0, occur naturally if the true dependence of yield or flow stress, Y, on grain size goes as 1/d (or ln d / d) yet is fitted by a linear dependence on dISR. As well as the six factors considered here which do contribute to the Hall-Petch parameter k, there are phenomena such as dislocation pile-up which are thought to contribute to the Hall-Petch parameter It might be thought that these results show that the Hall-Petch equation should be rewritten as ( values from the penultimate column of Table There remains a factor (or factors) that we have not identified, that would account for the 10% or 15% of reported k values, up to k ~ 1, that are many standard deviations away from Eq.4 (Fig. The variation of reported (normalised) values of the Hall-Petch coefficient k that fall in the range 0 to 0.2 is largely accounted for by the various factors reported by the original authorsspecifically, by the purity, the bulk strength and the grain size, and also by the material parameters, the elastic anisotropy and the stacking-fault energy. The very wide variation of the remaining 20% of reported values in the range up to 1 remains unaccounted for. The variation in values of k that arises from the various values of the different factors in different studies does not of itself indicate that Eq.1 is incorrect. However, that the grain size itself is one of the factors that matters most, unambiguously demonstrates that fitting the data to Eq.1 is incorrect. Rather remarkably, plastic strain is not a factor. Some comment can be made on the consequences of these conclusions for the various theories of the Hall-Petch effect. It is now clear that the difficulties previously encountered in explaining the values of the Hall-Petch coefficient k are due to trying to explain an incorrect equation. The theories that invoke plastic strain will need to be reconsidered, perhaps in terms of the cluster of correlated factors more-or-less related to strength. The theories that do not invoke the factors found here, such as pile-up The other factors can all go to zero in suitable circumstances. That leaves the grain-size itself as the only universal contributor to k and the general 1/d or lnd / d size effect as the only ubiquitous Hall-Petch mechanism, to which will be added the effects of the mechanisms that invoke the other factors when applicable. measurement and characterisation of texture. Such variations were not generally fully reported by the original authors and the data were not then and cannot now be corrected in any way for them. However, such variations did not affect the validity of the datasets as published or later used as support for Eq.1, and no more do they affect their validity under meta-analysis as evidence of a behaviour which refutes Eq.1. Indeed, selection or correction of the raw data is dangerous in meta-analysis because of the risk of introducing bias. Some authors gave information about, for example, measurement of grain size, while others did not. This is not a risk factor providing that (1) there is little likelihood that the reported information or lack of it is correlated any of the factors, and (2) that no attempt is made to correct some data in the light of this information while other data cannot be corrected for lack of the information. Analysis of data is a rather technical issue that does not concern us here, for it covers issues such as data-mining, in which a large body of data, tested for a very large number of correlations, will by chance give some false-positive outcomes among the very large number of true-negatives. Here we are looking for and finding specific outcomes predicted by theory. Good physics: The previous point raises a final criticism of meta-analysis, made by a referee of a previous version of this paper: good physics does not arise out of statistical analyses of large datasets. Here, of course, the physics does not arise out of the statistical analysis. The physics arises out of the Orowan-Bragg ideas about dislocation curvature, or out of the Eshelby-Frank-Nabarro pile-up ideas. Statistics are used merely to choose between them, in as rigorous a way as possible. It is for this reason that we do not use a coefficient of determination such as R 2 to test Eq.1 or Eq.3, but consider, simply, the question, what model is most likely given the data?