We study numerically the formation of Majorana bound states in a finite-size quasi-onedimensional square-lattice strip with Rashba spin-orbit coupling, in the presence of a proximityinduced superconducting pairing and a magnetic field perpendicular to the strip. We take into account both the Zeeman and orbital effects of the field. First, using the Majorana polarization, we demonstrate that such a system can host more than one pair of Majorana quasiparticles. We construct the corresponding topological phase diagram and we conclude that the topological regions are extended in the presence of orbital effects, however the gap protecting the topological states is reduced. Appendix D: Formation of MBS without orbital field After the Kitaev's groundbreaking article on realizing Majorana fermions in quantum wires, 1 various condensed matter setups of different dimensionality were suggested as possible platforms hosting them. While 2D proposals appeared earlier, In many previous works the orbital effects associated with the magnetic field were not taken into account. This simplification of the problem to the only three aforementioned ingredients is possible in certain situations, namely, if the wire is very thin and if the magnetic field is parallel to the axis of the wire. Nevertheless, these conditions can be easily violated in experimental setups where, first, the Zeeman field contribution can be much smaller than that of the orbital field, Thus we first show that in the presence of orbital effects such a setup may support multiple Majorana modes. We present also the spatial structure of the Majorana states and point out drastic differences between different Majorana pairs. While it was demonstrated that due to orbital effects a cylindrical geometry may support multiple Majorana modes, Second, we construct the corresponding phase diagrams as a function of the chemical potential and the magnetic field. We find that the topological phase in the presence of the orbital effects is greatly extended with respect to that obtained in their absence, however the topological gap is strongly reduced by the orbital effects. The model Hamiltonian for our system is presented in Section II, the corresponding methods are described in Section III, the results and a discussion thereof are presented in Section IV and we conclude in Section V. We start with a simple low-energy model describing an s-wave superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit coupling. The corresponding Hamiltonian can be written as: where Ψ † p = (ψ † p↑ , ψ † p↓ , ψ -p↓ , -ψ -p↑ ) is the Nambu basis, and where m is the effective mass of quasiparticles, μ ′ denotes the chemical potential, α the value of the Rashba spinorbit coupling and ∆ is the superconducting pairing. Pauli matrices σ ≡ (σ x , σ y , σ z ) and τ ≡ (τ x , τ y , τ z ) act in spin and particle-hole subspaces correspondingly. In order to introduce an out-of-plane magnetic field b ≡ b nz into the model above we add the Zeeman energy V Z σ z into the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( To diagonalize numerically the Hamiltonian above, we discretize it on a square lattice. Note that an analogous expression can be derived for Π y ψ. The final form of the tight-binding Hamiltonian obtained using the transformation introduced in Eq. ( Here r ≡ (x, y), t ≡ - , where a denotes the lattice constant. The vectors x and y represent the unit vectors in the corresponding directions. To be consistent with conventions in previous works, where m e stands for the rest mass of an electron, α ≡ ma• α/ is the dimensionless spin-orbit coupling amplitude, and all energies ( ∆, ṼZ , μ) are now dimensionless and expressed in units of t, while x and y are expressed in units of a. In this work fully-open systems are considered, hence one cannot diagonalize the Hamiltonian using Fourier transforms. Moreover, in the presence of orbital fields the calculation of bulk topological invariants cannot be done straightforwardly. Therefore, we resort to numerical methods for solving this problem, in particular the use of the MatQ code. The expression above takes into account the LDOS of electrons and not of holes, since the two are not simultaneously accessible in experimental setups. The most useful information is, however, recovered using the Majorana Polarization. If we introduce the particle-hole operator Ĉ = σ y τ y • K (K stands for complex conjugation operator), we have Ĉγ ≡ Ĉ(c + c † ) = c † + c ≡ γ. Thus, the eigenvalue of Ĉ for a MBS should be equal to one, and more precisely, for a spatial distribution: The summation usually runs along half of the system. Unlike calculating energies or finding the LDOS, the MP gives a necessary and sufficient criterion for determining whether a given state is a MBS or not, thus being a versatile and indispensible tool for studying Majorana physics. IV. RESULTS A. Quasi-one-dimensional strip We first consider a quasi-one-dimensional squarelattice strip of dimensions L x × L y = 201 × 5 described by Eq. ( Below we also plot the dependence of the MP with magnetic field and g-factor for two fixed chemical potentials. For μ = 2 (left panel) we see that for small orbital effects the topological phase is extended and the phase with two pairs of Majorana appears, but for larger orbital effects the topological phase is destroyed, in full accordance with previous works. In addition, in Fig. In order to understand better the formation of Majorana states we plot the DOS for the strip in the presence and absence of orbital effects as a function of energy and position. If only the SC is present, the system has a position-independent gap (slightly different from ∆ because of the finite-size effects) (see the upper panel in the left column of Fig. Given the spatial inhomogeneity of the effective gap in the presence of orbital effects, the gap closing caused by the Zeeman field will occur first in the regions close to the edges of the strip. For a Zeeman field larger than a certain critical value this gives rise to two gapless regions separated by a gapped region in the bulk (see Fig. We should note that even if the topological phase in which MBS can form is larger than in the absence of orbital effects, the topological gap protecting them is reduced, especially at high magnetic fields where the Majorana states are eventually destroyed. Also they are much more delocalized than in the case of no-orbital effects (see Appendix D for a plot of the LDOS in the presence of Majorana states when the orbital effects are not taken into account). While not shown here, we have observed in our simulations that for longer wires the induced modifications of the gap by the orbital field may consist of multiple spatial oscillations. In the data presented here only two minima of the gap occur close to the edges of the wire, thus one may obtain at most two pairs of MBS, however, depending on the size of the system and on the parameter values, more than two minima, and thus more that two topological regions may form in principle. In what follows, a square system of dimensions 51x51 is considered. In Fig. In this work, the orbital effects of the perpendicular component of the magnetic field have been studied for two planar systems with different geometries: a quasi-1D object (a strip) and a square system. In the case of a strip, one recovers MBS for extended regions of the topological phase diagram. These states persist even for relatively large values of the orbital magnetic field as long as gm/m e is relatively large. While the topological regions are more extended than in the absence of orbital effects, the topological gap protecting these states is significantly reduced. Interestingly, more than one pair of Majorana bound states can be hosted by the strip. One of the pairs is the "traditional pair" localized at the edges of the strip, whereas the other one occurs closer to the middle of the strip. The presence of a second pair of MBS can be qualitatively explained by the fact that the orbital field introduces an effective coordinate dependence into the pairing term. Therefore, in the semiclassical picture the standard topological criterion takes a coordinate-dependent form μ ′2 + ∆ 2 (x) < V Z , which in-turn ensures that in certain parameter regimes the strip we consider consists of three regions: a topological superconductor on the left, a normal superconductor in the middle, and a topological superconductor on the right. Such a configuration supports 2 pairs of MBS, one for each of the topological regions. For the square system, due to the geometry of the problem, quasi-MBS appear as low-energy solutions of the tight-binding Hamiltonian. We find that these quasi-MBS are less resistant to the effects of the orbital magnetic field. 