Nonlinear acoustic metamaterial (NAM) initiates new fields for controlling elastic waves. In this work, the flexural wave propagation in the half-infinite NAM beam consisting of periodic Duffing resonators is reported by considering the third harmonic generation (THG). Different analytical methods are proposed to describe the wave propagation in the equivalent homogenous medium. Then their effectiveness and accuracy are demonstrated in comparison with the finite element methods. We unveil analytically and numerically extensive physical properties of the strongly nonlinear AM, including the nonlinear resonance in a cell, the effective density, nonlinear locally resonant (NLR) bandgap, propagations and couplings of the fundamental and the third harmonics. These characteristics are highly interrelated, which facilitates the prediction of functionalities. In the near field, the identical bifurcation frequency of these features acts as the start frequency of the NLR bandgap for fundamental waves, whose width is narrower for a stronger nonlinearity. While in the far field, the NLR bandgap characterizes a distance-amplitude-dependent behavior leading to a self-adaptive bandwidth. Moreover, the transmission in the passband of the infinite NAM is different from the chaotic band effect of finite NAMs, and it is influenced by the shifted NLR gap. Our work will promote future studies and constructions of NAMs with novel properties. Theories for wave manipulations lay the foundation for advancements in diverse modern techniques. Acoustic metamaterials (AMs) High-order harmonic generation is an important characteristic of nonlinear systems, and it is active in diverse applications. In nonlinear electromagnetic metamaterials (NEMs) Local resonances (LR) in AMs give rise to the wave suppression in the LR bandgap. Passbands of finite LAMs are composed of dense modal resonances of the whole structure. In contrast, the wave propagation in infinite AMs features different process NAM can boost the development of various methods for achieving tunable, switchable, nonlinear, and sensing functionalities of metamaterials. However, wave propagation in infinite NAMs and its bifurcation mechanisms are not fully understood. Especially under the strongly nonlinear regime, many physical regimes are not clarified, which include: properties of nonlinear effective parameters; the mechanism and distribution of high-order harmonic generation, and its interaction with the fundamental wave; the wave transmissions in bandgaps and passbands; the relationships between the nonlinear resonances, bandgaps, effective parameters and high-order harmonics; and the corresponding mathematical frameworks. In order to reveal these mechanisms, this paper focuses on the flexural wave propagation in a half-infinite NAM beam consisting of a uniform beam and periodic Duffing resonators. Finite element method and different analytical approaches are proposed to study the properties of the nonlinear effective density ρ eff , nonlinear locally resonant (NLR) bandgap, propagations of the fundamental wave, third harmonic and their couplings. Their relationships and mechanisms arising from bifurcations are elucidated. Moreover, distributions of harmonics, including the new behavior of the nonlinear bandgap, are reported. This work promotes further understandings of NAMs. Figure Duffing oscillators m r with lattice constant a. The density, width and thickness of the primary beam are ρ, b and h, respectively. ρ 0 =ρbh. m 0 is the concentrated mass fixed on the beam, and m r is coupled to m 0 through the nonlinear spring k r x+k n x 3 . In theory, the length of the NAM bean is infinite in direction x, and a steady incident w 0 =W 0 sinωt is applied at the boundary x=0, where ω=2πf is the angular frequency, t denotes time, and W 0 is the constant amplitude. So, it is a half-infinite model. As shown in Figure The wave equation of a conventional media is generally written as: where D 0 is relevant to the stiffness, and L represents the linear partial differential operator. For the flexural wave in a uniform beam, L=∂ 4 /∂x 4 , D 0 =Ebh 3 /12. In our AM beam, local resonators lead to the negative effective mass density ρ eff . Under the long wave approximation, the wave equation of the linear AM (LAM) beam reads: For the LAM beam, substituting the representation u=Ue i(ωt-kx) gives the solution, Herein k denotes the wave number. Therefore, the eigen-function reads The homogenization approach is adopted to derive the effective parameters. In Figure where F(t) is the concentrated force applied on m 0 . To derive the nonlinear effective density of the unit cell, let"s suppose u r =U r sinωt, F(t)=Fsinωt. Substituting them into Eq.( A transformation of Eq. ( In which r r r   km is the linear nature frequency. eff eff   ma . For the linear cell, Substituting effL  into Eq. ( With the same approach, the approximate wave number of the NAM model reads Therefore, the phase velocity of the flexural wave is expressed as Equation Unless otherwise mentioned, the parameters specified in simulations are: m 0 =0, m r =0.01 kg, ω r =80π rad/s, k n =1×10 9 N/m 3 , b=0.02 m, h=0.002 m, E=70 GPa, ρ 0 =2700 kg/m 3 , a=0.04 m. There are two opposite approaches to solve U r in Eq. ( (ii) inversely, specify W 0 but F is unknown. Results solved by giving F=0.2 N and W 0 =2×10 -4 m respectively are shown in Figure Though the magnitudes of U r in the two cases are approximate, ω J for F=0.2 N is much higher than ω J for W 0 =2×10 -4 m, which indicates that specifying the force has stronger influences on the properties of NAM model. shown in Figure The hardening cubic nonlinearity in the NAM model generates three branches of ρ eff and k attributing to the bifurcation of U r in nonlinear resonance (see Figure In contrast, in the situation W 0 =2×10 -4 m, branch-1 represents ρ eff >0 and |Im(k)|=0; and the negative ρ eff depends on branch-3. ω J initiates the band for |Im(k)|>0, and its cutoff frequency increases to ω cN in the nonlinear case with f J = 58.6 Hz, ω J =2πf J . So, the interval (ω J , ω cN ) denotes the nonlinear LR (NLR) bandgap in the NAM model. As the deviation of ω J from ω r is much larger than the shifting of the cutoff frequency ω cL to ω cN , the width of the bandgap becomes narrower in NAMs when specifying the displacement of the fundamental media. To describe the mechanism for the third harmonic generation (THG) and its coupling with the fundamental wave analytically, the meta-cell is assumed to be equivalent to a homogeneous medium. In our work, the interaction concentrated force F(t) between the oscillator m r and the primary beam is equivalent to the uniformly distributive force f (x, t). Moreover, the linear damping effect  r u of m r is also taken into consideration. Hereby, the coupled wave equation of the NAM beam reads: Moreover, u r is also a function of the space x in the homogenized media, Therefore, Eq. ( Equation ( The coupling terms in To obtain succinct but accurate solution of Eq.( Supposing the solution of Eq. ( Herein k 1 denotes the wave number of the fundamental wave; h 1 and b 1 are amplitudes. Substituting Eq. (17) into Eq. ( Equation ( In fact, if ζ=0, Eq. ( If the damping is taken into consideration, by decomposing h 1 and b 1 into the real and imaginary parts 1 When the third harmonic propagating along the NAM beam, the nonlinear effect arising from itself arXiv: 1808.04682 Because b 1 is solvable from Eq. ( . This is also the process for THG. The solution is thereby a superposition of the particular and general solutions, i.e., Amplitudes h 3j and b 3j are determined by initial conditions. Because the third harmonic is absent at the boundary x=0, one yields 32  hh .Thus, there are at least two wave modes in the third harmonic whose wave numbers are 3k 1 and k 3 , respectively. For nondispersive media and nondispersive waves, 3k 1 =k 3 , so as to compose the two modes together. However, AMs are dispersive media and flexural waves are also dispersive, we cannot directly specify 3k 1 =k 3 . Substituting Eq. ( Equation ) The solution of k 3 with nonzero real part is This formula indicates that k 3 depends on the amplitude of the fundamental wave b 1 . Furthermore, a conversion of Eq. ( Moreover, we know from Eqs. ( When the nonlinearity is weak, the nonlinear terms relevant to the fundamental wave in Eq. ( In WN solution, linear effect is considered only, so kk . If ζ=0, h 30 characterizes two peaks at ω r /3 and the frequency for 3k 1 =k 3 respectively. Solving 3k 1 =k 3 leads to two frequency solutions: This equation indicates that the highly efficient energy generation in weakly nonlinear case depends on the attached mass ratio. . However, there must be 1   m in metamaterials, so the perfect phase matching in this case is unrealizable. If the nonlinearity is not weak, the peak frequency of h 30 is not only depends on the attached mass ratio, but also on the amplitude. The UC approach neglects influences of the third harmonic on the fundamental wave, and the nonlinear effects arising from the third harmonic itself. To consider all these couplings, this work derives the fully coupled (FC) solution. To obtain FC solution, the damping is not considered. Based on the analyses above, the solution of the differential equation ( Besides the modes k 1 , k 3 and 3k 1 introduced in Eq. ( By combining the condition h 32 =-h 31 , six unknown parameters are solvable by specifying h 1 . To demonstrate the analytical methods and investigate properties of the wave propagation in the half-infinite NAM beam, the COMSOL finite element (FE) model composed of 300 unit cells and a perfect match layer (PML) is established, as shown in Figure , and f F is the frequency of the fundamental wave. This is a displacement boundary. We note that, though the force is used in calculating the effective mass density, it cannot be used in time-domain simulations, on which occasion the response of the free structure approaches to infinite. Unless otherwise specified, other parameters are same with Figure Typical profiles of the wave propagation in the NAM beam are shown in Figure Frequency components in harmonics should be clarified in advance of analyzing the property of wave propagation. Figure Both f F =35 Hz and f F =50 Hz come from the band for efficient THG. As illustrated in Figure This section studies properties of the fundamental and the third harmonics by combining the analytical solutions with the numerical method without the damping effect. In analytical approaches, real solutions are solved and the input amplitude of the fundamental wave is h 1 =W 0 =0.2 mm, which is equal to the amplitude for deriving ρ eff . In analytical solutions, h 3 =|h 31 |. Figure Only linear effects of the fundamental and third harmonics are considered in the WN model, so that k 1 (3ω) = k 3 (ω) and its curves feature no bifurcations. This model anticipates that THG has two peaks at ω F =ω r /3 and ω F ≈ω r respectively. Near ω F ≈ω r , the incident wave gives rise to the fundamental nonlinear resonances of the oscillators m r that generate third harmonic efficiently. At ω F =ω r /3, THG arises from the third super-harmonic resonances of m r . However, the efficiency for THG near ω r /3 is much lower than the band near ω r in theory. As indicated by Im(k j ) in Figure There are three branches of THG solved with UC model in Figure Accordingly, the nonlinear resonance in a unit cell is helpful to explain the properties for THG in the whole NAM. The UC model still predicts the peak of h 3 near ω F =ω r /3, and its valley region ω r /3<ω F <0.61ω r agrees with the WN result well. However, there is not an obvious peak near ω r on branch-1 of UC solution. Instead, branch-1 gradually increases to a saturated value after the valley. According to the nonlinear resonance, branch-2 is unstable solution, thus branch-3 may dominate the characteristic of THG for ω F >ω J . h 3 may jump from branch-1 to branch-3 at ω J leading to the reduction of the efficiency for THG. Moreover, it is surprising that a peak of h 3 appear on branch-3. As indicated by Im(k 1 ), the band ω J < ω F <ω cN is the NLR gap of the third harmonic with wave number 3k 1 and the fundamental wave. Im(k 3 ) presented by UC solution is coincide with the WN solution here. In legends, "R300, Max" represents the maximum A 3 for cells 2<n<300 in the infinite FE model consisting of 300 cells and PML; "R300, Aver." is the average A 3 in that space; "R1500, Max" represents maximum A 3 for 2<n<300 in the finite FE model consisting of 1500 cells. ω J denotes the saddle-node bifurcation point. Before the statements of the FC solution, we describe the numerical results based on FE models, as shown in Figure FC solution considers more interactions. As shown in Figure The nonlinear strength influences the properties of NAM greatly There is an interesting peak for THG on branch-3. As shown in Figure Because f F =75 Hz is near the cutoff frequency of the linear LR bandgap, the peak will not appear at 75 Hz no matter how strong the nonlinearity is. Slightly increasing f F to 76 Hz, a distinct peak germinates at the weak nonlinearity k n =1.1e8. If f F >76 Hz, the peak always appears on branch-3 and a higher frequency requires a larger k n to generate that peak. Moreover, if k n <5e7, this peak disappears, as predicted by the WN solution. Damping in the oscillators has a major influence on the amplitude of the peak but not on other parts of the branch; unexpectedly, the peak with a lower frequency obtains larger reductions, so that the peak at 76 Hz under ζ=0.02 even disappears. Apparently, the stronger the nonlinearity is, the higher bifurcation frequency ω J will be for the arXiv: 1808.04682 (14 Aug 2018) 17 nonlinear fundamental resonance and amplitude-frequency curves of THG, as shown in Figure k n =1e10 N/m 3 , ω J >ω cL , therefore the whole LR bandgap is full of third harmonics. The jumping frequency presented in numerical results fits UC solutions though there are errors. Moreover, k n influences little on branch-1 for ω F >ω cL . For ω F <ω J , a weaker nonlinearity results in the smaller h 3 on branch-1, including the peak at ω r /3; meanwhile, the curve near ω r becomes steeper. However, the peak like the WN solution actually never appears, though the nonlinearity is very weak. As shown in Figure This work reports the wave propagation in the infinite nonlinear acoustic metamaterial (NAM) beam (consisting of periodic Duffing oscillators) by considering the third harmonic generation (THG). Characteristics and bifurcation mechanisms of the nonlinear resonance in a cell, the effective density, wave numbers, NLR bandgap, propagations and couplings of the fundamental and the third harmonics, including interrelationships between them, are elucidated. (1) Firstly, analytical mathematical frameworks are proposed to describe the fundamental wave propagation, THG and interactions in the equivalent homogenous medium. It shows that the wave number of the fundamental wave derived by ρ eff by specifying the displacement (but not force) is equal to the UC solution. Finite element models demonstrate that both UC and FC solutions describe correctly the amplitude-frequency relationship of the third harmonic, including the accurate saddle-node bifurcation frequency ω J . frequency range, the THG efficiency inside the linear LR bandgap is highest and the amplitude of the third harmonic h 3 jumps to branch-3 at ω J . Besides the peaks near the nature frequency ω r and ω r /3, h 3 features an interesting peak on branch-3. This peak depends on the nonlinear strength and damping. Although the dominant wave mode of the third harmonic changes with the frequency, its amplitude almost keeps steady with the increasing propagation distance. (3) Moreover, we find that different indexes have an identical ω J , which benefits the understanding and prediction of NAM. ω J initiates the near-field NLR bandgap of fundamental waves, whose width is narrower for a stronger nonlinearity attributed to the slowly shifted cutoff frequency, as demonstrated by the dispersion curves of NAMs in Ref. Therefore, the far-field NLR bandgap approaches to the original linear LR gap. Such a distance-amplitude-dependent property leads to the self-adaptive width of NLR bandgap. (4) In addition, when ω J <ω cL , wave propagations in the passbands of linear and nonlinear AMs are similar. This law is different from the chaotic band of finite NAMs, in which the broadband resonances of the finite structure are reduced greatly In short, our work proposes effective approaches to study NAMs and unveils essential properties of the wave propagation in infinite NAMs. The clarified phenomena enable future studies and constructions of NAMs with novel properties.