The reliable calculation of electronic structures and understanding of electrical properties depends on an accurate model of the crystal structure. Here, we have reinvestigated the crystal structure of the high-zT thermoelectric material tin selenide, SnSe, between 4 and 1000 K using high-resolution neutron powder diffraction. Symmetry analysis reveals the presence of four active structural distortion modes, one of which is found to be active over a relatively wide range of more than ±200 K around the symmetry-breaking Pnma-Cmcm transition at 800 K. Density functional theory calculations on the basis of the experimental structure parameters show that the unusual, step-like temperature dependencies of the electrical transport properties of SnSe are caused by the onset of intrinsic bipolar conductivity, amplified and shifted to lower temperatures by a rapid reduction of the band gap between 700 and 800 K. The calculated band gap is highly sensitive to small out-of-plane Sn displacements observed in the diffraction experiments. SnSe with a sufficiently controlled acceptor concentration is predicted to produce simultaneously a large positive and a large negative Seebeck effect along different crystal directions. Recently, single crystals of the binary compound tin selenide, SnSe, were reported to exhibit exceptionally good thermoelectric properties The crystal structure of SnSe can be described as a highly distorted rock salt derivate Here, we present a reinvestigation of the crystal structure of SnSe, extending the temperature range to 4-1000 K, using high-resolution neutron powder diffraction and symmetry mode analysis to determine the active structural order parameters. This structural information is then used to follow the evolution of the electronic structure of SnSe as a function of temperature using DFT calculations. These reveal a direct correlation between the primary order parameter and the electronic band gap; they show that small atomic displacements have a profound effect on the electronic structure, and they provide a coherent explanation for the unusual temperature dependence of the experimentally observed transport properties. We will also discuss the possibility of realizing simultaneously a large positive and negative Seebeck effect along different directions of a single crystal. SnSe was synthesized as described previously Electronic structure calculations were performed in the framework of density functional theory (DFT) and the fullpotential augmented-plane-wave + local orbital (APW+lo) approach as implemented in the W 2 code The structural parameters of SnSe in the temperature range of 4-1000 K were obtained from Rietveld refinements. form. The temperature dependence of the lattice parameters [Fig. In order to characterize the phase transition further, we found it helpful to consider not the bare fractional atomic coordinates, but instead the symmetry-allowed distortion modes By far the largest change in amplitude was observed for the Sn-Y2 mode, see Fig. In summary, the symmetry analysis shows that the motion of the Sn and Se atoms during the Pnma-Bbmm transition can be decoupled into independent, symmetry-adapted displacements parallel and perpendicular to the SnSe double layers. It identifies the Sn-Y2 mode as a primary order parameter for the phase transition, corresponding to a large Sn displacement within the double layers [Fig. The symmetry analysis reveals furthermore anomalous Sn displacements perpendicular to the rocksalt layers (Sn-Γ1 mode), which have not been recognized in previous studies We now turn to the DFT calculations, which were performed in order to understand how the structural variations of SnSe with temperature affect the electronic structure and transport properties. The modified Becke-Johnson (mBJ) exchange and correlation potential 3. Calculated band structure of SnSe at 300 K (solid lines, blue) and 900 K (dotted lines, red). The special points refer to the Pnma Brillouin zone, which was used for both calculations to allow for a direct comparison. standard LDA and GGA potentials significantly underestimate semiconductor band gaps. For the ambient-temperature crystal structure, the band structure calculated here with the mBJ potential is in close agreement with results obtained previously in GW calculations The band structure calculations were then performed using the structural parameters measured between 4 and 1000 K. The calculated band structure shows significant qualitative changes across the Pnma-Bbmm transition, with most of the changes occurring between 700 and 800 K. In these calculations, SnSe remains an indirect semiconductor at all temperatures, but the locations of the valence band maximum and the conduction band minimum change during the transition, as illustrated in Fig. Figure It is therefore important to bear in mind that the band structure calculations were performed assuming a static crystal lattice, as is common practice Figure These computational results explain the unusual step-like increase in conductivity in SnSe between 600 and 800 K as well as the marked kink at 800 K We performed additional calculations that show that the results for the temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity do not depend qualitatively on details of the underlying band structures (Figs. As a further test of the calculations and the above conclusions, we compare in Fig. Hall coefficients, 1/(eR H ), and Sn vacancy concentrations, C V Sn , in SnSe as a function of temperature. Red solid circles show the average inverse Hall coefficient obtained here from Boltzmann transport calculations assuming hole-doping concentration of n p = 5 × 10 17 cm -3 at ambient temperature and the adjusted band gaps from Fig. temperature range, which confirms the view that the steep increase in conductivity follows the increase in charge carrier concentration at the onset of intrinsic conductivity at ∼600 K, where the band gap also starts to decrease. The above conclusions are in contrast to the recently advanced notion that the carrier concentration in SnSe is dominated by the thermal creation of Sn vacancies We would like to point out that in a bulk semiconductor, the creation of a Sn vacancy (V Sn ) requires the creation of at least one secondary defect in order to conserve the bulk stoichiometry. For example, the Sn ion removed during the creation of a Sn vacancy could move to an interstitial site, creating a secondary interstitial defect (Sn Int ), or occupy a Se site together with Se moving to an interstitial site (Sn Se + Se Int ). Consequently, the effective activation energy will be substantially higher than for the Sn vacancy alone, which is by far the lowest-energy defect considered in (reproduced in Fig. Figure The computational results for S xx , in the direction perpendicular to the layers, deviate from the experimental results by Zhao et al. The prediction of a large Seebeck effect with opposite signs along two directions of a bulk crystal may seem very unusual, but there are precedents for such behavior: Early work on bismuth suggests a change in sign along one crystal direction at 280°C The simultaneous occurrence of a positive and negative Seebeck effect in highly anisotropic, layered materials at the onset of bipolar conduction is an interesting new aspect that could be exploited in thermoelectric applications. It would eliminate the need to find suitable dopants to produce both pand n-type versions of a given compound. Instead, a single, highly anisotropic material could be used in different orientations, i.e. parallel and perpendicular to the layers. Such a material does not necessarily need to be single-crystalline, a highly oriented polycrystalline material Our re-examination of the structural phase transition in SnSe using high-resolution powder neutron diffraction and symmetry-mode analysis identifies Sn displacements parallel to the SnSe layers (Sn-Y2 mode) as a primary order parameter and provides evidence for anomalous Sn displacements perpendicular to the rocksalt layers (Sn-Γ1 mode) that have profound effect on calculated electronic properties. The magnitude of the band gap is directly related to the Sn-Y2 mode amplitude during the transition. The magnitude of the calculated band gap was found to be sensitive to the atomic coordinates so that simulations based on DFT-relaxed crystal structures do not work sufficiently well in SnSe -a limitation that probably applies more generally to materials with anharmonic, soft chemical bonds. The transport property calculations provide a coherent explanation of the unusual step-like variation of the electrical conductivity observed experimentally in SnSe 