Amorphous solids manifest puzzling effects of mysterious degrees of freedom that give rise to a heat capacity and phonon scattering in great excess over what would be expected for a solid that has a unique vibrational ground state. Of particular conceptual importance is the apparent near universality of phonon scattering in amorphous solids made by quenching a liquid. To rationalise this universality, scale-free scenarios have been proposed that either hinge on there being long-range interactions between bare structural degrees of freedom or that invoke long-range criticality stemming from the emergence of marginally stable vibrational modes. In a contrasting, local scenario, the puzzling low-temperature degrees of freedom are, instead, weakly-interacting, strongly anharmonic degrees of freedom each of which involves the motion of a few hundred particles. In this scenario, the universality of phonon scattering comes about because the characteristic energy scale of the local anharmonic resonances and the strength of their interaction with phonons are both set by the glass transition temperature Tg, while their concentration is set by the cooperativity size ξ for dynamics at Tg. The nanoscopic length ξ is manifested in vibrational excitations of the spatial boundary of the resonances, which underlie the so-called Boson peak, and very deep, topological midgap electronic states in glassy semiconductors, which are implicated in a number of strange optoelectronic phenomena in amorphous chalcogenides. I discuss the merits of the above scenarios when confronted with experimental data. The detailed mechanism of the emergence of mechanical rigidity in structural glasses remains a disputed topic, enough so as to have found its way into the popular culture. To begin discussing mechanical instabilities in lowtemperature solids, we set the stage by invoking Nernst's Law and symmetry considerations. According to the Nernst theorem, any dynamical degree of freedom, when equilibrated, must attain a unique quantum state as the temperature is lowered to the absolute zero; otherwise it must be supplanted by other degrees of freedom, for instance, by way of a phase transition. In addition to being relatively scarce, one may reasonably expect low energy states to be also relatively symmetric: On the one hand, degenerate eigenstates of the Hamiltonian comprise an irreducible representation of a symmetry group. When particles combine to form a solid, translational symmetry is drastically lowered while the (quantummechanical) kinetic energy is increased. A solid can not be the true ground state of the system in the absence of external field: Quantum-mechanical superpositions of degenerate symmetry-broken states are clearly lower in energy. Yet for practical situations, the tunnelling barrier that would allow the system to escape such a symmetry-broken, "classical" state is incomprehensibly high. The present article focuses primarily on those aperiodic solids made by quenching a liquid sufficiently rapidlyvia cooling or compression-so that the liquid fails to crystallise. Instead, the particles become kinetically arrested in a structure that is approximately a snapshot of a liquid. In reference to window glass, which is made by cooling a silicate melt, all solids made by quenching a liquid are also called glasses, whether transparent or not. Judging by their strength, glasses are often rigiddespite their being aperiodic-in some sense more rigid than many periodic crystals. It then comes as a surprise that glasses apparently host structural degrees of freedom whose density of states is considerably greater-at pertinent energies-than the density of states of the vibrational modes of an elastic medium with a unique vibrational ground state. The discovery of these fascinating degrees of freedom came about in a rather prosaic way: The presence of such a large number of residual degrees of freedom then called for a revision of the conventional notions of mechanical stability of solids based on a unique ground state. A simple scenario was conceived shortly thereafter, by which the stability is compromised but only locally and quite sporadically: Owing to the ostensive lack of local point-symmetries on atomic lengthscales in amorphous solids, one might expect that the lattice might not be stable locally everywhere. At the same time, an amorphous solid can be regarded as isotropic on large lengthscales, the better the larger the length. One can put these two notions together by imagining small, bi-stable or, more generally, multi-stable groups of atoms that are embedded in a macroscopically stable lattice. Such a multi-stable group of atoms represents a multilevel system, but only the two lowest energy states will be relevant at sufficiently low temperatures. Thus one arrives at the venerable two-level system (TLS) model, which is often referred to as the standard tunnelling model (STM) when the distribution of the off-diagonal matrix element ∆ is explicitly specified. where σ z and σ x are the usual Pauli matrices. The apparent two-level nature of the excess degrees of freedom was directly confirmed shortly after the model was proposed, via phonon-echo experiments, In the local description, which effectively amounts to placing localised defects within a stable matrix, the concept of a (thermal) phonon seems to be still reasonably valid despite the lack of periodicity: The measured mean free path l mfp of a vibrational wave-packet turns out to be about hundred times longer than its wavelength λ; one can still define the frequency and wavelength sufficiently well. The macroscopic stability of the solid is thus handily ensured, too. Since the l mfp /λ ratio gives the number of whole periods, at the pertinent frequency, that fit within the vibrational wave-packet, it can be thought of as a measure of how well a phonon is defined as a quasi-particle, a quality-factor of sorts. For crystals, the phonon quality factor near absolute zero can be made arbitrarily large thus making the phonons rigorously defined excitations in the Landau sense. Serious doubts on the local picture described above were however cast following the work of Freeman and Anderson, Similar conclusions were reached when analysing internal friction data, Although the numerical value in the r. h. s. of Eq. ( Another view, espoused by Wolynes and myself, 27-30 is rooted in the classical density functional theory of the glassy state itself and its origin in quenching the liquid. This picture ties the two-level systems to the molecules and their motions directly in the actual threedimensional space. In this treatment, the rigidity of glasses emerges as a result of a translational symmetry breaking in the form of a random first order transition (RFOT). The three scenarios listed above are quite distinct in both style and substance. In the Yu-Leggett scenario, the mechanical stability of the overall matrix is simply assumed at the onset. The effective degrees of freedom are complex composites of local degrees of freedom interacting so strongly as to completely loose their individuality. In meanfield RSB analyses, the nature of the excitations is not entirely clear either; overall rigidity of the matrix arises internally-consistently in the treatment since the kinetic barriers separating distinct aperiodic free energy minima are strictly infinite and so is the correlation length. The only explicit length scales in the problem are the molecular length and the vibrational amplitude. The role of finite-dimensional effects, such as fluctuationinduced lowering of the symmetry breaking transition is not obvious. At the same time, perturbative analyses suggest such effects could completely destroy the transition in three dimensions. The article is organised as follows: the scenario of Yu and Leggett is discussed in Section II. Section III covers the picture based on the RFOT theory. The marginal stability scenario is discussed in Section IV. The final Section V provides a summary of the main points and touches upon possible experimental ways to differentiate between the various microscopic scenarios that have been put forward. In this Section, I review the main points of the Yu-Leggett scenario. To set the stage, we note that the Green's function of a massless field φ governed by the energy function K(∇φ) 2 /2, in d spatial dimensions, is given, up to a numerical factor, by the expression 1/Kr d-2 , see for instance Section 5.7.5. of Ref. 36. Thus two elementary degrees of freedom described indvidually by Eq. (1) and located, respectively, at r i and r j , will be effectively coupled via a "dipole-dipole" interaction up to a geometric factor reflecting the "orientation" of the couplings g and the space dimensionality d: see Eq. (5.110) of Ref. 36. Note the g's are vectorial for the scalar elasticity K(∇φ) 2 /2 but must be rank-two tensors in a proper treatment. where Suppose a macroscopic quantity of the elementary lowenergy anharmonic local degrees of freedom are embedded in a macroscopically stable lattice. To avoid excessive repetition, we shall interchangeably call these residual degrees of freedom "elementary," "bare," or "primitive." Two such primitive degrees of freedom i and j will form a resonance so long as their on-site energy difference is less than J/r 3 ij . The latter coupling strength will also determine the level spacing in such a resonance. At equilibrium below temperature T , all resonant pairs separated by a distance shorter than distance r T determined by will be found largely in their quantum ground state, or thermodynamically "frozen-out." The kinetics of this "freezing-out" are not explicitly considered in this analysis but could substantially affect measured quantities since measurements are performed on finite timescales. Thus below a temperature T , the equilibrium concentration of thermally active resonant pairs is limited from above by the quantity 1/r 3 T implying an upper bound on the specific heat This can be restated as a bound on the density of states: c.f. Ref. 23. As just mentioned, the inequality in the above equations reflects the uncertainty as to the spatial arrangement of the resonant pairs, a notion we will return to shortly. Perhaps more importantly, the inequality reminds us that the argument is not entirely constructive: While it predicts the effective density of strongly interacting degrees of freedom, it is agnostic as to whether or why such degrees of freedom should be present in the first place. An improved estimate for the effective density of states of the compound resonances was obtained by Yu and Leggett where ρ b is the number density of the individual degrees of freedom and the energy of a compound resonance is determined by E ≃ J/r 3 as before. The ultraviolet cutoff energy E max should correspond to the closest spacing between individual elementary degrees of freedom. The resulting density of states ρ b /∆E is, then: The above ideas were implemented systematically by Burin and Kagan, 39 see also Refs. 40 and 41. Note also that the logarithmic correction could potentially explain rather effortlessly-even if not fully quantitatively-why the heat capacity and conductivity should deviate from the simple linear and quadratic dependences, respectively. Thus Eq. ( in the ratio in the first equality in Eq. ( This condition is exactly the venerable Ioffe-Riegel criterion, The upper bound on the density of states of the compound resonances in Eqs. ( In the Yu-Leggett scenario, the final density of states from Eqs. (9) or (13) does not depend on the detailed nature of the individual elementary degrees of freedom or even on their concentration ρ b . The latter concentration only determines the threshold ultraviolet energy below which the universality sets in: The larger the concentration ρ b , the higher the energy threshold. Yet there is a potential issue posed by the type of density of states in Eqs. ( where C is a constant of dimensions energy that is not expressly determined by the atom size. Another potential complication has to do with the spatial arrangement of the primitive degrees of freedom. Indeed, suppose for the sake of argument the latter degrees were to comprise a periodic lattice characterised by a perfectly spatially-uniform nearest neighbour distance. If taken at its face value, the argument leading to Eqs. ( One way to include effects of the spatial arrangement of the primitive degrees of freedom would be to reformulate the argument leading to Eqs. ( where we have omitted the logarithmic correction from Eq. ( Note the above expression now does contain the material's density, but, seemingly, at the expense of universality. Recall, however, that by the equipartition theorem, K (∇φ) 2 = k B T . At the same time, the relative displacement |∇φ| corresponds with the typical vibrational displacement d v relative to the particle spacing a: |∇φ| = d v /a. Therefore we have The ratio d v /a is bounded from above by and numerically close to the ratio d L /a, where the quantity d L is the so called Lindemann displacement, i.e., the vibrational displacement at conditions where mechanical rigidity sets in. Numerically, d L /a ≃ 0.1 almost universally in the physical three dimensions, which is the venerable Lindemann criterion of melting. nearly universally, in view of Eq. ( where T D is the Debye temperature and we used Eq. ( up to a numerical factor of order one. while the coupling constant increases combinatorially rapidly with d, as remarked just below Eq. ( We first review select notions of the non-meanfield scenario of how mechanical rigidity emerges in structural glasses that is provided by the random first order transition (RFOT) theory. An up to date and very extensive, pedagogical account of the RFOT theory 32 as well as an older, less technical review 31 are available. A recent article 57 expands those notions established for molecular systems to a greater variety of preparation protocols so as to include amorphous collections of particles such as jammed colloidal particles or granular assemblies. The RFOT theory generalizes some established, quantitative notions of the liquid-to-periodic-crystal transition. The latter transition represents the extreme case where the translational degrees of freedom freeze out all at the same time in a first order transition, thus leaving in essentially no degrees freedom other than lattice vibrations. Important and interesting exceptions to this notion include solids that are largely periodic but that still house strongly anharmonic structural excitations such as phasons, What makes liquid-to-solid transitions difficult for analytical treatment is that they are intrinsically, strongly discontinuous thus rendering power-law expansions for small values of the order parameter mathematically dangerous. The necessity for the discontinuity itself was elegantly argued for by Landau already in 1937, Early attempts at developing quantitative theories of periodic crystallisation by Kirkwood and others where the summation is over the vibrationally averaged positions of individual particles. Note this ansatz would be exact for a strictly harmonic solid comprised of equivalent particles. In an equally quantitative fashion, it has been shown that a generic aperiodic lattice can be metastable with respect to the uniform liquid, whether it is made of hard or soft particles. FIG. crystal transition, the emergence of the degenerate aperiodic solids has come to be called a random first order transition (RFOT). As just mentioned, the entropy of the liquid is a smooth function of the temperature; thus unlike the transition to a periodic crystal, the RFOT has no latent heat. The emergence of transient rigidity predicted by the RFOT theory-in the form of long-lived local structures-immediately explains the established experimental fact that below a certain temperature (or above a certain density), transient cages form around each molecule already in an equilibrated liquid as directly seen, for instance, in neutron scattering The situation is indeed somewhat subtle, but actually does not present a contradiction. To appreciate this, imagine first an individual, small, and isolated ferromagnetic domain sufficiently below the Curie temperature of the bulk material so that the domain maintains its magnetisation long enough for the observer to notice and measure it, but not too long so that the polarization of the domain will typically flip before the observer runs out of patience. (Magnetic recordings deteriorate exactly because of such flips.) Thus, on the one hand, the free energy is minimised in one of the two polarised states: The ratio of the duration of the flip (i.e. the instanton time) to the typical wait time inside a minimum can be made arbitrarily small. On the other hand, the average magnetisation is still zero and the symmetry is maintained but only on very long times. Now imagine a macroscopic magnet below the Curie point, but not too much lower, and assume for convenience that the magnet was cooled so that the average magnetisation is small, much much lower than what it would be in a fully polarised sample. Clearly, the sample will represent a "mosaic" of regions polarised up or down. The so polarised domains are separated by domain walls. The number, extent, and shape of the walls will depend on the mismatch penalty between the distinct polarisations, translational and vibrational entropy of the walls, etc. The mosaic is not static because of the non-vanishing translational and vibrational entropy of the domain walls. Thus for long times, the magnetisation of the sample as a whole and any of its regions will be zero on average. At the same time, the free energy of the sample is minimised by polarised solutions, not the paramagnetic solution! Likewise, a liquid can be thought of as a mosaic made of distinct free energy minima when α > 0. where -T s c is the bulk driving force and the odd-looking term γN 1/2 approximates the mismatch penalty between two distinct aperiodic free energy minima. The scaling of this mismatch penalty is slower, in dimensions three or higher, than the N (d-1)/d scaling expected for interfaces between two distinct thermodynamic phases. This reduction comes about because a strained region separating two equivalent aperiodic minima can typically lower its energy by as much as ∼ N 1/2 by locally replacing any region by yet another equivalent random structure. This and other available detailed estimates for the coefficient γ yield values for relaxation barriers in glassy liquids that agree well with experiment, is finite unless the configurational entropy vanishes. This barrier directly determines the rate at which the liquid will flow when sheared, by virtue of τ -1 = τ -1 0 e -F ‡ /kB T and Eq. ( is finite and obligingly becomes greater than the molecular size 1 below the crossover temperature T cr , The quantity N * therefore gives a lower bound for the size of a region that can be occupied by a single aperiodic minimum. To gain an additional perspective on this result, one may recall the expression for the particle-number fluctuation in a uniform liquid: 67 δN = (N ρk B T /K) 1/2 . This means that the lower bound on the size N (1) of a region which will routinely accommodate for adding/removing one particle particle, δN = ±1, is given by N (1) = K/ρk B T , c.f. the second equality in Eq. ( The cooperativity size N * depends algebraically on the barrier and, hence, only logarithmically on the relaxation time. Indeed, Eqs. ( Because the timescale for conventional quenches varies between seconds and hours while τ 0 ≃ 10 -12 sec, we conclude that the cooperativity size is apparently nearly universal for routinely made glasses. Numerically, this size is about 200, For speedier quenches, the cooperativity size N * can be made significantly smaller than 200, but probably no smaller than a few tens of particles, see Ref. 97 and also the discussion of cooling protocols in Section IV. Since the molecular size a corresponds with the size of a rigid molecular unit, or "bead," To estimate the absolute values of a and ξ-as opposed to the dimensionless ratio ξ/a-one must be able to identify the effective particle of the theory, i.e. the bead. Rigid molecular units are straightforwardly identified in molecular substances; the corresponding size matches well its value as determined by calibrating the entropy of fusion of the substance by that of a Lennard-Jones like substance. i.e. one domain per several hundred atoms. Thus Eqs. ( where ∆c p (T g ) is the heat capacity jump at the glass transition. The resulting temperature dependence of the relaxation barrier and cooperativity length are exemplified in Fig. The emergence of the degenerate aperiodic crystal characterised by the density profile ( . This notion also formally enters in RSB treatments The lengthscale ξ, on the other hand, is intrinsically non-meanfield; it arises only because of the locality of interactions. It turns out the latter non-meafield effects undergird the great majority of the dozens of quantitative predictions the RFOT theory has made, see reviews in Refs. 31 and 32. Of particular significance in the present context are the quantum-mechanical consequences of the special physics associated with the length ξ, which are often overlooked, perhaps because the translational symmetry breaking α = 0 → α > 0 that occurs as a result of the random first order transition is entirely of a classical origin for most substances known. (Some interesting new The quantities a, dL, and ξ stand, respectively, for the lattice spacing, the particle displacement at the mechanical stability edge, and the cooperativity length for structural reconfigurations. The intrinsic uncertainty in the position of the boundary can be thought of as vibrations of the domain wall encompassing the reconfiguring region; these vibrations account for the Boson peak. To quantise the structural excitations of a frozen solid that is a mosaic of aperiodic free energy minima, we first enquire about the classical density of states of such a solid just above a kinetic glass transition at a temperature T g . The word "kinetic" implies that there are still lower energy states that would have been available in principle to the system, if it had been cooled more slowly. Nevertheless, the system became kinetically arrested in an offequilibrium configuration because the cooling rate was greater than the inverse relaxation time of a subset of the translational degrees of freedom. If, on the other hand, no lower-energy states were available, then the glass transition would be truly thermodynamic. The putative lowest energy aperiodic state is often called the ideal, Kauzmann state. 111 Now, the smallest reconfigurable region has exactly one state available near T g . (As far as the corresponding reconfiguration is concerned, the surrounding matrix is by construction regarded as purely elastic.) Thus with regard to the latter region, the temperature T g corresponds to a thermodynamic glass transition. A general form of the density of states for such a system, at low energies, is where the ground state is at E = 0 by construction. The glass transition formally comes about because in a finite temperature range T ∈ [0, T g ], the integrand of the partition function dE Ω(E) e -βE is dominated by the vicinity of E = 0. That is, the system freezes into its ground state already at the finite temperature T g . This formally corresponds to a density of states Ω(E) = (1/k B T g ) exp(E/k B T g ), the prefactor needed to reflect that exactly one ground state is found at energy E = 0 or below: 0 -∞ dE Ω(E) = 1. Considering that at any given time the spatial concentration of regions that can reconfigure is 1/ξ 3 , one obtains that the total density of states due to the domains is Thus without explicit consideration of the kinetics of structural excitations accessible at cryogenic temperatures, the above expression yields for the density of states of low energy excitations: P = 1/k B T g ξ 3 , since T g of most glasses is much larger than liquid helium temperatures. Substituting specific values for the glass transition temperature and bead size a yields P ≃ 10 45±1 m 3 J -1 . This value is consistent with experiment. c.f. Eqs. ( In view of Eq. ( i.e., comparable to the upper bound on the coupling strength between the bare degrees of freedom in the Yu-Leggett scenario, c.f. Eq. ( We used the numerical value 10 2 that specifically pertains to the routine laboratory quench of a molecular substance, as discussed following Eq. ( where we used Eq. ( In view of Eq. ( Quantum dynamics does enter into the problem of determining the density of states explicitly when one estimates the density of tunnelling states properly so as to account for the ability to carry out the reconfigurations at low temperatures. To make such an estimate one must consider the classically defined microcanonical density of states simultaneously with the distribution of the tunnelling barriers separating those states, all at a temperature just above T g . In the early part of the century, Lubchenko and Wolynes 27,29 provided detailed calculations for this quantum effect within the RFOT framework. Here we only point out that the density of configurational states of our generate aperiodic solid is indeed exponentially large: e scN/kB , thus implying that not only is it possible to find an alternative state at lengthscale ξ, but it is also possible to find a state reachable from the existing configuration by following an essentially barrierless path on a lengthscale that exceeds ξ only modestly. In volumetric terms, the cooperativity size for such zerobarrier events is only about 10% larger than for a reconfiguration with a typical barrier. see also Ref. 92. Including quantum-tunneling dynamics in the treatment preserves the basic scaling of the density of states (37) with T g and ξ 3 but introduces significant multiplicative corrections and requires use of an adjustable parameter to fit the heat capacity all the way from cryogenic temperatures to the high temperature set by k B T = ω ‡ . Including only the two lowest energy states in the treatment now yields, up to a multiplicative factor, a timedependent heat capacity owing to the distribution of finite tunneling times. For large times, the theory yields 29 where the constant c = ω ‡ / √ 2T g is numerically less then 0.1. The weak time dependence in Eq. ( The problem of the deviation of thermal conductivity from the simplest prediction is handily resolved, nevertheless, after one realises that the presence of the lengthscale ξ introduces additional physics reflected in a new sort of excitation. For one thing, a proper calculation of the density of states for a region of finite size must account for zero-point vibrations of its boundary! Thus an internally-consistent treatment must include the vibrational excitations of the domain wall separating cells in the (quantised) mosaic. We Here l ≥ 2. The second equality is obtained when we use the value of ξ corresponding to a routine quench as in Eq. ( A rather exotic yet consequential manifestation of the ripplons is that, together with the underlying structural transition, they are predicted Additional support for the quantum mosaic picture came relatively recently from a somewhat unexpected direction: Zhugayevych and Lubchenko have argued Finally we point out that at temperatures below but not too much below the crossover to the activated trans- port, the cooperative reconfigurations are less compact and are supplemented by a different type of motion that is locally string-like. A rather distinct-looking explanation for low-T universalities in glasses has grown up in recent years within strictly meanfield, replica symmetry breaking (RSB) treatments of the structural glass transition. In a fascinating set of developments, To describe the Gardner transition, we first recall that meanfield-theory liquids-similarly to Potts spin glass and p-spin models-exhibit a one step replica symmetry breaking at some temperature T A (or pressure p A ), which corresponds with the emergence of a thermodynamic quantity, e scN/kB , of equivalent free energy minima. In meanfield theory, each minimum becomes separated from the rest of the minima by strictly infinite barriers; the structure corresponding to each minimum is aperiodic. The transition signifying the emergence of this complex free energy landscape is depicted by the (φ A , 1/p A ) point in Fig. Suppose now one quenches a liquid starting from a state with α > 0, i.e., when a liquid is already securely arrested in one of those equivalent, infinitely-deep aperiodic free energy minima. As the quench continues further, a Gardner transition occurs eventually, 144 where the current free energy minimum splits into two basins. The distinct free energy sub-basins that emerge in this way now have a distributed degree of similarity; the replica symmetry breaking is now continuous. solids whose detailed nature is not entirely understood at present. Here we point out that the continuous replica symmetry breaking (RSB) implies that there is an additional contribution to the system's entropy, in the form of the mixing entropy of the distinct replicas. The corresponding degree of freedom is an exchange of particles between replicas. The appearance of marginally stable modes on the approach to the Gardner instability, following a deep quench, may have intriguing microscopic implications. Indeed, since the Gardner transition is a critical point, it has been conjectured that the resulting scale invariance could potentially explain the universality of the cryogenic anomalies this article has focused on. In seeming support of this suggestion, Gardner-like instabilities accompanied by long correlation lengths are observed in simulations of polydisperse hard sphere liquids, where particle-swap moves are explicitly allowed. The cage-escape events are locally string-like, see Fig. A stringy instability is signalled by the ability of a particle to escape the cage via a displacement that significantly exceeds the vibrational magnitude. The vibrational amplitude in the direction of lower pressure exceeds its typical value, while the collision frequency is lowered. (b) Illustration of how compression of an anisotropic cage can lead to a local symmetry breaking upon which the caged particle will be subject to a bistable effective potential and will have to choose one of the minima upon further compression, while leaving the remainder of the cage slightly undercoordinated. ple locations and percolate, thus resulting in zero-barrier relaxation events and partial restoration of translational symmetry. These notions are entirely analogous to the microscopic picture put forth some time ago by Stevenson, Schmalian, and Wolynes 82 in the context of the equilibrium crossover between activated and collisional regimes in finite dimensions. The reader is reminded that the position of this equilibrium crossover is much lowered relative to the meanfield spinodal at T A (p A ) where metastable minima in the liquid just begin to form but are easily overcome by thermal fluctuations. Thus at a first glance, the string-spinodal and the buckling instabilities represent candidates for the emergence of marginal stability in finite-dimensional systems with potential implications for the emergence of anharmonic degrees of freedom in cryogenic glasses. Yet already for rigid spheres, qualitative estimates )∇φ. The resulting enthalpy bias gives the coupling of the transition to the displacement field: g ≃ pa(α x /α y ) 1/2 . Further recalling that the bulk modulus for rigid particles goes as consistent with Eq. (38). Indeed, during string-like mo-tions that occur near the crossover, particle displacement in one direction significantly exceeds displacements along the other directions. This can be formally viewed as the ratio (α x /α y ) 1/2 greatly exceeding 1. Such degrees of freedom would interact with each other much more strongly than do the modes in a bona fide aperiodic crystal, in which α x ≈ α y , thus resulting in their ready freezing-out. We observe that since for the Gardner modes, α -1/2 y does not exceed α -1/2 x by much, their energetics are similar to the energetics of the local structural reconfigurations reviewed in Section III. The basic energy scale for the density of states is determined by the only pertinent energy scale in the problem, viz., the pressure at the Gardner transition, times the particle volume. This is numerically similar to the temperature at the beginning of the quench and thus is quite analogous to the local scenario from Section III. Likewise, the infinite-range mechanism of the universality from Section II will not apply here because of the lack of resonance between the Gardner modes. Finally we briefly comment on the amorphous solids made by quenching a liquid starting from a configuration on the low-density side of the string-spinodal in Fig. We have reviewed a number of ways to think about the quantum-mechanical freezing out of the liquid degrees of freedom in glassy solids as they approach absolute zero. These "relics" of liquid motions amount to a substantial density of states in excess of the Debye-like vibrational degrees of freedom that reveals itself in the form of resonances at sub-Debye frequencies. The Yu-Leggett scenario, Section II, postulates the existence of some bare degrees of freedom that are not ex-plicitly specified. Despite this agnosticism, one may generate a criterion for mechanical stability with respect to compound excitations involving motions of several bare degrees of freedom that interact. This analysis then yields a meaningfully restrictive upper bound on the density of structural states is excess of the vibrational motions of a fully stable solid, at least in the physical three dimensions. These excess structural excitations are viewed as resonances formed by the bare degrees of freedom; the spatial extent of the resonances resonances can be arbitrarily large, yet it is lower than the wavelength of thermal phonons thus enabling these compound degrees of freedom to scatter phonons resonantly. There appear to be two distinct scattering regimes. At low temperatures, where the thermally-pertinent interaction range between the bare degrees of freedom significantly exceeds the molecular length scale, phonons have a relatively high-fidelity, l mfp /λ 10 2 . As the temperature is raised, the system crosses over to a regime characterized by complete phonon localization, l mfp /λ 1. We saw that for the spatial dimensionality greater than the physical value of 3, even the low-T bound on the l mfp /λ ratio quickly drops to the Yoffe-Riegel value of one thus limiting the usefulness of this bound for estimating the actual amount of phonon scattering. The scenario advanced in Section III, using the RFOT theory, is more concrete about the origin of two-level systems. In that approach, the lifetimes of metastable, transiently-rigid local structures are explicitly computed, alongside the corresponding reconfiguration size. The experimentally observed, gradual onset of rigidity in the classical regime is quantitatively reproduced. This gradual onset of rigidity is associated with the growth of the size ξ of mechanically stable regions. The value of this cooperativity size ξ near the glass transition-where the liquid falls out of equilibrium-along with the glass transition temperature itself, then determine the gross density of states of the residual liquid motions that have not frozen out as a result of the glass transition but that now must equilibrate quantum mechanically at low temperatures. Further quantum effects have been analysed and lead to improvements in the estimate of the density of states and time dependence of the specific heat. In the LW scenario, the phonon "quality" ratio l mfp /λ is determined by the size of the cooperative region (ξ/a) 3 , which is predicted by the RFOT theory; it depends on the quench speed weakly, logarithmically, thus pegging it near the value of order 10 2 for glasses made by conventional quenches. The finite, even if relatively modest, lengthscale ξ characterises the lengthscale of a "mosaic" comprised of distinct aperiodic solutions of the free energy functional. The domain walls separating the mosaic cells are relatively strained regions that give rise to qualitatively new physics that are not directly accessible to meanfield approximations. In particular, vibrational excitations of the domain walls quantitatively account for the phenomena associated with the Boson peak and the thermal conductivity plateau. In amorphous semicon-ductors characterised by spatial variation of bond saturation, the domain walls are also predicted to host special, very deep midgap electronic states which are revealed by exposing a pristine sample to macroscopic amounts of photons at near gap frequencies. The non-meanfield nature of the RFOT-based calculation is key to one's ability to capture physics associated with reconfigurations on finite timescales. The finiteness of the cooperativity length ξ is directly linked with the finiteness of the relaxation barrier in a liquid near the glass transition, which is kinetically controlled. The present author believes that the mechanical stability of a glassy liquid on lengths less than ξ can be thought of as the bare degrees of freedom from the Yu-Leggett infiniterange scenario largely frozen out on all length scales less than ξ. As a result, these degrees of freedom no longer contribute significantly to phonon scattering while the cooperative motions on the length ξ are the only remnants of the liquid motions. The density of states of these nanoscopic regions is considerably lowered in comparison with that for the bare degrees in the infinite-range scenario due to Yu and Leggett. Indeed, the typical energy spacing is now on the order of T g implying resonant interactions between these degrees of freedom are unlikely and do not significantly affect thermal properties. The interaction still manifests itself in subtle ways already at near-Kelvin temperatures because of their multilevel nature, for instance, by causing a negative thermal expansivity. Direct determinations of the cooperativity length ξ, together with dozens of quantitative predictions made by the RFOT theory The ability of a glassy liquid to stabilise or age via cooperative reconfigurations may be also key for assessing the relatively recent proposal for the low-T glassy anomalies as stemming from marginal stability on the approach to Gardner instabilities predicted to take place in meanfield liquids. In the latter picture, discussed in Section IV, the liquid is unable to reconfigure below the temperature T A at which metastable structures begin to form and can be thought of as residing all in the very same aperiodic free energy minimum. This is because interconversions between the minima are subject to strictly infinite barriers in the meanfield limit. Yet in finite dimensions the liquid is broken up into a mosaic made of distinct aperiodic solutions, as discussed in Section III. The cost of making the mosaic, γN 1/2 per domain, is exactly compensated by the entropic stabilisation, -T s c N per domain, at the cooperative size N * . Still, the mosaic is more stable than a bulk aperiodic state, at finite temperatures, because of the finite entropy of the domain walls. Going beyond meanfield theory, Lubchenko and Wolynes 57 have argued that quench-induced instabilities in finite dimensions would require very high kinetic pressures that are in significant excess of those achievable in a glass using a conventional thermal quench. In fact, achieving such kinetic pressures requires ambient pressures on the order of several Gigapascales. In addition, any incipient criticality associated with the Gardner instability would be destroyed by the activated ageing events. For these reasons, the Gardner instabilities were argued not to be the cause of the cryogenic anomalies observed in structural glasses. On the question of scale invariance or absence thereof in the context of the emergence of rigidity in structural glasses, one may legitimately enquire as to the current status of renormalisation group (RG) based treatments of the glass transition. Such treatments have often been the tool of choice in testing for scale invariance. As pointed out in Ref. 156, RG calculations are particularly difficult to implement for liquid-to-solid transitions because the very nature of the degrees of freedom changes entirely at the transition, viz., from density fluctuations above T cr to vibrations of an essentially fixed lattice below T cr . These difficulties can be partially circumvented in glasses Angelini and Biroli 33 have argued, using a spin model and an approximate RG scheme that above spatial dimensions 4, one indeed should expect two zero temperature fixed points that correspond with the crossover and the Kauzmann crisis. "Zero temperature" implies that the ratio of the coupling strength to temperature diverges at the transition. At finite temperatures, this corresponds with an infinitely deep bound state. Such bound states are characteristic of asymptotically free theories. To address some of the challenges faced by existing spectral diffusion setups, in which one looks at a single chromophore at a time, Lubchenko and Silbey proposed 164 that such setups can be modified to separately determine the concentration of the resonances and their coupling to the phonons (or photons). In this modified setup, one employs not one but two or more chromophores and monitors simultaneously the evolution of their frequencies. The idea behind such "molecular binoculars" is that high-frequency, low-magnitude spectral jumps of the chromophores are due to remote defects. Such jumps will be correlated even for relatively well-separated chromophores because their respective sets of remote defects mutually overlap. In contrast, large-magnitude rare jumps will sense only those defects found in the immediate vicinity and thus will be uncor-related. Thus according to Ref. 164, two chromophores placed at a distance r ≈ 200 nm, at a temperature near 0.1 K, will decorrelate after about one tenth of a millisecond. The two-chromophore setup allows one to separate out the concentration of the defects because it introduces an additional lengthscale in the problem, viz., the distance between the chromophores. It would be interesting to investigate whether such a setup could be used to differentiate between the local and Yu-Leggett scenarios. Presumably, the non-local nature of the compounds resonances implies the spectral jumps of two remote chromophores will be correlated even on relatively long time scales. An entirely distinct avenue for tests of the molecular motions underlying the cryogenic degrees of freedom is afforded by the amorphous chalcogenides or any other materials that could host the topological midgap electronic states. Just as in the context of conjugated organic polymers, Last but not least, there has been recently a surge of interest in low temperature anomalies in disordered films. In fact, TLS-like excitations are deemed to be a key contributor to the loss of coherence in Josephson junctions, which are an important candidate system for quantum computing. the Center for Advanced Computing and Data Systems at the University of Houston. Partial support for this work was provided by resources of the uHPC cluster managed by the University of Houston and acquired through the NSF Award Number ACI-1531814. Also gratefully acknowledged is the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin for providing HPC resources. URL: http://www.tacc.utexas.edu. tion of transient cages leads to other consequences that have been observed, such as the violation of the Stokes-Einstein relation or decoupling of translational and rotational diffusion, and decoupling of dielectric and mechanical relaxation, see Refs. 68, 79, and 81 and references therein.