We investigate the collective plasmon modes in double layer of two dimensional materials where either one or both of the layers have tilted Dirac cone. Consistent with quite generic hydrodynamic treatment, similar to double layer graphene systems we find two branches of plasmons. The in-phase oscillations of the two layers disperses as √ q, while the out-of-phase mode disperses as q. When even one of the layers hosts tilted Dirac cone spectrum, the plasmonic kink which is a salient feature of a monolayer of tilted Dirac cone is inherited by both of these branches. In double layers composed of graphene (nontilted) and borophene (tilted) where the two layers have two different Fermi velocities, the velocity scale of plasmonic modes is set by the greater of the two. The kink always takes place when each plasmon mode crosses an energy scale ω kink . When the two layers have different chemical potentials, there will be two such scales, and each of in-phase and out-of-phase modes develop two kinks. Moreover we find that an additional linearly dispersing overdamped mode of monolayer tilted Dirac cone system survives in the double layer system. The concept of two dimensional (2D) Dirac materials began with graphene Not only the physics of a 2D monolayer borophene as a prototypical tilted Dirac cone material is interesting, but it also possible to think of multilayer of such 2D systems composed of tilted Dirac cones, or combination of tilted and upright Dirac cones. When these layers come close together in a periodic arrangement, situations with potentially new physics can be created. The early investigations of the heterostructure of 2D systems, especially 2D electron gas dates back to the development of molecular beam epitaxy, which was employed to explore macroscopic sample of A-B super lattice like Ga and As compound. Given that in addition to organic materials a 2D monolayer of borophene hosts tilted Dirac cone, it is timely to consider the double layers of tilted Dirac cone systems. This can be either the double layer of borophene-borophene (DLB) or a double layer of borophene-graphene (DLBG) where the borophene hosts tilted Dirac cone spectrum, while graphene hosts upright Dirac cone. Based on our analytical calculation of the polarization function for tilted Dirac cone To describe the collective excitations of the borophene layers in our double layer system, we need the linear response function of charge density to the external potential and the dielectric function for the double layer system. To begin, the Hamiltonian for DLB which are separated along z direction and are interacting via the long range Coulomb interacton l,l ,σ,σ ,p,q,k where, h(k) is the Hamiltonian for tilted Dirac cone, l, l = 1, 2 are layer indices, and V ll denotes the interlayer (l = l ) and intralayer (l = l ) Coulomb matrix element. The operator ψ p,σ,l anihilates an electron at Bloch state p, with σ in layer l of area A. The tilted Dirac Hamiltonian which describes the low energy electronic properties of borophene and organic conductors (under high pressure) is given by Here, L (R) stands for left (right) valley, the diagonal Fermi velocities v x0 , v y0 represent the tilt of the Dirac cone and the off-diagonal Fermi velocities v x = v y represent the anisotropic of the principal Fermi velocity. As a special case of Eq. ( where λ = ± and the tilt parameter η is defined as The intralayer and interlayer Coulomb interaction for the pair parallel of 2D borophene layer in a medium with different dielectric constant around ( 1 , d , 2 form top to bottom) is given by 32 where, Here, it has been assumed that the first (second) layer, l = 1 (l = 2), is located at z = d (0) and has been sandwiched between two dielectric media 1 at the top and d ( d and 2 at the bottom). Hence, V 22 can be find thorough V 11 by changing variable 2 → 1 . Within the random phase approximation (RPA), and ignoring the interlayer PH propagators, the dressed density response function can be expressed as Now the dispersion of collective excitations is obtained by To begin investigating the plasmon mode properties in the DLB we first analyze the density response and its plasmons in long wavelength limit, analytically. Using linear response theory, the density fluctuation of the noninteracting borophene monolayer in the presence of external electromagnetic filed is given by, where k = k + q, n k,λ is Fermi distribution function with λ as band index, the factor γ 2 = v x /v y is Jacobian transformation, g includes spin degeneracy, A is area of system and the form factor f λ,λ (k, k ) is defined as an expectation value of the density operator σ 0 = 1 between two eigenstates |k, λ , k , λ of the tilted Dirac cone, which is given by where θ k is a direction of momentum k to x axis. Here we just consider contribution of one valley (say right) in each layer and ignore the effect of intervalley process, which require large momentum transfer. The analytical result of noninteracting density response function has been calculated in Ref. 21 by the present authors. In the long wavelength limit q → 0 this result can be summarized as, where, It can be easily seen that the density response function in Eq. ( and, The ω + ∝ √ q is the in-phase oscillations of charge density in two layers, and therefore conforms to the generic √ q hydrodynamic behavior of 2D systems Both plasmonic branches depend on the chemical potential of each layer and the linear one is also sensitively dependent on the separation of the layers. Note that up to this point we have assumed that except for the chemical potential, all other parameters of the two layers forming the DLB are the same. In addition, if we consider different dielectric media, the qualitative behavior remains the same, but the two plasmonic branches will disperse at lower energy and the group velocity of acoustic mode will be modified 1 = d = 2 . Moreover, when studying bilayers composed of graphene and borophene, their Fermi velocities is assumed to be v F = c/300, c/1000, respectively, where c is the light velocity. The fine structure constant is e 2 /hc = 1/137. We also assume that the Fermi velocity in x and y directions are the same, v x = v y = v F . Moreover, the kink feature in which we are interested is best seen for the direction φ = π/2 of the momentum q. So we will report our plots for this direction. energy hω/μ 1 (momentum q/k F1 ) where the subscript 1 refers to layer 1 which is taken as reference in case the corresponding quantities are different from layer 2, and the vector q is along the y direction. In this section we consider, the pair of parallel borophene layers which are placed in background dielectric constant ( 1 = d = 2 = 1) and separated by a distance d in z direction and investigate the dependence of the two plasmon dispersions on various parameters such as the tilting parameters (η 1 , η 2 ), chemical potentials (μ 1 , μ 2 ). The background dielectric constant appears as an overall constant that reduces V (q) to which the results are not very sensitive. So we take the background dielectric constant to be 1. Moreover, all plots will be in the (ω, q) space, where the vertical (horizontal) axis is the dimensionless To begin with, we consider DLB with both layers at the same chemical potential (μ 1 = μ 2 ). Since both layers are made of borophene, they have the same tilting parameter. We take the tilt parameter to be η 1 = η 2 = 0.45 In this figure, the in-phase (out-of-phase) plasmon mode i.e. ω + (ω -) has been shown with purple (black) curves. The red line denotes the plasmon mode for the monolayer borophene. When the separation becomes infinitely large, the two layers are expected to be decoupled, and therefore the in-phase and out-of-phase modes both become degenerate with the monolayer (red) mode. The boundary of interband and intraband PHC which is defined by ω kink and ω s has been shown with dotdashed curve and line, respectively. These boundaries are given by The reason the lower boundary of inter-band PHC is given the name ω kink is that in Ref. 21 we established that at this boundary the plasmon dispersion of a single-layer tilted Dirac cone system develops a kink. As can be clearly seen in Fig. To further investigate the role of tilt parameter, let us assume that one of the layers is not tilted, i.e. η 1 = 0, and vary the tilt strength η 2 of the other layer. This will teach us how the kink which is the hallmark of tilted Dirac cone evolves in a double layer system. For this purpose in Fig. This is obtained by plugging the long wavelength expression of Eq. ( This singular behavior near η ≈ 1 explains why the plasmon modes become steeper for very large tilting. To establish the claim of our previous work Every G factor contains its own kink information, and therefore both ω ± modes will inherit two kinks, one from the G function of each leyer. An interesting lesseon can be learned by studying the plasmon modes of two borophene layers where layer 1 is doped (μ 1 = 0), while the second layer is undoped (μ 2 = 0). When such two layers are infinitely separated, such that the collective charge oscillations in the two layers are decoupled, in layer 1 we have standard plasmons, while in layer 2, since the doping level is zero, there are no plasmon oscillations at the RPA level The PHC consist of two contributions. In the doped layer, there is a window below the ω kink . But in the undoped layer, this window is filled with interband PH excitations. Therefore the total PHC which is the union of the PHC for the two layers, consists of no gapped (white) region which will then make the plasmon mode of essentially layer 1 Landau damped by creasing interband PH excitations in the layer 2. Indeed we have checked that the dispersion of the present DLB system is almost degenerate with that of a single layer 1, as long as we are concerned with ω < ω kink . However, for ω > ω kink the FIG. plasmon branch enters the interband PHC of layer 1 itslef, and its dispersion is heavily affected by the presence of layer 2, and it will no longer be nearly degenerate with the dispersion of a monolayer 1. Finally note that by increasing the common tilt parameter η 1 = η 2 of the two layers, the energy of the plasmon mode increases. This is a generic behavior in all combinations, as in e.g. Fig. Next, we assume in the DLB we have identically tilted layers with identical velocities, which are doped differently. The difference in doping is quantified by doping ratio. In Fig. of wave vector q is fixed in y direction. An important player in this case is the upper border ω s of the intra-band PHC. As for the border ω kink of the interband PHC, there will be three possibilities to form the interband particle-hole excitations: (i) within the layer 1, (ii) within the layer 2, (iii) cross layer involving particle-hole excitations between layer 1 and 2. In the present approximation where interlayer PH propagators are not included, the third item above is absent. The lower bound ω kink of the intralayer interband for each of the layers are plotted by dottdashed lines. As can be seen first of all, both modes when cross every one of these boundaries, develop a kink. So we end up having two kinks for each mode. Second point to notice is that, in panel (b) where the chemical potentials are closer to each other, the ω kink boundaries approach to each other. In this case, we have two decent ω ± modes. However by reducing the ratio μ 2 /μ 1 , the nearly triangle shaped region shrinks more and more. As a result, the out-of-phase mode (black line) is attracted more and more to the intraband PHC. At the limit μ 2 /μ 1 = 0 of Fig. So far we have assumed that both layers are composed of borophene, such that the Fermi velocities are identical. In this section, we are going to study a double layer composed of borophene and graphene. In this case, a new player will be the difference in the Fermi velocity of the two layers. The Fermi velocity sets the slope of the boundary ω s of the intraband PHC for every layer. The monolayer graphene as a 2D Dirac material with Fermi velocity c/300 and borophene layer as a 2D tilted Dirac material with Fermi velocity ≈ c/1000 are a good candidate for constructing a double layer system. Another candidate for the tilted Dirac cone layer at the bottom can be organic material where the superscript in parenthesis indicates their layer indices. More explicitly, F Note that in the DLBG system the PHC will be the union of intralayer PH excitations of both layers. In this way, the interband portion of the PHC for moderate η 1 comes below the ω kink curve. This is manifest in panels (a), (b) and (c) of Fig. Next, we consider DLBG with different chemical potential (μ 2 = μ 1 ) and of course with different Fermi velocities in Fig. In our previous work In Ref. 21, we found that the overdamped plasmon branch for borophene monolayer is in the energy range ω < ω s . This mode is caused by strong enough tilt, and disperses linearly. In the case of monolayer graphene where there is no tilt, such an overdamped mode does not exist at all. It is interesting to note that when it comes to double layer graphene, such an overdamped mode will appear. This has not been explored in earlier publications addressing the double layer systems In this work, we investigated plasmon oscillations in double layer systems where either one or both of the layers have tilted Dirac cone spectrum. It is well known that in this context, there will be two plasmon modes. The in-phsae mode will disperse as √ q -consistent with the hydrodynamic picture -while the out-of-phase mode disperses as q 1 . The inphase (symmetric) mode always lies at higher energies that the out-of-phase (asymmetric) mode. This is in contrast to the intuition from molecular orbitals where the symmetric combination of atomic orbitals usually has lower energy than the asymmetric combination. This is because in the present case, we are dealing with a symmetric combination of particle-hole objects, and not single-particle orbitals. An extra minus sign coming from the fermion loop places the symmetric plasmons at higher energies. When the tilted Dirac cone systems are combined in a double layer framework, interesting plasmonic features arises. The tilt of the Dirac cone is manifested in its plasmons as a kink when it crosses ω kink . Such a kink is absent in Dirac cone without tilt. In a bilayer setting we find quite generically that even when one of the layers hosts tilted Dirac cone, the plasmonic kink will be inherited by both in-phase and outof-phase mode. This kink in both branches takes place at precisely ω kink . In situation such as in Fig. When one of the layers is graphene with larger Fermi velocity, the small window where undamped plasmons can live will become smaller and will be set by the larger Fermi velocity of graphene. This pushes both in-phase and out-of-phase plasmon modes to higher energy. Therefore the typical plasmonic group velocity in such double layer systems with two different Fermi velocities, is set by the greater of the two velocities. Another unique feature of tilted Dirac cone monolayer is the existence of linearly dispersing overdamped plasmon mode inside the intraband PHC. Although this mode does not exist in monolayers of upright Dirac cone systems such as graphene, in the double layer setting such a mode emerges. In the double layer systems with tilt, this mode continuously reduces its slope by increasing the tilt. This mode is the in-phase overdampled oscillation of the individual tilted layers 