The structural relaxation, potential energy states, and mechanical properties of a model glass subjected to thermal cycling are investigated using molecular dynamics simulations. We study a non-additive binary mixture which is annealed with different cooling rates from the liquid phase to a low temperature well below the glass transition. The thermal treatment is applied by repeatedly heating and cooling the system at constant pressure, thus temporarily inducing internal stresses upon thermal expansion. We find that poorly annealed glasses are relocated to progressively lower levels of potential energy over consecutive cycles, whereas well annealed glasses can be rejuvenated at sufficiently large amplitudes of thermal cycling. Moreover, the lowest levels of potential energy after one hundred cycles are detected at a certain temperature amplitude for all cooling rates. The structural transition to different energy states is accompanied by collective nonaffine displacements of atoms that are organized into clusters, whose typical size becomes larger with increasing cooling rate or temperature amplitude. We show that the elastic modulus and the peak value of the stress overshoot exhibit distinct maxima at the cycling amplitude, which corresponds to the minimum of the potential energy. The simulation results indicate that the yielding peak as a function of the cycling amplitude for quickly annealed glasses represents a lower bound for the maximum stress in glasses prepared with lower cooling rates. The development of novel processing routes that include thermal and mechanical treatments of metallic glasses is important for numerous engineering applications Remarkably, recent experimental studies on metallic glasses have demonstrated that cryogenic thermal cycling can induce rejuvenation that leads to less relaxed states of higher energy and improved plasticity In the last few years, the evolution of the potential energy, structural relaxation dynamics, and mechanical properties of glasses subjected to multiple shear cycles were examined using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations In this paper, the influence of thermal cycling on the potential energy and mechanical properties of binary glasses is studied using molecular dynamics simulations. The glasses are initially annealed across the glass transition with various cooling rates to a low temperature and then subjected to repeated heating and cooling cycles at constant pressure. We show that quickly annealed glasses reach lower levels of potential energy after one hundred thermal cycles, while slowly annealed glasses are rejuvenated at large temperature amplitudes. The results of numerical simulations indicate that the elastic modulus and the yield stress as a function of the cycling amplitude each exhibit a distinct maximum, which correlates well with the lowest potential energy level detected at the same amplitude. This paper is organized as follows. The details of molecular dynamics simulations including parameter values, equilibration procedure, and temperature protocol are described in the next section. The results for the potential energy series, analysis of nonaffine displacements, and stress-strain response are presented in section III. A brief summary is provided in the last section. The model glass studied in this paper is represented by the binary Lennard-Jones (LJ) mixture (80:20), which was originally developed by Kob and Andersen (KA) where the interaction parameters for both types of atoms are specified as ε AA = 1.0, ε AB = 1.5, ε BB = 0.5, σ AB = 0.8, σ BB = 0.88, and m A = m B In our setup, all atoms were initially placed in a periodic box and the system was allowed to equilibrate at a high-temperature liquid state in the N P T ensemble. Throughout the study, the pressure was kept constant, i.e., P = 0. The temperature, denoted by T LJ , was regulated using the Nosé-Hoover thermostat Note that k B denotes the Boltzmann constant. In the next step, the system was thermally annealed across the glass transition to the target temperature of 0.01 ε/k B with cooling rates 10 -2 ε/k B τ , 10 -3 ε/k B τ , 10 -4 ε/k B τ , and 10 -5 ε/k B τ . Thus, the typical annealing time varies from about 100 τ , which is only a couple of orders of magnitude greater than the atomic vibration time, to about 10 5 τ , which requires an efficient parallel code for the large system size We first discuss the variation of the potential energy and glass density for samples annealed with cooling rates 10 -2 ε/k B τ , 10 -3 ε/k B τ , 10 -4 ε/k B τ , and 10 -5 ε/k B τ to the low temperature of 0.01 ε/k B and aged at this temperature and zero pressure for the time interval of 10 6 τ . The results are summarized in Fig. After the annealing procedure, the binary glasses were subjected to repeated thermal cycling, where the temperature was varied piecewise linearly from 0.01 ε/k B to the maximum value and back to 0.01 ε/k B over 100 cycles with the period T = 10 000 τ . An example of the temperature profiles measured during the first five cycles is presented in Fig. where the sum is over nearest neighbors that are located closer than 1.5 σ to the i-th atom. Recently, the analysis of spatial configurations of atoms with large nonaffine displacements was carried out for cyclically sheared On the other hand, below the yield point, binary glasses start to deform reversibly after transient cycles and nonaffine displacements become organized into compact clusters We next discuss nonaffine displacements in thermally cycled glasses for two limiting cases We find that the thermal treatment of binary glasses can significantly affect their mechanical properties. The stress-strain curves for different cycling amplitudes are presented in Fig. The summary of the data for the yielding peak, σ Y , the elastic modulus, E, and the potential energy minimum, U (100 T ), as a function of the cycling amplitude is presented in Fig. In summary, molecular dynamics simulations were carried out to study structural relaxation and mechanical properties of a model glass after thermal cycling with different amplitudes. We considered a binary Lennard-Jones mixture, which was initially annealed from the liquid state to a temperature well below the glass transition. With increasing cooling rate, the glasses settle into more shallow potential energy minima and become less dense. After annealing, the thermal treatment was imposed during one hundred cycles of heating and cooling at constant pressure. We found that depending on the cooling rate and cycling amplitude, the glasses can be either overaged or rejuvenated by periodic temperature variations. Thus, the potential energy in quickly annealed glasses decreases during thermal cycling, while the potential energy in slowly annealed glasses increases at large cycling am-plitudes. It was further shown that the lowest energy minima are attained at a particular temperature amplitude for quickly and slowly annealed glasses. In all cases, the structural changes leading to different energy states occur via collective nonaffine displacements of atoms, and the typical size of clusters of mobile atoms is reduced with decreasing cooling rate or temperature amplitude and with increasing cycle number. In turn, the mechanical properties were probed via uniaxial tensile loading at constant pressure after the thermal treatment. The simulation results demonstrated that the elastic modulus and the peak value of the stress overshoot become larger with increasing cycling amplitude up to about two-thirds of the glass transition temperature. In this range, the variation of the yield peak as a function of the temperature amplitude for quickly annealed glasses provides a lower bound for the maximum stress in more slowly annealed glasses. FIG. 5: (Color online) The potential energy series for the glass annealed with the cooling rate of 10 -3 ε/k B τ and thermally cycled with amplitudes 0.1 ε/k B (red), 0.2 ε/k B (green), 0.3 ε/k B (blue), and 0.4 ε/k B (orange). The data at the temperature of 0.01 ε/k B are denoted by the black line.