Characterizing electrochemical energy conversion devices during operation is an important strategy for correlating device performance with the properties of cell materials under real operating conditions. While operando characterization has been used extensively for low temperature electrochemical cells, these techniques remain challenging for solid oxide electrochemical cells due to the high temperatures and reactive gas atmospheres these cells require. Operando X-ray diffraction measurements of solid oxide electrochemical cells could detect changes in the crystal structure of the cell materials, which can be useful for understanding degradation process that limit device lifetimes, but the experimental capability to perform operando X-ray diffraction on the fuel electrodes of these cells has not been demonstrated. Here we present the first experimental apparatus capable of performing X-ray diffraction measurements on the fuel electrodes of high temperature solid oxide electrochemical cells during operation under reducing gas atmospheres. We present data from an example experiment with a model solid oxide cell to demonstrate that this apparatus can collect X-ray diffraction spectra during electrochemical cell operation at high temperatures in humidified H 2 gas. Measurements performed using this apparatus can reveal new insights about solid oxide fuel cell and solid oxide electrolyzer cell degradation mechanisms to enable the design of durable, high performance devices. High temperature solid state electrochemical cells such as solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) and solid oxide electrolyzer cells (SOECs) are promising technologies for efficiently converting between chemical and electrical energy While many previous studies have focused on degradation of the electrolyte or the oxygen electrode (the cathode in SOFCs or anode in SOECs), changes in the fuel electrode (the anode in SOFCs or cathode in SOECs) are also worthy of investigation because they can significantly impact cell performance Operando characterization techniques are becoming increasingly important for studying electrochemical systems because they enable measurements of composition, chemical state, and/or crystal structure during electrochemical cell operation In this work, we describe the first apparatus that can enable collection of time-resolved XRD spectra of fuel electrodes in solid oxide electrochemical cells during electrochemical operation at high temperatures (up to 745 °C). The apparatus can operate under reducing (e.g. dry or humidified H 2 ) or inert (e.g. Ar or N 2 ) gas atmospheres, enabling measurements of fuel electrode materials, as well as electrolytes. It is designed to be compatible with a conventional laboratory powder X-ray diffractometer, which enables high experimental throughput. Setup of the electrochemical cell for testing is simple and requires no permanent bonds to make electrical contacts. Both two-electrode and three-electrode electrochemical cells in a range of shapes and sizes can be accommodated. This apparatus will enable measurements of structural changes in the fuel electrodes and electrolytes of solid oxide cells during operation, which can provide new insights into the design of high performance, durable solid oxide electrochemical cells. Our apparatus is designed to enable collection of XRD spectra of the fuel electrode and electrolyte during solid oxide electrochemical cell operation. The primary design objectives are presented in Table Figure Gas inlet and outlet ports (Swagelok SS-200-1-2BT) are attached to the NPT tapped holes on the front of the housing. Each port is fitted with a quarter turn plug valve and a miniature quick-connect fitting (Swagelok SS-2P4T and SS-Q2-S-200). These fittings enable easy connections to an external manifold of valves, flow controllers, and a water bubbler to humidify the gas stream and regulate the gas flow rate into the apparatus. All internal components are constructed using materials that are resistant to degradation at high temperatures under inert or reducing gas atmospheres. The chamber is leak tight, as confirmed using a H 2 gas detector, which measures a H 2 concentration < 1 ppm a few cm away from all external surfaces of the apparatus at all times during operation. The internal volume of the apparatus is approximately 1 L, so at gas flow rates of 200 -300 sccm, it is possible to completely exchange the internal gas within 15 -20 min. Inside the apparatus, the electrochemical cell is mounted to a ceramic heating stage, and electrical connections are made using various platinum contacts, as shown in Figure As shown in Supporting Information S2, the electrical connections to the anode and reference electrode on the bottom of the electrochemical cell are made using Pt foils with Pt mesh on top to enable electrical contact while still permitting gas access to the electrodes. The Pt foil/mesh contacts are secured onto the ceramic heating stage using ceramic screws, and are cut to fit the shape of the anode and reference electrodes used in the example electrochemical cell pictured in Figure To connect the electrodes to the outside of the apparatus, all the Pt foil/mesh contacts and current collectors are attached to Pt wires which run through insulating ceramic tubes. The ends of these wires are crimped onto small stainless steel cylinders, which are pressure fit over the alumel pins in an NPT feedthrough which passes through on the front of the housing (MPF Products, Inc. A0198-12-NPT). The feedthrough can accommodate up to 10 independent electrical connections, but routinely four electrical connections are made (one to the anode, one to the reference, and two to the cathode). High temperature teflon tape (McMaster-Carr 44945K34, max temperature of 288 °C) is used on all NPT feedthrough junctions on the external housing side. On the outside of the apparatus, the electrical feedthrough is terminated with BNC cables used to connect to a potentiostat (Bio-Logic) for measuring the performance of the electrochemical cell. The electrochemical cell is heated using a resistive spiral microheater (Micropyretics Heaters International Inc. MC-GAXP-130) underneath the ceramic stage. The electronic circuit controlling the heater is shown in Figure We performed an example measurement using the electrochemical cell shown in Figure Figure The capabilities of our apparatus could be extended to study other conditions or enhance performance with some modifications. Increasing the height of the beryllium X-ray windows could enable access to at 2θ angle of 0°. While this is not necessary to collect XRD spectra to analyze the crystal structure of electrochemical cell materials, it could be useful for sample height alignment in the diffractometer. The maximum operating temperature of the apparatus could likely be increased to exceed the maximum demonstrated operating temperature of 745 °C by adding extra insulation to the interior walls of the apparatus to further reduce heat loss through the stainless steel housing. It is not possible to measure the temperature uniformity of our apparatus at present, but there is likely some variation in the local temperature at different positions across the electrochemical cell. Using a larger heater coil could could provide improved spatial uniformity of the temperature across the electrochemical cell, and also potentially contribute to higher maximum temperatures. Our apparatus could be modified to be resistant to oxidizing gas atmospheres such as air. This would enable operando XRD measurements of oxygen electrodes in SOFCs and SOECs. Presently, the primary component of our apparatus that would corrode at high temperatures in air is the copper wires that connect the heater coil to the heater power feedthrough. These wires could be replaced with a different material such as Pt, which is resistant to oxidation. Some other apparatus components, such as the stainless steel current collector brackets, could also oxidize, but this would not significantly inhibit the performance of the apparatus. Finally, this apparatus could be used to investigate structural changes in other high temperature electrically active systems beyond solid oxide electrochemical cells. For example, with only minor modifications to the electrical contacts, the apparatus could be used to study high temperature piezoelectric materials Our apparatus provides the first experimental capability to measure structural changes in fuel electrodes of high temperature solid oxide electrochemical cells under reducing atmospheres via operando XRD. The apparatus is compatible with a conventional laboratory powder X-ray diffractometer, which enables high throughput measurements. Solid oxide electrochemical cells with diameters ranging from 4 -30 mm can be tested in the apparatus. Rapid setup of these electrochemical cells is facilitated by flexible electrical connections. The apparatus can make up to four electrical connections to the electrochemical cell, enabling experiments with both two-electrode and three-electrode configurations. Electrochemical cells can be tested at temperatures up to 745 °C under reducing (e.g. dry or humidified H 2 ) or inert (e.g. Ar or N 2 ) gas atmospheres. As a result of this unique combination of capabilities, this apparatus will enable experiments to assess the effect of operating conditions on electrode and electrolyte structure, making this an important tool for identify strategies to limit degradation and create durable, high performance solid oxide electrochemical cells. 