Two models are proposed to predict the evolution of shear band width as a function of applied strain for simulated glasses mechanically deformed in simple shear. The first model arises from dimensional analysis and an assumption that band broadening is controlled by the strain rate inside the shear band. The second model describes the shear band as a pulled front propagating into an unsteady state, the dynamics of which are described using the effective temperature shear transformation zone (ET-STZ) theory. Both models are compared to three simulated systems: a two-dimensional binary Lennard-Jones glass, a Cu64Zr36 glass modeled using an embedded atom method (EAM) potential, and a Si glass modeled using the Stillinger-Weber potential. Shear bands form in all systems across a variety of quench rates. Depending on the case these bands either appear to broaden indefinitely or to saturate to a finite width. The shear band strain rate model appears to apply only when band growth is unconstrained, indicating the dominance of a single time scale in the early stages of band development. The front propagation model, which reduces to the other model in the early stages of band broadening, also applies to cases in which the band width saturates, suggesting that competition between the rate of shear-induced configurational disordering and thermal relaxation sets a maximum width for shear bands in a variety of materials systems. Strain localization, also known as shear banding, is a deformation mechanism present in a variety of glassy systems including gels Unfortunately, attempts to characterize the nature of shear bands in experimental systems have been limited by the small length and short time scales over which shear bands form Simulation of shear bands presents an alternative method of studying this phenomenon. In this study we propose two models for the width of a shear band as a function of the applied strain in simulated glassy systems driven at constant strain rate in simple shear. The shear band strain rate (SBSR) model assumes that the strain rate within the shear band is the only relevant time scale in our system and predicts that the shear band width will be proportional to the square root of strain. This model is empirical in nature, arising from dimensional analysis, and assumes a single material length scale. A second model assumes that shear bands are pulled fronts which propagate into an unsteady state. An effective temperature is used to characterize the structural state of the material ahead of and behind the front and effective temperature shear transformation zone (ET-STZ) theory defines the time-evolution of these states. We call this model the shear transformation zone pulled front (STZ-PF) model, and, in addition to assuming an existing length scale analogous to that from the SBSR model, another length scale arises in the STZ-PF model that corresponds to a shear band saturation width. We test the applicability of the SBSR and STZ-PF models to three simulated systems -a twodimensional binary Lennard Jones glass, a three-dimensional embedded atom method (EAM) Cu64Zr36 glass and a three-dimensional Stillinger-Weber Si glass. This paper is arranged as follows. In the Theoretical Background section, we introduce the concepts of effective temperature and shear transformation zones. We then detail the derivation of the linear spreading speed of a moving front propagating into an unsteady state based on an explicit form of the structural evolution state taken from STZ theory. In the Methods section we outline how model systems were prepared and deformed as well as the procedure used to determine the width of the shear band. In the Results section we fit our models to simulation data and comment on the fit parameters they generate. Lastly, in the Discussion section we summarize our work and comment on future directions. The Shear Band Strain Rate (SBSR) Model Derivation In deformed systems where strain localization dominates the response, a simple geometrical relationship is observed between the global strain rate, !, and the strain rate within the shear band, !̇#, In this expression & is the length of the simulation cell perpendicular to the direction of the applied load and ' is the width of the shear band. If one assumes that the strain rate is the dominant time scale in such simulations we can justify the existence of a simple relationship between the rate of broadening of the shear band, '̇, and the global strain rate, where we introduce another length scale L which dictates the magnitude of broadening for a given configuration driven at constant strain rate. We surmise that this is a material length scale, with some dependence on the internal structure of the glass. Taken together, these equations result in a simple analytic expression for the predicted width of a shear band as a function of applied strain, where ' -and ! -are the respective band width and strain at shear band nucleation. We will refer to this model as the shear band strain rate (SBSR) model. The SBSR model suggests that, at sufficiently large applied strain, the width of the shear band is proportional to the square root of the applied strain, ' ∝ ! 4 5 . In the SBSR model the physics of the evolving glass is expressed using a single empirically determined parameter L. This limits our ability to intuit response for a variety of glassy systems (metallic, covalent, etc.) or to draw connections between the response and the internal structure of a particular glass. To overcome these limitations, we seek an alternative expression for shear band broadening which incorporates the physics of ET-STZ theory, where a strong connection is drawn between material structure and response. We propose an alternative framework where band broadening is modeled as a pair of moving interfaces which separate jammed and flowing material inside and outside of the shear band. We assume that the leading edge of each interface, or front, moves outward at the linear spreading velocity 6 * . This velocity can be determined by linearizing the dynamical equations describing the state of material ahead of the front about the unsteady state. Our approach was adapted from a review of front propagation dynamics by W. van Saarloos In his review, van Saarloos defines pulled fronts as the class of interfaces whose propagation speed is exactly 6 * in steady-state. The speed of a growing and spreading perturbation, 8(9, :), can be characterized by constructing a level set line through this curve at some fixed, arbitrary value 8(9, :) = ;. The time-rate-of-change of the position of the intersection point of the line and the curve, <= > (?) <? , is expected to reach an asymptotic velocity, 6 * as : → ∞. This velocity can be calculated by linearizing the dynamical equations describing the structural state of the material ahead of the front and using a saddle-point approximation. The details of this procedure are discussed extensively in Ref The concept of an effective temperature stems from the idea that non-equilibrium systems can be thought of as consisting of two, weakly-coupled subsystems In the effective temperature shear transformation zone (ET-STZ) theory it is proposed that when one does plastic work on such a glassy system nanoscopic defects called shear transformation zones (STZs) undergo shear-induced structural rearrangements dissipating energy. A typical STZ contains 10s of atoms ET-STZ theory has undergone numerous changes and appeared in various forms since its introduction The general structure for the evolution of the effective temperature proposed by Manning et al. in Ref In this expression ; CDD is a specific heat and E F = X F /Z [ , where X F is the energy required to nucleate a STZ and Z [ is the Boltzmann constant. Heat due to mechanical work done on the system, E CDD (IJ N I: ⁄ ) MCNO , drives the structural state, A = E CDD E F ⁄ , towards the steady-state value A. The existence of Â has been demonstrated in a prior study of the LJ system The parameter `is an internal time scale comparable to the phonon frequency and a(b) is a function of the deviatoric shear stress, b. The plastic strain rate is the product of the rate of stress induced STZ transitions, 2a(b) `-⁄ , and an Arrhenius term that is proportional to the number density of STZs, exp(-1 A ⁄ ). It is assumed that STZ transitions occur only in the direction of loading. We hold off providing an explicit definition of a(b) until later in our derivation. In Ref where 6 F is the number of molecules within an STZ, Ω is the volume per molecule, l -is a strain increment of order unity, Λ = exp (-1 A) ⁄ is proportional to the STZ density and Γ(s) is the energy dissipated per STZ. The STZ energy dissipation term Γ(s) (Eq. A10) is given as where b -is the minimum flow stress and s is the deviatoric shear stress. Combining Equations ( Manning et al. analyze strain localization simulations performed at low temperature and assume that the contribution due to thermal fluctuations is marginal. Consequently, an expression for (IJ N I: ⁄ ) ?OCSM is not provided. We refer instead to Ref In this expression p is a dimensionless scaling parameter, ρ(T) is a thermal factor whose form is beyond the scope of this derivation, and t is an activation term which dictates the susceptibility of STZ transitions to thermal fluctuations. Manning et al. define a dimensionless effective temperature u-= ; CDD Ω/(Z [ 6 F ). Combining Equations ( We know from prior studies ( We give the perturbation the following form This is a generic plane wave with amplitude 8 -, wavenumber Z, and angular frequency |. Parameters W and : represent position and time, respectively. The plane wave equation is in complex exponential form with imaginary number {. The expression for the evolution of the uniform part of the solution is Since 8 ≪ A -, we can make the approximations, We now solve for the linear solution of 8̇, excluding any terms of order Å(A - d. ) or higher. We introduce a dimensionless rate factor Ç that determines the rate at which the perturbation grows or decays due to mechanical work, Recall that A -characterizes the structural state of jammed material. There is a critical effective temperature A N beneath which a perturbation is expected to grow, i.e. for A -< A N < Â . When the structural state of the jammed material exceeds this critical value, A -> A N , a perturbation will decay. A N represents the crossover from heterogeneous to homogeneous deformation when thermal relaxation is ignored. We introduce a second dimensionless rate factor that determines the direction of perturbation growth due to thermal relaxation, The term in parenthesis is negative because ] ≤ A -≤ t, while all other terms are positive. We introduce a minus sign to yield a positive rate factor. A sign change also occurs in the perturbation growth rate equation 8̇ and indicates that thermal relaxation damps perturbations. We further assume that the stress in our systems is equal to the minimum flow stress, b = b -. Substitution of Equations ( Recall that 8 = 8 -exp({ZW -{|:). We can obtain the dispersion relation where the spatial wavenumber Z is complex, and its real and imaginary parts are denoted using the subscripts á and {, respectively. As discussed at length in Ref. Equation 21 can be separated into its real and imaginary components and used to determine the critical wave number, The linear spreading speed is therefore We assume that the STZ activation rate is proportional to the strain rate within the shear band, where é is the constant velocity imposed on the simulation cell at the boundary, ' is the width of the shear band, and the density of STZs within the shear band is assumed constant and given by c9ê(-1 A⁄ ). The rate of band broadening is therefore We define the dynamic length scale that governs the initial rate of band broadening at low strain when ' ≪ ' í . This length scale appears in the SBSR model and is now explicitly defined in terms of the ET-STZ theory. To understand the behavior of this length scale, we first expand this expression by substitution of Equation ( The exponential term is the proportion of STZs within the jammed material at the maximum allowed disorder due to amorphous packing and approaches 1 as A -→ A. As the jammed material becomes more disordered, the radical term decreases, suggesting a reduction in the energy dissipated into the configurational degrees of freedom. The combined effect is a dynamic length scale which increases the shear band growth rate when the state of jammed material is more disordered up to some critical value A -→ A K . At even higher levels of disorder the shear band growth rate sharply decreases until reaching zero at the degree of disordering above which shear bands never form. The functional form of L thus suggests that shear bands typically broaden faster in systems with more disordered states. We can also define a band width saturation length scale, which determines when the rate of shear band broadening goes to zero. The dependence on both rate factors Ç and p̃ suggests that this length scale is set by the competition between stress induced structural rejuvenation and thermal relaxation. We explore the behavior of the saturation length scale by expanding Eqn. (29), The term in the parenthesis decreases as the effective temperature of the jammed state, A -, increases, once again demonstrating that thermal relaxation dampens the effects of shear induced disordering resulting in the reduction of the saturation length scale. The exponential term, by contrast, represents the fraction of STZs available to deform, which increases with effective temperature. The combined effect is a saturation length scale that is small for less disordered systems with low effective temperatures but which increases exponentially for systems whose disorder temperature approaches the steady state value. the same functional form as the SBSR model. The shear band broadening models are tested on simulated glasses generated using LAMMPS The LJ system was introduced by Lançon et al. in a study of phase stability of simulated quasicrystals The length of the simulation cell perpendicular to the loading direction, &, is 639.5 õ. There are 35,776 large and 44,224 small particles. We prepare three LJ configurations via a constant volume quench from a well-equilibrated liquid at 0.351 Z [ /l to 0.0299 Z [ /l over durations of 1,000 ` (LJ-1), 10,000 ` (LJ-2) and 100,000 ` (LJ-3). Temperature is controlled using a Nose-Hoover thermostat. We prepare ten replicas for each configuration to minimize sample-to-sample variation. The internal structures of each LJ configuration are statistically different as indicated by their respective average potential energies: -2.15 l (LJ-1), -2.17 l (LJ-2) and -2.19 l (LJ-3). Preparation of the CZ system follows the work of Shimizu et al. This system has a 4:20:1 aspect ratio with & = 547.81 Å and 80,000 atoms. We prepared three configurations by quenching from 3500 K to 300 K at constant pressure using the Tersoff potential and a Nose-Hoover thermostat and barostat. The quench rates were 0.100 K/ps (Si-1), 0.010 K/ps (Si-2) and 0.001 K/ps (Si-3). The system is subsequently annealed at 400 K for 100 ps using the Stillinger-Weber potential. Five replicas of each Si configuration are prepared with average potential energy values of -4.09 (Si-1), -4.10 (Si-2) and -4.11 (Si-3) eV. We deform our systems in simple shear by incrementally deforming the simulation cell at a constant rate of 0.0001 ps -1 (`-1 , LJ). We integrate the SLLOD equations of motion Strain localization occurs in all simulations; however, the chosen geometry minimizes stress concentration allowing us to strain the systems in excess of 1000%. The systems are coupled to a Nose-Hoover thermostat at 300 K (CZ and Si) and 0.0299 Z [ /l (LJ) to remove heat generated during shear. We compute the local atomic strain using OVITO The relative stability of a glass is measured by its average atomic energy and the likelihood that multiple shear bands will form increases with decreasing glass stability. Table The SBSR and STZ-PF models assume that shear bands have well-defined edges and constant width; however, actual shear bands have more complex structures. Figure In (b) a secondary shear band is present at 20% strain and broadening occurs in both features. Secondary bands may form at any stage of deformation and we exclude simulations from our analysis if they do. The formation of additional features indicates that in addition to aging, plastic deformation occurs in material outside the primary shear band. The STZ-PF model incorporates these effects by including a thermal relaxation term, p and a structural rejuvenation term that depends on the local strain rate !. Figure The coexistence of low and high-strain regions within shear bands is less prevalent in CZ and Si simulations, which may be result of averaging strain over the third dimension. Vertical shear bands may occur at early stages of deformation as shown by the tail of the dominant feature in Figure Two scenarios are possible for simulations where a single shear band dominates the response: We use R-squared (R 2 ) as a metric for comparing the goodness of each model. We exclude simulations where unconstrained growth is determined by the STZ-PF model because ' í is undefined. Table Figure Shear band saturation is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the systems studied and occurs in the majority of simulations. In Figure This study compares two models of shear band broadening -the shear band strain rate (SBSR) model which assumes that the rate of band broadening is proportional to the strain rate within the shear band and the shear transformation zone pulled front (STZ-PF) model that describes shear band broadening as a pulled front propagating into an unsteady state. We test these models on three systems: a two-dimensional Lennard-Jones glass, a three-dimensional embedded atom method Cu64Zr36 glass and a three-dimensional Stillinger-Weber silicon glass. Shear bands form in each system and their dynamics are well captured by the STZ-PF model, even when configurations are generated at increasingly high cooling rates. Initially, shear bands grow at a rate proportional to the square root of applied strain. Shear bands may grow indefinitely with increasing strain, but more often saturate to a finite length forming coexisting regions of jammed and flowing material. The SBSR model is able to capture the dynamics of shear bands at the onset of strain localization or whenever band width is unconstrained; however, the SBSR model breaks down as shear bands saturate to finite width. The STZ-PF model improves upon this shortfall in the SBSR model by introducing a band width saturation length scale that depends on the internal structure and rate of thermal relaxation of the glass. The STZ-PF model reduces to the SBSR model whenever band width is much smaller than saturation length, such as the case of unconstrained band growth. This work represents the first step in an ongoing study of strain localization in simulated glasses. It demonstrates that the structural state of sheared glassy systems can be well-described using an effective temperature (ET) and the dynamics of the state can be described using shear transformation zone (STZ) theory. Our results suggest that shear bands can be modeled as pulled fronts which propagates into an unsteady state. The dynamics of the state on either side of the front can be described as a competition between increasing structural disorder due to plastic work and increasing structural order due to thermal relaxation. Experimental studies of shear banding in metallic glasses report widths ranging from 10 -210 nm Although these results seem promising, we acknowledge several difficulties when drawing comparisons between simulated and experimental systems. We deform our simulations in simple shear while experiments tend to compress samples using nanoindentation This preliminary study leaves many questions unanswered. A subsequent investigation will focus on understanding the role of thermally-induced structural relaxation by shearing LJ glasses at different bath temperatures. We predict that as the reservoir temperature increases, thermal relaxation should play a larger role in the material response leading to a decrease in saturation length. This study should provide insight into the functional form of p. Several model parameters depend explicitly on the structural state of the system, which is poorly defined. We also hope to elucidate the relationship between potential energy and effective temperature in order to quantify A and completely define our systems in terms of ET-STZ theory. Tables 