We study the bulk and edge properties of a driven Kitaev chain, where the driving is performed as instantaneous quenches of the on-site energies. We identify three periodic driving regimes: low period, which is equivalent to a static model, with renormalized parameters obtained from the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff (BCH) expansion; intermediate period, where the first order BCH expansion breaks down; and high period when the quasienergy gap at ω/2 closes. We investigate the dynamical localization properties for the case of quasiperiodic potential driving as a function of its amplitude and the pairing strength, obtaining regimes with extended, critical and localized bulk states, if the driving is performed at high frequencies. In these, we characterize wave-packet propagation, obtaining ballistic, subdiffusive and absence of spreading, respectively. In the intermediate period regime, we find an additional region in the phase diagram with a mobility edge between critical and localized states. Further, we investigate the stability of these phases under time-aperiodicity on the drivings, observing that the system eventually thermalizes: It results in featureless random states which can be described by the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. In a system with open edges, we find that both Majorana and fermionic localized edge modes can be engineered with a spatially quasiperiodic potential, in similarity with the case of homogeneous on-site energies. Besides, we demonstrate the possibility of creating multiple Majorana 0 and π modes in a driven setting, even if the underlying static Hamiltonian is in its trivial phase. Lastly, we study the robustness of the Majorana modes against the aperiodicity in the driving period, showing that the ones created via quasiperiodic potential are more robust to the decoherence. Moreover, we find an example where a Majorana mode displays high-robustness, provided that it is chosen from a special point in the topological region. TABLE I. Presence of Majorana modes in various settings: T and N refer to Majorana modes created from topological and trivial regions of the undriven Hamiltonian and the star refers to Majorana zero mode created from the flat band point. The important role of topology in condensed matter physics was seminally pointed out in the description of the quantum Hall effect In parallel, another exciting topic of research is quantum localization, which can be studied either in timeindependent systems Here, our goal is to bridge these two aspects, dynamical localization and topological order by studying their interplay. In fact, in the context of quantum driven systems, one can point out the growing interest on the experimental realization of topological states of matter via periodic modulation In our case, the starting point is the superconducting Kitaev chain, where the driving in some of the parameters of the Hamiltonian, namely on the chemical potential Thus the questions we address here are: (i) can Majorana modes be engineered with a time-periodic potential that leads to localization? (ii) what are the conditions for their creation? Namely, periods of the driving, range of parameters, etc. (iii) Are other driving protocols, as in the case of aperiodic drivings, robust on the stabilization of Majorana modes? Table The paper is organized as follows: We first introduce the model, a kicked Kitaev chain of spinless fermions and describe the basics on Floquet theory in Sec. II. Section III reviews the spatially homogeneous static and time-periodic case. Then we present the detailed analysis of the bulk properties of the spatially quasiperiodic periodically kicked system. Next we study the results of aperiodic kicking in Sec. IV. The time evolution of initialy localized state is presented in Sec. V before focusing on the edge states in Sec. VI. Lastly, we summarize our findings in Sec. VII. We consider a 1D Kitaev chain model 8 of spinless fermions 50 , in a lattice of size L with either open or periodic boundary conditions, whose Hamiltonian reads where ) is the superconducting p-wave pairing and Ĥ0μ = -μ i ĉ † i ĉi is the chemical potential and H.c. stands for the hermitian conjugate of the preceding terms. The fermionic creation (annihilation) operator at site i is ĉ † i (ĉ i ); J i and ∆ i are the hopping and superconducting p-wave pairing between sites i and i + 1, respectively. Hereafter, we choose homogeneous hoppings (J i = J) and pairings (∆ i = ∆), with J = 1 setting the energy scale of the problem. The last term in the Hamiltonian Ĥ1 = -λ τ δ(tt τ ) V , where V = i V i ĉ † i ĉi , is the potential which is applied onto the system at times t τ and the integer τ counts the number of applied kicks. These act as kicks in time by quenching the onsite energies of the lattice whose maximal amplitude is given by λ. In the periodic case t τ = τ T and we employ the Floquet formalism to construct effective timeindependent Hamiltonians whose stroboscopic dynamics is equivalent to the one for the original problem. The Floquet formalism states that the time-evolution operator describing the dynamics at stroboscopic times of a time-periodic Hamiltonian, Ĥ(t + T ) = Ĥ(t), is captured by Û (nT ) = e -i Ĥeff nT , where Ĥeff is a time-independent Hamiltonian, often referred as the Floquet Hamiltonian. In general, it is not guaranteed that a closed form of the Floquet Hamiltonian is always obtainable, In the limits of high-frequency (T 1) and small kickamplitudes (λ 1), one can truncate the effective Hamiltonian in the first order as (see Appendix A) Such expansion tells us that the small period regime is equivalent to the static problem, with an appropriatelly renormalized potential. Although the BCH formula gives us insights on the physics in the small period and kickamplitude limits, for general parameter values, we use exact diagonalization of the time-evolution operator to probe bulk and edge localization. From the high frequency and small kick strength expansion (see Appendix A), we can write down the effective static Hamiltonian, which has the general form where the hoppings and pairings between the sites separated by distance r emerge and μ is the renormalized chemical potential. In the case that the driving kicks are homogeneous in space, V = V i ĉ † i ĉi , it leads to spatially homogeneous parameters J r , ∆ r and μ, rescaled by the period, intensities of the kicks and the original parameters in Ĥ0 . Generically, the static long-ranged Hamiltonian (4) has been already studied in the literature (see, e.g., Refs. 55-58) and here we briefly revisit some of its main results. Considering periodic boundary conditions, after Fourier transforming into momentum space (using ĉ † k = 1 √ L j e ikj ĉ † j ), one can rewrite the effective Hamiltonian (4) as where x, y, z) being Pauli matrices in the Nambu space. By solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation being particle and hole coefficients in momentum space, respectively, one obtains the energy-momentum dispersion relation via diagonalization as In this subsection we first review the static system, before presenting our results on the periodically kicked case. Here we consider spatially inhomogeneous potentials, focusing on the quasiperiodic (Aubry-André-Harper) potential Localization of the bulk states can be studied via the non-ergodic properties of the system's eigenvalues and eigenvectors. , where the occupation of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle m on site i is given as and u m i , v m i are the corresponding particle and hole coefficients, respectively. The average PR is then R = R m r , where we first average over all the eigenstates m and then take an average over different disorder realizations r. The average PR thus quantifies localization of the eigenvectors in real space. A completely localized state has R = 1, while a perfectly delocalized state (such as a plane wave) has R = L. In contrast, critical states scale with the multifractal dimension of the wave-function. However, when dealing with a time-periodic problem one instead investigates the level of ergodicity of the eigenstates of the time-evolution operator after one period -the Floquet operator -Û (T ), with similar definitions for the PR. We report in Fig. Next, we focus on four representative points (λ/T, ∆) from the four regions of the phase diagram. These are marked in panel Fig. A general observation is that in all regions there are multiple quasienergy bands, which do not grow with the system size. Points D and P1, consisting of (bulk) extended and critical states, respectively, also host (Majorana) zero quasienergy state and a few localized states, which are due to open boundary conditions and quasiperiodic potential used 78 . We discuss these further in section VI. The points P2 and L have a band in the region of quasienergy 0 and due to the larger parameter values, the maximum quasienergy values approach the value of ω/2. When the quasienergies reach ω/2 at even larger values of parameters (or at larger period T ) the bands start to mix, introducing a new regime of long periods. To confirm the nature of the separate states in the four representative points, we also present in Fig. We start by recalling that in the static case, a scaling analysis of critical states was recently performed In this section we explore the effects of aperiodicity in the driving period on the bulk properies of the Kitaev chain. From an experimental point of view, a small time-aperiodicity is an unavoidable effect and we investigate here the robustness of the different phases we have so far obtained. In fact, the effects of decoherence in non-interacting systems displaying dynamical localization were experimentally studied in the paradigmatic quantum kicked-rotor systems. with T τ = t τt τ -1 and Û (T τ ) = e -i Ĥ0Tτ e -iλ V and we are interested in the average NPR after a number τ of aperiodic kicks R τ /L, obtained from exact diagonalization of Eq. ( Here we reach a similar conjecture in the case of nonzero pairing, where R ∞ /L = 1/3, which is the same as the average NPR of e iA , where A is a full, random matrix belonging to BDI symmetry class (chiral GOE). An example demonstrating this behavior is presented in Fig. Having probed the aperiodic properties of the kicked problem in the presence of pairing, we return for now to the strictly periodic drivings and focus instead on the transport properties of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle excitations in the Kitaev chain with spatially inhomogeneous kicks. For this, we consider the stroboscopic evolution of an initially localized excitation at the middle and at the edge of an open lattice. On top of being of theoretical relevance, we emphasize that experiments in optical lattices have used the ability to probe densities with single-site resolution to address coherent single and two particle quantum walks 82 -our extra ingredient is the time-periodic and instantaneous quench on the onsite energies. We start by studying in Fig. for the situation of NN hopping and pairing (with periodic boundary conditions). Since an initially completely localized state is a linear combination of all the Bogoliubov excitations of the static Kitaev model, the maximum group velocity will be connected to the maximum velocity of the spread- ing, whereas the mean velocity can be estimated as the average group velocity 1/π π 0 |v g (k)|dk, which gives 1 and 0.64 site per kick, respectively, for the parameters from panels (a) and (e). In fact, we thus observe that the presence of kicks reduces these two values, which may then be recovered in the limit λ → 0. Using similar arguments, the revival times after quantum quenches in finite systems were recently studied 83 in a dual model, the quantum XY model, which provides a connection to the Lieb-Robinson bounds for the light-cone propagation of information in interacting systems. To obtain a more quantitative picture, next we study the wave-function spreading using the root mean square FIG. of the displacement, defined as where is the density probability at site i after the evolution for τ kicks of an initially localized state at site i 0 . The growth of the root mean square displacement is usually of the form σ(τ ) ∼ τ γ , where γ = 1, 1/2 and 0 indicates ballistic spreading, diffusion and localization, respectively. The intermediate cases 1/2 < γ < 1 (0 < γ < 1/2) are denoted as superdiffusion (subdiffusion). In Fig. In this analysis of the extraction of the diffusion exponent γ, we highlight some caveats: First, some care must be taken to avoid the initial transient behavior and the final oscillating regime; the latter is a manifestation of the system's finiteness, where the state has essentially spread over the whole lattice. Second, we note that a single realization (single φ) behaves differently than the disorder averaged ones considered in Figs. In this last section, we explicitly explore the formation of the Majorana edge states in time-periodic settings in different parts of the phase diagram, differentiating them from trivial fermionic (Andreev) edge states. Later, we explore their stability under different aperiodic drivings. In the driven case considered here, we examine both the 0 and π quasienergies Besides Majorana 0 and π quasi-energy states, other localized fermionic edge modes may be present in the system After explicitly characterizing the Floquet Majorana states, we are now in position to tackle an important property of periodically driven systems: starting from a static Hamiltonian whose parameters result in the absence of any topological order, it is possible that the driving induces topologically non-trivial states. This procedure, called Floquet engineering of topological states of matter, has lately received increased attention. Finally, an important question concerns the stability of topological states under various types of noises, which were investigated either theoretically Here we study the noise due to aperiodicity in the times between successive kicks as introduced in Section IV, i.e., the quenches on the on-site energies all have the same amplitude and phase, but they happen at non-periodic times. For this we track the stroboscopic time evolution of an initial Majorana edge state, Floquet engineered from a parent nontopological static Hamiltonian with a period T , and promote time-deviations from this mean period. We start by showing in Fig. To study the sudden increase of self-conjugacy in more detail we look into snapshots of the Majorana mode wave-functions at different times, which we show in Fig. We studied bulk and edge properties of driven 1D Kitaev chain. The driving consisted of instantaneous quenches of the on-site energies, with the main focus on the quasiperiodic modulation of the potential, for both periodic and aperiodic kicks. In the former, we identified three typical driving regimes, the low (T < 0.1), intermediate (T ∼ 0.5) and high period (T > 1) ones. In the low period, the time-dependent problem can be mapped onto a time independent effective Hamiltonian whose parameters are renormalized, as obtained from the expansion based on the BCH formula. By deriving the effective Hamiltonian up to the second order in the expansion, we note that the first order term only renormalizes the chemical potential by an additional term which is given by the kick amplitude divided by the period of the driving; in second order, additional terms characterized by NNN pairings and hoppings also appear. In the intermediate regime, the effective Hamiltonian description breaks down. This occurs at about T ∼ 0.1 provided that other parameters are not much larger than 1 and the kick strength λ is of the order of the period T or smaller. Finally, the high period regime occurs when the quasienergy gap at ω/2 closes (quasienergies multiplied by the period become larger than π) or equivalently |ε m | > ω/2 for some state(s) m. We studied the bulk properties of the spatially inhomogeneous kicked chain via the average mean normalized participation ratio, and by considering the (stroboscopic) time evolution of an initially localized excitation. In the low period regime the phase diagram consists of delocalized, critical and localized regions and the bulk wavefunctions possess different scaling forms with the system size in these regions. A localized excitation spreads nearly ballistically, subdiffusively and does not spread in delocalized, critical and localized region, respectively. In the intermediate regime, an additional phase emerges, hosting a mobility edge in quasienergies between the critical and localized states, which is a new type of mobility edge, contrasting the single particle mobility edges studied previously Finally, we have also studied the edges and demonstrated that in an open system both Majorana and fermionic edge modes are present in delocalized and critical regions of the phase diagram. We have shown that similar to the case of homogeneous kicks, multiple Majorana edge modes can be created by periodic driving with a quasiperiodic potential, thus demonstrating the possibility of Floquet engineering where the renormalized parameters are J 1 = J, J 2 = -T λ|∆| 2 /3, ∆ 1 = ∆ 1 + λ λ + 2T μ /6 , ∆ 2 = -T λ∆Re(J)/3, μ = μ+λ/T -2λT |∆| 2 /3 . Note that the Hamiltonian (A4) was already studied before (see, e.g., Refs. 55 and 57) in the context of static Hamiltonians, but here the model's parameters are expressed in terms of the driven model parameters. As an exercise of the topological behavior that is manifest in this Floquet Hamiltonian, we start by writing it in momentum space, considering periodic boundary conditions, as where H k =μ/2 + J 1 cos(k) + J 2 cos(2k) τ z + ∆ 1 sin(k) + ∆ 2 sin(2k) τ y , with τ α Pauli matrices in the Nambu space. After diagonalization, it results in the following dispersion E 2 k = μ/2 + J 1 cos(k) + J 2 cos(2k) 2 + ∆ 1 sin(k) + ∆ 2 sin(2k) 2 . We report an accurate analysis in Fig. 