A recent experimental breakthrough allowed to probe electronic parametric resonance of a single magnetic atom in a scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) setup. The results present intriguing features, such as an asymmetric lineshape and unusually large ratio of the decoherence and decay rates, which defy standard approaches using the conventional Bloch equations. To address these issues we employ novel generalized Bloch equations, together with proper microscopic modeling of the magnetic adatom, and show how all the experimental features can be naturally accounted for. The proposed approach may also be useful in treating any future similar experiments, as well as next generation hybrid quantum devices. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiments have been a powerful tool in studying the properties of different paramagnetic materials by probing the spin of unpaired electrons for several decades Focusing here on experiments with polarized tips, the results of these experiments pose several difficulties. First, a conspicuous asymmetry in the resonance lineshape, with the signal even dropping below its asymptotic value; this was previously attributed to phenomenological Fano interferences The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we present the theoretical model for the experimental system, as well as its mapping to an effective open quantum two-level system (TLS). We then show how a measurement of the tunneling current reveals the steady state polarization of the TLS in Sec. III. The flaws in treating the system using traditional approaches are pointed out in Sec. IV, leading to an introduction of our novel generalized approach in Sec. V. After showing that our proposed treatment can account for some of the experimental observations, in Sec. VI we consider the higher voltage regimes, where higher energy levels play a role, and show that our approach captures the unique features observed in this regime. We summarize our findings in Sec. VII. We give additional technical details regarding the derivation of our generalized approach in Appendix A, and expand on the calculation of relaxation and decoherence rates in Appendix B. To make the discussion concrete we concentrate on the system studied in Ref. with the applied magnetic field B and the Bohr magneton μ B . The values used for the parameters in H lf are given in Table Parameter Approximate value Projecting (1) into its two lowest levels and including the periodic drive and the coupling of the atom to the tip and substrate electrons, one finds the total Hamiltonian with H S , H D , H I and H B representing the system, periodic driving, interaction of the TLS with the electronic bath (phononic dissipation is neglected as a result of the low temperature, T ≈ 0.6 K) and bath Hamiltonians respectively, and are given by where σ are the Pauli matrices in the TLS subspace, ω 0 is the two-level energy separation, Ω ∝ V rf is the driving amplitude, ω d ≡ ω 0 + δω is the driving frequency (typically Ω = 1 -20 MHz, ω 0 , ω d ∼ 25 GHz. The driving Ω and detuning δω combine to give the generalized Rabi frequency ω ≡ √ Ω 2 + δω 2 ), T 0 is the tip-substrate tunneling amplitude, and c kσ is an electronic annihilation operator with momentum k and spin σ in reservoir (either the tip or the substrate, with ̄ the reservoir opposing ). The three different components of the interaction Hamiltonian H I describe different hopping processes of electrons: tip-atom-tip (tt), substrate-atom-substrate (ss), and tip-atom-substrate (ts), see Fig. with S = k,k c † kσ σ σσ c k σ + h.c. . S is the physical spin operator of the magnetic atom, while σ, whenever next to c, c † operators, operates within the spin space of the tunneling electrons. The Hamiltonian Eq. ( with the matrix elements O ij ≡ i| Ô |j . In this manner, we can map all spin operators in the two-level subspace using the general notation Using the parameters in Table Importantly, α zz is by far the most dominant matrix element, and we find the approximation α xx ≈ α yy ≡ α ⊥ well justified. The quantization axis of the spin in the interaction Hamiltonian (4), the ẑ axis, is directed along the "lab" ẑ direction, normal to the substrate (which is also the easy axis of the adatom deposited on the MgO layer). We perform a rotation on the electronic operators such that the new spin axis lies in the direction of the STM tip spin-polarization (similarly to After this rotation, we write the interaction Hamiltonian as with the electronic operators Σi , and Σ+ = Σ- † . We consider the tunneling current due to interactions with the reservoirs, following mainly the treatment in with ) and J ts = √ J t J s . We can expand the average of the current operator to lowest (first) nonvanishing order in the tunneling Hamiltonian, using the relation Ô , where the average inside the integral is taken in the zero tunneling state. We find The expression in Eq. ( We set the local densities of states ν σ = νt 2 (1 + σp) , ν σ = νs 2 , which is possible since we choose here the ẑ direction to be the tip spin-polarization axis, denoted as p in the following. Moving to a summation over energies instead of momenta, and taking the long-time limit such that S p reaches its steady state, Performing the integration over τ will result in a delta function. Assuming eV k B T (in the experiment eV = 5-60 meV and k B T ≈ 50 μeV), we find i.e., the spin-dependent contribution to the current is proportional to the steady-state spin polarization of the intermediary adatom in the direction of the tip polarization. The physical spin polarization can be expressed in terms of TLS expectation values, Since α zz overwhelmingly dominates the other matrix elements, and taking into account ψ ≈ 80 • -88 • in these experiments, we conclude that so that the tunneling current is a direct measurement of the TLS polarization. Sweeping the driving frequency and measuring the change in current (compared to the non-driven Ω = 0 case), resonant lineshapes may be observed, with the resonant frequency corresponding to the energy separation of the TLS. Ref. with Γ ↓ , Γ ↑ and Γ z the relaxation, excitation, and pure dephasing rates, which are given by (a = -1, 1 corresponding to ↓, ↑, respectively) where Tr B {•} is a trace over the bath degrees of freedom (the reservoir electrons), and ρ B is the bath density matrix. The commonly used decay times are then , where in the experiment Ref. Solving (20a)-(20b) for the steady state of the system and extracting which is even in the detuning frequency δω, and thus cannot reproduce the distinct asymmetric shape observed in many experiments on these systems We develop and solve a novel generalized approach by working in the rotating frame but avoiding the customary secular approximation (24) With this treatment, subtle changes in the bath spectral density from a frequency shift of order ∼ ω may be taken into account, without any restrictions on the size of the decay rates themselves. As we subsequently show, in the EPR-STM experiments discussed in this work this fact is crucial to interpreting the measured results. The absence of perturbative assumptions regarding the Rabi frequency gives rise to an imbalance in the excitation and relaxation rates in the rotating frame [see Eq. (A9a)], translating to an asymmetry in the EPR lineshape, which was previously not accounted for. The generalized approach thus results in a more complicated master equation (see Appendix A for the full derivation), where (20a) remains unchanged but (20b) is modified to with tan β ≡ δω Ω . It is sufficient to expand the ±ω spectral component around the dc contribution as Γ z ± ≈ Γ z ± ∆ 2 ω. In equilibrium, detailed balance for Γ z + /Γ z yields then ∆ (V = 0) = Γz T 1. As we show below, despite the smallness of this correction, its relative importance is strongly enhanced in the presence of a finite dc bias V , which takes the system out of equilibrium, and may suppress the even term in the lineshape. The physical origin of ∆ is in the interference of the electronic continuum in the leads with the precession of the adatom qubit at frequency ω, as is evident by the full rate calculations in Appendix B. Plugging this expansion into the generalized master equation, we find the modified steady-state polarization, which, compared to (23), has an additional contribution, odd in δω. Eq. (26), however, does not guarantee that the lineshape becomes visibly asymmetric. Defining ∆σ ≡ σ ∞ z -σ ∞ z Ω=0 , it may be written in a form compliant with Ref. with ∆σ peak ≡ - and This so-called Fano parameter is a measure of the visibility of asymmetry in the lineshape. Note that q * grows with Ω, in a manner consistent with Ref. Since the square root term is of the order of 1, and because Γ z T ≈ 10 -3 in this experiment, visible asymmetry requires This is quite unusual that the excitation and relaxation rates are almost identical, since T ω d . This points at the crucial role played by the dc voltage V , which is the most dominant energy scale in the system. Such a scenario is also consistent with the experimental observation that the measured T 1 decay time dramatically increases when this voltage is turned off 3 . We will now show that finite V can indeed make Γ ↓ ≈ Γ ↑ (and thus to make q * significant although ∆ is small), provided one also keeps in mind the distinction between the physical spin of the adatom and the effective TLS. The latter will also allow us to explain why T 1 T 2 . The different dissipative rates can be calculated explicitly in terms of the properties of the electronic reservoirs and their couplings to the TLS. The detailed calculation is straightforward yet lengthy, and is presented in Appendix B. Under the conditions ψ ≈ π 2 , ω T , ω d V, and full polarization of the tip, we obtain with η ± (x) ≡ ± x e ±x -1 , Js ≡ ν s J s , and s dc = ±1 corresponds to the dc voltage sign. Note that we find ∆ = Js T quantify, respectively, the projection of the adatom Hamiltonian into the effective TLS and the ratio of the atom interaction strength to the tip and the substrate. Since α zz α ⊥ , the relaxation time T 1 becomes much longer than the dephasing time T 2 , as found in the experiment. This conclusion originates in the microscopic treatment of the system, regardless of our modification of the master equation itself. Note that although our microscopic consideration produce a ratio αzz α ⊥ ∼ 4 • 10 3 , experimental observation of the ratio between relaxation times suggest that this ratio, while exceptionally large, is realistically about 1-2 orders of magnitude smaller. Note that the value of r corresponds to the relative importance of non-equilibrium (finite bias) enhanced relaxation as compared with the thermal ones. As for χ, it is quite sensitive to the exact values of the ligand field Hamiltonian parameters in Table It shows that small values of this ratio are plausible in a substantial regime near the black dashed line where Γ ↑ = Γ ↓ . Finally, let us note that not only is it required that Γ ↓ ≈ Γ ↑ , but also that Γ ↑ be slightly larger than Γ ↓ in order to reproduce the correct lineshape, in the same orientation of the asymmetry observed in We may now put everything together, and reproduce the asymmetric lineshapes using a sensible choice of the different parameters, along with staying consistent with quantities which were already measured, i.e., the rough estimates for the decay times and driving intensity that appear in We note that by changing the parameters the lineshape can be flipped along either the horizontal or vertical axis. Since I T0J ∝ V α zz σ z , changing the sign of α zz due to, e.g., a change in the direction of B z will lead to a resonant dip instead of a peak, as was observed in Refs. A more comprehensive study of the EPR-STM properties of the system under discussion was performed in We employ a simplified scheme, where only consider the transition rates between different energy levels (see Fig. • Each of the bottom |0 , |1 levels is strongly connected to each of the upper |2 , |3 levels, as seen by S -,02 ≈ S +,13 ≈ 0.78, -S -,03 ≈ S +,12 ≈ 0.6. The magnitudes of the matrix elements with |4 are 0.08, one order of magnitude weaker, and therefore negligible. In light of these observations, we simply approximate the upper levels as a composite state M , with new transition rates, Γ 0/1→M = Γ 0/1→2 + Γ 0/1→3 , see Fig. ) with D 0 /D 1 the part coming from our novel generalized master equation for the TLS, Eqs. (20a),(20b),(25), and Γ i→j the transition rate form level i to level j. In the steady state, d dt P M = 0, we find the inclusion of the M composite state results in a modification of the relaxation and excitation rates for the TLS, The transition rates can then be evaluated in a similar manner to the scheme used in Appendix B. For each Γ i→j we calculate the ᾱ matrix that connects the physical spin operator to a two-level representation of levels i, j, expressed as S = ᾱ i,j σ. The Pauli matrices σ represent the reduced Hilbert space of the two levels (i, j). The energy difference between each two relevant levels ∆E i,j is take into account, and thermal contributions to excitation rates (i.e., ones that do not involve the bias voltage) are neglected, since ∆E T when any of the higher energy levels are involved. With ψ ≈ 81 • and V = 60 mV, which are the parameters values in the relevant high voltage experiment 4 , we find where r ts ≡ Jtνt Jsνs , Γ ≡ 2.15 We observe that the ratio between the rate of exciting the adatom into the higher energy manifold, compared to the relaxation rate out of it, is of the order r ts = r T V . Since T V ∼ 10 -3 , and we find that reproducing the experimental results dictates r ∼ 10, our assumption of very low occupation for the high energy levels is well-justified. Crucially, we find the rates Γ 0→2 and Γ 1→3 are of comparable size, contradicting the existence of an appreciable spin-torque effect, where transitions between levels lowering S z are favored compared to ones raising it, or vice versa, depending on the sign of the dc voltage. The comparable size of theses transition rates can be traced to the fact that whereas in our earlier analysis for the |0 , |1 levels, αzx α ⊥ ≡ χ was an O (1) number (around 3), for the upper levels it is O 10 -2 . This, in conjunction with cos ψ being close to zero, strongly attenuates the S z directionality of the inter-level transitions. The effective TLS master equation now has, up to second order corrections in the small parameter r ts , where in our calculations γ ≈ 0.16. Thus, by accounting for the microscopic details of the adatom spin matrix elements, we see that both the TLS excitation and relaxation rates are increased with comparable magnitude. We note that reversing the bias direction will amount to taking γ → -γ in the above modification. We finally write the high voltage regime relaxation and excitation rates as where ā is the relative amplitude of the M -assisted transitions compared to the direct ones ā ≈ 2 Γ Γ ts ↓ +Γ ts ↑ , with Γ ts being the tip-atom-substrate tunneling contribution. We note that by taking ā = 0, one recovers the rates of the low voltage regime, Eqs. (29a)-(29b). The critical line where Γ ↑ = Γ ↓ depends on the voltage sign and is given by To estimate the size of ā, we examine for example The righthand fraction has the order of 10 -2 , as χ ∼ 3-8 in our analysis thus far. However the lefthand fraction seems huge and of order 10 6 . Actually we know that α 2 ⊥ 0,1 is much larger than the order 10 -3 evaluated, as discussed above in Sec. V. Taking this into account, we may estimate that Γ is of the same order as Γ ↓ and Γ ↑ or perhaps one order of magnitude larger, leading to an estimate of ā ∼ 10. The form of Γ ↑/↓ we find in Eq. ( In conclusion, we have shown that treating the adatoms in spin-polarized STM-EPR experiments as a driven open quantum system requires special care and a novel generalized approach. On the one hand, this approach should not treat the driving in a perturbative manner, such that changes in the bath spectral density as a result of small frequency shifts are resolved by the different master equation rates. On the other hand, it should be valid in the experimental parameter regime, where some of the decay rates may be significantly large compared to the driving amplitude. We present such a treatment, which allows a clear understanding of the origin of the asymmetry in recorded lineshapes, due to the small difference in the electronic reservoirs spectral functions at 0 and ±ω. We find that even a modest difference allows for a small odd component in the lineshape [Eq. ( As we have shown, completely accounting for the underlying physics of the experimental system is crucial: We find that tuning the voltage as to make the TLS re-laxation and excitation rates close strongly suppresses the even component of the lineshape [Eq. ( Furthermore, our novel approach enables recreating virtually all other experimental trends, even in higher voltage regimes, e.g., a change of the asymmetry sign depending on the bias voltage or on the magnetic field orientation The generalized approach developed here may be useful in properly analyzing results from any future EPR-STM studies, as well as for other open quantum systems which involve non-trivial parametric regimes, e.g., hybrid quantum devices and we defined the bath correlation functions Let us note that for vanishing driving, Ω = 0, one gets ω = δω, β = π/2, hence only the spectral functions at frequencies 0 and ±(ω d + δω) = ±ω 0 remain, so the dependence on ω d disappears, as it should. The conventional secular approximation would now have allowed us to discard D ω and D 2ω terms, but in this generalized treatment we keep these non-secular terms. In our next step, we perform a unitary transformation on the master equation (A8) with e -i HS t (...) e i HS t (where Let us illustrate the calculation of the last product of correlation functions appearing in the above expression, defining Each of these correlations can be expressed in terms of the Fermi-Dirac distribution, with the subscripts of f indicating the lead and spin direction. Allowing an additional finite voltage V between the leads (may be set to zero for inter-lead tunneling), we find where ν ↓ represents the of states for ↓-electrons in lead , and ν ↑ the density of states for ↑-electrons in lead . The densities of states are approximated to be roughly constant near the Fermi energy. Next, we Laplace transform this correlation function in order to retrieve its spectral features. Since we only use the real part of the bath correlation functions in our analysis (as they represent the rates governing the master equation; the imaginary parts correspond to shifts of the subsystem Hamiltonian, whose effect we have verified to be small), we exploit the relation between the Fourier and Laplace transforms F {C} = 2Re {L {C}} (due to the property C (-τ ) = C * (τ )) and calculate the Fourier transform instead, Let us now define We may now calculate the contributions of different tunneling processes to the master equation rates: tip-atomsubstrate tunneling [( , ) = (t, s)], tip-atom-tip tunneling [( , ) = (t, t)], and substrate-atom-substrate tunneling [( , ) = (s, s)]. This is done by using the densities of state where we used the fact that V T, ω d , ω and ω T , to make some simplifications. We now employ some additional approximations, compliant with the experimental setup: 1. α zz α xz , since according to Eq. ( 2. p ≈ 1 -taking the polarization level to be maximal allows us to simplify the above expressions greatly, without modifying the underlying physics in any meaningful way, as we have explicitly checked. 2 -in accordance with the experiments After defining Js ≡ J s ν s , Jt ≡ J t ν t , Jt ≡ r Js T V and T1 , 1 T2 (rotating frame approach). Crucially, the generalized approach keeps the distinction between bath correlations calculated at frequencies ±ω and those at 0, while neglecting the distinction between correlations at ±ω d and ±ω d ± ω. The latter distinction is negligible since for ω ω d , as we have explicitly checked. The distinction between frequencies ±ω and 0 necessitates the introduction of Γ z ± , which are similar to ωσ z ). This introduces the coherent time evolution term -i HS , ρ into the righthand side of (A8), while allowing us to eliminate the e ±iωt /e ±2iωt time dependence appearing in D ω /D 2ω . The novel non-secular terms are now more manageable, as they do not introduce any new time dependencies into the master equation.For the purposes of this work we may approximate Γ (±ω d ± ω) ≈ Γ (±ω d ), since ω ω d , and hence deviations from this assumptions have only a minor effect on the results we present. We now define the relevant ratesΓ ↓ ≡ |a| 2 2 Γ (ω d ) ,(A11a)Γ ↑ ≡ |a| 2 2 Γ (-ω d ) ,(A11b)