We study the spontaneously broken phase of the XY model in three dimensions, with boundary conditions enforcing the presence of a vortex line. Comparing Monte Carlo and field theoretic determinations of the magnetization and energy density profiles, we numerically determine the mass of the vortex particle in the underlying O(2)-invariant quantum field theory. The result shows, in particular, that the obstruction posed by Derrick's theorem to the existence of stable topological particles in scalar theories in more than two dimensions does not in general persist beyond the classical level. Topological excitations are among the most fascinating objects in quantum field theory (QFT) In three dimensions the simplest theory with symmetry properties allowing for topological excitations -vortices -is the O(2)-invariant scalar theory. This describes the universality class of the XY lattice model, which includes the superfluid transition of 4 He as a particularly interesting representative (see In this paper we consider the three-dimensional XY model in its spontaneously broken phase, slightly below the critical temperature T c , with boundary conditions enforcing the presence of a vortex line. As the other properties of the near-critical system, the corresponding energy density and order parameter profiles have to be accounted for by the O(2) scalar QFT describing the continuum limit. Remarkably, these profiles are calculable in the field-theoretical framework, and we compare the analytic results with the numerical determination obtained by Monte Carlo simulations, finding excellent agreement as we vary the temperature and the end-to-end distance of the vortex line. In the process we numerically determine the mass m V of the vortex particle, which for small |T -T c | can be expressed as where m + is the mass of the fundamental particles in the phase with unbroken symmetry (T > T c ). This result provides the first direct verification that Derrick's theorem, as a statement concerning classical field configurations, does not prevent the existence of stable topological particles in quantum theories of self-interacting scalar fields in more than two dimensions. We consider the XY model with reduced Hamiltonian where s i is a two-component unit vector (spin) located at the site i of a cubic lattice, and the sum is performed over all pairs of nearest neighboring sites. We focus on the case T < T c in which the O(2) symmetry of the Hamiltonian is spontaneously broken, i.e. s i = 0; • • • denotes the average over spin configurations weighted by e -H . Close to T c the intrinsic length scale of the system becomes much larger than lattice spacing and the system is described by a O(2)-invariant Euclidean scalar field theory, which in turn is the continuation to imaginary time of a QFT in (2 + 1) dimensions. Switching to notations of the continuum, we denote by x = (x 1 , x 2 , τ ) ≡ (x, τ ) a point in Euclidean space, τ being the imaginary time direction, and by s(x) = (s 1 (x), s 2 (x)) the two-component spin field. The field theory is the usual one defined by Geometry considered for the XY model below Tc. Boundary spins point outwards orthogonally to the vertical external surfaces. On the top and bottom surfaces they are fixed as indicated, so that a vortex line (one configuration is shown) runs between the central points of these surfaces. the action with the XY critical point reachable tuning the couplings (see e.g. L → ∞ and R large but finite. The boundary conditions are chosen in such a way that all spins on the external surfaces parallel to the τ -axis point outwards orthogonally to the surface. This implies the formation of a vortex on each section with constant τ , with the vortex center forming a vortex (or defect) line as τ varies. Boundary conditions on the surfaces τ = ±R/2 are fixed as shown in figure The boundary conditions at τ = ±R/2 act as boundary states |B(±R/2) = e ± R 2 H |B(0) of the Euclidean time evolution; here H denotes the Hamiltonian of the quantum system. These boundary states can be expanded on the basis of asymptotic particle states of the QFT, and will contain the vortex as the contribution with minimal energy, i.e. where p is the two-component momentum of the particle, E p = p 2 + m 2 V its energy, a p an amplitude, and we normalize the states by V (p ′ )|V (p) = (2π) 2 E p δ(pp ′ ). In the calculations performed with the boundary conditions we have chosen (which we indicate with a subscript B) the one-vortex contribution in (4) determines the asymptotics for R ≫ 1/m V (indicated below by the symbol ∼). Then we have while for the expectation value of a field Φ we obtain where is the low-energy limit of the form factor of the field on the vortex state. Its behavior determines the final form of where x = x/|x|, and v = | s(x, τ ) | is the modulus of the bulk magnetization for free boundary conditions. It was argued in it was shown in the same paper that, when inserted in where 1 F 1 (α, γ; z) is the confluent hypergeometric function, I k (z) are Bessel functions, and The generalization of (10) to s(x, τ ) B is straightforward and results in replacing η by η/ 1 -4τ 2 /R 2 . We now compare the theoretical prediction The relations we write below are intended in the limit in which the temperature approaches the critical value T c , which is known very accurately; we quote here the result 1/T c = 0.4541652 with ν = 0.6717(1), β = 0.3486(1) As any critical amplitude, m 0 V is non-universal (i.e. depends on lattice details), and it is relevant to obtain the universal ratio with another mass amplitude. Above T c , the correlation function s(x) • s(0) decays exponentially at large distances as e -m+|x| , where m + ≃ m 0 + (T -T c ) ν is the mass of the lightest particles and coincides (see e.g. In order of decreasing slope at x1 = 0, the curves refer to (T = 2.0, R = 31), (T = 2.1, R = 61), and (T = 2.18, R = 61). The Monte Carlo curves were obtained for L = 61, 101, 161, respectively. Below T c , the presence of Goldstone bosons makes more complicated extracting a mass scale from the decay of spin-spin correlations, and it has been common to consider instead the helicity modulus Υ, which measures the free energy change under a twist of the spins We also measured the local energy density ε i = j∼i s i • s j , where the sum runs over the nearest neighbors of site i. The Monte Carlo data we obtained along radial directions at τ = 0 are shown in figure for the energy density field ε(x) ∼ s 2 (x); the superscript c denotes the connected part. Upon insertion in (6) this yields where the additive constant E vac = 0|ε|0 , corresponding to the vacuum energy density, comes from the disconnected part (2π The quantities appearing in It follows from (10) that | s(x, 0) B |/v behaves as A|x| and 1-(B|x|) -2 for small and large |x|, respectively, with A/B = √ π/4 ≃ 0.443. We notice that these asymptotics are also exhibited by the numerical solution (see It must be noted that the result (10) for s(x) B relies only on the topological constraints, and does not require that the scalar field interacts only with itself. Hence, Summarizing, we studied the spontaneously broken phase of the three-dimensional XY model with boundary conditions enforcing the presence of a vortex line. Through comparison with analytic expressions, we showed that the results of Monte Carlo simulations for the order parameter and energy density profiles correspond to a field theory possessing the vortex as a stable quantum particle, and determined in the process the numerical value of its mass. The result also yields the first direct verification that Derrick's theorem, as a statement for classical field configurations, does not provide a fundamental obstruction to the existence of topological particles in purely scalar QFTs in more than two dimensions. The analytic form of the profiles for large end-to-end distance of the vortex line relies on topological properties and should continue to hold when the scalar field is coupled to electromagnetism.