We present a systematic phenomenological description of Gilbert damping in two-sublattice magnets. Our theory covers the full range of materials from ferro-via ferri-to antiferromagnets. Following a Rayleigh dissipation functional approach within a Lagrangian classical field formulation, the theory captures intra-as well as cross-sublattice terms in the Gilbert damping, parameterized by a 2×2 matrix. When spin-pumping into an adjacent conductor causes dissipation, we obtain the corresponding Gilbert damping matrix in terms of the interfacial spin-mixing conductances. Our model reproduces the experimentally observed enhancement of the ferromagnetic resonance linewidth in a ferrimagnet close to its compensation temperature without requiring an increased Gilbert parameter. It also predicts new contributions to damping in an antiferromagnet and suggests the resonance linewidths as a direct probe of the sublattice asymmetry, which may stem from boundary or bulk. The fundamental connection 1 between magnetic moment and spin angular momentum underlies the important role for magnets in nearly all spin-based concepts. An applied magnetic field provides the means to manipulate the state of a ferromagnet (FM), and thus the associated spin. Conversely, a spin-polarized current absorbed by the FM affects its magnetization 2-5 . Exploiting a related phenomenon, switching the state of an antiferromagnet (AFM) has also been achieved Concurrently, ferrimagnets (FiMs) have been manifesting their niche in a wide range of phenomena such as ultrafast switching Dissipation strongly influences the response of a magnet to a stimulus and is thus central to the study of magnetic phenomena such as switching, domain wall motion and spin transport. Nevertheless, magnetic damping has conventionally been investigated via the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) linewidth. It is accounted for phenomenologically in the Landau-Lifshitz description of the magnetization dynamics via the so-called Gilbert damping term The Gilbert damping represents the viscous contribution and may be 'derived' within a Lagrangian formulation of classical field theory by including the Rayleigh dissipation functional Here, we formulate the magnetization dynamics equations in a general two-sublattice magnet following the classical Lagrangian approach that has previously been employed for FMs The paper is concluded with a summary in Sec. VII. The discussion of a generalized Rayleigh dissipation functional and properties of the damping matrix is deferred to the appendix. We consider a two-sublattice magnet described by classical magnetization fields M M M A ≡ M M M A (r r r, t) and M M M B ≡ M M M B (r r r, t) corresponding to the sublattices A and B. The system is characterized by a magnetic free energy F [M M M A , M M M B ] with the magnetization fields assumed to be of constant magnitudes M A0 and M B0 . Here, the notation F [ ] is employed to emphasize that the free energy is a functional over the magnetization fields, i.e. an integration of the free energy density over space. The undamped magnetization dynamics is described by equating the time derivative of the spin angular momentum associated with the magnetization to the torque experienced by it. The resulting Landau-Lifshitz equations for the two fields may be written as: where γ A,B (< 0) are the gyromagnetic ratios for the two sublattices, and H H H A,B are the effective magnetic fields experienced by the respective magnetizations. This expression of angular momentum flow may be derived systematically within the Lagrangian classical field theory in the generalized equations of motion: where while the right hand side accounts for the damping. The Gilbert damping is captured by a viscous Rayleigh dissipation functional parameterized by a symmetric matrix η ij with {i, j} = {A, B}: (10) thereby introducing the Gilbert damping matrix α for a two-sublattice system: As elaborated in appendix B, the positivity of the dissipation functional implies that the eigenvalues and the determinant of α must be non-negative, which is equivalent to the following conditions: Thus, Eqs. ( In this section, we employ the phenomenology introduced above to evaluate the resonance frequencies and the decay rates of the spatially homogeneous modes that can be probed in a typical FMR experiment. We thus work in the macrospin approximation, i.e. magnetizations are assumed to be spatially invariant. Considering an antiferromagnetic coupling J (> 0) between the two sublattices and parameterizing uniaxial easy-axis anisotropies via K A,B (> 0), the free energy assumes the form: where H 0 ẑ z z is the applied magnetic field. The magnet is assumed to be in a collinear ground state: (3) to evaluate the effective fields, the magnetization dynamics is expressed via the LLG equations ( where we define Substituting ω = ω r± + iω i± into the ensuing secular equation, we obtain the resonance frequencies ω r± to the zeroth order and the corresponding decay rates ω i± to the first order in the damping matrix elements: In the expression above, Eq. ( with ᾱ ≡ (α AA + α BB ) /2 and ∆ᾱ ≡ (α AA -α BB ) /2. Eq. ( (ii) off-diagonal components of the damping matrix may reduce the decay rates (Fig. Furthermore, it is consistent with and reproduces the mode-dependence of the decay rates observed in the numerical studies of some metallic AFMs 37 . To gain further insight into the results presented in Eqs. ( We now examine two cases of interest: (i) the mode decay rate in a ferrimagnet close to its compensation temperature, and (ii) the Gilbert damping matrix due to spin pumping into an adjacent conductor. FMR experiments carried out on gadolinium iron garnet These experiments have conventionally been interpreted in terms of an effective singlesublattice model thereby ascribing the enhancement in the decay rate to an increase in the scalar Gilbert damping constant allowed within the single-sublattice model We note that while the spherical samples employed in Ref. 23 are captured well by our simple free energy expression [Eq. ( Spin pumping 34 from a FM into an adjacent conductor has been studied in great detail Within the macrospin approximation, the total spin contained by the magnet is given by: The spin pumping current emitted by the two-sublattice magnet has the following general form with G AB = G BA , where the spin-mixing conductances G ij may be evaluated within different microscopic models (9) and ( which in turn implies Eq. ( with A general physical significance, analogous to γ A,B , may not be associated with γ m,n which merely serve the purpose of notation here. The equations obtained above manifest new damping terms in addition to the ones that are typically considered in the description of AFMs. Accounting for the sublattice symmetry of the antiferromagnetic bulk while allowing for the damping to be asymmetric, we may assume γ A = γ B and M A0 = M B0 , with ᾱ ≡ (α AA + α BB ) /2, ∆ᾱ ≡ (α AA -α BB ) /2, and α AB = α BA ≡ α od . Thus, the damping parameters simplify to thereby eliminating the "new" terms in the damping when α AA = α BB . However, the sublattice symmetry may not be applicable to AFMs, such as FeMn, with non-identical sublattices. Furthermore, the sublattice symmetry of the AFM may be broken at the interface 41-43 via, for example, spin mixing conductances The resonance frequencies and normalized decay rates [Eqs. (16) and (18)] take a simpler form for AFMs. Substituting K A = K B ≡ K, γ A = γ B ≡ γ, and M A0 = M B0 ≡ M 0 : where we have employed J K in the final simplification. The term ∝ K/J has typically been disregarded on the grounds K J. However, recent numerical studies of damping in several AFMs 37 find ᾱ ᾱ -α od > 0 thus suggesting that this term should be comparable to the one proportional to J/K and hence may not be disregarded. The expression above also suggests measurement of the normalized decay rates as a means of detecting the sublattice asymmetry in damping. For AFMs symmetrical in the bulk, such an asymmetry may arise due to the corresponding asymmetry in the interfacial spin-mixing conductance Thus, decay rate measurements offer a method to detect and quantify such interfacial effects complementary to the spin pumping shot noise measurements suggested earlier We have presented a phenomenological description of Gilbert damping in two-sublattice magnets and demonstrated how it can be exploited to describe and characterize the system effectively. We now comment on the limitations and possible generalizations of the formalism presented herein. To begin with, the two-sublattice model is the simplest description of ferri-and antiferromagnets. It has been successful in capturing a wide range of phenomenon. However, recent measurements of magnetization dynamics in nickel oxide could only be explained using an eight-sublattice model A generalization of our formalism to a N-sublattice model is straightforward and can be achieved via a Rayleigh dissipation functional with N 2 terms, counting η ij and η ji as separate terms. The ensuing Gilbert damping matrix will be N×N while obeying the positive determinant constraint analogous to Eq. ( In our description of the collinear magnet [Eq. ( Including these contributions converts the two uncoupled 2×2 matrix equations [ (15)] into a single 4×4 matrix equation rendering the solution analytically intractable. A detailed analysis of these contributions In evaluating the resonance frequencies and the decay rates [Eqs. ( We have developed a systematic phenomenological description of the Gilbert damping in a two-sublattice magnet via inclusion of a Rayleigh dissipation functional within the Lagrangian formulation of the magnetization dynamics. Employing general expressions based on symmetry, we find cross-sublattice Gilbert damping terms in the LLG equations in consistence with other recent findings 