The valence force field (VFF) model is a concise physical interpretation of the atomic interaction in terms of the bond and angle variations in the explicit quadratic functional form, while the machine learning (ML) method is a flexible numerical approach to make predictions based on some pre-obtained training data without the need of any explicit functions. We propose a so-called ML-VFF model, by combining the clear physical essence of the VFF model and the numerical flexibility of the ML method. Instead of imposing any explicit functional forms for the atomic interaction, the ML-VFF model predicts the potential and force with the Gaussian regression approach. We take graphene as an example to illustrate the ability of the ML-VFF model to make accurate predictions with relatively low computational expenses. We also discuss some key advantages and drawbacks of the ML-VFF model. The atomic interaction plays a fundamental role in governing both static and dynamic progresses for materials on the microscopic atomic level. The first-principles calculations can provide accurate atomic interactions for most materials. However, the first-principles calculations demand rather expensive computational costs for large systems, where empirical potentials are desirable. As a consequence, a large number of empirical potentials have been proposed, including the valence force field (VFF) model, the Stillinger-Weber potential, 1 the Tersoff potential, 2 and the Brenner potential, Basically, the task of the empirical potential is to provide (predict) the atomic potential and the atomic force for an arbitrary given structure. The empirical potential is very efficient in such predicting, owing to its explicit functional form. For instance, the VFF model is a linear model with the simplest quadratic function of the bond length b and bond angle θ, V = V (b, θ) = 1 2 K b (∆b) 2 + 1 2 K θ (∆θ) 2 , where K b and K θ are the corresponding force constants. With this quadratic functional form, the VFF model treats bonds and angles as two kinds of linear springs. The potential and force of a given structure can thus be predicted analytically by the VFF model. In terms of prediction, there are some machine learning (ML) approaches, like the Gaussian regression method, that are good at making predictions based on some available data. Taking advantage of its predictability, the ML approach has been applied to investigate some physical or mechanical processes, such as the modeling of molecular atomization energies, From the above, an explicit functional form is a characteristic feature that enables the high efficiency and clear physics for the empirical potential. However, the explicit functional form also causes some limitations for the empirical potential, because the functional form is constructed based on few physical considerations and will inevitably lose some other physical information. For example, the VFF model treats the bond and angle as linear springs, so nonlinear effects are ignored. On the other hand, the ML approach is a purely numerical or mathematical approach, which does not include any physical effects; i.e., no explicit functional form is required. We are now aware that the VFF model contains concise physical essences, while the ML approach is extremely flexible. We try to combine these two advanced features. A minimum physical consideration is to assume that the atomic interaction is a function of the bond length and bond angle, V = V (b, θ). In contrast to the usual VFF model, the functional form for V (b, θ) is not assumed, but the atomic potential and force are predicted by the ML approach. In doing so, we actually generalize the linear VFF model to be a nonlinear model, including all high-order nonlinear terms, so this new model will be referred to as the ML-VFF model. In this paper, by combining the advantages of the VFF model and the ML technique, we propose the ML-VFF model to describe the atomic interactions. In contrast to the usual VFF model that is a quadratic function of the bond and angle variations, the ML-VFF model does not have an explicit functional form, while the potential and force are predicted by the Gaussian regression method. The ML-VFF model is able to approach the accuracy of other more complex models with much lower computational expenses. We illustrate the training of the ML-VFF model to the Brenner potential in graphene, and demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of the ML-VFF model in the simulations. In relevance to the present work, the VFF model and the Brenner potential are two typical empirical potential models that have been widely used in the simulation of solid materials. They represent two extreme situations in developing empirical models for the atomic potential. Bonds and angles are represented by linear springs in the VFF model. The VFF model is the simplest model, so it is the most efficient but less accurate. The Brenner potential has a much more complex functional form, so it is more accurate but less efficient. The VFF model assumes that the atomic interaction is a function of the bond variation ∆b and the angle variation ∆θ. It is further assumed that the atomic interaction takes the following quadratic functional form, where K b and K θ are two parameters. By taking this quadratic functional form, the VFF model is constrained in the linear regime, so it is of high efficiency in computation, but this model is typically less accurate as a trade off. The underlying mechanism for the VFF model is that materials are discretized by bonds and angles that are treated as linear springs. The Brenner potential is more complex than the VFF model. The atomic interaction is assumed to be a function of the atom's bond-order environment in the Brenner model, and the explicit function has a much more complex form. Specifically, the energy in the Brenner potential is V R and V A are the repulsive and attractive energy, with the cut-off function f c (r), where r is the distance between two atoms. The many-body coupling parameter is The angle function G(θ ijk ) is where θ ijk is the angle formed by atoms i, j, and k. All parameters in the Brenner potential can be found in Ref. 3 for carbon materials. Both the VFF model and the Brenner potential have explicit functional forms, which are constructed based on particular physical essences. The atomic potential and the atomic force can be predicted in an efficient manner by these explicit functions. However, in the meantime, these explicit functional forms will inevitably miss some other physics, which may be important in some materials. Similar as the usual VFF model, the atomic interaction is also assumed to be a function of the bond and the angle in the ML-VFF model. However, different from the usual VFF model, no explicit functional form is assumed for the ML-VFF model, because the ML approach can make predictions without explicit functional forms. where the superscript ml indicates "machine learning". The summation < ij > runs over all neighbors for atom i, and < ijk > runs over all angles for atom i. N b and N θ are the number of sparse points for the bond and angle spaces, respectively. α b and α θ are the coefficients that will be determined in the training process. K b pi and K θ pi are the kernel functions, which are chosen to be the following Gaussian kernel (also called the squared exponential kernel) in the present work, where ξ b and ξ θ are two parameters. As a result, the total energy for a given structure is where N is the number of atoms in the structure. The atomic force for atom i can be derived from the atomic potential in Eq. ( To determine the coefficients α b and α θ in the training process, we point out that, the total potential and the atomic force are linear functions of the coefficients α b and α θ as shown in Eqs. ( where N t is the total number of structures in the training set. V t is the total potential energy for the training structure t with σ t as the error. F ti is the atomic force for atom i in the training structure t and δ ti is the error. These quantities (V t , σ t ) and ( F ti , δ ti ) are input as training data, which have been pre-obtained experimentally or theoretically. These two quantities V ml t and F ml ti are calculated from Eqs. ( In the present ML-VFF model, these two physical quantities, bond length and bond angle, are used as the variables for the unknown function of the atomic potential, leading to a natural generalization of the standard VFF model. The bond length and bond angle have exact physical meaning, but they are not complete for the description of the whole crystal structure due to their short-ranged nature. For a fully description of the crystal structure, readers are referred to some other more complete quantities, such as the smooth overlap of The smaller structure is used for training, while the prediction is made for the larger structure. atomic positions, We will now take graphene as an explicit example to illustrate how to train and use the ML-VFF model. The ML-VFF model is trained to the Brenner potential in graphene. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are performed to generate the training data. The interaction in graphene is described by the Brenner potential. The ML-VFF model can be applied to simulate the stretching for graphene sheet of arbitrary size, though it is trained with small pieces of graphene structures. We stretch a larger graphene sheet with 1792 carbon atoms at 100 K temperature as shown in Fig. Fig. We have demonstrated the accuracy and efficiency for the ML-VFF model in the above. However, there is one common drawback in all ML based predictions, including the ML-VFF model developed in the present work. The common drawback is that the accuracy of the ML based prediction is dependent on the completeness of the information contained in the training set. For instance, no defect has been included in the above training data, so there is no guarantee that the ML-VFF model trained to this training set can make sound predictions for the creation of defects. To resolve this issue, one needs to add some configurations with defects into the training set. To summarize, we have proposed a numerical version of the VFF model based on the ML approach, which is referred to as the ML-VFF model. In contrast to the usual VFF model, the ML-VFF model does not have an explicit functional form, while the potential and force for a given structure are predicted by the Gaussian regression approach. The ML-VFF is applicable to describe the interaction for materials, where the interaction can be regarded as a function of the bond length and angle. As an example, we train the ML-VFF model to the Brenner potential of graphene, and apply the resultant ML-VFF model to simulate the mechanical loading process of graphene. It is shown that the results from the ML-VFF model can be as accurate as the Brenner potential at much lower computation expense. We discuss some key advantages and drawbacks for the ML-VFF model in practical applications. Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing financial interests. potential energy of single-walled carbon nanotubes and its applications: relaxed equilibrium structure, elastic properties, and vibrational modes of ultra-narrow tubes. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 20, 045228 (2008). TABLE II: Training results for the ML-VFF model of graphene. The length is in the unit of Å, while the angle is in the unit of rad. bond b p coefficient α b p angle θ p coefficient α θ Ghasemi, S. A., Hofstetter, A., Saha, S. & Goedecker, S. Interatomic potentials for ionic systems Bartok, A. P., Kondor, R. & Csanyi, G. On representing chemical environments. Phys. Rev. B 87, 184115 (2013). Jiang, J.-W., Tang, H., Wang, B.-S. & Su, Z.-B. A lattice dynamical treatment for the total