Using the continuum model for low energy non-interacting electronic structure of moiré van der Waals heterostructures developed by Bistritzer and MacDonald [1] , we study the competition between spin, charge, and superconducting order in twisted bilayer graphene. Surprisingly, we find that for a range of small angles inclusive of the so-called magic angle, this model features robust Fermi pockets that preclude any Mott insulating phase at weak coupling. However, a Fermi surface reconstruction at θ 1.2 • gives emergent van Hove singularities without any Fermi pockets. Using a hot-spot model for Fermi surface patches around these emergent saddle points, we develop a random-phase approximation from which we obtain a phase diagram very similar to that obtained recently by Isobe, Yuan, and Fu using the parquet renormalization group [2] but with additional insights. For example, our model shows strong nesting around time-reversal symmetric points at a moderate doping of ∼ 2 × 10 11 cm -2 away from the van Hove singularity. When this nesting dominates, we predict that charge-order enhances singlet superconductivity, while spin-order suppresses superconductivity. Our theory also provides additional possibilities for the case of unnested Fermi surfaces. Recently, superconductivity (SC) and correlated insulating phases have been reported in twisted bilayer graphene (tBG) at small twist angles The emergence of SC and insulating phases can be un-derstood either from a strong coupling picture or at weak coupling. At strong coupling, an antiferromagnetic Mott insulating phase arises for Dirac fermions at charge neutrality from the short-range part of the Coulomb interaction (which is enhanced in tBG compared to monolayer graphene) In this work, we study the Fermi surface topology using the Bistritzer and MacDonald continuum low energy model. At θ = 1.05 • , we find robust non-nested Fermi pockets around Brillouin zone center when the chemical potential crosses saddle points. Based on this finding, we predict that no insulating phase should be observed at In this case, the weak coupling theory for twisted bilayer graphene is determined solely by the intra-and inter-saddle point couplings shown in (c). Here U 1 is the exchange interaction between the saddle point and its time-reversal partner, U 2 is the density-density interaction. V 1 and V 2 are the exchange interactions between two saddle points separated by q = Q 2 and Q 3 marked in panel (b). magic angle θ = 1.05 • in the weak coupling limit. To study the insulating and superconducting phases, we construct a hot-spot RPA model. If the Fermi surface is nested -as is widely believed -we predict that the insulating phase is charge-ordered and the superconductivity is a spin-singlet. Our model also allows us to explore other possibilities when the Fermi surface is not nested. Interlayer coupling between TBG layers results in a hybridization between the Dirac bands which belong to the constituent layer. The essential features of the hybridized bands can be captured by three Fourier components of similar magnitude w, consistent with the underlying threefold rotational symmetry of the tBG where k 1 ( k 2 ) refers to the momentum states of the first (second) layer, while s = ± denotes the valley K/K'. We use the following convention in our work: where v F is the Fermi velocity of monolayer graphene, and n ∈ {0, 1, 2}. The vectors q n = 2K sin( θ 2 )[R( 2nπ 3 ){0, 1}] define the connections between momenta on different layers, i.e. k 2 = k 1 + s q n and R(φ) is the rotation operator. In our for the single adjustable parameter, we use the accepted value of w = 110 meV. Under the influence of interlayer couplings, the bands experience significant reconstruction, such as avoided crossings at momentum states located midway between the Dirac points, Van Hove singularities (VHS) in the lowenergy spectrum and Fermi velocity renormalization (see e.g. Ref. The hybridized bands show a complex structure. When doped away from the charge neutrality point, Fermi pockets start forming around the Dirac points. With further doping, these Fermi pockets become connected and saddle points emerge. Due to the three-fold symmetry of tBG, these saddle points occur at three momenta connected by symmetry in the Brillouin zone for each valley. The doped regions and the saddle points are plotted in Fig. For small angles θ 1.07 • , we show (for the first time) that the FS at this doping contains 6 small Fermi pockets around the Γ point, in addition to those at the Dirac points. In particular, these small Fermi pockets are present when the twist angle is at the magic angle θ = 1.05 • (see Fig. Due to the logarithmically divergent DOS near the saddle points, the role of interaction is enhanced in this region. The p-h fluctuation is strong for momentum connecting these saddle points ( Q 1 , Q 2 and Q 3 in Fig. In addition to the appearance of saddle points, another feature of the FS is possible nesting. The nested FS can further enhance the p-h fluctuation. Several authors including Refs. Here χ is the susceptibility, and the nesting vectors Q 1 , Q 2 and Q 3 are shown in Fig. In general, there are three standard methods to study p-h fluctuation mediated superconductivity: (1) spin-fermion model, (2) parquet renormalization group (p-RG) and (3) the RPA (that we adopt here). The second method was applied to tBG recently by Ref. There are 9 independent intra-patch and inter-patch interactions, as shown in Ref. where i is the patch index, ī is the patch opposite to i, σ and σ are spin indexes. The diagrammatic representation of U 1 and U 2 is shown in Fig. . When the FS is not nested, it is possible that Q 2 or Q 3 is the momentum with the largest p-h fluctuation. In this case, for the same reason, we consider only two non-zero interactions V 1 and V 2 . The corresponding interacting Hamiltonian is: The diagrammatic representation of V 1 and V 2 are shown in Fig. First, we consider the case where Q 1 is the dominant nesting vector. The renormalized CDW and SDW susceptibility at RPA level is where V CDW and V SDW are the interactions in CDW and SDW channel. . i, j = 1, 2 are valley indices, while f ( ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, with 1 k and 2 k are the dispersion for the two valleys. Besides the nesting vector Q 1 , we observe other "accidental nested" segments contributing to large susceptibility, which is marked by thicker lines in Fig. where i-SC represents different pairing symmetry. is the irreducible pairing vertex in each SC channel and the bare p-p susceptibility χ 0 pp (0 pp (0) is always logarithmically divergent as long as the system preserves time reversal symmetry. The critical interaction strength of density wave is determined by 1 ± V cri CDW (SDW ) χ 0 ph ( Q 1 ) = 0. Due to the logarithm divergence of χ 0 ph , this condition can be satisfied in the weak coupling limit. Once the interaction strength V CDW (SDW ) is larger than the critical value, the system will be in the charge(spin) density wave phase. We also notice for some {U 1 , U 2 }, interaction in CDW and SDW channel are both larger than the critical value. Since this case is outside the formal validity of the RPA theory, as is common, we take the one with the larger effective interaction to be the ground state because presumably its T c is higher. If the interaction strength is smaller than the critical value, there will be no long range density wave order. However, the short range charge (spin) density wave order can mediate the pairing between two electrons. SC instability occurs when χ i-SC diverges. Since χ 0 pp (0) is also logarithmically divergent, SC occurs as long as the irreducible pairing vertex is negative. To the first order, as we show above, . To get singlet SC, U 1 + U 2 needs to be negative so strong electron phonon coupling is required. To get triplet SC, U 1 needs to be larger than U 2 . This is impossible for finite range interactions because U 1 involves large momentum transfer. To get attractive interaction, we need to consider the renormalization of these irreducible pairing vertices. The renormalization to RPA level is V irred triplet-SC = - where The phase diagram is shown in Fig. Our result is also consistent with the intuition from the spin-fermion model. The spin fermion model states when the pairing is mediated by spin fluctuation, the order parameter, as a function of momentum, will change sign if the momentum is connected by the nesting vector. In the other case, when the pairing is mediated by charge fluctuation, the order parameter will not change sign. From the the form of order parameter and pairing symmetry in We also compare our result that obtained previously using p-RG. As shown in Fig. Up to this point, we have discussed the case where Q 1 is the nesting vector (as is widely believed). We now consider the possibility of no nesting using the example of θ = 1.65 • at the VHE as an example. We plot the distribution of χ 11 ph ( q) and χ 12 ph ( Q) for θ = 1.65 in Fig. V irred d-wave = - (For Q 3 , we exchange V 1 and V 2 ). The resulting phase diagrams are shown in Fig. 