Thermal rectification in heat conduction problems has been extensively studied in planar slabs. Here we consider the rectification problem in planar, cylindrical and spherical geometries involving two layers one of which has a temperature variable heat conductivity. The rectification factor is analytically calculated. It is shown that a maximum theoretical value of 1.618 is obtained. In many heat transfer processes, it is necessary to transfer the flow of heat in a desired direction but block the heat flow in the opposite direction. Heat transfer devices with this feature are termed thermal diodes analogous to the electrical diodes which are commonly employed for rectification in electrical circuits. This phenomenon can appear in heat conduction Let us consider a bilayer spherical shell as indicated on Fig. The case of non-zero temperature at r=R 3 can be treated by a simple variable change. At steady state the heat equation writes: By solving this equation in the two layers and using the flux continuity condition at r=R 2 , one can easily show (as done in the annexe) that the interface temperature obeys the following second degree equation: Where T f stands for the interface temperature in this forward case and where = and = ( ) ) . The global heat conduction flux then writes: Let us now consider the reverse case where temperature T 1 is imposed at the outer boundary while the inner boundary is set to T=0. One then can show that the solution to the heat equation leads to the following interface temperature where Tr stands to the reverse interface temperature and where  and s are defined as previously: The global flux in this reverse case is therefore given by: = 4 The rectification factor is usually defined by the ratio of the heat fluxes: = . From equations ( By introducing the flux expressions and noting that: (1 + ) = , one finally obtains the following expression : conclusions can be drawn for the slab and spherical cases. Our numerous simulations showed that the great values of R are obtained for high values of j. This is due to the fact that the rectification is a result of the non linearity. One can then expect that the maximum rectification factor would be obtained for the highest values of the ratio: = . If we now express R as a function of x=k/j= and by taking the limit when j tends to infinity, one can see that: This function is plotted on Figure This maximum value is surprisingly equal to the golden ratio and is to be compared to the maximum value of 3 obtained in In this study we considered steady heat conduction in a bilayer walls of planar, cylindrical and spherical geometry. A diode effect has been identified when the heat conductivity of one layer varies with temperature while the other one remains constant. Simple analytical expression for the rectification factor has been given. Theoretical maximum and minimum values have also been discussed. 