We report the results of a sequence of magnetisation and magneto-optical studies on laser ablated thin films of ZnCoAlO and ZnCoO that contain a small amount of metallic cobalt. The results are compared to those expected when all the magnetization is due to isolated metallic clusters of cobalt and with an oxide sample that is almost free from metallic inclusions. Using a variety of direct magnetic measurements and also magnetic circular dichroism we find that there is ferromagnetism within both the oxide and the metallic inclusions, and furthermore that these magnetic components are exchange-coupled when aluminium is included. This enhances both the coercive field and the remanence. Hence the presence of a controlled quantity of metallic nanoparticles in ZnAlO can improve the magnetic response of the oxide, thus giving great advantages for applications in spintronics. The injection of spin-polarized electrons from a ferromagnetic metal into a semiconductor is much less effective than between two semiconductors The study of oxide magnetism has developed very rapidly since the suggestion that doped ZnO should be ferromagnetic at room temperature Theoretical models of doped DMS oxides have been built on carrier-mediated interactions between the magnetic transition metal (TM) ion dopants that are added to induce the ferromagnetism. The carriers can be either itinerant or bound to defects in magnetic polarons Aside from the controversy about the origin of the ferromagnetism, potential applications motivate research into ways to improve the magnetic properties, most notably the coercive field and remanence which, at the present time, are invariably too small to be usable In this paper, we demonstrate how to obtain a ZnO-based ferromagnet that possesses both a large density of spin-polarized mobile carriers and a usable remanence. We have achieved this by employing metallic Co nanoparticles to enhance the magnetic hardness of ZnCoAlO through the phenomenon of exchange-coupling. This contrasts with work by other groups in which the aim was to grow films without Co nanoparticles so as to be sure to observe true oxide magnetism The paper is organized as follows. After describing the experimental methods in Section 2, we first present the results obtained by magnetization measurements in Section 3. Then, in Section 4, we present magneto-optical measurements. In Section 5 we discuss the implications of our results and present a justification of our exchange coupling model. Finally, in Section 6 we give our conclusions. The samples were grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on c-cut sapphire substrates purchased from Crystal GmbH Berlin. Before deposition, the substrates were cleaned ultrasonically in methyl alcohol and did not show any substantial ferromagnetism Powders of ZnO and Co2O3 and, where desired Al2O3, were first mixed in the proportion to give the desired Co:Zn ratio and were then ground together using a pestle and mortar for 30 minutes; this method was found to give a better mix than mechanical grinders. In each case the process of first grinding and then sintering the mixture in air for 12 hours was repeated for annealing temperatures of 400 °C, 600 °C, and 800 °C, before final pressing into a target mould and sintering at 1000 °C for more than 12 hours; however the final sintering of the target for sample B was performed at a higher temperature (~1150 0 C) so that the target colour changed became a dark green unlike the others that were a light grey green indicating that a change in chemical bonding had occurred in this anneal.. Samples A and B, of thicknesses 131nm and 136nm respectively, were made from a target that contained 10% cobalt and were grown at base pressure, 3×10 -2 mTorr, with substrate temperature of 400 0 C. Sample C was co-doped with 0.6% Al and was grown in an atmosphere of 10 mTorr oxygen and had a thickness of 140 nm. A Lambda Physik LEXTRA 200 XeCl excimer laser with an operating wavelength of 308 nm and a 10 Hz repetition rate was used for the ablation of the target. The concentration of Co in films A and B was measured by energy dispersive x-ray analysis (EDX) and found to be 20.1% and 14.5% of Co respectively and that for film C was ~25% as measured by particle-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) measurements The relative amounts of metallic cobalt and Co 2+ ions were determined by x-ray measurements made on beamline 20-ID-B (samples A and B) and beamline 20-BM-B (sample C) at the Advanced Photon Source as shown in figure for the presence of the diamagnetic substrate by measuring a blank substrate and subtracting off its contribution from the total. Magneto-optical data were obtained in Faraday geometry using a photo-elastic modulator over an energy region of 1.5eV-3.4eV. Since this energy range is below the band gap of ZnO at ~3.4eV, magneto-optical responses probes the magnetic polarisation of any gap states. The imaginary part of the off-diagonal dielectric constant was deduced from the measured magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) according to: where ω is the angular frequency, L is the thickness of the film and n its refractive index. Further experimental details are given elsewhere Three types of MCD measurements were taken: a spectrum that was obtained by subtracting the measured ellipticity in a large negative field from that taken in a large positive field; a remanence spectrum that was taken at zero field after first saturating the sample at large field and a hysteresis loop at a definite energy. In the cases of the spectra taken in field and the MCD hysteresis loop equivalent measurements taken from a blank substrate were subtracted from the data that is presented here. This section describes detailed magnetisation measurements made on the three samples: sample A where the magnetization is dominated by the contribution from metallic cobalt, sample B where very little metallic cobalt was detected by x-ray spectroscopy and is a good example of a sample whose magnetisation is due to ZnO doped with Co 2+ , and sample C that shows some effects that are characteristic of both samples A and B. The focus of this paper is to discuss sample C but we discuss samples A and B first as they exemplify the behaviour expected when the samples is and is not dominated by nano-inclusions of metallic cobalt. Sample A has behaviour that is characteristic of a magnetic sample dominated by cobalt nanoparticles , where C=4.2×10 -6 emu deg -1 and θ=66 K, indicating antiferromagnetic coupling between the nanoparticles. The ratio of the remanence to the saturation magnetisation at 5K is close to 0.5 which is the value expected for an isotropic array of nanoparticles with uniaxial anisotropy. However the saturation magnetisation observed at 5K is larger than that expected to result from metallic cobalt alone, as calculated using the measured values of the total cobalt concentration and the fraction of Co ions in a metallic environment (see Table We can obtain further insight by analysing the low field susceptibility for sample A. This quantity can extracted either from the ZFC magnetisation via χzfc = Mzfc/H or from the hysteresis curve directly using ( ) and are in good qualitative agreement. These experimental curves are compared to a model that assumes that the observed hysteretic magnetism is entirely due to blocked nanoparticles, and hence that the low field susceptibility is related to the temperature dependence of the remanence The low-field susceptibility is dominated by the part of the magnetisation, Npara(T)Mcluster, that is due to superparamagnetic particles with average magnetization, Mcluster, while the remanence is related to the fraction of the nanoparticles that are blocked. Assuming that the superparamagnetic particles obey a Curie law and that the blocked particles have an average cluster magnetization Mcluster that follows Stoner-Wohlfarth theory which relates the remanence to half the saturation magnetization ( ) The qualitative agreement between the experimental data for the zero-field susceptibility and the model is apparent in figure The temperature dependence of the coercive field and the remanence are shown in Fig Sample B has an overall Co concentration of 14.5% and its saturation magnetization is particularly high although there was hardly any presence of metallic cobalt detected from the near edge absorption measurement of the EXAFS. It is therefore an example of a sample with negligible metallic cobalt. Consequently, its magnetic properties are very different to those of sample A. The shape of the hysteresis loops at 300K are almost unchanged from those taken at 5K (see figure Sample C contains 25% cobalt, with 2% of the Co in the metallic state. This sample also contains 0.6% Al, which has been shown to give a ferromagnetic exchange between cobalt nanoparticles in ZnAlCoO, unlike the antiferromagnetic exchange found between Co nanoparticles in ZnCoO Hysteresis loops were measured at a range of temperatures using SQUID magnetometry. As the temperature is increased the coercive field drops smoothly and can be fitted by a model of a distribution of non-interacting nanoparticles with uniaxial anisotropy as is shown in figure However the same model fails to fit the measured temperature dependence of the remanence. The experimental data is unlike anything that is normally given by microscopic modelling as it is normal for the remanence to fall more slowly than the coercive field at low temperatures whereas in this data the initial rates of change are very similar The imaginary part of the off-diagonal dielectric constant, Im ( ) ε ω , may be deduced from MCD spectra using equation ( The MCD signal is found by measuring the total ellipticity induced by the sample after polarising in a direction along the light path and then subtracting the measurement taken after the sample is polarised in the opposite direction. This measurement is particularly important in samples that contain metallic cobalt and spin polarised ZnO because their contributions dominate at different energies. The cobalt nanoparticles are known to give a disproportionably large contribution to the MCD relative to their magnetisation In this case, the effective dielectric function for light propagating along the direction of magnetization, z, is given by, where f is the fraction of the sample occupied by the Co inclusions, and Lxx is the demagnetising factor of the metallic inclusions. For energies below the band gap we can replace the diagonal part of the dielectric tensor of ZnCoAlO, ZnO xx ε , by the (energy dependent) refractive index squared, n 2 Inclusions of Co that are spherical on average would produce Lxx = 1/3. However, there is a report ε ω is negative for low energy and then crosses zero at an energy that depends on (1 ) xx L f -, but is between 2.5 eV and 3.5 eV The spectrum of a sample dominated by magnetism in the oxide due to a polarised donor band is very different from the M-G spectrum and is characterised by a strong dip near the band gap at ~3.4eV The MCD spectrum of sample A, taken in field, is fitted very well by equation (3) as shown in figure The fraction of the volume of the film that is occupied by metallic Co was found to be fMCD = (3±1)×10 -3 which may be compared with what is expected from the measurements of the Co concentration and the fraction of Co ions that have a metallic environment, as obtained from x-ray data and given in Table The MCD spectrum for sample B in figure The spectrum of sample C, shown in figure τ (eV -1 ) fMCD fstruct. A: ZnCoO 0.36 0.16 3.1x10 -3 7x10 -3 C:ZnCoAlO 0.4 0.22 1.4x10 -3 ≤ 2.5x10 -3 We have measured hysteresis loops with MCD for sample C at the two energies, 1.9eV and 3.3eV, marked by arrows in Figure The results are shown in figure Since the spectra from Co nanoparticles and oxide magnetism are so different, these plots indicate that the coercive field is essentially the same for both components even as it varies with temperature. This can only occur if they are exchange-coupled to each other. The size of magnetic nanoparticles, d, can normally be determined from the superparamagnetic blocking temperature TB via the relationship , where V is the average particle volume, and Keff is the anisotropy parameter for fcc cobalt, Keff = 5×10 5 Jm -3 to obtain TB ~ 250 K, which gives V ~ 175 nm 3 , d~7nm. The exact value of Keff is somewhat uncertain since it depends on the particle size as surface, shape and strain anisotropies play a role 