Diffraction-based methods have become an invaluable tool for the detailed assessment of residual strain and stress within experimental mechanics. These methods typically measure a component of the average strain within a gauge volume. It is common place to treat these measurements as point measurements and to interpolate and extrapolate their values over the region of interest. Such interpolations are not guaranteed to satisfy the physical properties of equilibrium and applied loading conditions. In this paper, we provide a numerically robust algorithm for inferring two dimensional, biaxial strain fields over a region of interest from diffraction-based measurements that satisfies equilibrium and any known loading conditions. By correctly treating the measurements as gauge volume averages rather than point-wise the algorithm has better performance when large gauge volumes and subsequently shorter beam-times are used. This algorithm is demonstrated on simulation and experimental data and compared to natural neighbour interpolation with linear extrapolation and is shown to provide a more accurate strain field. Neutron and X-ray scattering techniques provide a range of diffraction-based methods for measuring elastic strain (and hence stress) within polycrystalline solids In the vast majority of cases, these instruments measure strain in a point-wise fashion where individual components are measured as an average over a gauge volume defined by a slit or collimator system where κ = i j κ i κ j is the average normal strain in the direction κ (unit vector), d is the measured lattice spacing and d 0 is an equivalent un-deformed reference spacing. The full assessment of a strain field typically revolves around measuring multiple components over a mesh of points within a sample from which the full biaxial or triaxial strain distribution can be calculated and interpolated. Given the fact that the measurement refers only to the elastic component of strain, Hooke's law can then be used to infer the distribution of the stress tensor. The practical reality is that beam time is limited and detailed measurements can be time consuming. This often drives a compromise in terms of the number of points that can be investigated and the size of the gauge volume used to perform these measurements. Large gauge volumes reduce sampling times for a given level of uncertainty, however this is at the cost of spatial resolution. Due to the averaging involved, the full amplitude of the strain field may not be captured. It is common practice to interpolate (and extrapolate) the strain fields from these measurements, treating the measurements as point measurements rather than as averages. However, there is no guarantee these interpolations will satisfy equilibrium conditions. Furthermore, there are often known boundary conditions (sample loading) which are not taken into account and violated by the interpolation. Gaussian Process (GP) regression provides a nonparametric method for inferring functions from measured data. Recently, this method was demonstrated to be an excellent approach for tomographic reconstruction of strain fields from Bragg-edge neutron transmission measurements In this paper, we extend the GP approach to a new problem involving the robust inference of twodimensional strain fields from diffraction based measurements. This principally involves the derivation and adaptation of a different measurement model to the GP model for strain. We also derive a more flexible noise model for the application of traction constraints and present a robust GP algorithm that relies on QR factorisations This new approach is demonstrated in both simulation and on experimental data where significant improvements in accuracy and/or beamtime requirements were apparent. A detailed description of GP regression can be found elsewhere (e.g. A GP is a generalisation of the multivariate Gaussian probability distribution to a Gaussian distribution of functions, f(x). This distribution is uniquely defined over the spatial coordinate x by a mean function T , where E refers to the expected value of the relevant quantity. For example, we can define the distribution of a scalar function to consist of a finite series of polynomial basis functions f (x) = φ(x) T w, where φ(x) = (1, x, x where the prior mean function is zero as the weights had prior distributions with mean zero. Note that the assumption of zero mean is for convenience; in any process of fitting the model to measurements, the mean and covariance functions will be updated. If a more appropriate prior assumption is known, it can be used. In this form, the covariance function is given by the outer product of a finite set of basis functions. More generally, any function that generates a positive definite symmetric covariance can be used. A common choice is the squared-exponential; which corresponds to a Bayesian linear regression model with an infinite number of basis functions where e ∼ N(0, σ) represents measurement noise, b is a constant bias term 2 , and the measurement model L x is a linear operator. Note that, in the case where the operator contains integrals or derivatives, the superscript denotes the variable with which the operator is in respect to. As GPs are closed under linear operators where Σ n = diag(σ 1 , . . . , σ n ) is a diagonal matrix containing the variance of each measurement, and ) based on the measurements can be then written as; To sumarise, the estimate of the value of a function from a set of measurements is found through the following process; First, a prior distribution for the function is assumed and m(x) and K(x * , x * ) calculated for the locations of interest. The measurement geometry is then used to calculate a prior estimate of the measurements mean μ y , and the covariances K yy and K y * . Finally, these terms along with the measurement values Y provide a posterior estimate of the function using Equation Conceptually, if we were to estimate values of an unknown scalar function using GP regression with mean and covariance function given by (2), then this could be thought of as fitting a finite series of polynomials to the measurements. In the case where (3) is used, the series is effectively infinite. For a more in-depth discussion on GPs see A GP suitable for the estimation of two-dimensional strain fields satisfying equilibrium was shown in We define a GP for a distribution of Airy's Stress functions, φ(x), where x = [x y] T , from which we can define a stress field as and σ xy (x) = ∂ 2 φ(x) ∂x∂y . Through Hooke's law, under an assumption of plane stress, this provides strain of; where E = [ xx , xy , yy ] T , and ν is poisson's ratio. The distribution of φ(x) is assumed to have mean m φ (x) = 0, and covariance K φ (x, x ). This allows us to write a GP for the strain field with mean function m = V x m φ (x) = 0 and covariance function As stress and hence strain calculated from an Airy's stress function satisfy equilibrium, any strain field estimated based on measurements using this GP will inherently satisfy equilibrium. Although many options exist for the choice of covariance function, the squaredexponential is used in this work as it has previously been shown to be suitable for reconstructing strain fields in Assuming plane stress, the traction at a surface location, x s can be calculated by where n = [n 1 n 2 ] T is the surface normal at x s . This allows the prior joint distribution of a strain E * at x * and a set of traction observations, T P = [T 1 , . . . , T P ] at surface points [x s1 , . . . , x sP ], to be written as where While traditionally measurements are considered to be of the form where η = {κ, G}, κ is the measurement direction unit vector, G is the gauge volume, and e ∼ N(0, σ). In order to estimate the values of the strain field from a set of diffraction measurements subject to traction constraints, we require the prior joint distribution of the measurements, d = [d 1 , . . . , d n ] T , the traction observations T P , and the strain at the location we desire an estimate E * = E(x * ); , where d 0 is an n by 1 vector of the un-deformed lattice spacing. For two-dimensional strain fields, three unique measurement directions-κ 1 , κ 2 , and κ 3 -are required in order to accurately reconstruct the cartesian strain components; xx , yy , and xy . These measurement directions can be chosen by examining the mapping from cartesian strains to the normal strains in the measurement directions given by y . We require M to be invertible and hence the measurement directions are chosen to provide a well conditioned mapping. Measurement directions typically used are; . Which give volumetric averages of xx , yy , and xy + 1 2 ( xx + yy ) respectively-allowing for easy use within more traditional point-based interpolation approaches. The measurement model ( where and the linear operator represents The required covariance terms are now given by; Estimation of strain can now be performed from diffraction strain measurements subject to traction constraints using An approximation scheme is implemented to reduce the computation time. The scheme selected allows for an analytic solution to The squared-exponential covariance function can be approximated by a finite sum of m basis functions as in Loosely speaking, L x , L y , λ x j and λ y j control the frequency and phase of the basis functions. For our application they were chosen such that the basis functions spanned a region where their spectral densities, Σ p j j , were greater than a minimum threshold. This helps to ensure that the dominant frequencies of the response are captured while maintaining numerical stability. To apply this approximation to the problem of estimating strain from diffraction measurements we are required to map the basis functions through The evaluation of these basis functions is found in Appendix A. Instead of forming the full joint prior distribution and calculating an estimate using where 1×P ] T , and Σ n = diag(σ i , . . . , σ n ). This reduces the complexity of the regression from O (N + P) 3 to O (N + P)m 2 A robust implementation of these equations is found in Algorithm 1, where the calculation of of Σ p to be positive definite. This is important during parameter optimisation during which particular parameter choices could cause the equations to become ill-conditioned. Ameliorating the ill-conditioning of this matrix affords for a larger region of attraction for the optimisation problem. Input : Φ * (Estimation basis functions),Y (measurements), μ y (prior measurement mean), Φ Y (Measurement basis functions), Σ y (measurement variance), Σ p (basis function spectral densities) The squared-exponential covariance function is governed by the parameters θ = {l x , l y , σ f }. These parameters can be determined by an optimisation process where we maximise the marginal log likelihood of the measurements When the approximation shown in Section 2.4 is used K dd is replaced with Φ d Σ p Φ T d and the expressions for the log likelihood and its derivatives are given in Appendix B. The parameters can then be determined using a suitable gradient-based method such as the BFGS algorithm in Additionally, d 0 can be included in the set of parameters that are optimised. This requires that we include the traction observations into the marginal log-likelihood. As the average strain within the sample is defined by the sample's boundary tractions (see The classical cantilevered beam (see Figure h < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " t z n J 5 l 2 a e 4 x k m p o 8 i X + V q 0 F J 5 8 5 h z 9 w P n 8 A y v e M 4 g = = < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " t z n J 5 l 2 a e 4 x k m p o 8 i X + V q 0 F J 5 8 5 h z 9 w P n 8 A y v e M 4 g = = < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " t z n J 5 l 2 a e 4 x k m p o 8 i X + V q 0 F J 5 8 5 h z 9 w P n 8 A y v e M 4 g = = < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " t z n J 5 l 2 a e 4 x k m p o 8 i X Measurements were simulated from this strain field at 24 points using The strain fields resulting from a natural neighbour interpolation (which is C 1 continuous) and linear extrapolation of the measurements using MATLAB's scatteredInterpolant function are shown in Figure A measure of how well the interpolated strain field represents a physical strain field can be provided using the equilibrium constraints. Assuming plane stress, we can write the equilibrium constraints as; C 1 and C 2 were calculated for the interpolated strain field using a central difference approximation and are shown in Figure The feasibility of the interpolated strain field can also be assessed by calculating the equivalent tractions along the top and bottom of the beam. The resulting tractions are shown in Figure The GP regression method was applied to measurements from the KOWARI constant wavelength straindiffractometer at the Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering within the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) Two sets of measurements were made; a detailed and a coarse set, again as shown in Figure T . These directions were chosen so that the measured volumetric strains could be easily mapped to the strain components for the more traditional pointbased interpolation approach; xx = κ 1 , yy = κ 2 , and Sampling times were based on achieving measurement uncertainty with standard deviation σ m = 7 × 10 -5 . This required approximately fifteen hours per measurement direction for the detailed set and approximately 1.25 hours per measurement direction for the coarse set. Strain fields generated using the MATLAB scatteredInterpolant intrinsic function and the GP method are shown in Figure If we consider the detailed strain field inferred from the GP to be the closest to the truth, then Table The violation of constraints calculated from ( A novel method for inferring strain fields from diffraction-based strain measurements is proposed. These estimated strain fields implicitly satisfy equilibrium, ensuring their physical feasibility. In contrast to traditional interpolation methods which treat the measurements as point-wise this GP based approach correctly relates the measurements to the average estimated strain within a gauge volume. This improves the estimate accuracy when large and/or overlapping gauge volumes are used. Furthermore, multiple data sets using different size gauge volumes, measurement locations, and measurement uncertainty can be combined. Additionally, including boundary tractions improves the accuracy of the method close to the sample boundaries and outside of the measurement locations. This method was compared to strain fields generated using natural neighbour interpolation and linear extrapolation on both simulated and experimental data sets. For these interpolated fields it was shown that the physical properties of equilibrium and zero tractions on the boundary were not satisfied. In simulation, the GP approach demonstrated much greater accuracy from a limited data set created with large gauge volumes. Experimentally, the coarse GP was able to achieve results with greater agreement to the detailed sets than the interpolation. The results indicate that the GP method allows for larger gauge volumes to be used while still achieving estimates comparable to an interpolation with smaller gauge volumes, allowing for a reduction in beam-time. For instance, in our experiment the GP method was able to provide more or less equivalent results on a data set that required less than 10% of the beam time used for the detailed mapping. The method presented in this paper is suitable for continuous planar biaxial strain fields under the assumption of plane stress. For discontinuous strain fields (i.e. the extreme case of the ring and plug) a mixture of experts model This work is supported by the Australian Research Council through a Discovery Project Grant (DP170102324). Access KOWARI diffractometer was made possible an ANSTO Program Proposal PP6050. Additional support from AINSE Limited was provided during the experimental work. The following provides more complete expressions for the equations given in Section 2.4. As stated in Section 2.2 the target strain field is related to the scalar Airy's stress functions via where the second derivatives of the scalar basis functions are Section 2.2 also states that this strain field can be related to surface tractions via the linear mapping Section 2.3 states that the diffraction measurements can be related to the strain field via the linear mapping For planar problems we define the gauge volume geometry as per Figure A.9. This allows the integral over the gauge volume to be written; where q) = [x 0 + û1 s + v1 q, y 0 + û2 s + v2 q] and Γ 1 = λ x, j λ y, j (û 2 v1 + û1 v2 ) x, j û1 v1 + λ 2 y, j û2 v2 Γ 3 = L x L y (λ x, j û1 -λ y, j û2 )(λ x, j û1 + λ y, j û2 ) . . . (λ x, j v1 -λ y, j v2 )(λ x, j v1 + λ y, j v2 ) α 1 = cos(λ x, j (L x + û1 s + v1 q + x 0 )) . . . cos(λ y, j (L y + û2 s + v2 q + y 0 )) α 2 = sin(λ x, j (L x + û1 s + v1 q + x 0 )) sin(λ y, j (L y + û2 s + v2 q + y 0 )) As discussed in Section 2.5 the optimal values for θ = {σ f , l x , l y } can be found by maximising the marginal log-likelihood L(θ). The following provides the expressions to calculate the L(θ) and its partial derivatives when the approximation scheme presented in Section 2. Algorithm 2 provides psuedo-code for a robust implementation of these expressions. The notation, v ∼ N (μ, Σ) indicates that the vector v is a normally distributed random variable with mean μ and variance Σ.