We study a three-dimensional single-band repulsive Hubbard model at weak coupling. We establish the superconducting phase diagram in the parameter space of the chemical potential and the out-of-plane hopping strength. The model continuously connects the Hubbard model in two and three dimensions. We confirm previously-established results in these limits, and identify a rich structure of competing order parameters in between. Specifically, we find five types of p-and dwave orders. In several regions of the phase diagram, even when the Fermi surface is a corrugated cylinder, the ground state is a time-reversal-symmetry-breaking superconductor with nodes, i.e. a Weyl superconductor. The widely-celebrated Bardeen Cooper Schrieffer (BCS) theory describes superconductivity deriving from Cooper pairs in a zero relative angular momentum (swave) state 1 . It was later established that superconductivity could arise from purely repulsive electron interactions 2 , in stark contrast to the phonon-mediated coupling of BCS theory. Cooper pairs originating from repulsive interactions are typically non-s-wave, and chiral complex combinations, e.g. p x ± ip y , often lower the free energy At weak coupling the repulsive Hubbard model has been used as an illustrative platform to study unconventional superconductivity in two dimensions In this paper we demonstrate the importance of corrugation effects in unconventional superconductors by establishing the superconducting weak-coupling phase diagram for a repulsive Hubbard model in (μ, t ⊥ ) space, where μ is the chemical potential and t ⊥ the out-of-plane hopping. We consider a tight-binding single-band model with a minimal number of free parameters. Our model connects the two-to the three-dimensional case, and it spans four Fermi surface topologies below half-filling. We employ a weak-coupling procedure which allows us to calculate the order parameter from first principles We set up a nearest-neighbor tight-binding model to address the impact of 3D effects in unconventional superconductors. Electrons at chemical potential μ hop on a primitive tetragonal lattice with an out-of-plane hopping strength t ⊥ and in-plane hopping strength t . We assume that the electrons interact via a weak repulsive on-site interaction U > 0, where c ( †) iσ annihilates (creates) an electron with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓} on site i, n iσ = c † iσ c iσ is the number operator, and • and • ⊥ denote in-plane and out-of-plane nearest neighbor sites, respectively. Fourier transforming the Hamiltonian yields the single-particle dispersion We assume in the following that U/t 1, and the superconducting order is calculated perturbatively by treating the interaction to one-loop order, O(U 2 ) (see Appendix A) where the integral is over the Fermi surface and |S F | is its area. The matrix g t/s k,k is the dimensionless two-particle vertex and is given by Here, is the density-density response (the Lindhard function), and f (E) the Fermi-function. An eigenfunction of the integral equation corresponding to a negative eigenvalue λ n signals the onset of superconductivity with an order parameter below the critical temperature T (n) c ∼ ωe -1/|λn| , where ω is the bare bandwidth (when ω U 2 /t). In the numerical scheme in Sec. III the Lindhard function was regularized by adding a small imaginary contribution to the denominator of Eq. (5). The order parameter belongs to a representation of the relevant lattice point group. In our case this is the tetragonal point group D 4h as summarized in Table A useful quantity to help distinguish topological phases is the Chern number, defined for any 2D slice of the 3D Brillouin zone This quantity is a topological invariant as long as the gap is nonzero along the integrated path. As k z is smoothly varied, the Chern number can jump up or down by an integer when the integration path passes through a point node. Initial attempts at establishing the phase diagram of the two-dimensional (t ⊥ = 0) repulsive Hubbard model at weak coupling To establish the complete phase diagram we apply the weak-coupling scheme and discretize the Fermi surface, typically using 3000 to 4000 points, such that Eq. ( In Fig. Order parameters belonging to five different representations of the point group D 4h are seen to be realized as the highest T c order within the parameter window 1 1.5 1.25 0.5 0.25 0.75 0 . We should emphasize that the gap is always given by a linear combination of lattice harmonics that lie in the same given irreducible representation. While in certain cases, this linear combination is dominated by the fundamental lattice harmonic (for example cos(k x )cos(k y ) for B 1g ), this is in general not the case, and the basis functions given in Table Comparing with previously established results, we recover the transition from {d x 2 -y 2 , d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 } to {p x , p y , p z } at μ = -2.46 (n = 0.32) for t ⊥ = t 11 . At μ ∼ -3.0 we note that the E g and B 2g states, which were left out in Ref. 11, are practically degenerate with the E u states around t ⊥ = t (Fig. Across the van Hove singularity at μ (x,y) = -2t ⊥ the Fermi surface changes topology due to the k x , k y = ±π zone boundaries. An enhanced density of states close to this line tends to favor gap symmetries for which the magnitude is large at the points where the Fermi surface touches the k x and k y zone boundaries, respectively. This is most notable for d x 2 -y 2 (see Fig. A small pocket of E u order, dominated by the lattice harmonics sin(3k x ) and sin(3k y ) (see also Sec. III B) appears with k F ∼ 2π/3 close to the two-dimensional limit in the phase diagram. As t ⊥ increases from zero the order parameter of this phase develops an interesting but disfavorable k z dependency, shown in Appendix B. As the van Hove line is approached the E u phase is quickly overtaken by the d x 2 -y 2 (B 1g ) phase, see Fig. At lower filling an E u phase of rich structure as a function of t ⊥ emerges, see Fig. In regions where two or more orders are degenerate, complex combinations are spontaneously favored to increase the condensation energy of the superconducting state. Examples of such states are shown in Fig. The combination d x 2 -y 2 + id 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 , as displayed in Fig. For all gapped k z slices the gap has Chern number 0. This complex combination (or did) is favored along all of t ⊥ = t for -2.46 μ < 0. A rather different, but no less exotic, phase we find is the p-wave phase at low filling for t ⊥ barely smaller than t . This was briefly discussed at the end of the last subsection. The circular-like nodes emerging at small k z in the E u constituents cause the chiral combination p x + ip y to have a total of ten point nodes and to realize both Chern numbers C = +1 for |k z | > k z and C = -3 for |k z | < k z , where k z is the smallest vertical value of the nodes, see Fig. We consider the model (1) at sufficiently low fillings, such that the Fermi surface becomes rotationally sym-metric around the k z axis. From Eq. ( x + k 2 y + k 2 z /α 2 = k 2 F , where α ≡ t /t ⊥ and k F = 4 + (μ + 2t ⊥ )/t . For α > 1 this is a prolate spheroid, whereas for α < 1 the Fermi surface is an oblate spheroid. With α = 1 in the low-filling limit the Fermi surface is spherical, yielding the well-known isotropic susceptibility χ(q) = ρ 0 g(q/2k F ), where g(x) = 1/2 + (1x 2 )/(4x) log|(1 + x)/(1x)| and ρ 0 = k F /(4π 2 t ). The effective (odd-parity) integral equation, , has as solutions the spherical harmonics Y m for odd (2 + 1 degeneracy in m). By direct integration in the appropriate-parity sector, we obtain the first few solutions in shown in Table Consider next α > 1 at low filling, such that the Fermi surface is a prolate spheroid. We define the eccentricity of this spheroid as ν ≡ 1 -1/α 2 ∈ (0, 1). The prolate Fermi surface spheroid has an area of |S F | = 2πk 2 F (1 + ν -1 arcsin ν). Applying spheroidal coordinates, i.e. rescaling the axes, p = k F (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, α cos θ) T , the Fermi velocity is Combining this in Eq. ( where χ has the same form as in the spherical case. Here, we made use of the expansion ξ pξ p+q = -t 2p • q + q 2 + O(p, q) 4 , which is valid at low filling. We solve Eq. ( With α < 1 we redefine the eccentricity as ν ≡ √ 1α 2 ∈ (0, 1). Expressed in terms of ν the Fermi surface area is now |S F | = 2πk 2 F (1 + 1 2ν log 1+ν 1-ν ), and the Fermi velocity is v F (k) = 2k F t 1 + ν 2 /(1ν 2 ) cos 2 θ in rescaled coordinates. This leads to the pairing matrix in the oblate regime: Again solving the integral equation in (3) by expansion in orthogonal polynomials yields the results shown in Fig. The perturbative framework of weak-coupling provided a substantial step forward in the understanding of superconductivity arising from purely repulsive interactions 2, Equation (1) could serve as a basic platform from which to model experimentally-observed systems. To facilitate a match to known systems it would likely be necessary to include further terms in the tight-binding expression, multiple bands, and spin-orbit coupling. For example, applying the weak-coupling scheme to threedimensional materials such as SrPtAs 9 , FeSe 29 , and URu 2 Si 2 30 could yield valuable insights. Moreover, the chiral C = -3 phase shown in Fig. The weak-coupling treatment employed here is similar to that of Refs. 12, 23, 34, and 35 and can be formulated in terms of solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation in the particle-particle channel. At second order, the shape of the Fermi surface is not renormalized. For generic Fermi surface shapes, away from finely tuned points such as perfect nesting or van Hove singularities, this is ensured when the bandwidth is ω U 2 /t. In this limit, the susceptibilities that enter the calculation are those of the unperturbed Fermi liquid. Altered effective interactions from renormalization of the Fermi surface thus becomes relevant only at higher order in U . 