The ancient paper craft of kirigami has recently emerged as a potential tool for the design of functional materials. Inspired by the kirigami concept, we propose a class of kirigami-based metamaterials whose electromagnetic functionalities can be switched between nonchiral and chiral states by stretching the predesigned split-ring resonator array. Single-band, dual-band and broadband circular polarizers with reconfigurable performance are experimentally demonstrated with maximum circular dichroisms of 0.88, 0.94 and 0.92, respectively. The underlying mechanism is explained and calculated via detailed analysis of the excited multipoles, including the electric, magnetic, and toroidal dipoles and quadrupole. Our approach enables tailoring the electromagnetic functionalities in kirigami patterns and provides an alternate avenue for reconfigurable optical metadevices with exceptional mechanical properties. Metamaterials are artificial materials engineered at the subwavelength scale to achieve electromagnetic functionalities Reconfigurable metamaterials are designed to achieve dynamic control over the physical properties to realize multiple functions in one metadevice Although the design capacity of origami is remarkable, achieving complex target shapes with only folds is mathematically challenging. Such complex folding patterns require a convoluted series of deformations from the flat to folded shapes, making fabrication difficult. Different from origami, kirigami is an art form that introduces cuts into folding processes, providing extra degrees of freedom in 3D shape construction A chiral structure can be modeled as electric and magnetic dipoles with parallel or antiparallel orientations of comparable magnitude. Different absorption occurs when circularly polarized waves pass through such a structure. This is the widely discussed phenomenon of conventional circular dichroism. However, for toroidal circular dichroism, the chiroptical effects are mostly attributed to the combination of toroidal dipoles and other higher order electric multipoles. In this letter, we propose and demonstrate a general class of kirigami-based chiral metamaterials (KCMMs) whose electromagnetic performance can be switched between nonchiral and chiral states at single-band, dual-band and broadband wavelengths. Moreover, for the first time, we propose and investigate the reconfigurable toroidal dipole moments based on the kirigami. Split-ring resonators (SRRs) are periodically arranged on thin, foldable sheets. When transforming the 2D metasurface to 3D kirigami-based metamaterials, the resonant modes exhibit a gradually enhanced chiroptical response. The underlying mechanism is explained via detailed analyses of the excited multipoles, including the electric, magnetic, and toroidal dipoles and electric quadrupole. The nonradiating feature and high flexibility of the toroidal geometry will be useful in many applications, such as lasers The schematic of the KCMMs is illustrated in Figure Additional details on the geometric dimensions of KCMMs and the folding process can be found in the Supporting Information (Figure The simulation results for the three types of KCMM are illustrated in Figure For the L-handed enantiomer, as shown in Figure Animations can be found in the supplementary materials (video 1, 2,3). To demonstrate the chiroptical responses experimentally, samples were fabricated based on printed circuit board (PCB) technology. Copper split-ring resonators (thickness 0.035 mm) were periodically printed on a type of polyimide film (thickness 0.05 mm) with a permittivity of 3.5. Measurements of chiroptical responses and chirality switching of the KCMMs were implemented in a microwave chamber with a vector network analyzer. KCMMs consisting of 10×20 unit cells were designed along the x-and y-axes, respectively. Additional experimental details are described in the Supporting Information. The results are illustrated in Figure The specific combination of the electric and magnetic dipoles, that is, parallel or antiparallel with comparable magnitudes, can induce strong chiral responses similar to those in natural chiral molecules We performed a multipole decomposition to quantify their contributions. In our KCMMs, only the electric dipole P, magnetic dipole M, toroidal dipole T, and electric quadrupole Qe provide significant contributions to the macroscopic electromagnetic responses, and all the other higher-order multipoles are relatively weak and can be neglected. The radiated powers of multipole components as a function of wavelength were calculated by integrating the current, and the results are plotted in Fig. Compared with that in Figure objects. With the ongoing development of micromanufacturing techniques, we expect our work to lead to alternate approaches to lightweight, reconfigurable, and deployable metadevices.