Ever increasing hardware capabilities and computation powers have made acquisition and analysis of big scientific data at the nanoscale routine, though much of the data acquired often turns out to be redundant, noisy, and/or irrelevant to the problems of interests, and it remains nontrivial to draw clear mechanistic insights from pure data analytics. In this work, we use scanning probe microscopy (SPM) as an example to demonstrate deep data methodology, transitioning from brute force analytics such as data mining, correlation analysis, and unsupervised classification to informed and/or targeted causative data analytics built on sound physical understanding. Three key ingredients of such deep data analytics are presented. A sequential excitation scanning probe microscopy (SE-SPM) technique is first adopted to acquire high quality, efficient, and physically relevant data, which can be easily implemented on any standard atomic force microscope (AFM). Brute force physical analysis is then carried out using simple harmonic oscillator (SHO) model, enabling us to derive intrinsic electromechanical coupling of interests. Finally, principal component analysis (PCA) is carried out, which not only speeds up the analysis by four orders of magnitude, but also allows a clear physical interpretation of its modes in combination with SHO analysis. A rough piezoelectric material has been probed using such strategy, enabling us to map its intrinsic electromechanical properties at the nanoscale with high fidelity, where conventional methods fail. The SE in combination with deep data methodology can be easily adapted for other SPM techniques to probe a wide range of functional phenomena at the nanoscale. The fusion of scientific research and big data has provided unprecedented opportunity for accelerated discovery, understanding, and innovation As the first step, we develop a sequential excitation scanning probe microscopy (SE-SPM) technique to acquire high quality The method can be easily implemented in any standard atomic force microscope (AFM) without the need for any additional hardware and instrumentation. The code used for SE-PFM analysis can be accessed at online 20 . To this end we note that majority of SPM measurements deduce physical properties of samples from the interactions between a cantilever with a sharp tip and sample surface, as schematically shown in Fig.  , and Q are intrinsic electromechanical response (piezoelectricity), resonant frequency (elasticity), and quality factor (energy dissipation) of the system that we are interested in learning, while  is the excitation frequency with () A  and ()  as the corresponding amplitude and phase that are directly measured in experiment. As such, it is desirable to acquire the amplitude ( , , ) A x y  and phase ( , , ) xy  over a two-dimensional (2D) space ( , ) xy of sample surface as well as a frequency spectrum of excitation (), from which 0 A , 0  , and Q can be solved from Eq. (1). Conventional techniques such as dual amplitude resonance tracking (DART) Therefore, there is still a strong desire for innovative yet simple and easily accessible approach to acquire high quality (less noisy), efficient (less redundant), and physically relevant SPM data to enable deep analysis. To this end, we develop sequential excitation (SE) that excites the sample using a sequence of AC waveforms with distinct frequencies j  , as shown in Fig. As a demonstration, we study piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) of a PZT ceramic under SE, wherein a sequence of its amplitude mappings ( , , ) j A x y  are shown in Fig. We start with brute force physical analysis accomplished by fitting 3D datasets of amplitude ( , , ) A x y  at each pixel ( , ) xy using SHO model represented by Eq. (1.1). This is demonstrated by one representative pixel in Fig. Mappings acquired from SE-PFM, on the other hand, are free of such problems. While SHO fitting works well under SE-PFM, it is a computationally an expensive process, taking an Intel Xeon E5-2695 CPU approximately 0.06s for one pixel and thus 1.09hr for a 256×256 mapping (or 5.8min for a parallel pool with 28 CPU workers). We thus resort to multivariate statistical tools such as PCA to speed up the analysis Here, we demonstrate that PCA not only speeds up our computation by four orders of magnitude, but also allows a clear physical interpretation of its modes in combination with SHO analysis. To this end, we recast 3D dataset of ( , , ) A x y  into 2D dataset of ( , ) Ax  , where 2D spatial grid is collapsed into 1D. This reshaped dataset can be viewed as a 2D matrix A, such that each row of A represents a spatial mapping at a particular excitation frequency, while each column represents a spectrum of data spanning all excitation frequencies for a particular grid point. The details of following derivation are presented in the SI, wherein principal components of A, i.e., spatial eigenvectors i w of the covariance matrix A T A, are evaluated by singular value decomposition (SVD) On the other hand, Aj-row can also be reformulated from Eq. ( where components To demonstrate this analysis, we compare the first three spectral eigenvectors of PCA versus the SHO expansion in Fig. Intuitively, the set of SE-PFM mappings under different frequencies contain two important information, the variation of the amplitude with respect to the spatial locations and with respect to excitation frequencies, which are interconnected in the original mappings of Fig. The spatial variation of intrinsic amplitude, resonant frequency, and quality factor, key material parameters of interests in this analysis, are not known in advance. Thus, in order to unambiguously establish our physical interpretation of PCA, we construct a model three-phase system numerically with given distribution of intrinsic amplitude, resonant frequency, and quality factor, as shown in Fig. and SHO expansion (Fig. respectively. This set of studies thus confirm the physical interpretation of PCA modes, which can be used to substantially speed up the analysis. Principal component analysis has been widely used to compress and visualize multi-dimensional dataset, though its physical meaning is often unclear. Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) measures a wide range of properties of sample through cantilever-sample interactions in term of cantilever dynamics, though intrinsic response is rather challenging to determine quantitatively, often interference by various cross-talks. Sequential excitation (SE) technique we developed, in combination with dynamics-based SHO model and data analytic PCA, allows us to overcome such difficulties through deep data methodology. Of particular interest is a clear mechanistic understanding of the unsupervised PCA acquired through sound physical principle, making it possible to speed up physical analysis by at least four orders of magnitude. The method can be easily implemented in any standard AFM without the need for any additional hardware and instrumentation. While the technique is demonstrated in terms of electromechanical coupling via PFM, the dynamics involved is universal in SPM, making the method widely applicable. There are no conflicts to declare. An Asylum Research (AR) Cypher AFM was used to perform DART PFM measurements. An AC bias with an amplitude of 3V near the sample-probe resonance frequency was applied to the PZT disk to amplify the piezoresponse via a Nanosensors PPP-EFM with a spring constant of 2.6Nm -1 . The line scan rate was set to 0.57Hz to ensure the DART technique work smoothly. A series of single frequency PFM mappings were acquired under an AC voltage of 3V and excitation frequency ranging from 320 to 400 kHz with a 2kHz increment. The scan rate was set as 1.5Hz. Therefore, a total of 41 PFM mappings were obtained by using the programmable function Macrobuilder of AR software. All raw amplitude data were then imported into MATLAB as 41 256×256 matrices. Subpixel image registration were performed for all images by cross-correlation to correct for inevitable topography drifts during the experiment. We take the deflection mapping of the first scan as a benchmark to do the image registration for other scans. The obtained translation is applied to the amplitude and phase mappings as well to correct drifting. An open-source algorithm is adopted in this process, which obtains an initial translation estimation of the cross-correlation peak and refines it by a matrixmultiply discrete Fourier transform (DFT) Default Fit function with nonlinear least-squares method in MATLAB is used to perform SHO fitting, which returns the mappings of A 0 , ω 0 , Q, and R 2 . R 2 is a statistical measure of how close the data are to the fitted regression line. It ranges from 0 to 1. R 2 =1 indicates that the fitted data i f explains all variability in observed data i y , while R 2 =0 indicates no 'linear' relationship between them. The most general definition of R 2 is PCA function based on SVD in MATLAB is used to perform this analysis. The variance data plotted in Fig. SSIM is an index for measuring the similarity between two images, which is defined as the mean of the local SSIM value map PCC is a measurement of the linear correlation between two vectors X and Y, which are reshaped from two images, respectively. It ranges from +1 and -1, where 1 means total positive linear correlation, 0 means no linear correlation, and -1 means total negative linear correlation, where i w are defined as PCA spatial eigenvectors sorted in the order of decreasing 2 i  . For any given pixel scanned at a specific frequency j  , () j A  can be reformulated as follows by plugging Eq. (1.2) into Eq. (1.1), 2 00 where ()  are coefficients that only depends on After switching the row and column of A , we get T A , where now each row represents a spectrum of data spanning all excitation frequencies for a particular grid point. Consequently, the PCA of T A gives principal spectral modes by computing the eigenvectors of the new covariance matrix T AA . A simple way to do this is left multiplying A on the both sides of (Eq. S1), Reference: (1) Guizar-Sicairos, M.; Thurman, S. T.; Fienup, J. R. Efficient Subpixel Image Registration Algorithms. Opt. Lett. 2008, 33 (2), 156-158.