Lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO 4 ) is the prototypical two-phase battery material, whose complex patterns of lithium ion intercalation provide a testing ground for theories of electrochemical thermodynamics. Using a depth-averaged (a-b plane) phase-field model of coherent phase separation driven by Faradaic reactions, we reconcile conflicting experimental observations of diamond-like phase patterns in micron-sized platelets and surface-controlled patterns in nanoparticles. Elastic analysis predicts this morphological transition for particles whose a-axis dimension exceeds the bulk elastic stripe period. We also simulate a rich variety of non-equilibrium patterns, influenced by size-dependent spinodal points and electro-autocatalytic control of thermodynamic stability. The morphology of two-phase coexistence in single crystals of the battery material LiFePO 4 has been the subject of much debate since its discovery over two decades ago Such a dramatic reversal of fortune has drawn attention to this system as a model for studying the role of phaseseparation in electrochemical systems, and spurred the development of sophisticated imaging techniques designed to image the phase state of single crystals. Observations of the morphology include stripes Here, with the help of phase-field modeling, we show that elastic strain energy leads to significant morphological differences between nano and micro-sized particles. Whereas the equilibrium morphology of nanoparticles is controlled by elastic interaction between particle surfaces, that of microparticles is controlled by bulk elasticity. There Figure is a stress-induced transition that depends on the size and aspect ratio of the particle, around 250 nm for standard platelet LiFePO 4 particles, and the size-dependent nonequilbirium morphology is further influenced by driven intercalation reactions. Previously, we showed that equilibrium phase separation in finite-size particles involves stripes, whose wavelength scales with the square root of particle size L c along the c-axis where γ is the FePO 4 /LiFePO 4 interfacial energy and ∆f is the free energy difference between the homogeneous and the elastically phase-separated states. Equation 1 is plotted in Fig. Although the stripe period is determined by L c , the size of the particle along the c-axis, the size L a along the a-axis determines whether the stripes fit in the particle. Thus the aspect ratio L c /L a plays an important role in determining phase boundary morphology. In We perform simulations using the same depth-averaged reaction-limited model Fig. In contrast, the microparticles in Fig. There is a clear morphological asymmetry between charging and discharging in the micron-size particles which can be seen in Figs. Another cause of asymmetry is the concentration dependence of the exchange current The lithiated diamond core morphology This thin wetting layer of lithium present at the side facets is responsible for charge/discharge symmetry at the nanoscale. It was first predicted by ab initio calculations A key difference between the nano and micro regimes not captured by our model is tendency for fracturing in micron particles Another neglected effect is surface diffusion, recently identified as an important phenomenon in LiFePO 4 In conclusion, without making any changes to our singleparticle intercalation model other than varying the particle size, we have been able to reconcile many of the conflicting reports in literature of the near-equilibrium twophase morphology in LiFePO 4 . The morphology is largely controlled by the surfaces in nanoparticles and by elastic strain energy in the micron-sized particles. The transition between the two regimes depends on the particle aspect ratio and occurs when the elastically controlled stripe period becomes smaller than the size of a particle along its a-axis. Complex two-phase morphologies become possible in the micron regime, including asymmetry between charge and discharge. The lithiated diamond core is a common equilibrium morphology that tends to minimize elastic energy in micron-sized particles. August 21, 2018 