Rheological measurements of model colloidal gels reveal that large variations in the shear moduli as colloidal volume-fraction changes are not reflected by simple structural parameters such as the coordination number, which remains almost a constant. We resolve this apparent contradiction by conducting a normal mode analysis of experimentally measured bond networks of the gels. We find that structural heterogeneity of the gels, which leads to floppy modes and a nonaffine-affine crossover as frequency increases, evolves as a function of the volume fraction and is key to understand the frequency dependent elasticity. Without any free parameters, we achieve good qualitative agreement with the measured mechanical response. Furthermore, we achieve universal collapse of the shear moduli through a phenomenological spring-dashpot model that accounts for the interplay between fluid viscosity, particle dissipation, and contributions from the affine and non-affine network deformation. Introduction -Colloidal gels are soft matter with disordered structure and slow dynamics due to short-range, attractive inter-particle forces The low-frequency elasticity of colloidal gels has been predicted from pair potential interactions and microstructure in a few instances. The linear elastic modulus of fractal cluster gels has been modeled by a microrheological approach, in which the elastic modulus is inversely proportional to the fractal cluster radius and the mean-squared localization length of colloids in the gel. The localization length can be predicted by summing over the hierarchy of normal modes of the fractal cluster Here we address these gaps by presenting a theoretical framework to not only compute the frequency-dependent linear viscoelastic modulus of colloidal gels, but also reveal the physics behind the frequency, volume-fraction, and attraction strength dependence of the modulus, as a result of the interplay between floppy modes and mechanical stability, and between affine and nonaffine deformations. Our theory includes two parallel approaches to characterize the elasticity of colloidal gels. The first approach is a microscopic model, in which we take particle positions from measured 3D microstructures of a model colloidal gel and perform normal mode analysis. Harmonic springs are introduced between neighboring particles with a spring constant extracted from the interparticle potential in the presence of thermal fluctuations; viscous drag against the affinely-deforming fluid medium is also included in the model. This microscopic model predicts frequency-dependent shear moduli, showing a crossover from low frequency nonaffine deformations with low rigidity to high frequency affine deformation with high rigidity, in good qualitative agreement with our rheological measurements. The origin of this crossover is a collection of floppy modes, i.e., particle displacements that don't change bond lengths Experiment -The 3D structure of the colloidal gels is studied in conjunction with linear rheological characterization. We synthesize poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) colloids (radius a = 0.58μm ± 4%) that are sterically stabilized with a 10-nm layer of poly(12hydroxystearic acid) (PHSA). The colloids are dyed with fluorescent Nile Red and are suspended at various volume fractions (φ = 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.35, and 0.40) in a mixture of cyclohexyl bromide (CHB) and decalin (63:37 v/v). Non-adsorbing polystyrene (molecular weight MW = 900,000 g/mol, radius of gyration R g = 41 nm) is added at a dilute concentration (c/c * = 0.4 and 0.5, where c * is the overlap concentration of the depleting polymer) to induce a short-ranged depletion attraction that leads to gelation. Charge screening is provided by adding 1μM tetrabutylammonium chloride (Debye length = 730 nm, zeta potential ≤ 10 mV) to the gels. Gels are allowed to quiescently equilibrate for 30 minutes prior to imaging and rheological characterization. Figure The radial distribution function, g(r), and the coordination number distribution, P (z), are directly computed using the location of the particles in 3D. The g(r) for gels with c/c * = 0.4 and c/c * = 0.5 are plotted in Fig. Microscopic Model -We model colloidal gels as disordered spring networks. Particle positions are taken from 3D confocal images of the gels, and springs are added to pairs of particles in contact with one another. Additionally, we treat the fluid medium as moving affinely (i.e., homogeneous deformation field) in response to the external stress, allowing us to approximate the complex effects of the hydrodynamics where rij is the unit vector pointing from particle i to its bonded neighbor j, u i is the displacement of particle i from its equilibrium position, u aff i is the affine displacement which is (Λ-I)•r i for a particle with equilibrium position r i under deformation gradient Λ, η f = 0.0025 Pa • s is the fluid viscosity, ω is the frequency of the driving force, and k eff the effective spring constant. In order to obtain the spring constant, we start from the Asakura-Oosawa potential for depletion interaction where r is the distance between the centers of the two particles. Additionally, repulsive electrostatic forces are present, leading to a total potential U (r), as described in the SI. While this interaction is not harmonic, given that the depth of this potential is ≈ 5.7 k B T (c/c * = 0.4) and ≈ 7.9 k B T (c/c * = 0.5), thermal fluctuations cause the distance between the pair of particles to explore a significant portion of this potential well. Thus, instead of taking the curvature of U (r) at the minimum, the effective spring constant should be extracted from the thermal fluctuations of the pair distance through a fluctuationdissipation approach as described in the SI, resulting in an effective spring constant that accommodates the nonlinearity of the pair interaction over thermal fluctuations in the pair separations: where r 2 , r 2 are evaluated over all possible bonded separation lengths, 2a ≤ r ≤ 2 (a + R g ) for an isolated pair with Boltzmann factor e -U (r)/k B T . This results in spring constants of 9.2 × 10 -5 N/m and 1.8 × 10 -4 N/m for depletant concentrations c/c * of 0.4 and 0.5, respectively. In Fig. This model permits the direct calculation of the mode structure of the several thousand particles in the CLSM scan (Fig. This spring network model recovers the rheological shear response without any free parameters, as shown in Fig. The upper limit frequency of this regime is where the fluid drag is comparable to the nonaffine shear modulus, as we discuss more below. In the third regime, which corresponds to intermediate frequencies, shear moduli increase somewhat sublinearly in frequency, displaying nontrivial behavior as nonaffinity is reduced. This is the regime accessible via the rheometer, and good qualitative agreement is found between direct measurements and the spring model developed from the scans as shown in Fig. Similar types of nonaffine-affine crossovers have been discussed theoretically in the context of disordered spring networks near isostaticity Phenomenological Spring-Dashpot Model -The agreement between our microscopic model and the rheological data suggests a phenomenological picture as shown in Fig. Adding up these contributions, the total shear modulus is Taking the real part of this equation and assuming that η c ω G A , we have which suggests that our rheological data G (ω) can be collapsed into a master straight line. To obtain this collapse, we use G A from a simple estimate that all bonds are in random orientations in the network (see SI for derivation), and G NA from the low-frequency plateau in G (ω) data (computed as average G (ω) for ω < 0.2 rad/s). We extract η c through the following procedure. From the imaginary part of Eq. ( Conclusions and Discussion -We propose a theoretical framework to understand mechanical properties of colloidal gels, including a method to compute frequency dependent linear shear modulus G (ω) from observed microstructures, and a phenomenological spring-dashpot model that collapses G (ω) into a master line for different φ and c/c * . Our theory is based on analyzing normal modes of the colloidal gel structure as a spring network, which exhibits a large number of floppy modes due to the structural heterogeneity, and gives rise to dramatically different static shear moduli at different φ and c/c * . The static shear modulus, which involves nonaffine deformations of the network, gives way to a much higher affine shear modulus as a result of viscous drag of the fluid as frequency increases. The affine shear modulus displays a much smaller spread as a function of φ and c/c * , because it is not sensitive to the structural heterogeneity. Our computational model, without any free parameters, accurately predicts the range of moduli observed, roughly how they vary between samples of different particle and depletant densities, and their sub-linear dependence on frequency. Detailed characterization of the heterogeneous network structure, especially at larger scales which is important in understanding the low frequency shear modulus, and how that affects the gelation transition, as well as how we can control the heterogeneity in experiment and thus tune mechanical response of gels, may be interesting questions in future studies Note that this calculation is done using a one dimensional potential. Extending it to three dimensions will lead to a geometric factor of O(1), but this correction is negligible for small fluctuations which is the case of our interest. More generally, because the external force of the rheometer is applied at finite frequency, we could consider finite-time correlations (via Fourier transform) to determine a frequency-dependent spring constant. However, since the thermal equilibration time is short compared to the periods explored in the rheometer, the force experienced is effectively constant in time. Thus, to good approximation k eff (ω) ≈ k eff (0), as used in the main text. This result coincides with that predicted by the equipartition theorem. However, the above approach has the added utility of accounting for nonlinear potentials, demonstrating that the thermal fluctuations root the effective interaction in the long-range features of the electrostatic and depletion interactions rather than the shortrange hard-wall repulsion. Appendix C: Calculating frequency dependent shear moduli from microstructures We obtain positions of particles within the 30.72μm × 30.72μm×25.08μm scan window via confocal microscopy. As discussed in the main text, we model the particle dynamics as the following equation of motion Within our scan window, we fix the particles within a single bond length of two opposing sides to undergo uniform shear strain at fixed frequencies. Each type of strain can be written in terms of a deformation gradient Λ such that the affine displacement of each particle r i is u aff i ≡ (Λ -I) • r i . Boundary particles are assumed to follow the affine displacements. We can combine these displacements into a single vector of all the boundary displacements, u B . Internal particles have displacements u I which can be nonaffine, such that the total force on each internal particle, as given in Eq. (C1), is zero (neglecting the small inertial term). We can use Eq. (C1) to relate the forces to the displacements via the following matrix equation. where D is the dynamical matrix from the first term in Eq. (C1) and we have separated it into boundary and inner parts, and drag force is included as a second term. At finite frequencies, this matrix equation is exactly solvable for any given u B , allowing us to obtain both the nonaffine displacements in the interior u I and the forces f B on the boundary particles necessary for the shearing motion. At zero frequency, there is a possibility of internal zero modes, leaving the interior displacements not fully defined but not affecting the boundary forces. Dividing the total boundary force by the area of the boundary, we find the stress induced by the given shear strain. The real and imaginary parts of the ratio of stress to strain are the storage and loss moduli, G (ω), G (ω). We average over the components of shear moduli obtained from a full Cartesian basis (σ xy , σ yz , σ zx ). At low frequencies, the nonaffine displacements approach a welldefined limit, which minimizes elastic energy. This limit is finite for most samples we studied, leading to a lowfrequency plateau in G (ω), and vanishes only for some low density samples. As frequency increases, each particle experiences an increasing drag force that inhibits nonaffine deformations, so that the deformation becomes increasingly affine. At high frequencies, the displacements achieve the affine limit, again leading to a (much higher) plateau in the storage modulus. In this section we derive the affine limit of shear moduli [Eq. and the resulting elastic energy in volume V is where G is the shear modulus. Next we consider this elastic energy as coming from stretching bonds between colloidal particles and obtain a simple estimate for G in the affine limit. The total number of bonds in volume V for a colloidal gel with volume fraction φ and mean coordination number z is given by where a is the particle radius. The elastic energy of one bond (of length 2a) in direction (θ, ψ) in polar coordinate, under the affine strain in Eq. ( Averaging over all solid angles we find The total elastic energy in volume V is then the contribution of all bonds, Equaling the above quantity with the continuum elastic-ity expression (D2) we find the affine shear moduli which is Eq.( 