Romano et al. [2017a], in the considered study, discussed the different constitutive models proposed by Eringen according to their abilities to give well-posed nonlocal boundary value problems that admit exact solutions. They concluded:  A nonlocal field problem formed based on Eringen's constitutive model admits a unique solution only if the nonlocal field fulfils constitutive boundary conditions (formed in Romano et al. [2017a]).  The paradoxes of the nonlocal results of previous studies stem from the incompatibility between the constitutive boundary conditions and equilibrium conditions imposed on the nonlocal field.  The fully nonlocal elasticity model secretes ill-posed nonlocal field problems, which admit no solutions.  The local/nonlocal mixture elasticity renders well-posed nonlocal field problems, but only if the local component is a strictly positive fraction of the mixture. The problem will anyway tend to illposedness when this fraction tends to vanish. Here, we comment against these arguments and demonstrate that:  No exact solution is exist for any nonlocal boundary value problem formed by any of Eringen's nonlocal constitutive laws.  The nonlocal boundary value problem formed by Eringen's model admits no exact solution even if the constitutive boundary conditions defined by Romano et al. [2017a] are fulfilled.  No physical meaning of the constitutive boundary conditions defined by Romano et al. [2017a] since the original problem has no solution. The constitutive law of Euler-Bernoulli beams can be written in the general form where ( ) is an attenuation function. is the beam curvature. This nonlocal constitutive law may depend on a strongly singular kernel which gives the "fully nonlocal" constitutive law with the form: An alternative kernel, which is weakly singular, can be considered where ( ) is the Dirac delta function. The substitution of the kernel (4) into (1) gives the "local/nonlocal mixture" constitutive law It is evident that the local/nonlocal mixture constitutive law is a special case of the fully nonlocal constitutive law with the constitutive boundary conditions The differential fully nonlocal constitutive model is recovered when = 0: with the constitutive boundary conditions: To demonstrate this, let us consider the equilibrium differential equation for the elastostatic of Euler-Bernoulli beams modeled using Eringen's model: where ( ) is the applied transverse load. ( ) is the bending field. A general solution of equation ( where and are constants to be determined using the equilibrium boundary conditions. and are homogeneous and particular solutions, respectively. According to equations ( and into (5): It is clear that there are no exact solutions for equations ( Next, it is demonstrated that the right-hand sides of equations ( What about the constitutive boundary conditions ( For the demonstration and without loss of generality, let us consider a simple case of a beam subjected to point force (F) and moment (M), i.e. = 0 and ( ) = ( ) = F( -) + M. Consequently, the local/nonlocal mixture constitutive model (equations ( with the constitutive boundary conditions: For a constant beam stiffness, , a general solution of equation ( where and are two constants that shall be determined by applying the constitutive boundary conditions (equation ( To examine the validity of the obtained solution from the differential local/nonlocal mixture constitutive model, which satisfied the constitutive boundary conditions (equation ( By performing the integration, the bending field from the local/nonlocal mixture constitutive law is obtained as follows: It is clear that the bending moment ( ) obtained from the nonlocal constitutive law is nonlinear due to two exponential terms in equation ( It is interesting to observe that the nonlocal constitutive law secretes two exponential terms in each of the curvature function ( ( )) and the moment function ( ( )), as presented in equations ( These exponential terms form nonlinear expressions of the beam curvature and moment with unavoidable singularities of the curvature and moment fields and their derivatives. For the fully nonlocal constitutive law, It follows from the previous discussion that the nonlocal boundary value problem formed using any of Eringen's nonlocal constitutive laws suffers of (1) an inconsistency between the equilibrium equation and the nonlocal constitutive law (2) and a singularity of the nonlocal fields. Given these observations, the question about the possibility of the total elimination of the inconsistency revealed in equation ( Now, let us examine the possibility of eliminating the inconsistency revealed in equation ( 