We find that the recently developed self consistent and appropriately normed (SCAN) metageneralized gradient approximation, which has been found to provide highly accurate results for many materials, is, however, not able to describe the stability and properties of phases of Fe important for steel. This is due to an overestimated tendency towards magnetism and exaggeration of magnetic energies, which we also find in other transition metals. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations 1 are a central tool in condensed matter physics, chemistry, and materials science. This utility is the result of the availability of sufficient accuracy in tractable approximate functionals. This enables predictive calculations of properties of interest and elucidations of underlying mechanisms of physical behavior. Therefore the development of new practical functionals that improve the accuracy, and therefore the range of behaviors and materials that can be studied with DFT calculations, is of great interest. Steel is arguably the most important industrial material. Annual production exceeds 1.7 billion metric tonnes. Steels are complex materials whose properties are controlled by microstructure. These microstructures are what provides steel with desirable combinations of ductility, toughness and tensile strength. These microstructures come from balances between different phases mainly in the Fe-C phase diagram. This has posed ongoing challenges to density functional calculations. Early on it was found that the otherwise highly successful local (spin) density approximation (LDA), cannot describe Fe. In particular, it was shown that the LDA predicts a non-magnetic fcc ground state for Fe, with the ferromagnetic bcc structure lying higher in energy. An important step was the development of generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functionals, Therefore, it is very reasonable to assume that functionals that incorporate additional known exact properties of the inhomogeneous electron gas will at least on average improve the description of atoms, molecules and solids. A significant recent development along these lines was the construction of a strongly constrained and appropriately normed (SCAN) functional. The SCAN functional satisfies exact constraints, including importantly the Lieb-Oxford lower bound for the exchange energy, The measured saturation magnetizations of Fe, Co and Ni are 2.22 μ B , 1.72 μ B and 0.62 μ B , on a per atom basis. Fig. The above results point to a surprising degradation of the predictions of SCAN relative to PBE in describing magnetism in transition metals, and suggest caution in the use of this functional for predicting magnetic properties of materials. This may perhaps be due to the challenge of obtaining the itinerant physics of systems like Fe with multiple partially occupied d-orbitals, and at the same time reproducing correct physics of atoms, including cancellation of self-interaction. In any case, we hope that the above results may motivate further work to develop improved meta-GGA functionals, particularly functionals that satisfy known constraints, from the inhomogeneous electron gas, including the many constraints satisfied by SCAN, and possibly additional constraints, and at the same time predict accurate magnetic properties of metals. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Award Number de-sc0019114. We are grateful for helpful discussions with Guangzong Xing.