Interplay between superconductivity, spin-orbit coupling and magnetic field can lead to realisation of the topologically non-trivial states which in finite one dimensional nanowires are manifested by emergence of a pair of zero-energy Majorana bound states. On the other hand, in two dimensional systems the chiral edge states can appear. We investigate novel properties of the bound states in a system of mixed dimensionality, composed of one-dimensional nanowire connected with twodimensional plaquette. This setup could be patterned epitaxially, e.g. using heterostructure analogous to what has been reported recently by F. Nichele et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 136803 (2017). We study this system, assuming either its part or the entire structure to be in topologically nontrivial superconducting state. Our results predict delocalisation of the Majorana modes, upon leaking from the nanowire to the nanocluster with some tendency towards its corners. Recent nanotechnological progress allows for fabrication of artificial nanostructures Proximity-induced superconductivity combined with the magnetic field and the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) drives the system from its topologically trivial to nontrivial superconducting phase Emergence of the degenerate Majorana modes from the Andreev bound states has been also reported in hybrid structures, comprising the quantum dots side-attached to the topological superconducting nanowires In one-dimensional structures the Majorana quasiparticles localise at the sample boundaries In general, realisation of the MBS might not be restricted solely to systems with simple geometries The paper is organised as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the microscopic model and present computational details. In Sec. III, we describe the numerical results obtained for each constituent and for the entire hybrid structure. Beyond the scope of numerical calculations, we also described the proposal for experimental verification of out theoretical predictions (Sec. IV). Finally, we summarise the results in Sec. V. The nanostructure shown in Fig. where t denotes the hopping integral between nearestneighbour sites and c † iσ (c iσ ) describes creation (annihilation) of electron on i-th site with spin σ. In general, the chemical potential μ i can be tuned in-situ by some external gate voltage. For simplicity, however, we assume it to be constant over the entire 2D plaquette (∀ i∈2D μ i = μ 2d ) and in the 1D nanowire (∀ i∈w μ i = μ w ). We assume the magnetic field h to be parallel along the wire and neglect any orbital effects accounts for the proximity induced on-site pairing, where ∆ is the uniform energy gap in the system. The spinorbit coupling (SOC) is given by [57-60] where σ i are the Pauli matrices and λ stands for the Rashba potential. Since the nanowire is oriented along x axis, only the second part of SOC term survives. Hamiltonian H of the hybrid structure can be diagonalised by the Bogoliubov-Valatin transformation where γ n , γ † n are the new quasi-particle fermionic operators and u inσ , v inσ are the corresponding eigenvectors. From this transformation (4) we get the Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) equations where H ijσ = -tδ i,j -(μ i + σh)δ ij is the single-particle term, D ij = ∆δ ij refers to the superconducting gap, and -1 π Im c iσ |c † iσ . In the present case we have where the spectral weights refer to probability of the n-th quasiparticle energy and spin σ to exist at i-th site of the system In what follows we study the hybrid consisting of N = N x × N y + N w sites, comprising N x × N y sites of the 2D-plaquette and N w sites in of 1D-nanowire. For numerical computations we choose ∆/t = 0.2 and λ/t = 0.15. In presence of the spin-orbit coupling and the Zeeman effect the on-site electron pairing evolves into the inter-site (p-wave) superconducting phase where W is half of the bandwidth (equal to 2t and 4t for 1D and 2D system, respectively). Upon increasing the magnetic field h, the superconducting gap closes at h c and reopens when entering the topological region. Our calculations are done for the finite-size system, therefore the quasiparticle spectra are discretised. As a useful guide-to-eye, in panels (a) of Figs Here, we briefly describe the quasiparticles for each component of the hybrid structure separately. Let us start with the 1D chain. For ∀ i μ w = -2.0t and assuming the magnetic field h = 0.35t the nanowire would be in its non-trivial topological state. Let's now focus on properties of the plaquette. Fig. Let us first consider the case, when only part of our hybrid setup is in the topologically non-trivial superconducting phase. This can be realised e.g. for the chemical potential μ 2D = μ w = -2t (Fig. We now describe the results for the system, in which both 1D and 2D regions are in non-trivial topological phase. This situation can be achieved by fine-tuning FIG. Spectrum of the plaquette-nanowire hybrid as a function of μ2D for various sizes of 1D and 2D components (as indicated) obtained for h/t = 0.25 and μw/t = -2. the site-dependent chemical potentials. For instance μ w = -2t and μ 2D = -4t yield a transition to topological phase of the entire system at h c = 0.2t. Numerical results for this case are shown in Fig. It is worth noting that both parts of the system have comparable topological gap. Due to existence of the common topological non-trivial state, all the in-gap states tend to be localised at the sample edges. The quasiparticle state appearing at zero energy is predominantly localised in the right hand end of the wire [Fig. Role of finite size effects. -Here, we address influence of the finite-size of our hybrid structure. In Fig. Nanowire coupled to plaquette's corner -We have checked numerically, that spatial patterns of the MBS leaking from 1D to 2D parts do not much depend on a particular location of the contact point between these constituents. In Fig. Quasiparticles of the topologically non-trivial superconducting state appearing at zero energy at boundaries of one and two-dimensional parts in our hybrid structure could be experimentally probed by the scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). Its low-energy and spinpolarised version, relying on the selective equal-spin Andreev reflection (SESAR), has been proposed Let us briefly explain how such SESAR spectroscopy FIG. could probe the spatial distribution of the localised and delocalised Majorana quasiparticles in our hybrid structure. By applying the voltage V between the conducting STM tip and the superconducting nanowire-plaquette system there would be induced the charge transport of a given spin σ carriers. On microscopic level, electrons arriving from the STM tip would be converted into the inter-site pairs, reflecting holes of the same spin polarisation back to the tip. The resulting current can be expressed by the Landauer-Büttiker formula where the transmittance for a given pair of the neighbouring sites is 2 with Γ σ N denoting the spin-dependent hybridisation between the STM tip and individual sites of our hybrid structure. We assume it to be uniform, which should be reasonable assumption as long as distance between the STM tip and the probed system was kept constant. At low temperatures the conductance simplifies to Fig. V ) obtained at zero bias V = 0. Each point corresponds to the central place between the neighbouring sites i and i + 1 of the entire hybrid structure. We clearly see that this polarised zero-bias conductance is strongly enhanced near the localised Majorana mode at the end of nanowire and can also detect its delocalised partner, whose spectral weight is smeared along the boundaries of 2D-plaquette. Additionally, it should be noted that the magnitude of spin polarised conductance is locally 100 times lower in plaquette than in nanowire. Other method for probing the delocalised mode could be based on measurements of the edge currents We have investigated quasiparticle spectra of the hybrid system, comprising the 1D-nanowire attached to the 2D-plaquette both proximitized to the s-wave superconductor. Depending on the electron energies in these constituents (which should be tunable by external gate potentials), the spin-orbit interactions along with the magnetic field could induce the topologically non-trivial superconducting phase, either (i) only in the nanowire or (ii) in the entire setup. Selfconsistent numerical determination of the quasiparticle spectra has revealed, that under such circumstances the zero-energy Majorana quasiparticles would be (i) localised near the ends of 1Dnanowire, or (ii) one of them would leak into the plaquette region. For the latter case we have inspected the spatial profile of the delocalised Majorana mode and found its signatures distributed along boundaries of the 2Dplaquette, with some preference towards its corners. We have shown that, spatial profiles of both the localised and delocalised Majorana quasiparticles could be probed by the polarised scanning tunnelling measurements, where such quasiparticles would be detectable via the Andreev scattering mechanism. Here proposed hybrid structure (and similar ones) could open new perspectives for studying the topological superconducting phase in complex geometries of mixed dimensionality and might shed an insight into itinerancy of the emerging Majorana modes After the initial version of this manuscript has been submitted for refereeing, we became aware of recent experimental evidence for the delocalised Majorana modes in Fe islands deposited on Re superconducting substrate 