We describe a theoretical and computational framework for adiabatic shear banding (ASB) and dynamic recrystallization (DRX) in polycrystalline materials. The Langer-Bouchbinder-Lookman (LBL) thermodynamic theory of polycrystalline plasticity, which we recently reformulated to describe DRX via the inclusion of the grain boundary density or the grain size as an internal state variable, provides a convenient and self-consistent way to represent the viscoplastic and thermal behavior of the material, with minimal ad-hoc assumptions regarding the initiation of yielding or onset of shear banding. We implement the LBL-DRX theory in conjunction with a finite-element computational framework. Favorable comparison to experimental measurements on a top-hat AISI 316L stainless steel sample compressed with a split-Hopkinson pressure bar suggests the accuracy and usefulness of the LBL-DRX framework, and demonstrates the crucial role of DRX in strain localization. Under severe loading conditions, adiabatic shear bands (ASBs) often develop in ductile metallic materials. The concentration of plastic deformation into narrow bands of the material, often preceding ductile fracture (e.g., Numerical representation of ASBs presents a major challenge because of the short length and time scales involved. Mesh sensitivity issues naturally arise from direct finite-element implementations which impart a length scale equal to the element size in the shear band. Recent developments have made substantial progress in addressing these issues, through embedding the shearband width into the problem by non-local techniques The physical mechanisms underlying adiabatic shear localization pose a profound challenge very distinct from that on the numerical front; advances in numerical methods alone do not provide an understanding of ASB mechanisms, or a predictive description of the shear-banding process. There is growing evidence in the literature that dynamic recrystallization (DRX)the process by which fine, nano-sized grains with few or no dislocations form in the ASB -provides an additional softening mechanism and supplements the role of thermal softening in shear band initiation. DRX has been observed in conjunction with adiabatic shear localization in a broad range of metals and alloys, including titanium and titanium alloys (e.g., Numerous authors have developed hypotheses for the underlying cause of dynamic recrystallization. Important physical ingredients seem to be inadequately included in many of the existing models in the literature. Firstly, many of these theories do not account for energy balance, a crucial physical ingredient in a deforming material because of the input work of deformation and the thermal effects arising from the input work. Some of these theories (e.g., the MTS model used in where k 1 and k 2 are parameters, and is the total strain. The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( We recently proposed a minimal, thermodynamic description of DRX in polycrystalline solids during adiabatic shear localization The present paper is devoted to a finite-element implementation and verification of the LBL-DRX theory in simulations; the rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present an overview of the LBL-DRX theory of dislocation plasticity and dynamic recrystallization, and discuss the physical basis of the thermodynamic approach. We also propose a simple way to compute the Taylor-Quinney coefficient of a deforming polycrystalline material. We describe in detail the computational framework in Section 3, and the experiment on the 316L stainless steel in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes the computational results and demonstrates good agreement with experiments. We conclude with a brief summary in Section 6. A list of symbols used throughout the paper is included in Table In this section, we provide an overview of the LBL theory of dislocations and the recent extension we developed to describe dynamic recrystallization. The LBL theory Let σ ij and ̇ ij denote the Cauchy stress and total strain rate tensors, and let s ij and ėij denote their deviatoric counterparts. These are related to each other by (The repeated indices indicate the Einstein summation convention.) In polycrystalline metals, where the elastic strain is expected to be small, we decompose the total strain rate tensor additively into elastic and plastic parts, Plastic incompressibility, or the notion that plastic deformation preserves volume, implies that the plastic strain-rate tensor is trace-free, or Assuming isotropic elasticity, the total stress rate is then given by Here, μ is the shear modulus, and λ is the first Lamé parameter, related to μ and the Poisson ratio ν by λ = 2μν/(1 -2ν). In this study, we assume that the shear modulus is temperature-dependent: where μ 0 and D 0 are parameters with the dimensions of stress, and T 0 is a reference temperature. We also assume that the Poisson ratio ν is a constant, and that λ varies with the temperature accordingly. Define the deviatoric stress invariant Dislocation motion is governed by the Orowan relation, which says that the plastic strain rate is proportional to the dislocation density or dislocation line length per unit volume ρ, their average velocity v, and some atomic length scale a: The Orowan relation, as written in Eq. ( A dislocation moves when it hops from one pinning site to another. The distance l between pinning sites is related to the dislocation density ρ by l = 1/ √ ρ. We take the view that depinning is a thermally activated process with energy barrier e P and stress barrier s T , so that the pinning time τ P is given by Here, τ ∼ 10 -12 s, being the only relevant atomic time scale, is on the order of the inverse Debye frequency; we absorb any uncertainties in the length scale b into here. θ = k B T is the thermal temperature T in energy units, with k B being the Boltzmann constant. The stress barrier s T equals the shear stress needed to unpin a dislocation and move it by a fraction of the length scale a when the average separation between dislocations is l = 1/ √ ρ. The shear strain associated with this operation is a fraction of the quantity a/l = a √ ρ, so that it is given by the Taylor expression s T = μ T a √ ρ, where μ T = α T μ with α T being on the order of 0.1. Combining Eqs. ( which conveniently defines the dimensionless dislocation density ρ = a 2 ρ. It is useful to define the dimensionless plastic strain rate from the strain rate invariant One of the most important aspects of the LBL theory of dislocation plasticity is the compliance with the laws of thermodynamics, based upon which the steady-state defect densities and the evolution of state variables are derived. This is the place where the present theory diverges from traditional descriptions of polycrystalline plasticity and dynamic recrystallization. The deforming polycrystalline material is by definition in a nonequilibrium state because of the nonzero external work rate arising from deformation itself. The configurational degrees of freedom -those pertaining to the positions of atoms -fall out of equilibrium with the kinetic-vibrational degrees of freedom pertaining to the atoms' thermal motion, whose time scale given by the Debye frequency is often many orders of magnitude above the strain rate. As such, we partition the total energy density U tot and entropy density S tot into configurational (C) and kinetic-vibrational (K) contributions: Dislocations and grain boundaries (GBs) clearly belong to the configurational degrees of freedom. Denote by ξ the GB density, or the GB area per unit volume, and its dimensionless counterpart ξ = aξ. (The characteristic grain size d is related to the GB density by d = 1/ξ.) The configurational energy and entropy densities U C and U K can then be written as U D and S D are the energy and entropy densities associated with dislocations; their counterparts for GBs are U G and S G . U 1 and S 1 are the energy and entropy densities of all other configurational degrees of freedom. We implicitly assume that the contributions of dislocations and GBs to the entropy are independent, while there is a contribution U int from the interaction between dislocations and GBs to the total energy density. Define the effective temperature The first law of thermodynamics says that Because deformation at constant defect densities ρ, ξ and configurational entropy S C is by definition elastic Move on to the second law of thermodynamics, according to which Eliminating ṠC using the energy balance equation, one finds The Coleman-Noll argument These inequalities say that the time rates of change of the defect densities ρ and ξ change sign when U C at constant S C is a minimum. Once we write explicitly that where is the configurational free energy density, the requirement in ( A very generic assumption is that the energy density of dislocations U D and GBs U G increase linearly with the dislocation and GB densities, and that the interaction energy U int is bilinear in the defect densities; i.e., This defines the characteristic formation energies e D and e G for a dislocation line of length a and a GB of area a 2 , respectively, and the energy scale e N . The length scale a is therefore the minimum average separation between dislocation lines and between GBs, or the minimum length for which dislocation and GB densities are meaningful quantities, and should be roughly 10-20 atomic spacings. The entropies S D and S G can be computed by a simple counting argument detailed in, for example, As such, the steady-state defect densities are given by It is seen that whenever e D > e G and e N > 0, dynamically recrystallized grains with depleted dislocations correspond to the steady state. Of course, there needs to be a pathway, i.e., large enough strain rate, for the polycrystalline material to reach this DRX state to begin with. It is convenient to rescale the effective temperature χ and the defect energies e Energy is stored in dislocations and grain boundaries that are formed over the course of deformation. In order to express a direct connection between the rate at which mechanical work is done on the material and the rates at which defects are created or annihilated, the rates of change of the defect densities, ρ and ξ, are manifestly proportional to the plastic work rate σ ij ̇ pl ij = s ij ėpl ij , which is the only relevant scalar invariant with the dimensions of energy per unit volume per time. The equation for the dislocation density evolution towards the steady-state value ρss reads Here, the quantity where q is the dimensionless strain rate defined in Eq. ( where q r determines the onset of rate hardening, and κ 0 , κ r are hardening parameters. The evolution equation for the GB density is where κ d is a dimensionless GB storage parameter. Note that in contrast to our earlier work where d ss = a/ ξss is the steady-state grain size. The effective temperature χ increases as deformation induces configurational disorder, and saturates at some χ0 : with κ 2 being a dimensionless parameter. At saturation, ρss ≈ e -1/ χ0 , and the average separation between dislocation lines should be about 10a, in the spirit of the Lindemann melting criterion In the adiabatic approximation, we neglect the flow of heat within the material, and between the material and the surroundings. This is valid as long as heat is generated more quickly than the speed of heat conduction, and is a good approximation at sufficiently high strain rates. The Taylor-Quinney coefficient β is the fraction of plastic work converted into heat. c v is the heat capacity per unit volume of the material; it is related to the heat capacity per unit mass c p and the mass density ρM by c v = c p ρM ; in this study we assume temperature dependence of the form where c 0 and c 1 are constants. Incidentally, the thermodynamic description outlined in Section 2.3 provides a simple estimate of the Taylor-Quinney coefficient β, a long-standing challenge in the materials science and solid mechanics communities (e.g., where K is a non-negative thermal transport coefficient Suppose that this also holds true beyond the nonequilibrium steady state, by virtue of consistency. Then from which we directly read off the Taylor-Quinney coefficient Because thermal fluctuations of energy θ = k B T are insufficient to create dislocations and grain boundaries, θ e G e D χ χ 0 . As such, The present argument says that the Taylor-Quinney coefficient, or the fraction of plastic work expended in heating up the material, is entirely controlled by the state of its configurational disorder, increasing towards unity as the deforming material approaches the nonequilibrium steady state, at which all of the input work is dissipated as heat. To solve evolution equations, which include Eq. ( The implicit algorithm is as follows. Denote by Λ α the collection of state variables ρ, d, χ, and T at each element. At each time step t, we first perform an explicit update to make a best guess for the state variables at the next time step at t + ∆t: If t = 0, we perform an explicit update to compute the stress value σ ij at the next time step. Otherwise, we perform the following Newton-type iterative algorithm to compute the stress. If ∆ ij is the strain increment accrued through time ∆t, define ) is a function of σ kl (t + ∆t) and the state variables at time t + ∆t. σ ij (t + ∆t) is then found by setting R ij (σ kl (t + ∆t)) = 0. The iterative solution going from the nth to the (n + 1)-st iteration is where is the 4-by-4 Jacobian of the function R ij σ (n) kl (t + ∆t) defined above (no summation over the four possible pairs of kl-indices here), and δ ij,kl = 1 when (ij) = (kl) and 0 otherwise. Upon reaching sufficient accuracy for σ ij (t+∆t), we stop the iteration, and perform one final update for the state variables at time t + ∆t: using the trial values Λ * β (t + ∆t) obtained from Eq. ( The cylindrical hat-shaped sample geometry, first developed by In the experiment that we consider in this manuscript and also described in We present in this section the simulations results based on the traditional finite element method and the implicit algorithm presented in Section 3. Three finite element meshes have been used in this study, with element sizes h = 90, 40, and 20 μm in the shear section; two of these are shown in Fig. 12. 18. Figure (a) h = 90μm parameters are known. For example, its heat capacity, mass density, and the parameters associated with the shear modulus μ are well documented in the literature (e.g., To demonstrate the softening effect of dynamic recrystallization, we performed the simulation with "pseudo-steel", for which DRX is prohibited by setting κ d = 0, but whose material parameters are otherwise identical to those listed in Table To verify the position of the shear band, we show in Fig. , at the end of the experiment. Model prediction for the temperature rise in the ASB is given by the left panel Fig. Turn now to our predictions for microstructural evolution. Fig. This paper presents the first implementation of the thermodynamic theory of dislocation plasticity and dynamic recrystallization in a finite-element simulation framework. Using known parameters for steel, plus a small handful of tunable parameters with available order-of-magnitude estimates, we have been able to fit the experimental stress-strain behavior of 316L stainless steel that undergoes dynamic recrystallization, using only minimal assumptions. In so doing, we have also provided a simple estimate of the Taylor-Quinney coefficient. This serves as an indication of the validity and usefulness of the LBL-DRX theory. Our effort represents a first step in bridging between physical theories and numerical simulations; there remains substantial work to be done in this area, including more sophisticated finite-element implementations that address the issue of shear-band width and mesh dependency. We conclude with a plea for more detailed imaging and thermomechanical measurements of the recrystallization process, in order to shed light on the nature of ASBs and further validate the theory via a more rigorous constraint of parameters appropriate for steel and other materials. P Dislocation depinning energy barrier T , θ Thermal temperature, in Kelvins and energy units (θ = k B T ) s T Taylor stress barrier α T , μ T Taylor parameter, and effective shear modulus (μ T = α T μ) q Dimensionless plastic strain rate (= 2τ ėpl ) ν Dimensionless quantity s/s T e D Typical dislocation formation energy e G , ẽG Typical grain boundary energy and its rescaled version (ẽ G = e G /e D ) e N , ẽN Typical dislocation-grain boundary interaction energy and its rescaled version (ẽ N = e N /e D ) ρ, ρ Dislocation density and its dimensionless version (ρ = a 2 ρ) ξ, ξ Grain boundary density and its dimensionless version ( ξ = aξ) χ, χ Effective temperature in energy units and its dimensionless version ( χ = χ/e D ) χ 0 , χ0 Steady-state effective temperature and its dimensionless version ( χ0 = χ 0 /e D ) ρss , ξss , d ss Steady-state dimensionless dislocation density, dimensionless grain boundary density, and grain size U C , S C Configurational energy and entropy U K , S K Kinetic-vibrational energy and entropy