The pressure dependence of the order parameter in superfluid 3 He is amazingly simple. In the Ginzburg-Landau regime, i.e. close to T c , the square of the order parameter can be accurately measured by its proportionality to NMR frequency shifts and is strictly linear in pressure. This behavior is replicated for superfluid 3 He imbibed in isotropic and anisotropic silica aerogels. The proportionality factor is constrained by the symmetry of the superfluid state and is an important signature of the corresponding superfluid phase. For the purpose of identifying various new superfluid states in the p-wave manifold, the order parameter amplitude of superfluid 3 He-A is a useful reference, and this simple pressure dependence greatly facilitates identification. The pressure dependent superfluid In the GL limit, the magnitude of the initial slope ∆ω(P )/T c of the temperature dependence of the NMR frequency shift ∆ω(P, T ) = ∆ω(P )(1 -T /T c ) can be measured with high accuracy, provided the NMR magnet homogeneity is of sufficiently high quality. Comparisons between measurements of these frequency shifts in different superfluid phases can give confidence in the identification of the corresponding superfluid states. This procedure was first exploited by Osheroff 9 on the melting curve to show that the pure superfluid B phase is the isotropic state in comparison with the A phase as the axial state. A similar comparison of frequency shifts was used by Rand et al. The order parameter of superfluid Where d is a vector in spin space; m1 , m2 , and p are vectors in orbital space; and R μj is a relative rotation between the spin and orbital degrees of freedom. According to Ginzburg-Landau theory, for temperatures just below the second order thermodynamic transition to the superfluid state, the free energy, f , in zero magnetic field can be represented phenomenologically as an expansion in terms of invariants of the order parameter neglecting the dipole energy. Here, A † and A T are, respectively, the Hermitian conjugate and transpose of A. There are five fourth-order terms for which the coefficients, β i , determine the stable superfluid states. In the weak-coupling limit we have, The normal, single-spin density of states at the Fermi energy is N(0); k B is the Boltzmann constant; and ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function. For the weak-coupling, pure superfluid the isotropic state, i.e. the B phase, is the most stable of all the p-wave states. The existence of the A phase at high pressure is a consequence of strong-coupling, expressed as a pressure dependence of the β i coefficients deviating from their weak-coupling values, proportional to T c /T F in leading order The combinations that are relevant here are those that determine the free energy for a specific superfluid phase, f γ , and the corresponding order parameter amplitudes, i.e. the maximum energy gaps, ∆ γ , where γ represents A, B, or P phases where k is the dimensionality of the superfluid phase: respectively, 1, 2, and 3, for P , A, and The energy gaps and heat capacity jumps in the GL limit are related to the β i parameters as: where ∆C γ is the heat capacity jump at T c from the normal state to the corresponding superfluid phase, γ, and α ′ is the temperature derivative of α. According to Leggett 2 , the longitudinal resonance frequencies, Ω γ , susceptibilities, χ γ and root mean square order parameter amplitudes, Ψ γ , can be compared for A and B phases, which we extend to a comparison of the A and P phases as follows: The ratios of Ψ 2 , can be replaced by the ratios of the square of the maximum energy gaps, From Eq. 8 and 9 this leads to, The relationships given in Eq. 8 and Eq. 10 can be used for phase identification in different regimes. At high pressure, near the PCP, we can take β B = β A for pure superfluid It is illuminating to express these relationships directly in terms of the transverse NMR frequency shifts. With transverse NMR we can identify the frequency shifts for energetically stable textures with correspondingly minimum or maximum dipole energy that we call dipole-locked or dipole-unlocked and are specified by choice of θ = ( l, Ĥ) and NMR tip angle β, where l is the quantization axis of angular momentum. These frequency shifts are expressed in terms of form factors, F γ (θ, β), and the Larmor frequency, ω L , At magnetic fields greater than the dipole field (≈ 3 mT), we can write Eq. 11 as, For the A phase For the B phase and for (dipole unlocked), For the polar phase It is most convenient to measure frequency shifts in the configurations: θ = π/2 and β = 0, for which F A = 1 (locked), F B = 4/5 (unlocked), and F P = 1 (locked). In these cases, from Eq. 10, 11, we have: The measured NMR frequency shifts relative to the A phase are twice the ratio of the corresponding heat capacity jumps, including strong coupling corrections. This fact could be useful since the frequency shifts are more easily and more precisely measurable than the heat capacity. The identification of A and B phases is well-established for pure Another approach is to scale the appropriate β parameters from their pure 3 He values Finally, it has been predicted 