We present a gradient-based optimization strategy to design broadband grating couplers. Using this method, we are able to reach, and often surpass, a user-specified target bandwidth during optimization. The designs produced for 220 nm silicon-on-insulator are capable of achieving 3 dB bandwidths exceeding 100 nm while maintaining central coupling efficiencies ranging from -3.0 dB to -5.4 dB, depending on partial-etch fraction. We fabricate a subset of these structures and experimentally demonstrate gratings with 3 dB bandwidths exceeding 120 nm. This inverse design approach provides a flexible design paradigm, allowing for the creation of broadband grating couplers without requiring constraints on grating geometry. Leveraging well-established CMOS technology, silicon photonics promises a low-cost and scalable solution to integrate photonic and electronic systems Two common solutions to this fiber packaging problem in silicon photonics are edge couplers and grating couplers. Edge coupling involves tapering waveguides that terminate at open facets. This process results in an expanded waveguide mode that better overlaps with the large fiber mode. Edge couplers can reach large coupling efficiency and bandwidth, with recent demonstration showcasing coupling efficiencies greater than -0.5 dB (90%) over more than 100 nm of bandwidth 3 . However, edge coupling restricts the location of input and output ports to the edge of the chip and requires additional fabrication post-processing and careful optical alignment Much work has gone into improving grating coupler efficiencies, including apodization schemes Owing to its ability to scale independently of the number of degrees-of-freedom, adjoint-based optimization has emerged as an alternative photonic element design method In this article, we present and apply the design approach to grating couplers on 220 nm silicon-on-insulator for a variety of target bandwidths. We fabricate and experimentally characterize a subset of the gratings. The experimental results demonstrate the desired large broadband behavior and follow similar trends to simulated performance. Verification of this inverse design approach to photonics design underscores the flexibility of this method toward fiber packaging and wideband applications. The grating couplers were designed using the gradientbased inverse design approach introduced in In our approach, the optimization is divided into two stages wherein the same optimization problem is solved but with different constraints on the permittivity distribution in a specified design region (i.e. the grating region). During the continuous stage, the permittivity distribution is allowed to vary continuously between air and silicon. The resulting structure is then converted into a binary grating by solving a combinatorial optimization problem. This binary grating is further optimized in the discrete stage in which the permittivity is restricted to either that of air or silicon. A minimum feature size is also enforced at this time to ensure fabricability. During optimization, the grating couplers are simulated in two dimensions (2D) using the finite-difference frequency-domain (FDFD) method 32 with 20 nm discretization, and the efficiencies of the final structures are verified using a finer discretization with the finitedifference time-domain (FDTD) method in Lumerical FDTD To optimize for broadband gratings, the coupling efficiencies of a given structure are evaluated at equally spaced wavelengths. The efficiencies are then averaged together to form an objective function that is minimized during the optimization process. Therefore, a target bandwidth can be achieved by the range of wavelengths simulated. Formally, the optimization problem is given by: minimize where m is the number of frequencies at which the structure is evaluated, E i is the electric field at ω i , J i is a total-field scattered-field (TFSF) Gaussian beam source, p is a vector that parametrizes the structure, (p) is the permittivity, and f i is equal to the coupling efficiency from the Gaussian beam into the fundamental waveguide mode. Multi-goal problems, such as optimizing for low back reflections, wavelength demultiplexing, or polarization insensitivity, can be achieved by adding additional terms to the objective function Each optimization took roughly 300 iterations, where each iteration requires approximately two function evaluations. The continuous stage was run until convergence or up to 100 iterations, whichever came first, and the discrete stage was run until convergence or up to 300 iterations, whichever came first. The discretization step takes under a minute and is therefore negligible with respect to the optimization time of the continuous and discrete stages. We empirically find that the last 50 iterations of each phase increases efficiency for every wavelength by less than 1%, and therefore the optimization could be stopped much earlier (i.e. use a less stringent convergence condition) to achieve a 50% reduction in iterations. Figure The relationship between the target bandwidth and bandwidth of the optimized gratings is shown in Figure The trade-off between bandwidth and efficiency is depicted in Figure We fabricated and characterized the fully-etched gratings of target bandwidths 40 nm, 100 nm, and 120 nm. While higher efficiencies can be realized with the partially etched structures, we elected to demonstrate the highbandwidth capabilities of our design algorithm with fullyetched gratings because of ease of fabrication. To enable characterization, each device consisted of two grating couplers, where one was used as an input coupler and the other as an output coupler. These 12 μm wide grating couplers were tapered to 500 nm waveguides over 215 μm. The tapered gratings were connected with a region of single-mode waveguide ranging in length from 10 μm to 2.3 mm in order to characterize waveguide losses. An SEM micrograph of the target 120 nm bandwidth grating is shown in Figure The devices were fabricated on 220 nm silicon-oninsulator (SOI) with a 2 μm buried oxide layer. ZEP-520A was spun at 5000 RPM for 50 s, followed by 2 min of curing on a 180 • C hotplate. A JEOL JBX-6300FS electron-beam lithography system and a transformercoupled plasma etcher were used to transfer the pattern to the device layer of the SOI sample. The plasma etch used a C 2 F 6 breakthrough step and a HBr/O 2 /He main silicon etch. The resist was stripped in an overnight solvent bath, followed by a HF dip. The devices were left air-cladded. grating coupler with target bandwidth of 120 nm. (Bottom) SEM micrograph of complete input/output coupler device with 12 μm wide waveguides tapering down to a single-mode waveguide of 500 nm, over 215 μm. This device has a single-mode waveguide length of 10 μm. Characterization of the devices was done in a fiberin/fiber-out measurement setup as depicted in Figure In order to ensure robust and repeatable alignment of the fibers, we implemented an automated scheme to determine the optimal fiber position. First the setup was set to S 1 S2 S3 S 4 configuration ( Si = 0, S i = 1), using the CW laser as the source. After hand-tuning the fiber placement, power measurements were fed back to a 3- S i = 1 indicates the state of a switch. The first configuration, S 1 S2 S3 S 4 , was used to align to the grating with the continuous-wave (CW) tunable laser source at 1550 nm. The positions of the fibers were optimized on a 3-axis closed-loop piezo stage (PZ), using an automated line-search scheme to maximize the power on a photodetector (PD), followed by adjustment of the polarization controller (PC). Next, a reference spectra of the supercontinuum (SC) source was taken by bypassing the sample with a single-mode path fiber (REF) in configuration S1 S 2 S 3 S4 . The spectra are recorded on an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA). Lastly, measurement of the coupling efficiency was obtained by using the setup S1 S2 S3 S4 , where light collected from the output grating was sent to the OSA for measurement. The polarization of the SC source is set through a linear polarizer (LP). The axes of both the CW and SC source are co-aligned to allow for identical setting of the PC. axis closed-loop piezo controller and a line-search algorithm was used to maximize power reading through the input/output system. After the optimization, the fiber polarization controller was adjusted to maximize the signal. This also sets the optimal polarization for the SC, as the axes of both the CW laser and SC polarizationmaintaining fibers are co-aligned. Next, in order to take a reference spectrum of the SC source, the setup is set to S1 S 2 S 3 S4 . Finally, the configuration is set to S1 S2 S3 S4 and the fiber-to-fiber measurement is obtained. Measured coupling efficiencies are obtained by subtracting the reference spectrum from the measured spectrum (in dB). Assuming input and output coupling efficiencies are equal, we divided the difference spectra by two. Waveguide losses were obtained through characterization of devices with varying singlemode waveguide lengths; measured waveguide losses were found to be 3.4 dB/mm. The measured coupling efficiency spectra from the devices with the shortest length of single-mode waveguide (10 μm) are shown in Figure Figure Two features to note between the simulated and experimental spectra are the observation of spectral shift (roughly 40 nm blue-shift) and the lack of multiple peaks in the measured spectra. From SEM micrographs, we observed a consistent overetch in our devices. We investigated the effect of this overetching by simulating the target 120 nm bandwidth grating with enlargement of the trench widths by 0, 4, 8, and 12 nm. The results of this study are shown in Figure Additionally, we extended our method beyond the range of operating parameters in In this paper, we demonstrated our fully-automated optimization method for the design of broadband grating couplers. These couplers designed for 220 nm SOI achieved 3 dB bandwidths exceeding 100 nm while maintaining central coupling efficiencies ranging from -3 dB to -5.4 dB, depending on partial-etch fraction. Fabricated devices demonstrate greater than 120 nm 3 dB bandwidths and agree with simulated coupling efficiencies, at the respective spectral centers, within 0.5 dB. This work provides support for the use of adjoint methods in the design of grating couplers, specifically for wideband applications.