A simple practical formula for the shear viscosity coefficient of Yukawa fluids is presented. This formula allows estimation of the shear viscosity in a very extended range of temperatures, from the melting point to 100 times the melting temperature. It demonstrates reasonable agreement with the available results from molecular dynamics simulations. Some aspects of the temperature dependence of the shear viscosity and diffusion coefficients on approaching the fluid-solid phase transition are discussed. Studies of static and dynamical properties of Yukawa systems constitute an important interdisciplinary topic with applications to strongly coupled plasmas, complex (dusty) plasmas, and colloidal suspensions. Significant efforts have been made over the years to understand the transport properties of such systems. In particular, this includes diffusion, viscosity, and thermal conductivity. Extensive numerical simulations have been performed and a large amount of accurate data for the transport coefficients exist. What is often required in practical situations is a simple and accurate tool to estimate the transport coefficients in a broad range of parameters. The main purpose of this article is to present a useful practical expression to estimate the shear viscosity coefficient of three-dimensional Yukawa fluids in a wide regime of coupling and screening. The proposed formula is shown to describe quite well (deviations are within ±10%) the available results from numerical simulations in a very broad temperature range, from the melting temperature to 100 times the melting temperature. It can be particularly useful in the context of complex (dusty) plasmas and related soft weakly dissipative systems. The Yukawa systems are characterized by the repulsion between point-like charged particles immersed into neutralizing background, which provides screening. The corresponding interaction potential (also known as the Debye-Hückel or screened Coulomb potential) is φ(r) = (Q 2 /r) exp(-r/λ), (1) where Q is the particle charge and λ is the screening length. In the limit λ → ∞ (i.e. screening is absent), the pure Coulomb interaction potential is recovered, corresponding to the one-component plasma (OCP) limit. is in a rather good agreement with the tabulated data in the regime κ 5. Here the constant α = (4π/3) 1/3 1.612 is the ratio of the mean interparticle distance ∆ = n -1/3 to the Wigner-Seitz radius a. The occurrence and location of a glass phase on the phase diagram of Yukawa systems have been investigated. Shear viscosity of single-component 3D Yukawa fluids has been extensively studied using MD simulations, 23-30 see in particular an overview in Ref. 31. Despite the apparent simplicity of the single-component Yukawa model, accurate determination of the shear viscosity by MD simulation is not trivial. This can be exemplified by the significant discrepancies in the results obtained over the years by different authors. The original data from Refs. 28 and 31 used in this work are plotted in Fig. where m is the particle mass and ω p = 4πQ 2 n/m is the plasma frequency. In Fig. Historically, the use of the plasma frequency ω p in presenting reduced transport coefficients of OCP and Yukawa systems [like in Eq. ( Reduced coefficient of shear viscosity ηR of Yukawa fluids versus the reduced coupling parameter Γ/Γm. Symbols correspond to the data tabulated in Refs. 28 and 31 (the notation is the same as in Fig. This form of the reduced viscosity coefficient is suggested by an elementary kinetic theory formula for viscosity, η ∼ nm v T , for a dense medium of particles with thermal velocities v T and a mean free path between collisions , which is of the order of the average interparticle distance. is shown in Figure More attention should be given to the strongly coupled regime not too far from the fluid-solid phase transition, where some theoretical predictions are available. Here, although the functional form F(x) can be system-dependent, certain universality has been previously suggested. For example, Vaulina et al. We can now combine the expressions for F 1 and F 2 in the following form, which then agrees with the individual expressions in their corresponding regimes of applicability and appropriately interpolates between them. The interpolation formula ( An alternative expression for the shear viscosity of Yukawa fluids can also be elaborated. Bastea proposed an accurate three-term fit to describe the behavior of the OCP fluid viscosity η * obtained in MD simulation in a wide range of coupling. This fit is shown by the red solid curve in Fig. where the subscript "m" stands again for the melting point and C is approximately constant. This coincides with the scaling proposed by Andrade for liquid metals at the melting point. where D is the diffusion coefficient of a sphere of radius R immersed in a medium characterized by the shear viscosity η. Applying the SE relation to atomistic scales (although this does not always works satisfactory, see Ref. 51 and references therein), we arrive at Dη(a/T ) = const, (11) where the characteristic interparticle separation a plays the role of the sphere radius R. Table which coincides (to within a numerical coefficient of order unity) with the expression obtained by Andrade using completely different arguments. A simple practical expression for the shear viscosity coefficient of 3D Yukawa fluids has been put forward. The proposed formula is applicable in a wide range of coupling and screening and demonstrates reasonable accuracy. The analyzed numerical results related to shear viscosity support the temperature scaling η ∝ √ T exp(B T m /T ) (at a constant density) on approaching the fluid-solid phase transition. In the context of complex (dusty) plasmas many experiments and simulations have been dealing with twodimensional (2D) mono-layers of particles. 