Unconventional superconductors are often characterized by numerous competing and even intertwined orders in their phase diagrams. In particular, the electronic nematic phases, which spontaneously break rotational symmetry and often simultaneously involve spin, charge and/or orbital orders, appear conspicuously in both the cuprate and iron-based superconductors. The fluctuations associated with these phases may provide the exotic pairing glue that underlies their high-temperature superconductivity. Helimagnet MnP, the first Mn-based superconductor under pressure In strongly correlated electron systems, the kinetic and interaction energies of electrons compete, which often couples the charge, spin, and orbital degrees of freedoms, resulting in a variety of complex quantum phases. Nematic order is one of the most important forms of intertwined order, which exists in both the two known families of high temperature superconductors -cuprates and iron-based superconductors. In iron pnictides, e.g. LaFeAsO and BaFe 2 As 2 Under pressure, the helical magnetic compound CrAs and MnP have been recently found to be the first Crand Mn-based superconductor, respectively -pol. -pol. The reference spectra were obtained on beam line 8.0.3 at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) dom in MnP could be highly interconnected. Therefore, MnP provides a novel playground to probe the relation between unconventional superconductivity, magnetism, and possibly nematicity in the vicinity of a helical spin order on a low-symmetry lattice. Resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSXS), which can be viewed as a combination of x-ray absorption (XAS) and x-ray emission (XES) spectroscopies with x-ray scattering, provides a direct and powerful probe of the ordering in 3d transition metal compounds anisotropy Figure We made an exhaustive search for scattering signals at the Mn L-edge along (0 0 L) at 20 K. By varying L, X-ray polarization, photon energy, and detection mode, we discovered resonance peaks at q 1 =(0 0 0.11634±0.00002), q 2 =(0 0 0.23470±0.00003), and q 3 =(0 0 0.35239±0.00004). q 2 and q 3 wavevectors approximately double and triple that of q 1 , respectively. Figure Next, we study the temperature dependences of the diffraction peaks. First, we take the (0 0 2) lattice diffraction peak as a reference. It does not show any observable temperature dependence across T S and down to 20 K (Fig. To comprehensively elucidate the nature of the three resonant peaks at q 1 , q 2 , and q 3 , we have plotted in Fig. Clearly, the resonant profiles of q 1 , q 2 , and q 3 are very different from each other in maximal intensity, resonant energy, and polarization dependence. For example, the resonant energies for the maximum peaks at q 1 , q 2 , and q 3 are 637 eV (π polarization), 648.2 eV (σ polarization), and 641.2 eV (π polarization), respectively. The maximal intensity at q 3 is ∼ 23 times weaker than that at q 2 , and the maximal intensity for q 2 is ∼30 times weaker than that of q 1 , based on the data of the resonance peaks taken with the same detector. The q-integrated resonant profiles are compared in Fig. . However, such an unequal charge distribution at different Mn sites could not be found in our LDA calculations shown in the supplementary materials. Instead, an orbital distribution with half the periodicity of the magnetic order can be explicitly obtained in the calculation. Here, we suggest that the hidden order must be a orbital density wave (ODW), which can be induced by the orbital redistribution in developing the double helical spin density wave. In a simple helically ordered state, it is well known that an orbital redistribution can be induced by spin-orbital coupling in the presence of the crystal field, and such an orbital redistribution only depends on | S q1 | With this coupling, there is a new phase in which < S α * q1,a >= 0 but < S α * q1,1 S α * q1,2 > = 0, which describes the locking of the magnetic fluctuations between the two helices. In general, this phase could exist slightly above T s , thus explaining the intriguing full development of the q 2 peak at a slightly higher temperature than the q 1 peak. The linear coupling between the ODW and This argument is generally known as "order by disorder" and has been used to explain the nematicity in FeAs-based superconductors in which a similar phenomenon has been observed in the parent compounds, e.g. BaFe 2 As 2 Since the spins lie in the ab plane in the double helical phase, the orbital moment should also be in the ab plane from the coupling H Q . This explains the observed polarization dependence of the q 2 peak and also suggests that the charge redistribution mainly occurs in the d (e) When T F 2 ≥ T≥ T F 1 , the ODW is fully developed and stops to grow with decreased temperature, while SDW domains continue to grow. There is regions with fluctuating spin order but without orbital order. (f) When T ≤ T F 1 , the spin order is fully developed. d xy orbitals (the orbital basis in the octahedral coordination with these two orbitals in the ab-plane is used here for the ease of explanation, while we note Mn ions are in a tilted and distorted octahedrons made of P ions). The observation of the weak q 3 peak also lends strong support to the presence of hidden ODW order since it represents the harmonics generated by the coupling between the ODW and the helical spin order. The intensity of the q 3 peak is less than 1/600 of that of the SDW peak, yet it saturates at a slightly higher temperature. This remarkable behavior suggests that the q 3 peak is also non-magnetic in nature. Moreover, since it is slightly stronger for π-polarized than σ-polarized incident photons (Fig. In Figs. A similar observation was made in Pr 0.6 Ca 0.4 MnO 3 , whose spin order correlation length is longer than its charge/orbital order correlation length, which was attributed to likely decoupling between spin and charge/orbital orders Our findings provide an unprecedented picture on the intricate interplay between spin and orbital orders in MnP, and show that intertwined ordering and nematiclike ordering is ubiquitous to the phase diagrams of unconventional superconductors, even in the case of low symmetry and incommensurate ordering. The extraordinary helical ODWs found here may provide a foundation for understanding the complex behaviors of spin/orbital order in helimagnets and correlated systems in general, and for understanding the unconventional superconductivity in MnP and other related materials. Canadian Light Source (CLS). In our experiment, the long direction of the needle-like MnP sample in RSXS experiment is along the b axis and the flat shiny surface is a (1 0 1) plane. We tilted the sample using a wedge with an angle of 48° in order to make the momentum transfer Q direction along the c axis and use (0 K L) as the horizontal scattering plane. In this way, the specular reflection background can be effectively suppressed. The experimental geometry is shown in Fig. Here we study the relationship between the magnetic period and the charge/orbital density period by density functional theory (DFT). Because the incommensurate ordering requires a large unit cell that is beyond our computing capability, a realistic calculation is currently unfeasible. Nevertheless, insight can be gained by using artificial commensurate lattice. Here, we design two antiferromagnetic (AF) states, one has the 1 × 1 × 2 supercell as shown in Fig. Our DFT calculations employ the projector augmented wave (PAW) method encoded in Vienna ab initio simulation package(VASP) 2-4 , and generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) 5 for the exchange correlation functional is used. Throughout this work, the cutoff energy of 600 eV are taken for expanding the wave functions into plane-wave basis. The number of these k points are 9 × 15 × 5 for 1 × 1 × 2 supercell case and 9 × 15 × 3 for 1 × 1 × 4 supercell case in the calculations of the magnetic structures. In the designed model, MnP is in antiferromagnetic states with spin alignment along the c axis. The local magnetic moments are indicated by arrowhead in Fig. In summary, the period of orbital order is half of the period of the magnetic order in MnP. Figure More data on the temperature dependence of the three resonance peaks, i.e., peak area as a function of temperature are shown in Fig. 