We investigate the osmotic (electrostatic) pressure acting on the proteinaceous shell of a generic model of virus-like particles (VLPs), comprising a charged outer shell and a metallic nanoparticle core, coated by a charged layer and bathed in an aqueous electrolyte (salt) solution. Motivated by the recent studies accentuating the role of multivalent ions for the stability of VLPs, we focus on the effects of multivalent cations and anions in an otherwise monovalent ionic bathing solution. We perform extensive Monte-Carlo simulations based on appropriate Coulombic interactions that consistently take into account the effects of salt screening, the dielectric polarization of the metallic core, and the strong-coupling electrostatics due to the presence of multivalent ions. We specifically study the intricate roles these factors play in the electrostatic stability of the model VLPs. It is shown that while the insertion of a metallic nanoparticle by itself can produce negative, inwarddirected, pressure on the outer shell, addition of only a small amount of multivalent counterions can robustly engender negative pressures, enhancing the VLP stability across a wide range of values for the system parameters. Encapsidation of non-biological cargo in viral proteinaceous capsids has attracted a lot of interest in recent years, connected with their role as (noninfectious) virus-like particles (VLPs) in applications such as gene transfer, drug delivery The interactions between the viral capsid and its native genomic cargo can include both non-specific and highly specific interactions, depending on the type of the virus. This consequently influences whether the encapsidation of artificial cargo can be achieved without help from nucleic acids, or whether oligonucleotides of a given length and specific sequence are needed for proper assembly The chemical and physical properties of the nonbiological VLP core play a major role in determining the efficiency of the formation of the proteinaceous shell around it, as well as in determining the VLP's overall stability and electrostatic properties The role of the bathing ionic solution conditions for the electrostatic stability of viruses and VLPs has also been studied in recent years Motivated by these developments and the relevance of electrostatic interactions for the stability of the VLP formation, we investigate the effects of multivalent cations and anions in an otherwise monovalent ionic bathing solution, in which a model VLP is formed. We formulate a theoretical approach that can take into account also the effects of the metallic nanoparticle core polarization due to the discontinuous jump of the dielectric constant at its surface in the presence of ionic screening, as well as the strong-coupling electrostatic effects generated by the presence of solution multivalent ions. In particular we address also the combined effect of dielectric images, due to the sharp increase of the dielectric constant at the metallic core surface, as well as the dielectric images which result in the inhomogeneous distribution of the salt that cannot penetrate inside the metallic core (see also the recent work in Ref. We model the metallic nanoparticle (NP) core as an ideally polarizable and electrostatically neutral sphere of radius R 0 , decorated with a coating layer of outer radius R 1 (representing, e.g., a polymeric layer such as the negatively charged polyethylene glycol used to cover encapsidated gold NPs When multivalent ions have a relatively large valency q (typically |q| > 2, as exemplified by polyamines where i l (•) and k l (•) are modified spherical Bessel functions of the first and second kind, respectively, P l (•) are Legendre polynomials, and we have defined r = |r|, r = |r |, and θ as the angle between r and r . The first term in Eq. ( The Green's function where U ii is the self-energy of the ith multivalent ion, giving its self-interaction with its own image charges; U ij is the contribution due to direct screened Coulomb interaction between distinct multivalent ions i and j and the cross interactions between these ions and their respective image charges; U σ i is the contribution due to interactions between the ith multivalent ion i and the two charged (inner and outer) shells, subscripted by α, β = 1, 2 for their radius and surface charge density; and U σσ is the contribution due to the interaction between the two charged shells. The image contributions to the ion-shell and shellshell interactions are systematically included in U σ i and U σσ . These contributions can explicitly be calculated as (see the Appendices) where r i = |r i |, r j = |r j |, and θ ij is the angle between r i and r j . In what follows, we shall focus on the effective electrostatic or osmotic pressure, P , acting on the viruslike (outer) shell due to the combined effect of screened Coulomb interactions between fixed charges on the outer and inner shells and their interactions with the multivalent ions, as expressed in the configurational Hamiltonian, Eq. ( where the bar represents the numerically evaluated (thermal) average over different equilibrium configurations of multivalent ions, V 2 = 4πR 3 2 /3 is the outer shell volume, and the partial derivatives are taken at fixed value of the total surface charge of the shell, Q 2 = 4πR 2 2 σ 2 . The net pressure on the outer shell can be written as where P DH is the baseline pressure acting on the outer shell in the absence of multivalent ions and P q , on the other hand, gives the pressure contribution explicitly stemming from the interactions of the shells with the multivalent ions, fully incorporating the interactions due to their respective salt/dielectric images produced by the metallic core (thus, P q = 0 when q = 0). The baseline pressure can be written as where P σ2σ2 > 0 is the pressure component arising from the self-energy of the outer shell and P σ2σ1 is the pressure component arising from the interaction of the outer shell charge with the fixed charge on the inner shell, both systematically accounting for salt/dielectric image effects produced by the metallic core. The two can be obtained explicitly as (see the Appendices) The multivalent-ion pressure P q can be written as where we have (see the Appendices) where sgn(•) is the sign function. We shall also discuss later the reference case of a model VLP with no NP core. This case helps discern the effects of image charges produced by the NP core from other factors. The corresponding expression for P DH and P q in this latter case are given in the Appendices. The configurational Hamiltonian, Eq. ( (3)-( Our model parameters include the radius R 0 of the NP core, the inner and outer shell radii R 1 and R 2 and their surface charge densities σ 1 and σ 2 , respectively, the multivalent-ion charge valency q, the inverse screening length κ (supplemented by the ionic densities n 0 and c 0 ), and the solvent dielectric constant, which we shall equate to that of water at room temperature, ε = 80. Our primary goal is to investigate the generic electrostatic properties of the model VLP with a metallic core in the presence of (positively and negatively charged) multivalent ions and, as such, structural details that may be present in actual experimental systems are largely ignored (see Section IV). In order to bring out the salient roles of image charges and multivalent ions, especially in the effective pressure they produce on the capsid (outer shell), we explore typical regions of the parameter space by fixing the values of system parameters that are of less immediacy to our analysis, i.e., the radii of the NP core and the two charged shells, the charge density of the capsid σ 2 , and vary the other parameters. In experiments with plant viruses (such as BMV, RC-NMV, or CCMV) encapsidating a single coated gold NP The surface charge density of the coating layer, σ 1 , is varied within the range σ 1 ∈ [0, 5] nm -2 , which is consistent with the values used or estimated in previous studies respect to sign inversions q → -q and σ 1,2 → -σ 1,2 . Though some of the numerical values listed above are adopted directly from the BMV experiments, other ranges of parameter values corresponding to other NPs and other viral capsids (such as CCMV) In Fig. As seen in the figure, the baseline pressure P DH (blue squares) acting on the outer shell in the absence of multivalent ions increases linearly with σ 1 , which is in accordance with Eq. b) by the inner shell) only if the two shells are oppositely charged; see also Eq. Another point to be noted is that the pressure component due to divalent cations, P q (red diamonds), vanishes for σ 1 > σ * * 1 -1 nm -2 , where the net pressure (black circles) equals the base pressure, P P DH . P q is nonzero only for σ 1 < σ * * 1 -1 nm -2 , where it takes sizably large (outward-directed pressure) values, partially balancing the negative (inward-directed) pressure due to P DH , or more accurately, P σ2σ1 ; hence, producing a nonmonotonic behavior in the net pressure, P , as a function of σ 1 (Fig. The net pressure on the outer shell shows qualitatively similar behavior for varying cation charge valency (compare q = 2 and 4 in Fig. The absolute value of the total multivalent-ion charge, |Q|, accumulated within inter-shell space of the VLP, R 1 < r < R 2 , can directly be measured from our simulations. We rescale the accumulated charge with the characteristic charge 1 )|q|e 0 c 0 . The results, plotted in Fig. The behavior of accumulated multivalent-ion charge in Fig. In the case of multivalent anions, the positive P q in region (II) (black symbols in Fig. ). We shall return to the underlying cause of this large negative pressure in Section III D. We conclude this section by emphasizing that the change of sign in the pressure component P q in going from region (II) to region (I) is essential in maintaining a negative osmotic pressure on the outer shell across a broad range of values for σ 1 in the case of multivalent anions. Our results thus also suggest that multivalent anions present a more robust case (in contrast to multivalent cations) in stabilizing the VLP, irrespective of the sign and magnitude of the surface charge density of the NP coating layer. The effects due to the image charges on the net pressure, P , can be assessed by comparing the results obtained in the case of a VLP containing a metallic NP with those obtained in an equivalent model in which the dielectric constant of the NP core is set equal to that of the aqueous solution, ε = 80, while the coating charge density, σ 1 , is kept fixed and the monovalent salt (screening) ions are allowed to permeate within the core region (r < R 0 ). These cases are labeled in the plots by "NP" and "no NP", respectively. Note that, in the latter ("no NP") case, both the dielectric images and also the much weaker salt images are eliminated The image charge effects turn out to be small for divalent cations (q = 2) for the parameters chosen in Fig. To understand the difference in the image-charge effects found in the two cases mentioned above, one should first note that inserting (removing) the metallic NP core has the effect of decreasing (increasing) the net pressure, or making it more attractive (repulsive), by itself. This is due to the fact that, in the presence of a metallic core, the outer shell charge distribution, σ 2 , is pulled inward by its own oppositely charged image, being produced in the core (formally, this effect is embedded in Eq. ( We proceed by comparing the results for a VLP containing a metallic NP (labeled by "NP") with those obtained in an equivalent model in which the VLP contains no NPs, representing an "empty shell", whose entire inside volume is accessible to multivalent and monovalent (salt) ions. In Fig. , empty shell , NP , empty shell , NP For the parameters given in Fig. In both cases of q = 2 and q = -4 in Fig. We study the role of electrostatic interactions in stabilization of a model virus-like particle (VLP) encapsidating a coated metallic nanoparticle (NP) in an asymmetric Coulomb fluid, which consists of a solution mixture of 1 : 1 and q : 1 salts. Using Monte-Carlo (MC) simulations within an effective dressed multivalent-ion model In the case of multivalent cations, inward-directed net pressure on the outer shell, stabilizing the VLP, is found to occur only for negative coating layer charge densities of sufficiently large magnitude, which is generally consistent with recent experimental observations of coated gold NP-encapsidation within BMV capsids Our MC simulations are enabled by calculating the electrostatic interactions through the relevant Green's function of the system (see the Appendices), which consistently accounts for image charge effects (due to inhomogeneous dielectric constant and salt distribution in the system), salt screening effects and also strong electrostatic coupling effects due to multivalent ions that go beyond the scope of usual mean-field theories. Our dressed multivalent-ion implementation thus accounts for both the ionic screening effects due to the weakly coupled monovalent ions in the bathing solution and also the leading-order electrostatic correlations between multivalent ions and the opposite surface charges on the shell or NP coating layer (see Refs. The present model is constructed based on several simplifying assumptions, which, despite their limitations for the applicability to specific systems at full extent, posses two key advantages. First, they enable us to provide a thorough investigation of electrostatic effects that usually turn out to be very challenging because of the longranged nature of Coulomb interactions and the combined interplay between various factors such as mobile (multivalent) ions and image charge related effects where θ is the angle between r and b. Explicitly, we have The image interaction part, on the other hand, is found as or, -duP l (u) - The net contribution from the second term in Eq. (B4) is thus obtained as qσ α R α 2κbεε 0 e -κ|b-Rα| -e -κ(b+Rα) + qσ α R α 2κbεε 0 e -κ(b+Rα) 1 + e 2κR0 κR 0 - For the last part of Eq. (B4), which gives the contribution from surface-surface interaction (including the relevant image effects), we can write The direct interaction part here is give by The first angular integration above can be done straightforwardly, and since the result is independent of the angle between the two vectors, the second integration only yields a constant. Thus, πσ α σ β R α R β κεε 0 e -κ|Rα-R β | -e -κ(Rα+R β ) . (B17) The image interaction part, on the other hand, is obtained as i l (κR 0 ) k l (κR 0 ) k l (κr i )k l (κr j )P l (cos θ) + N i>j=1 κ 2 R 0 e 2κR0 q 2 4πεε 0 (1 + κR 0 ) k 0 (κr i )k 0 (κr j ). (B23)