Motivated by a previous "sd 2 -graphene" study, the pairing symmetry in the superconducting state and the thermal Hall conductivity are investigated by a self-consistent Bogoliubov-de Gennes approach on the kagome lattice with intrinsic spin-orbit coupling near van Hove fillings. While the topologically trivial state with broken time-reversal symmetry appears in the absence of spin-orbit coupling, the highest flat band becomes dispersive with a hexagonal symmetry due to spin-orbit coupling, which leads to a topological superconducting state. Since the thermal Hall conductivity in the low-temperature limit is associated with the topological property of time-reversal symmetry breaking superconductors, we study its temperature dependence near van Hove fillings. In particular, the pairing symmetry in the highest flat band is sensitive to the amplitudes of spin-orbit coupling and the attractive interaction, which is reflected remarkably in the thermal Hall conductivity. The obtained result may enable us to investigate the stable superconducting state on the kagome lattice. Chiral superconductivity has attracted much interest as a hot topic in condensed matter physics. The pairing in the superconducting state breaks time-reversal symmetry (TRS) and has the nontrivial topology with interesting properties Experimentally, the chiral p-wave is observed in the A-phase of the spin-triplet superfluid 3 He Doped graphene corresponding to 3/8 or 5/8 filling has a density of state (DOS) with logarithmic divergence, which results from the van Hove singularities (VHSs) originating from three inequivalent saddle points where the Fermi surface has a hexagonal geometry with perfect nesting. The renormalization group studies for the Hubbard model Graphene is composed of sp 2 hybridization in carbon, and its low-energy electronic structure is well described by a tight-binding model with the hopping between NN sites on a hexagonal lattice The single orbital tight-binding model on the kagome lattice with NN hopping has two dispersive bands and a completely dispersionless flat band, which is depicted in Fig. In addition, the intrinsic SOC generates rich phases. In the Kane-Mele topological insulator on the honeycomb lattice On the other hand, thermal Hall conductivity is suitable for investigating the topological property of TRS breaking in superconductors In this paper, we focus on the superconducting state in the vicinity of the highest band on the kagome lattice. We calculate thermal Hall conductivity to distinguish the topological aspect of the superconducting state by using the lattice model, and discuss the interplay between the SOC and superconductivity. The paper is organized as follows. We construct the effective Hamiltonian in Sec. 2. In Sec. 3, we show the normal phase properties induced by the SOC. After that, we show the phase diagram of superconducting states, the temperature dependence of order parameters, and the thermal Hall conductivities in Sec. 4. Conclusions are given in Sec. 5. In this section, we introduce the model Hamiltonian in order to discuss the superconducting state on the kagome lattice. Figure Since short-range repulsive interactions generate the d + id-wave pairing between the 3rd NN sites near the VHS in the upper honeycomb band The corresponding Hamiltonian is written as with where i (and j) is the site index including the sublattice index M (= A, B, C). Then c † iσ (c iσ ) denotes the creation (annihilation) operator for the electron on site i with spin σ =↑, ↓. n iσ = c † iσ c iσ is the particle number operator. i, j ({i, j}) stands for the summation for NN (3rd NN) bonds. H h represents the hopping term between NN sites with the amplitude t and the chemical potential μ. H so represents the intrinsic SOC between NN sites. ν ij is a factor corresponding to the hopping direction, which is -1(+1) for the clockwise (counterclockwise) direction. H a represents the attractive interaction on 3rd NN bonds with the amplitude -U . We introduce the BCS-type meanfield approximation to decouple the attractive interaction term assuming the spin-singlet channel. Then the interaction term H a is rewritten as where ∆ ij is the spin-singlet superconducting order parameter defined as where M and l stand for the sublattice and displacement indices, respectively. Then, we obtain the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian in momentum space, yielding the 3rd NN spin-singlet pairing on the kagome lattice, where the operator Ψ † k,σ = ψ † k,σ , ψ -k,-σ is a sixcomponent Nambu spinor representation with ψ k,σ = (c k,A,σ , c k,B,σ , c k,C,σ ) T . c k,M,σ denotes the Fourier component of the electron annihilation operator c i,M,σ . The diagonal block term ξσ (k), which describes the energy dispersion resulting from the kinetic term, is given by with Moreover, the off-diagonal block term ∆σ (k) in H BdG , which represents the superconducting order parameter, is given by with where the symbols ∆ M,i correspond to the order parameter in Eq. ( Hereafter, we will define the lattice constants 2 |a i | = a and take the physical constants , e, k B and a as unity. First, we discuss physical properties in the normal phase before discussing the superconducting phase. The band structure, Fermi surface, and topological property are investigated for U = 0 in this section. Figure Figure Moreover, μ = μ 3 ≡ +2 √ t 2 + λ 2 corresponds to n = 3/4 except for λ = 0, because in the absence of λ, the highest band becomes completely flat. The SOC turns the dispersionless flat band into a dispersive one. Therefore, the amplitude of the peak at E = μ 3 is more sensitive to the amplitude of λ than those at E = μ 1 and E = μ 2 . Figure On the other hand, the introduction of the SOC leads to the hexagonal structure of the Fermi surface with the perfect nesting in the highest band. The distribution of the energy dispersion around the VH filling is enhanced with increasing λ depicted in Fig. In the honeycomb lattice, the SOC connecting NNN bonds induces the fully opened gap. The topologically nontrivial insulating phase appears when the chemical potential lies in the gap where E kα is the energy eigenvalue of ξσ (k) with the band index α, and the factor γ = √ 3/2 denotes the area of the unit cell. f ( ) ≡ 1/(e β + 1) is the Fermi distribution function, and the current operator is defined as Then, the spin-dependent Chern number is defined as Figure Next, let us discuss the property in the superconducting phase at zero temperature in this subsection. Order parameters are obtained by solving the BdG Hamiltonian Eq. ( with complex coefficients (α s , α x 2 -y 2 , α xy ) describing the superconducting state. For example, the pure d x 2 -y 2 + id xy state is represented by (α s , α x 2 -y 2 , α xy ) ∝ (0, 1, i). The Chern number N C in the superconducting state is defined in a similar manner to the normal phase in Eq. ( Figure First, let us discuss the superconducting state without the SOC as shown in Fig. On the other hand, around μ = μ 3 , the amplitude of Re[α s ] is reduced and that of Re[α x 2 -y 2 ] is enhanced, so that the d 1 + id 2 state with the finite Chern number appears. Since the Fermi surface in the highest band has hexagonal symmetry due to the SOC, the strong nesting effect leads to the d 1 +id 2 state. This result indicates that the SOC gives rise to the topological superconducting state in the highest band on the kagome lattice. Figure In the absence of the SOC, the component of the d 1 ± id 2 state is dominant around μ = μ 1 and μ = μ 2 in the honeycomb bands. On the other hand, the energy dispersions near the bottom of the lower honeycomb band and the top of the upper honeycomb band are symmetric with respect to ε = 0 for λ = 0, μ/t = -1, and there are circular Fermi surfaces around the Γ point (μ/t -4 and 2). We stress that there exists the topologically trivial s+ id 2 state with the broken time-reversal symmetry around μ = μ 3 mainly in the flat band and may be difficult to appear on the honeycomb lattice. In the presence of the SOC (λ/t = 0.3), the phase diagram does not change markedly in the honeycomb bands qualitatively. On the other hand, the s+id 2 with N C = 0 state found for λ/t = 0 around μ = μ 3 turns into the d 1 ± id 2 state with N C = ∓2 in the wide range of parameters, which is attributed to the Fermi surface nesting with the hexagonal symmetry induced by the SOC in the highest band. The SOC leads to the hexagonal Fermi surface with perfect nesting at μ = μ 3 , where the sufficiently small U generates the d 1 + id 2 state and further increase in U generates the s + id 2 state. Since the phase boundary between the d 1 + id 2 and s + id 2 states is determined by the competition between the width of the highest band and the amplitude of U , the parameter region of the appearance of the d 1 + id 2 state is enlarged around μ = μ 3 with increasing amplitude of the SOC. Note that in the large U region (U/t > 1), although the order parameter changes continuously around μ/t = 2, the Chern number switches at μ/t = 2. It is attributed to the change in the Fermi surface topology where the Fermi surface vanishes for μ/t < 2. Next, we discuss the temperature dependences of order parameters for U/t = 1 at VHSs, as plotted in Figs. Note that the nonmonotonic behavior appears with increasing temperature at μ = μ 3 for the small-λ region. Around T = T c , while the d 1 + id 2 component is dominant, the amplitude of order parameters changes discontinuously and the s component is enhanced in the low-temperature region for λ/t = 0.1. However, the Chern number still becomes a finite integer in the lowtemperature region, which indicates that the superconducting state still maintains the d 1 + id 2 state. However, for the rather small λ ( 0.09t) while the s component is further enhanced and the s + id 2 state is realized in the low-temperature region, the The measurement of the thermal Hall conductivity gives information on the topological properties in TRS broken superconductors where f (E) is the derivative of the Fermi distribution function. T and N denote the temperature and number of sites, respectively Therefore, in the low-temperature region, κ xy is uniquely determined by the topological properties of the superconducting state. The breaking of the TRS and inversion symmetry in the superconducting state gives rise to the finite thermal Hall conductivity. Therefore, κ xy will vanish in the s + d 1 state with the TRS. Although the s + id 2 state breaks the TRS and inversion symmetry, κ xy also vanishes because the s + id 2 state is the topologically trivial one. On the other hand, the d 1 + id 2 state with the finite Chern number gives a finite κ xy . We can also confirm the temperature linear behavior even at μ = μ 3 at λ/t = 0.1, but that occurs only in the temperature region lower than that at μ = μ 1 and μ = μ 2 . The deviation from Eq. ( In addition, the thermal Hall conductivity at μ = μ 3 for λ = 0 shows a different temperature dependence from those for other choices of λ in Fig. Note that in the large-U region, although the order parameters change continuously around μ/t = 2, the topological property switches, which is discussed in the previous subsection. The thermal Hall conductivity is strongly sensitive to the amplitude of the chemical potential, depicted in Fig. While the low-temperature behavior is strongly affected by the amplitude of μ, the high-temperature one has a similar form with respect to the temperature around μ/t = 2. Since the order parameters for μ/t = 1.95 and 2.05 are almost the same, it is difficult to distinguish the superconducting states for μ/t 2 and μ/t 2 in the high-temperature region. Here we demonstrate the large-U and λ case. However, since the switch of the temperature dependence of κ xy around μ/t = 2 is associated with the ratio U/λ, a similar behavior can occur even in the low-U and λ region. We have investigated the spin-singlet superconducting state and the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity on the kagome lattice by the selfconsistent BdG approach. In particular, we focus on the highest band and discuss the interplay between the amplitude of the attractive interaction and the SOC effect. In the normal phase, there exist perfectly hexagonal Fermi surfaces at all VH fillings in the honeycomb bands. The presence of the SOC leads to the dispersive highest band with the hexagonal symmetry, and also generates band gaps, where topological nontrivial states appear where that around μ/t = 2 is proper on the kagome lattice. In the superconducting phase, order parameters and the phase diagram are obtained. In the honeycomb bands, the d 1 + id 2 states appear in the vicinity of VHSs. Since the amplitude of the DOS at VH fillings is enhanced by the SOC, T c increases with increasing λ. In the highest band around μ = μ 3 , the s + id 2 state appears for λ = 0. Since the Fermi surface in the highest band has the perfect nesting property induced by the SOC at μ = μ 3 , the d 1 + id 2 state appears for λ > 0. When the width of the highest band depending on the amplitude of the SOC is comparable to the amplitude of the attractive interaction and/or temperature, the s + id 2 (d 1 + id 2 ) character is dominant in the low-temperature region (around T c ). Moreover, the thermal Hall conductivity is proportional to the temperature with a prefactor that is uniquely related to the Chern number. While the d 1 +id 2 state has the temperature linear behavior, the thermal Hall conductivity in the s + id 2 state increases slightly with temperature owing to the increase in the d 1 component. In particular, the character of pairing symmetries changes in the highest band owing to the competition between the attractive interaction and the bandwidth, which may be detectable in the thermal Hall conductivity. Therefore, the measurement of the thermal Hall conductivity may enable us to distinguish the supercon-ducting states on the kagome lattice. ACKNOWLEDGMENT