Thin films of the wide band gap semiconductor β -Ga 2 O 3 have a high potential for applications in transparent electronics and high power devices. However, the role of interfaces remains to be explored. Here, we report on fundamental limits of transport properties in thin films. The conductivities, Hall densities and mobilities in thin homoepitaxially MOVPE grown (100)-orientated β -Ga 2 O 3 films were measured as a function of temperature and film thickness. At room temperature, the electron mobilities ((115±10) cm 2 Vs ) in thicker films (> 150 nm) are comparable to the best of bulk. However, the mobility is strongly reduced by more than two orders of magnitude with decreasing film thickness ((5.5±0.5) cm 2 Vs for a 28 nm thin film). We find that the commonly applied classical Fuchs-Sondheimer model does not explain the contribution of electron scattering at the film surfaces sufficiently. Instead, by applying an electron wave model by Bergmann, a contribution to the mobility suppression due to the large de Broglie wavelength in β -Ga 2 O 3 is proposed as a limiting quantum mechanical size effect. Over the past years, gallium oxide (Ga 2 O 3 ) has proved to be a promising candidate for a variety of possible applications, such as deep UV-detectors, gas sensors, but especially for high power devices. One unintentionally doped bulk-β -Ga 2 O 3 single crystal and several Si-doped homoepitaxial layers were measured. Representative V (I) and R(B) curves for van-der-Pauw and Hall measurements are shown in figure Figure Regarding the Hall densities n, it is shown that the n(T ) curves show the expected semiconductor-like temperature dependence, see figure with the effective density of states N C in the conduction band being k B as the Boltzmann constant and h as the reduced Planck constant. Only for the highest doped sample n(T ) deviates from the typical semiconductor-like temperature dependence. Comparing the samples with a film thickness of t = 155 nm and t = 28 nm shows, that their Hall densities differ only by a factor of 2, whereas the mobility differs by almost 2 orders of magnitude. This suggests an additional scattering mechanism that relates to the sample thickness and becomes dominant in very thin films. Regarding the mobility at high temperatures, no dependence on the film thickness is to be expected for dominating electron phonon scattering. Figure As shown previously for bulk Imperfect growth may play a role for the mobility of real samples. The main type of defects in the films examined here are twin boundaries. For the purpose of calculating the scattering of electrons on those defects, the twin boundaries can be treated like grain boundaries in a polycrystalline or powdered semiconductor, with a certain potential barrier that has to be overcome The scattering of electrons at the twin boundaries adds another term μ tb to the total mobility. This term is temperature dependent and can be described as where L is the mean distance between twin boundaries and E B is the mean potential barrier height. This model was applied to three representative thin films (28 nm, 60 nm and 155 nm) with L and E B as fit parameters. For the 155 nm sample twin boundary scattering was added to the already described phonon and ionized impurity scattering terms, leading to corrections to the mobility fit, most clearly seen at low temperatures, see figure Assuming films of high quality, possibilities for a mobility reduction in crystallographically perfect thin films are discussed in the following. Characteristic lengths that could play a role in the mobility in thin films are the effective mean free path l, the de Broglie wavelength λ e , the sample thickness t and the surface roughness r S . It has been shown, that depletion due to band bending at the surface does not play a role for free standing thin β -Ga 2 O 3 films leading with m * = 0.28 m 0 , T = 300 K to λ e = 14 nm. It increases for lower temperatures to tens of nm, therefore finite size effects may play a role when λ e ≈ t. A quantum theoretical model by Bergmann It mainly depends on the ratio of film thickness t and de Broglie wavelength λ e and has no longer any direct dependence on material parameters. All mobility data taken at a temperature of 265 K were plotted against μ Bergmann described in eq. ( was carried out. Here, μ vol represents all the scattering processes that also take place in the bulk and thick film samples (see eq. ( Considering this model Here, T 0 = 300 K and λ e,0 = 14 nm is the corresponding de Broglie wavelength. This temperature dependence is experimentally verified for the 28 nm sample, see figure Vs and shows a good agreement with the fit curve. For low temperatures (150 K and below) the data were approximated linearly to show the dominance of the logarithmic ln (t/λ e,0 ) term. Extrapolating the fit curve, the mobility reaches zero at about 70 K. Here, the de Broglie wavelength following eq. ( The previous examinations clearly show, that multiple scattering mechanisms play an important role to describe the mobility in the measured homoepitaxial thin β -Ga 2 O 3 films. We identify three different thickness regimes with respect to dominance of the several scattering mechanisms: The thicker, bulk-like films (150 nm and above), an intermediate thickness range (150 -50 nm) and the very thin films (50 nm and below). For the bulk-like films, phonon scattering for high temperatures and ionized impurity scattering for low temperatures are the most dominant scattering mechanisms. The scattering at twin boundaries also gives an important correction for low temperatures. A representative fit conducted for the 155 nm sample considering these three mechanisms is shown in figure In figure A bulk β -Ga 2 O 3 single crystal as well as thin homoepitaxial layers have been examined here. Bulk β -Ga 2 O 3 single crystals were grown from the melt by the Czochralski method Ohmic contacts on the sample were realized using aluminum (Al), gold (Au) and titanium (Ti). After cleaning the samples in acetone, a positive photoresist (AZECI 3007) was spun on to the sample at 3500 rpm for 50 s. After that, the laser lithography was performed and the sample was developed in a developer solution (AZ 326 MIF). The metal contacts were then produced via magnetron sputtering of 25 nm Ti and 50 nm of Au onto the sample with subsequent liftoff in acetone in an ultrasonic bath. In a next step, the sample was glued into a chip carrier for later measurements and wedge bonded with Al-wire. It should be noted, that ohmic contacts were achieved only by bonding of those contacts with the Al-wire, therefore point like contacts on the bonding sites can be realized. All measurements were done in a KONTI IT TM flow cryostat. Van-der-Pauw and Hall-measurements were carried out in a temperature range between 30 K and 300 K. For the van-der-Pauw measurements, the sample is ideally contacted at four points very close to the sample edges. A current I is then applied between the two neighboring contacts (1,2), the voltage V is measured along the other two contacts (3,4). Doing this measurement in two alternating configurations yields two resistances (R 12,43 , R 23,14 ), from which the conductivity σ can be determined by where t is the film thickness and f is a correction factor depending on the sample shape. The deviation caused by the placement of contacts away from the sample edges leads to another correction factor, needed to calculate the correct conductivity and Hall density. Those correction factors were simulated with a finite elements simulation using the program COMSOL TM . The measurements were taken with a Keithley TM 2450 Sourcemeter, evaluating a current sweep to obtain the resistances being measured. With these measurements, conductivities and Hall carrier densities were determined. The Hall coefficient is assumed to be 1 in this work. The Hall mobility μ H is therefore written simply as μ. The Hall density n H can be determined, when measuring the sample in a magnetic field B perpendicular to the sample. With variations in the magnetic field ∆B, the measured resistance R 13,24 will change by ∆R and the Hall density can be calculated as with e as electron charge and t as film thickness. With the conductivity σ and the Hall density the mobility μ could be calculated using