Very recent observation of superconductivity (arxiv: 1807.08572) in both transport (resistance versus temperature) and magnetization (Zero field cooled) at around above 235K has obviously raised many eyebrows. The experimentalists in particular are more thrilled than the theoreticians. Although the results presented in the paper are clean and both transport and magnetization measurements do approve the observation of superconductivity to some extent (the dia-magnetic shielding fraction is low), the problem is to synthesize/fabricate the material. This I name a "goldsmith" job, primarily because one has to deal with Gold and Silver nano-particles combination/amalgamation/alloying or even who knows the interfacial new phase, which could be superconducting. Superconductivity being often quoted as "Superconductivity 100 Years young" seems to have been getting even younger by the day. Thanks to a very recent report which appeared around two weeks before on arxiv claiming superconductivity at ambient temperature and pressure in Gold-Silver nano-particles Theoreticians are yet struggling to find a unified theory to explain high T c superconductivity of Cuprates. More latter leaving aside the discovery of superconductivity in MgB 2 at 39K in 2001 from J. Akimitsu group in Japan The latest discovery Any case, as far as the exact location (interfaces/grain boundary/edge states) of the superconductivity is concerned the same could be looked after from various local probes or transport and spectroscopy measurements, only after one gets through the reproducible quality material in question. In this direction, the strategy one could be to follow the process of the authors (b) Second strategy could be to grow the Gold and silver alloyed structures from their liquid state i.e. after vacuum heating them at above 1000 0 C and cooled slowly. Various combinations related to different stoichiometric ratios and growth parameters will be required. This could be a situation like Bi 1-x Sb x (c) Third strategy may include the controlled interfaces by evaporation based thin film heterostructures of Gold and Silver, which as such may not be the straight forward task. The author would further like to state that strategy a, b or c may not be sufficient or fruitful at all, however one has to start from somewhere and secondly the same would pave the way for new avenues. The claimed discovery of superconductivity On theoretical front already an interesting article related to the existence of confined High T c superconductivity phase, behind a robust Fermi liquid in monovalent metals has just appeared on arxiv 