We theoretically investigate a new kind of nonlinear magnetoresistance on the surface of three-dimensional topological insulators (TIs). At variance with the unidirectional magnetoresistance (UMR) effect in magnetic bilayers, this nonlinear magnetoresistance does not rely on a conducting ferromagnetic layer and scales linearly with both the applied electric and magnetic fields; for this reason, we name it bilinear magneto-electric resistance (BMER). We show that the sign and the magnitude of the BMER depends sensitively on the orientation of the current with respect to the magnetic field as well as the crystallographic axes -a property that can be utilized to map out the spin texture of the topological surface states via simple transport measurement, alternative to the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Beyond doubt, the giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect In the past decade, both theoretical and experimental endeavors have been dedicated to realizing similar functionalities of a spin valve in magnetic bilayer structures consisting of a ferromagnetic layer and a nonmagnetic layer with strong spin-orbit coupling. The main idea is to use spin-orbit coupling together with structural inversion asymmetry to generate net spin density (or spin accumulation) at the interface through the spin Hall In this work, we theoretically investigate a new kind of nonlinear magnetoresistance originating from the topological insulator surface states, which does not require a magnetic layer. We name this new magnetoresistance effect as bilinear magneto-electric resistance (BMER) due to its linear scaling with both the external electric and magnetic fields. At variance with the UMR effect, the BMER emanates from the conversion of a nonlinear spin current to a charge current rather than the current-induced spin density. The physical picture of the BMER is schematically depicted in Fig. Let us start with the following model Hamiltonian for a Dirac electron in the topological surface state: ) is generated at the second order in E, due to spin-momentum locking. When an external magnetic field B is applied, the nonlinear spin current is partially converted into a charge current δje(E 2 ): a high(low)-resistance state can be reached by applying a magnetic field antiparallel (parallel) to the spin direction of the electronic states with k E, as shown in panels e and f respectively. with σ the Pauli spin matrices, B the uniform external magnetic field, g and μ B representing the g-factor and the Bohr magneton respectively, and where α is the Dirac velocity, and the term cubic-in-k describes the hexagonal warping effect. where φ k is the azimuthal angle of the wavevector k with respect to the x-axis. The energy dispersion can be obtained by where s = +1 and -1 correspond to the upper and lower surface bands respectively, and the group velocity is given by Note that the group velocity is odd in k in the absence of the external magnetic field. In what follows, we shall assume the Fermi level lies in the upper band (s = +1) and thus suppress the superscript for the band index hereafter. Also note that the Berry curvature effects on the density of states and the orbital magnetic moment are not included since they are negligibly small when the Fermi surface is far away from the Dirac point, as we will show in Sec. 3.4. In the absence of the external magnetic field, the effective Hamiltonian for the topological surface states, i.e., H T I = σ •h (k), is invariant under the following two operations: 1) Mirror reflection about the y-z plane, i.e., M : x → -x, and 2) threefold rotation C 3 about the z-axis. Here, we are interested in the nonlinear current-density response to the second-order electric field and the first-order magnetic field, i.e., j where the response function K abcd is a fourth-rank tensor with indices a, b, c = x or y and d = x, y or z. For the transport in the surface states, the external electric field is applied in the x-y plane (parallel to the surface of the TI) while the magnetic field can be three-dimensional; therefore, the tensor K abcd has 24 elements in total. As the response function is the property of the unperturbed system, we should expect it to reflect the same symmetries as those of H T I . First, we note that the mirror symmetry of the unperturbed 2D system requires that the tensor element K abcd must be zero if, under mirror reflection operation M : x → -x, the corresponding current component j e,a changes sign whereas the product of the external fields E b E c H d is invariant, and vice versa. Without doing any further calculation, we know the following 12 tensor elements are zero, i.e., The other 12 tensor elements could remain finite. Furthermore, arising from the threefold rotational symmetry about the z-axis, some of the remaining 12 tensor elements have equal values, as we will show explicitly below. Now let us examine the following single-band steady-state Boltzmann equation where we have assumed, for simplicity, a constant relaxation time τ . Expand the distribution function in powers of the electric field, i.e., where f 0 is the equilibrium Fermi distribution, f 1 and f 2 are the nonequilibrium distribution functions of the first-and second-order in the electric field, i.e., f 1 ∝ E a and f 2 ∝ E a E b . Placing the expansion (8) in the Boltzmann equation (7) and equating terms on the left and right sides of equal order in the electric field, we get where i = 0, 1, 2, ... By solving the series of equations iteratively, we find the first-order nonequilibrium distribution function takes the familiar form and the second-order nonequilibrium distribution function of interest can be expressed as where the prefactor 1 2 eliminates double counting in the summation. The charge current density can be calculated via j e = -e d 2 k (2π) 2 v (k) f (k). It follows that the nonlinear component of the current density of interest can be expressed as j where we have used the relation ∂ε = gμ B ∂ε ∂h d with h d (d = x, y or z) the Cartesian components of the vector h(k) given by Eq. (2). Note that all the derivatives in Eq. ( Performing integration by parts on the r.h.s. of the above equation, we get where f 0 ≡ ∂f0 ∂h with h ≡ |h(k)|, and {b ↔ c} is the shorthand notation of two more terms that are simply the first two terms in the parentheses with the indices b and c interchanged. Note that when the temperature at which the current is measured is much lower than the Fermi temperature, it is a good approximation to replace f 0 with the delta function -δ (h -ε F ) and it follows that It is straightforward to express the derivatives in the parentheses as those of h 2 or h a with respect to k b (a, b = x, y,or z) as follows where we have used the identities ∂h ∂h d = h d h and ∂ i h ≡ ∂h ∂ki = ∂ih 2 2h , and have converted the summation over k to an integral over the Fermi loop (FL) where h = ε F is a constant. Inserting Eq. ( where κ 0 = gμ B e 3 τ 2 / 3 . All other 12 tensor elements are zero, in agreement with the symmetry analysis that we carried out earlier. Note that in deriving these results, we have assumed that the linear term in the Hamiltonian for the TI surface states (1), giving rise to the spin-momentum locking, is dominant over the cubic hexagonal warping term. Having known these tensor elements, we can write the two Cartesian components of the current density as where c = 9λ 2 e 3 τ 2 gμ B ε 3 F 4πα (1) e + ...) the total current density. Up to the first order in the external electric field, we obtain where E is the magnitude of the external electric field E, φ E is the angle between E and the x-axis, ρ 0 = 4π 2 τ e 2 ε F is the linear surface resistivity independent of E, and the coefficients λ 2 ε F α 5 and ρ (2) characterize the magnitudes of the nonlinear surface resistivities for the in-plane and out-of-plane components of the external magnetic fields respectively. Now we are in a position to provide some remarks on the nonlinear component of the surface resistivity, i.e, the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 3) The nonlinear resistivities associated with the in-plane and out-of-plane components of the magnetic fields exhibit different dependences on the hexagonal warping, i.e., ρ (2) ∝ λ 2 and ρ (2) ⊥ ∝ λ, and both of them vanish when λ → 0, because the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic fields play different roles in altering the energy dispersion of the surface states. We will elaborate on this point in Sec. 3.2. 4) As shown by Eq. ( Placing Eq. ( where θ H and φ H are, respectively, the polar and azimuthal angles of the magnetic field, and B is the magnitude of the magnetic field. In Fig. As we noted earlier that the BMER's for the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic fields exhibit different dependences on the hexagonal warping, i.e., ρ ∝ λ 2 and ρ ⊥ ∝ λ. The two distinct dependences of BMER on the hexagonal warping emanate from the different roles played by the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic fields to the surface band structure of the TI. This can be seen by rewriting Eq. ( where In the absence of the hexagonal warping effect (i.e, λ = 0), we can see that an in-plane magnetic field shifts the Dirac cone rigidly in the k x -k y plane, whereas an out-of-plane magnetic field opens up a band gap of 2∆ g at the Dirac point. Consequently, without the cubic hexagonal warping term, applying an in-plane magnetic field would not alter the current provided the system has translational symmetry in the x-y plane, and likewise an out-of-plane magnetic field wouldn't do so as long as the Fermi level lies far away from the gap opened by B z (note that the gap is about 2 meV for B z = 10 T and g = 2). In the presence of the hexagonal warping effect, however, a magnetic field not only shifts the Dirac cone and/or open up a gap, but also deforms the snow-flake-like Fermi contour accordingly, as shown in Fig. As we have pointed out in the end of Sec. 3.1, the nonlinear longitudinal resistivity turns out to be independent of the relaxation time τ . Here we want to emphasize that this result relies on two approximations that we made in our calculation: 1) constant relaxation time approximation and 2) single-band contribution to the conductivity. The constant relaxation time approximation is valid when the scattering potential is isotropic and short-ranged. However, when there are multiple bands contributing to the conduction, the nonlinear resistivity would still depend on the relaxation time of each band even if the relaxation times are momentum independent. To see this, let us consider a simple case of two bands with constant relaxation times τ a and τ b . The total current density is the sum of the contributions from the two bands (neglecting interband transition); for a simple 1-D problem in which an electric field is applied in the x-direction, the total current density is given by where c a(b),1 and c a(b),2 are coefficients independent of τ a , τ b and E x . The resistivity can be obtained by ρ xx = E x /j x ; up to the 2nd order in E x , we get, We see that the τ -dependence of ρ xx disappears in the single-band case when either c a,i or c b,i (i = 1, 2) are set to zero; however, the nonlinear resistivity (i.e., the term linear in E x ) in general depends on the relaxation times in the two-band case when both c a,i and c b,i remain finite. The same conclusion holds for multiple-band (i > 3) cases. Hitherto we have not considered the influence of the Berry curvature of the surface bands on the nonlinear transport, which we shall justify below. Qualitatively speaking, the BMER effect relies on the hexagonal warping term which becomes important when the Fermi level lies far away from the Dirac point, as we have discussed in Sec. 3.2, whereas the Berry curvature effect is profound when the Fermi level is close to Dirac point. For the Bi 2 Se 3 investigated in the recent experiment, In the presence of an external magnetic field, the Berry curvature alters the transport property in two ways: 1) a correction to the density of states and 2) a correction to the total band energy due to the orbital magnetic moment, From the full Hamiltonian of the surface states (1), we can derive the following general expression for the Berry curvature And for the two-band model, one can easily show that the orbital magnetic moment is proportional to the product of the energy dispersion and the Berry curvature, i.e., where the energy dispersion of the upper band, ε(k), is given by Eq. ( Equipped with Eqs. ( In this paper, we have developed a transport theory for a new kind of nonlinear magnetoresistance on the surface of three dimensional TIs. At variance with the UMR effect in magnetic bilayers, the nonlinear magnetoresistance does not require the presence of a conducting ferromagnetic layer and scales linearly with both the applied electric and magnetic fields; for this reason, we name it bilinear magneto-electric resistance (BMER). We have also shown that the sign and the magnitude of the BMER depends sensitively on the orientation of the current with respect to the magnetic field as well as the crystallographic axes -a property that can be utilized to map out the spin texture of the topological surface states via simple transport measurement. The physical origin of the BMER is a partial conversion from the nonlinear spin current to charge current in the presence of an external magnetic field. An analytical expression of the BMER is derived based on a semiclassical Boltzmann transport theory in the relaxation time approximation, which allows us to further examine various aspects of the BMER. We find that, in addition to the spin-momentum locking of the topological surface states, the cubic hexagonal warping term also plays a crucial role in generating the BMER -the BMER vanishes in the absence of the hexagonal warping since in this case the external magnetic field can no longer deform the Fermi contour (provided that the Fermi level is not too close to the Dirac point). Also, we have shown that, the Berry curvature effect is unimportant when the Fermi level is far away from the Dirac point in which case the hexagonal warping effect is profound.