The identification of novel multifunctional Dirac materials has been an ongoing effort. In this connection quasi 2-dimensional (BEDT-TTF)-based charge transfer salts are widely discussed. Here, we report about the electronic structure of α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 and κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 under a hypothetical substitution of iodine with the halogens bromine, chlorine and fluorine. The decreasing size of the anion layer corresponds to applying chemical strain which increases tremendously in the case of (BEDT-TTF) 2 F 3 . We performed structural optimization and electronic structure calculations in the framework of density functional theory, incorporating, first, the recently developed strongly constrained and appropriately normed semilocal density functional SCAN, and, second, van der Waals corrections to the PBE exchange correlation functional by means of the dDsC dispersion correction method. In the case of α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 F 3 the formation of over-tilted Dirac-type-II nodes within the quasi 2-dimensional Brillouin zone can be found. For κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 F 3 , the recently reported topological transition within the electronic band structure cannot be revealed. 1 Introduction Organic charge transfer salts, especially quasi two-dimensional (BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 where X represent a variety of acceptor molecules, have generated great interest over the past few decades. Depending on the structural phase, the acceptor molecules, and other factors, these can be associated with a rich variety of physical phenomena such as charge ordering, metal-insulator transitions, unconventional superconductivity, antiferromagnetism and spin liquids. In these compounds, the molecular units consisting of carbon atoms (i.e., donors) usually preserve their specific features and are separated by layers of anion atoms that act as acceptors. It is believed that the unpaired electrons (or holes) in the carbon π-orbitals are responsible for the conducting properties. The α-phase with X=I represents a narrow band-gap semiconductor at ambient pressure We have recently reported first principles-based band structure calculations for αand β-phases with X=I and κ-phase with X=I, Br, Cl and F In the present work, we complement the previous study by revising and extending this discussion for the κand αphases incorporating very recently developed exchange correlation functionals within the framework of the density functional theory (DFT). Here, α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 is found to be of particular interest, due to emerging tilted (and over-tilted) Dirac crossings within the band structure. Furthermore, we rigorously discuss the structural changes and charge transfer connected to the incorporated chemical strain. We point out that the chemically induced strains may not necessarily be similar to those due to hydrostatic pressure. Although the numerical values of charge transfer may depend on the selected appropriation scheme, the trends in charge transfer yield useful and consistent insights into the donor-acceptor nature of various atoms based on the DFT framework. The paper is structured as follows. First, we discuss the change of the cell volume by inducing chemical strain mediated by the substitution of the iodine layer by bromine, chlorine and fluorine. Second, we report about the changing charge transfer observed by the chemical substitution. Afterwards, we discuss the change of the electronic structure for α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 and κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 due to the decreased unit cell size. We have examined the effects of changing the anion X in α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 and κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 in the framework of the DFT by applying a pseudopotential projector augmented-wave method The calculations were performed without spin-orbit coupling, which is a reasonable approximation due to the light elements within the (BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 molecule. For the integration in k-space, a 6 × 6 × 6 Γ -centered mesh according to Monkhorst and Pack Quantum ESPRESSO was applied to estimate the associated irreducible representations of the energy levels within the band structure. The cut-off energy for the wave function was chosen to be 48 Ry and the cut-off energy for the charge density and the potentials was chosen to be 316 Ry. The charge transfer for the κ-phase was computed using projected wavefunctions onto orthogonalized atomic wavefunctions, which calculates the Lowdin charges. The basic structural parameters of α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 and κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 were taken from the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) We have monitored the relaxed volumes of the unit cell under such substitutions and found a steady decrease in the volume of the unit cell under the progressive substitutions I→Br→Cl→F. Figures Figure 4 Symmorphic α-phase The α-phases of (BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 crystallize in a triclinic crystal structure, having the (symmorphic) space group P 1 (#2). Under ambient pressure, α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 is a narrow band-gap insula- tor as shown in Figure Recently, Dirac type-II and Weyl type-II materials have attracted a lot of attention, as they are discussed to effectively mimic the behavior of Dirac or Weyl fermions in the vicinity of a strong gravitational field 5 Nonsymmorphic κ phase The κ-phase crystallizes in a monoclinic crystal structure having the space group G ≡ P 12 1 1 (#4), which can be represented by the coset decomposition Here, {C 2y |(0, 1/2, 0)} denotes a two-fold screw symmetry, represented by a two-fold rotation about the y-axis together with a non-primitive shift along the lattice vector a 2 . The nonsymmorphic nature of the space group leads to degenerate line-nodes along the Brillouin zone boundary. Nonsymmorphic symmetries were widely discussed in protecting Dirac nodes The band structure of κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 close to the Fermi level is shown in Fig. 6 Universal Phase Diagrams Universal phase diagrams summarizing the rich physics of the α and κ-phases have been presented following the work of Refs. 7 Conclusions Organic materials based on (BEDT-TTF) 2 X 3 (X=I, Br, Cl, F) show great potential for fine tuning specific band structures near the Fermi level due to their softness. Our research shows that applying chemical strain to the αand κphases creates significant changes in the volume and ratios of their lattice constants. From the structural optimization it follows that the mutual replacement of iodine with bromine, chlorine and fluorine corresponds to an almost uniaxial strain applied to the sample. The structural optimization also give insights into the accuracy of the recently developed exchange-correlation functionals SCAN and VdW-corrected PBE. For SCAN we find a very good agreement with the experimental unit cell for α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 . However, for the κ-phase, both functionals underestimate the cell volume. As a result of the chemical strain, we observe over-tilted Dirac-type-nodes in the α-phase for α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 F 3 . These crossings exhibit a four-fold degeneracy. For the nonsymmorphic κ-phase, the existence of a topological transition has been examined and questioned throughout this work. This research highlights the promise and importance of tuning the band structure using chemical or other strains that could lead to creating multi-functional Dirac materials. Additionally, our calcu-