Intergranular attack of alloys under hydrothermal conditions is a complex problem that depends on metal and oxygen transport kinetics via solid-state and channel-like pathways to an advancing oxidation front. Experiments reveal very different rates of intergranular attack and minor element depletion distances ahead of the oxidation front for nickel-based binary alloys depending on the minor element. For example, a significant Cr depletion up to 9 μm ahead of grain boundary crack tips were documented for Ni-5Cr binary alloy, in contrast to relatively moderate Al depletion for Ni-5Al (~100s of nm). We present a mathematical kinetics model that adapts Wagner's model for thick film growth to intergranular attack of binary alloys. The transport coefficients of elements O, Ni, Cr, and Al in bulk alloys and along grain boundaries were estimated from the literature. For planar surface oxidation, a critical concentration of the minor element can be determined from the model where the oxide of minor element becomes dominant over the major element. This generic model for simple grain boundary oxidation can predict oxidation penetration velocities and minor element depletion distances ahead of the advancing front that are comparable to experimental data. The significant distance of depletion of Cr in Ni-5Cr in contrast to the localized Al depletion in Ni-5Al can be explained by the model due to the combination of the relatively faster diffusion of Cr along the grain boundary and slower diffusion in bulk grains, relative to Al. Preventing metal alloy failure during service life in high temperature, reactive environments remains an obstacle for new energy technologies such as light-water reactors It is well known that the penetration of intergranular oxidation can be strongly dependent on grain boundary characteristics and the applied stress Understanding kinetics and mechanisms by which intergranular oxidation occurs at the atomic level is of particular interest to guide development of durable, corrosion-resistant materials and their safe application in service environments. Fast penetration of oxidants along grain boundaries is one key aspect of this broad problem. Examples are grain boundary oxidation of NiAl alloys in the temperature range 500-1000 °C3,6 and intergranular attack along the grain boundary for Ni-Cr 7 , Ni-Al The objective of this paper is to present a generic kinetics model for intergranular selective oxidation of binary alloys based on Wagner's theory for internal oxidation The paper is organized in the following way. The kinetics model for intergranular oxidation is presented first in Section II. Application to the flat surface oxidation for Ni-Cr alloys is presented in Section III. Section IV applies the proposed model to intergranular oxidation of a set of nickel based alloys. Connections to available experiments are presented where possible, and some conclusions are drawn in Section V. The model provides governing equations describing the penetration of an oxidation front along a grain boundary in a homogeneous binary alloy AB. As shown in Fig. Due to the consumption of oxygen and metal atoms at the oxidation front, the dynamics of the oxide-alloy interface penetrating along the grain boundary can be modeled as the transport of reactants (oxygen and alloy elements A and B) to the interface and the consumption of elements A and B at the interface due to the oxidation reaction. The model first considers the transport of all three species toward the oxidation front. The concentration profiles of oxygen (O) and elements A and B follow the standard diffusion equations, ( ) The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( Following the original Wagner's analysis, At the oxidation front, both elements A and B are oxidized by oxygen, where the flux of oxygen and elements A and B should be stoichiometrically balanced. Selecting the simplest case, by assuming the reaction at the oxidation front follows the expression for elements A and B, respectively, where a and b are stoichiometric coefficients. This mass balance at the oxidation front can be explicitly written as ( )( ) ( )( ) where BO , with an average molar density of ( ) We also define the molar density in a binary alloy as , where A C ∞ and B C ∞ are the far-field concentrations of alloy elements A and B, as shown in Figure The advancing velocity of the oxidation front can be derived from the local mass conservation condition, where Equations ( At the oxide-alloy interface, ( )( ) ( )( ) where dimensionless constants are the ratio of diffusion coefficients. The Damköhler numbers are the ratio of oxidation rate constants to the diffusion coefficients. Substitution of Eq. ( ) ( ) These four equations will be used later. Numerical solutions of Eqs. ( for all relevant elements O, A, or B) at oxidation interface. This assumption hints an unchanged front shape that is not true at the very beginning. The objective here is to derive analytical solutions that can approximate the exact solutions and provide us more physical insights into this problem. Though full numerical solutions can be obtained via various advanced numerical techniques, approximate solutions of o c and i c (i = A or B) can be found as, with appropriate boundary conditions and ( ) where i represents element A or B. s L is the penetration depth of oxide as shown in Fig. Here i β is a parameter related to the characteristic length scale for an alloy element concentration profile. A large i β corresponds to a sharp and abrupt increase from the interface concentration i c + to the far-field concentration i c ∞ . On the other hand, a small i β corresponds to a slow and smooth transition leading to an extensive depletion of element i. Substitution of Eq. ( and the length parameter i β can be determined as 2 2 2 It is now obvious that a large i φ (slow diffusion), large i r (fast mass transfer from bulk crystalline grain to grain boundary), and a fast s v (advancing oxidation penetration) lead to large i β (sharp transition in concentration or localized depletion). Substitution of expressions ( ( ) ( ) In principle, three unknowns s v (penetrating velocity of the oxidation front), o c -(oxygen concentration at the oxidation front) and α can be found from algebraic Eqs. ( and Finally, by solving the coupled Eqs. ( ), and the mole fraction of BOb in the oxide is ( ) . Therefore, the mole fraction of each element A, B and O in oxide can be found as ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) which satisfies the condition 1 By solving s v , o c -, and α , the concentration and concentration gradient of elements A, B, and O at oxidation front can be obtained from Eqs. ( and O in oxide can be found from Eqs. ( Next, we will derive solutions of coupled Eqs. ( ( ) ( ) For any given oxidation penetration depth s L , the oxidation penetration velocity s v can be simply solved from Eq. ( where fraction parameter α can be solved from Eq. ( For flat surface oxidation the grain boundary is not present and there is no mass transfer between the bulk alloy and the grain boundary; the two mass transport parameters are set to zero, namely 0 , and Eq. ( Let us now focus on the surface oxidation of Ni-Cr binary alloys. We denote Ni as the more noble element A and Cr as the less noble element B. The density of an NiO film has been reported to be . The dimensionless number w in Eq. ( where 1 ) above which the oxidation of element B will dominate over element A and the oxide product will be dominated by the oxide of B element. The same is also true for the other limiting case where AB r = ∞ . The penetrating velocity of oxidation can be found for a flat surface with 1 AB r  from Eqs. (31) and (32), where Substitution of solutions (36) and (37) into (31) leads to the solution of interface concentrations for surface oxidation with ( ) Obviously when one element B is much less noble than the other one A, namely 1 AB r  , the interface concentration of less noble metal B is proportional to the ratio AB r . The interface concentration of oxygen is quite dependent on the parameter aA D ( aA D for surface oxidation can be much larger than that of intergranular oxidation because the diffusion of oxygen is much faster in a grain boundary than that in the lattice oxide). Similarly, the mole fraction of each element in the oxide (Eqs. ( In this section, we will focus on applying the proposed model to intergranular selective oxidation in Ni-based binary alloys. First, a literature survey of available bulk and grain boundary diffusion data for various alloy elements in Ni based alloys is presented in Fig. These data indicate the relative relations of diffusivity for Ni, Al, and Cr with , about seven orders of magnitude higher than its bulk diffusion. The bulk and grain boundary diffusion data of Cr in nickel-based alloys are quite complicated. These data were provided in ref. [30] in the presence of carbon (up to 0.004% in mass) in Ni-Cr-Fe alloys. It is argued that grain boundary diffusion should increase with decreasing level of carbon content due to the chemical affinity between carbon and chromium: a common carbide forming element. Varying carbon content does not affect bulk diffusion The effective diffusivity of oxygen along a grain boundary was estimated to be 6 2 10 cm s - 10 cm s at 20 o C, and is many orders of magnitude larger than that for oxygen diffusion in bulk nickel oxide. Obviously all these diffusivity estimates would benefit from more detailed experimental and molecular simulation study, such that species transport to the advancing oxidation front through grain boundaries is better understood at a mechanistic level. Based on the diffusivity data presented in Fig. MPa/m, 330oC) The oxygen concentration profiles are presented in Fig. The concentration profiles for Ni are shown in Fig. A r for both alloys, and if grain boundary migration can be ignored, the effect of mass transport from grain to grain boundary can be studied quantitatively. In such a case it was found that an increase of mass flow into the grain boundary will increase the oxidation penetration velocity for both alloys, as shown in Fig. A more pronounced increase for Ni-5Al alloy was observed than that of Ni-5Cr alloy because of the relatively faster bulk diffusion of Al. For the same reason, a larger decrease of α, the oxygen fraction taken by Ni, with increasing Ni in NiO [26] O in NiO [29] Al in Ni [27] Mg in Ni [27] Si in Ni [27] Ni in Ni [28] Cr in NiCrFe [30] Cr in NiCrFe GB [30] Cr in Ni 80 Cr 20 [32] Ni in Ni 80 Cr 20 [32] T=360 o C 10 - 