Efficient imaging of biomolecules, 2D materials and electromagnetic fields depends on retrieval of the phase of transmitted electrons. We demonstrate a method to measure phase in a scanning transmission electron microscope using a nanofabricated diffraction grating to produce multiple probe beams. The measured phase is more interpretable than phase-contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy techniques without an off-axis reference wave, and the resolution could surpass that of off-axis electron holography. We apply the technique to image nanoparticles, carbon substrates and electric fields. The contrast observed in experiments agrees well with contrast predicted in simulations. The electron microscope offers the opportunity to directly image material structure and physical processes at atomic length scales. Whereas many bulk measurements must be interpreted to infer microscopic structure or processes, in the transmission electron microscope (TEM), one can directly measure the atomic number and positions of atoms and atomic columns, local shifts in atomic transition energies, and electronic and magnetic properties with high precision However, the electron dose required to produce a good signal-to-noise ratio with HAADF-STEM is high even on high-atomic-number materials, and becomes prohibitive for dose-sensitive low-atomic-number materials that weakly scatter electrons and suffer structural damage quickly An electron diffraction grating has several advantages over a biprism for STEMH. The coherence width necessary for optimal fringe visibility is much lower for an amplitude-dividing beamsplitter than a wavefrontdividing beamsplitter First, we shall introduce our notation. We use a prespecimen probe wavefunction where x p is the offset-position of our probe. For thin specimens, we can describe the interaction of the probe with the specimen as a multiplication by a specimen transmission function t(x), resulting in a post-specimen wavefunction and an interference pattern at the detector at probe position x p where A p (k) is the Fourier transform of a(x -x p ) and T (k) is the Fourier transform of t(x). Using a diffraction grating to produce multiple sharply-peaked, evenly spaced probes, our probe wavefunction is where a m (x) is sharply peaked at x = 0 and thus If we plug this into (3), and move the plane wave terms through the convolution We can see that the specimen transmission function t(x) is encoded in the set of plane waves e -i(n-m)k•x0 . If we take the inverse Fourier transform, we see that the plane waves in (6) correspond to spatially separated spots. where = n -m and each I term contains a sum over m. For example, I 0 corresponds to the n = m terms , PMIDI-STEM that contain information only about the amplitude of the specimen transmission function, and I -1 contains the same information as I 1 . Each I (x p , x) is sharply peaked at x = x 0 . We can get better insight into the information encoded here if we restrict our attention to a limited set of plane waves. In off-axis electron holography, only two plane waves interfere. The resulting fringe pattern is therefore straightforward to analyze. We can perform a similarly straightforward STEMH experiment by introducing an aperture to block extra beams. We will consider the case where all beams but the m = 0 and m = +1 beams are blocked, and m = 0 passes through vacuum, i.e. t(x) = 1 near x = 0 over a region larger than the maximum range of x p . We shall further assume that the aperture function A m = A 0 is the same for both diffraction orders, and that it takes the form of a uniform disk, where K is the edge of the aperture. Now, with just two beams, only I -1 , I 0 , and I 1 are nonzero, and each one contains only a single term from the sum on m. For clarity, we will take x → x + x 0 , and therefore shift I 1 into the center. This eliminates a delta function from I 1 . We can ignore I 0 and I -1 ; we will choose a window for our integration that only includes the term we just moved to the center. In this work, we used a window with width 0.08|x 0 |. Because one beam is in vacuum, t(x) = 1 there. We therefore see that Although an iterative method to reconstruct t(x) from ( We see that the object we have defined, which we call t M to mean the measured transfer function, is exactly the specimen transmission function convolved with a point spread function h(x p ) = |a 0 (x p )| 2 for our choice of aperture function The contrast transfer function measures the efficiency with which an imaging method reconstructs the spatial frequencies which make up an image. The nearly-unity efficiency of STEMH as the spatial frequency approaches zero, shown in Figure We will show next that STEMH and the measurement method we have outlined can be employed to image nanoparticles, carbon substrates and contamination, and electric fields. We tested our implementation of STEMH on three types of specimens: a lacey carbon substrate, gold nanoparticles on lacey and ultrathin carbon, and semiconducting CdTe/CdS nanoparticles synthesized according to procedures described previously In order to produce multiple diffracted beams, we placed a 50 μm-diameter diffraction grating with a 150 nm pitch (see Fig. For a first test of our reconstruction method, we chose a 4 mrad convergence semi-angle so that we could easily block all but two beams with the selected area aperture. This is also possible with a higher convergence angle, but may require a custom-made smaller aperture to cleanly block other beams. The phase measured by STEMH is insensitive to diffraction at this convergence angle, as diffracted disks do not overlap with the center disk.We performed experiments on the TEAM I microscope with an incident electron energy of 300 keV, and recorded data with the Gatan K2 IS direct electron detector at 400 fps with a camera length L = 1.45 m. We found that the phase measured by STEMH and the ADF-STEM signal agreed very well on lacey carbon, as shown in Fig. Imaging with STEMH also works with the reference beam on a uniform substrate if no vacuum region is accessible. In Fig. Although the phase measured by STEMH may typically be more useful, the amplitude also offers valuable information. The amplitude image is similar to a bright field image, with linear rather than quadratic sensitivity to amplitide changes in the bright field disk. With our low convergence angle, diffraction produces only amplitude contrast. With a higher convergence angle, interference of the center disk and diffracted disks produces both amplitude and phase contrast. Strong linear phases from particle edges cause a shift in diffraction and therefore a reduced overlap of the two disks, so the amplitude image has good edge contrast. A combined phase-amplitude image is sometimes more interpretable than either alone, as seen in Fig. We see from experimental tests and comparison with simulation that STEMH offers efficient contrast on lowand high-atomic number materials as well as on electric fields. In particular, like ADF-STEM, but unlike other phase contrast STEM techniques, the contrast transfer function does not go to zero at zero spatial frequency (Fig. We have demonstrated a straightforward method to measure the transfer function of a specimen with STEMH. Unlike existing phase contrast STEM techniques, STEMH measures phase with respect to a vac-uum reference. A single pixel in STEMH therefore has an absolute meaning, just as in HAADF-STEM and offaxis holography. STEMH also produces a lower-noise image than ADF (see Fig. STEMH also has the potential to achieve higher resolution than off-axis electron holography. Unlike electron holography, the fringe spacing does not affect resolution in STEMH, since the fringes are in diffraction space. The real-space resolution is limited only by aberrations, coherence, and convergence angle of the probe. In Appendix section B, we derive the measured transfer function t M (x p ) in the presence of aberrations. We show in related work that atomic resolution phase measurement is possible with a higher convergence angle and aberration correction It is worth exploring in detail in the future two more involved reconstruction methods: first, retrieving spatial information by iteratively updating the transfer function based on I 1 (x p , x) rather than simply integrating out x; and second, extending the field of view by treating scans where all beams begin in vacuum and all end on a specimen, using information from the first beam's interaction at position x p to correct for the next beam's interaction at x p and produce a flat phase reference for the first beam at position x p + x 0 . Both methods, while more computationally intensive, could significantly improve the utility of STEMH in understanding the fine structural details of cells, organic semiconductor interfaces, and nanostructures. This simple modification to the electron microscope column-replacement of one condenser aperture with a diffraction grating-and straightforward reconstruction has the potential for versatile and efficient imaging. STEMH has sensitivity to electric and magnetic fields like off-axis holography and can image with a resolution comparable to ADF-STEM. we now insert the definitions for a * c (x) and a a (x) and write out the convolution, we see that We now see that, with an aberrated probe a a (x), As is the case for incoherent imaging in STEM, aberrations just produce a point-spread function h(x) = |a a (-x)| 2 , the probe shape with aberrations, that is larger than the aberration-free point-spread function |a 0 (x)| 2 . We have kept the sign in |a a (-x)| 2 for generality in the case of asymmetric probe shapes. The cubic phase associated with coma, for example, produces a probe for which h(x) = h(-x). interference pattern So, when the features of a specimen vary on a length scale much larger than the beam size (e.g. magnetic fields in an amorphous film), we see clearly that every plane wave in (6) of order = n -m carries information from the interference of pairs of beams that have passed through the specimen at probe positions separated by a distance x 0 . This limit matches the model we previously developed If we have three dominant beams, i.e. c 1 , c 0 , c -1 > 0, we see that there is a term in I p (k), These two terms can interfere. If the phase of the first term is π different from the phase of the second term, there is zero contrast in the interference fringes with the lowest spatial frequency. We observed this in In the setup we previously demonstrated 