Imagine that there is a gapless plane tessellated by irregular, convex pentagons with their side lengths at the sub-nanoscale, and tiny balls are placed at the vertices of each pentagon. If there are no interactions among these balls, one would expect that they stand still at the vertices of the pentagons. But what if these balls symbolize atoms? The electrons and nuclei of the atoms will start to interact following the laws of quantum mechanics. As a result, the atoms will relocate leading to a system of energy minimum. While performing an experiment of manipulating individual atoms and observing the resulting configurations may be challenging, we apply ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations to carry out a virtual experiment, where we assign carbon atoms at the vertices of 14 types of convex pentagons and then optimize the positions of these atoms. We obtain a variety of unexpected structures; almost all of them except types 2 and 4 structures-these two structures are equivalent-differ from the initial pentagonal geometries. We compute the band structure of each resulting geometry representing the crystal structure of a two-dimensional (2D) material. We find diverse electrical properties among these 2D materials: metallic, semiconducting, and semi-metallic with a Dirac cone. Our work shows that encoding quantum mechanics into the geometries of irregular, convex pentagons and with the help of DFT calculations open up a novel route for accelerating discovery of new 2D materials. Pentagonal geometries are attractive to professional and amateur mathematicians, for whom one longstanding question is how many types of irregular, convex pentagons can tessellate a plane leaving no gaps or overlaps. It is well known that a regular pentagonal tiling on the Euclidean plane is impossible because its internal angle is not a divisor of 360 • . But the number of families of irregular, convex pentagons that tile a plane have grown to 15 since the discovery of the first type by Reinhardt in 1918. Tessellating a plane with irregular, convex pentagons is like playing a jigsaw puzzle. However, encoding the puzzle with laws of quantum mechanics by placing atoms at the vertices of each piece of the puzzle will likely alters the shape of the piece owing to the electron-electron, electron-ion, and ion-ion interactions. We will show that Ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations can be used to play this imaginary puzzle. Ab initio DFT simulations are an ideal tool to relax the atomic positions of a system until it reaches a configuration of local energy minimum of the corresponding high-dimensional energy surface. Essentially, DFT is an eigenvalue solver giving information of total energy that can be used to derive a number of properties of the simulated system. What is needed for DFT calculations is often as simple as the lattice parameters and atomic coordinates of a crystal or molecule. To connect pentagonal geometries with DFT simulations, we analogized an infinite plane of pentagons to the periodic crystal structure of a two-dimensional (2D) material in our recent theoretical study. In this work, we extend our DFT study to other 14 types of pentagons. Instead of studying different species, we focus on a single element, carbon, which can form a number of polymorphs with flexible bonding environments. For example, in bulk form, two of the most familiar polymorphs of carbon are graphite and diamond. In addition, Zhang et al. recently have predicted a new 3D form with interlocking hexagons. All the density functional theory (DFT) calculations such as geometry optimizations and electronic structure are performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP, version 5.4.4). Figure To evaluate the energetics of the 14 carbon nanosheets, Table I also shows their relative energies. We find that type 9 carbon nanosheet (i.e., graphene) exhibits the lowest energy revealing that six-membered rings are the most energetically favorable bonding environment in 2D. We therefore set the energy of type 9 carbon nanosheet to zero and as a reference to calculate the relative energies of the other 13 carbon nanosheets. The relative energies are generally large, ranging from 0.44 eV/atom to 2.02 eV/atom. Interestingly, type 7 carbon nanosheet exhibits the lowest relative energy (0.44 eV/atom), possibly because of the six-membered rings embedded in the crystal structure as can seen in Fig. for example, in grain boundaries of graphene nanosheets. Because once these non-graphene nanosheets form during the growing process of graphene on a metal substrate by the chemical vapor deposition method, Having obtained the optimized crystal structures and examined their energetics, we set to compute the associated band structures to determine which of the 14 car-bon nanosheets are metals or semiconductors. Figure The band structures of several of the 14 carbon nanosheets are worth of further description. The two valence bands with the highest energies are nearly degenerate throughout the entire specified k-point path. The bottom two conduction bands exhibit similar degeneracy. Because types 2 and 4 carbon nanosheets are equivalent, their band structures are identical. The conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) of type 3 carbon nanosheet at the Γ point exhibits a cone shape at first glance. To examine whether the conduction and valence bands form a Dirac cone as found in graphene, In conclusion: We have carried out DFT calculations on carbon nanosheets using 14 distinct types of pentagons as the starting structures. We found that only one carbon nanosheet with the C atoms initially located at the vertices of a pattern of type 2 or 4 pentagons is capable of retaining the pentagonal pattern. We also showed attractive electrical properties such as small carrier effective masses that are attached to the predicted carbon nanosheets. We expect that the structural properties such as elastic modulus and cohesive energy to be calculated in the future work are useful to be included in the fitting processes of C-C empirical potentials in order to improve their transferrability. Another example of future work could be replacing carbon by other elements to explore the resulting 2D structures. Our theoretical work indicates that pentagons as well as other polygonal geometries offer a copious source of initial structures for DFT calculations, leading to an alternative method for discovering 2D materials that exhibit exotic properties for nanodevice applications. Type a ( Å) b ( Å) α ( • ) d ( Å) ∆E (eV/atom) Eg(eV) six-membered rings as graphene, and the unit cell the nanosheet is just a different representation of graphene unit cell. Note that type 15 carbon nanosheet in our previous study is also found to be equivalent to graphene.