Recently the doping of topological insulators has attracted significant interest as a potential route towards topological superconductivity. Because many experimental techniques lack sufficient surface sensitivity, however, a definite proof of the coexistence of topological surface states and surface superconductivity is still outstanding. Here we report on highly surface sensitive scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) experiments performed on Tl-doped Bi 2 Te 3 , a three-dimensional topological insulator which becomes superconducting in the bulk at T C = 2.3 K. Landau level spectroscopy as well as quasiparticle interference mapping clearly demonstrated the presence of a topological surface state with a Dirac point energy E D = -(118 ± 1) meV and a Dirac velocity v D = (4.7 ± 0.1) • 10 5 m/s. Tunneling spectra often show a superconducting gap, but temperature-and field-dependent measurements show that both T C and μ 0 H C strongly deviate from the corresponding bulk values. Furthermore, in spite of a critical field value which clearly points to type-II superconductivity, no Abrikosov lattice could be observed. Experiments performed on normal-metallic Ag(111) prove that the gapped spectrum is only caused by superconducting tips, probably caused by a gentle crash with the sample surface during approach. Nearly identical results were found for the intrinsically n-type compound Nb-doped Bi 2 Se 3 . Our results suggest that the superconductivity in superconducting-doped V-VI topological insulators does not extend to the surface where the topological surface state is located. It has quite early been theoretically recognized that the lack of spin-and spatial-rotation symmetries in p-wave superconductors leads to unconventional textures of the order parameter which may result in domain walls and quasiparticle excitations with vanishing excitation energies, so-called zero modes. Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 with 0.10 ≤ x ≤ 0.15 was the first intercalated topological material for which a superconducting transition with a transition temperature of 3.8 K was claimed. 15 X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments in combination with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) confirmed that Cu was intercalated into the van der Waals gap of Bi 2 Se 3 with "long or short range order". Sr-intercalated and Sr-doped Bi 2 Se 3 was investigated by resistivity experiments. Whereas no superconductivity was found for the doped sample, a superconducting transition temperature of 2.57 K was reported for Sr-intercalated Bi 2 Se 3 . Magnetic field-dependent measurements revealed a critical field of roughly 1 T and quantum oscillations verifying the presence of a surface state. Based on Landau level spectroscopy it was claimed that a proper topological surface state is present, even though the very narrow energy range over which the Landau levels could be observed severely complicates the determination if the Landau level dispersion relation indeed follows a Dirac-like behavior. Most transport studies Here we report on our attempts to verify the coexistence of topological surface states and surface superconductivity on cleaved surfaces of Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 and Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 . Especially Tldoped Bi 2 Te 3 is unique as-contrary to other materials-it is p-doped. In heavily n-doped materials the Fermi level is well inside the conduction band such that bulk and surface superconductivity may easily be confused. In contrast, we can disentangle topological states from bulk electronic properties for p-type Tl-doped Bi 2 Te 3 . Landau level spectroscopy in combination with quasiparticle interference mapping on one hand clearly demonstrates the presence of a topological surface state in both compounds. On the other hand, in neither case we were able to find clear evidence for surface superconductivity down to the lowest possible measurement temperature of 300 mK. Even though superconducting gaps were regularly observed in STS data at high energy resolution, several inconsistencies indicate that these results are most likely caused by an unintentional coating of the tip apex with superconducting material, possibly in form of a small cluster. This interpretation is supported by values for the critical temperature and the critical field which deviated strongly from corresponding values measured with bulk sensitive methods. The growth of Tl-doped Bi 2 Te 3 was performed by mixing high-purity elemental shots of Tl (99.99%), Bi (99.9999%), and Te (99.9999%) that were cleaned in order to remove oxide layers. The mixture was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube and heated to 1123 K for 48 h. The tube was cooled to 823 K with a rate of 5 K/h, followed by a quench in ice-water [see Refs. Measurements with a minimal temperature T min = 1.5 K were performed with a homebuilt cryogenic scanning tunneling microscope which is equipped with a superconducting magnet that supplies a magnetic field of up to 12.5 T perpendicular to the sample surface. Experiments at lower temperature (T = 300 mK) were executed with a commercial Unisoku USM-1300. For all measurements we used electro-chemically etched W tips. Topographic images were recorded in the constant-current mode. The bias voltage is applied to the sample, i.e., negative (positive) voltages correspond to occupied (unoccupied) sample states, respectively. Spectroscopy data were obtained under open feedback loop conditions by adding a small modulation voltage U mod to the bias voltage U by means of a lock-in amplifier. The samples were glued on a sample holder, introduced into the ultra-high vacuum system via a load lock, and cleaved at room temperature at a pressure p ≤ 5 • 10 -10 mbar. Immediately after cleavage the pristine sample was inserted into the STM. During tip conditioning, which was performed by dipping the tip apex into a clean Ag(111) surface, the sample was stored in a garage inside the LHe shield at temperatures close to 4.2 K. A. Tl-doped Bi 2 Te 3 1. The topological surface state scan area we find a total of (220 ± 15) defects, i.e., far below the number of 9,000 Tl atoms expected within the first quintuple layer of Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 . In fact, by analyzing the appearance of defects in STM images we find that the vast majority of them closely resemble defects which are also characteristic for pristine p-doped Bi 2 Te 3 , i.e., antisites of Bi in the top and the bottom Te plane of the first quintuple layer. where E D is the Dirac energy, v D the Dirac velocity, n the LL index, and B the magnetic field perpendicular to the sample surface. In the case of Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 all peaks visible in Fig. The results presented so far confirm that the surface of Tl-doped Bi In the same study To investigate potential superconducting properties of cleaved Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 we performed high resolution spectroscopy experiments close to the Fermi energy. An experimental result obtained at a nominal temperature T ≈ 1.5 K is presented as a black line in Fig. In order to characterize the probe tip more carefully, we performed STS experiments on a normal-metallic Ag(111) surface. The red curve in Fig. One can recognize a superconducting gap with a very similar shape as for Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 (cf. black spectrum). The small deviations are possibly caused by a slightly higher measurement temperature and the metallic nature of silver which leads to a much higher density of states at the Fermi level. These findings clearly show that the superconducting gap observed in the black curve of Fig. Comparison of our results with a recent temperature-and field-dependent STS study For example, for Sr 0.2 Bi 2 Se 3 a critical temperature T C ≈ 5 K and a second critical field μ 0 H C 2 ≈ 5 T were reported. Only if we took extreme care to safely approach the tip to the Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 surface by using a very low set point current I set ≤ 30 pA and feedback circuit settings which exclude self-resonance we could avoid any tip-sample contact. With these clean W tips we performed measurements on several samples that were previously analyzed by transport measurements. Even though all samples showed bulk superconductivity with transition temperatures close to 2.3 K, we were unable to detect any superconducting gap in the low-bias regime around the Fermi level in our STS experiments, as exemplarily shown by the thick blue line in Fig. This finding might be explained by three scenarios: (i) The sample was superconducting immediately after materials synthesis but later degrades due to aging effects, potentially because of insufficient cooling and the resulting onset of Tl segregation, which could lead to a reduction of the superconducting volume fraction. The surface-related downward band bending effects discussed above possibly results in a surface which is effectively decoupled from the p-doped bulk. This decoupling could lead to scenario (iii), i.e., a surface critical temperature which is substantially lower than the corresponding bulk value. In fact we could not detect any sign of surface superconductivity in our STS measurements down the lowest possible sample temperature in our study which was more than a factor of 6 lower than T bulk C = 2.3 K. As will be discussed below the issue of a p-n junction which isolates the surface from the bulk might be overcome by p-type doping the Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 surface. Another result of our study is that even gentle collisions of the STM tip with any of the two materials investigated here, i.e., Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 or Nb x Bi 2 Se 3 , lead to superconducting tips. For both materials, temperature-and field-dependent measurements reveal very similar values for the critical temperature and the critical field of T C ≈ 5 K and μ 0 H C 2 ≈ 5 T, respectively. It appears that-even though both the surfaces of extended single crystals and the W tip are normal conducting themselves-the combinations of W plus the nanoparticles picked up by STM tip very reliably exhibit a superconducting gap which survives up to critical temperatures or external magnetic fields well above the corresponding bulk values. The large critical field could be due to a finite-size effect, but the enhancement in T C cannot be explained in this way, thereby pointing to a new superconducting phase. In this regard, it is useful to mention that W has a tendency towards superconducting instability. In conclusion, we analyzed the surface structural and electronic properties of Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 and Nb x Bi 2 Se 3 by low-temperature scanning tunneling spectroscopy. We could clearly demonstrate the existence of a topological surface state by Landau level spectroscopy and quasiparticle interference. The not-so-occasional observation of gapped tunneling spectra is ascribed to tips which were unintentionally coated with superconducting material. In these cases both the critical temperature and the critical magnetic field are about a factor of 3-10 higher than in bulk sensitive experiments. In agreement with this hypothesis we could not find any hint of magnetic vortices in field-dependent measurements. We conclude that the x Bi 2 Se 3 (0.10 ≤ x ≤ 0.15) transport, XRD, TEM, STM 3.