Random lasers use radiative gain and multiple scatterers in disordered media to generate light amplification. In this study, we demonstrate a random laser based on diamond nanoneedles that act as scatterers in combination with fluorescent dye molecules that serve as a gain medium. Random lasers realized using diamond possess high spectral radiance with angle-free emission and thresholds of 0.16 mJ. The emission dependence on the pillar diameter and density is investigated, and optimum lasing conditions are measured for pillars with spacing and density of ~ 336±40 nm and ~ 2.9 x 10 10 cm -2 . Our results expand the application space of diamond as a material platform for practical, compact photonic devices and sensing applications. Diamond has long been considered an ideal material for many applications due to its high chemical stability and thermal conductivity, and excellent optical properties Indeed diamond has become a robust platform for emerging quantum photonic technologies Random lasing has emerged as a promising candidate for various applications in sensing To realize a diamond random laser, we engineered disordered nanoscale diamond pillars with a high density using reactive ion etching (RIE), and used a fluorescent dye solution as the gain medium. The diamond nanoneedles act as scatterers for the random lasing process, and also trap the fluorescent dye solution via capillary action and viscous entrainment Such nano-masking effects result in the formation of highly dense and disordered diamond nanoneedles without the necessity of patterning (figure To confirm the pillars were composed of diamond, we performed Raman analysis before and after etching. A laser of 633 nm wavelength and 1800 l/mm gratings was used and only one main Raman active mode at ~ 1332 cm -1 was observed. The measured peak was fitted with a Lorentzian function, and the full width at half maximum was <2 cm -1 . The Raman spectra confirmed that there was no amorphous carbon on the surface of diamond after etching as the presence of carbon would show a peak at 1580 cm -1 The emission properties of the diamond nanoneedles containing a gain medium were tested at room temperature by a pulsed laser at normal incidence. A 2 μl droplet of Rhodamine dye 6G 10 -3 mol/l (Rh6G) was drop cast onto the diamond samples (figure Figure The photon mean free path is an important parameter in random laser systems and is determined by the nature and the density of the scatterers. By changing the etching parameters, we have the flexibility to vary the density of the nanoneedles. Table The etch conditions (Table Another contribution to the decrease in the threshold is the nanoneedle geometry. Nanopillars with tapered profiles can suppress the reflectance of the flat substrate by gradually changing the refractive index contrast, thus incident light would concentrate in the disordered substrate. Enhanced absorption would then increase the optical gain efficiency of dye and correspondingly amplify the spontaneous emission Since different laser cavities formed by multiple scattering events could have different output directions, lasing modes observed at different angles can, in principle, be different. In our case, due to a 5 ns pulse width of the excitation laser, the laser peaks were averaged and merged into one broad peak. We successfully realized random lasers from diamond nanoneedles integrated with Rhodamine dye solution. We found that the best diamond nanoneedle sample for the random lasers is sample iv, containing tapered and sharp edge needles with average width of 139±15 nm, exhibits the lowest threshold of 0.16 mJ. Future directions of this work may include integration of diamond nanoneedles with microfluidic channels to achieve tuneable lasing and testing of other gain media. Our results are promising for applications in imaging, sensing and display technologies. The single crystal diamond sample (3 mm x 3 mm x 0.3 mm, Element Six) had the top face (100) synthesized by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) with nitrogen concentration < 1 ppm. A dilute silica bead solution was ultra-sonicated and vortex-mixed to evenly distribute the silicon nanoparticles in solution. A 0.5 mL droplet was dropcast on the diamond sample. The diamond samples were flushed with O2 plasma for 5 minutes before the RIE process using inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE), followed by a 10 minute O2 plasma clean. A Q-switched, frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser (532 nm wavelength, 1 to 10 Hz repetition rate, 5 ns pulse width) with a 3 mm pump beam diameter was used to pump the samples at an angle of 45° to the normal to the front face of the sample, which was adhered to a glass slide by immersion oil and the slide was mounted vertically. The dye liquid remained in position during the experiments, due to its viscosity and the entrainment by the nanoneedles A lens (f = 5 cm) was placed at 30° to the normal in front of the sample to collect emission light to a fibre-coupled spectrometer (Ocean Optics, USB2000 UV-VS-ES ~1 nm resolution). A 532 nm edge filter was used to block residual pump light from the spectrometer. reactive ion etching conditions used on different diamond samples. The average values for the spacing, width and taper angle were measured from the SEM images in figure