Although correlated electronic-structure calculations explain very well the normal state of Sr2RuO4, its superconducting symmetry is still unknown. Here we construct the spin and charge fluctuation pairing interactions based on its correlated normal state. Correlations significantly reduce ferromagnetic in favor of antiferromagnetic fluctuations and increase inter-orbital pairing. From the normal-state Eliashberg equations, we find spinsinglet d-wave pairing close to magnetic instabilities. Away from these instabilities, where charge fluctuations increase, we find two time-reversal symmetry-breaking spin-triplets: an odd-frequency s-wave, and a doublydegenerate inter-orbital pairing between dxy and (dyz, dxz). Intensive experimental and theoretical studies have not yet yielded a definitive answer for the superconducting symmetry for Sr 2 RuO 4 (SRO). Its similarities with 3 He On the other hand, low-temperature gapless excitations were found by various methods The multi-orbital nature of the superconductivity in SRO complicates the analysis. Numerous studies have attempted to characterize the symmetry of SRO superconducting order parameter along with its dominant orbital host We thus start from a correlated electronic structure obtained using density-functional theory in the local density approximation plus dynamical mean-field theory (LDA+DMFT) Figure The effect of local correlations on the electronic structure, encoded in the self-energy Σ, is to shift the non-interacting eigenenergies and to introduce a finite lifetime to quasiparticles. The orbital l's quasiparticle renormalization factor Z l , where In spin and charge fluctuation mediated superconductivity, the Cooper pairing interaction is expressed in terms of spin and charge susceptibilities that measure the response to external magnetic or electric fields, respectively where in LDA (LDA+DMFT) G K,l1l2 is the non-interacting (fully interacting) Green's function describing propagation of a particle from orbital l 2 to orbital l 1 with fermionic energymomentum four vector K ≡ (iω m , k). The external bosonic energy-momentum four vector is Q and its momentum q is called a nesting vector when the response is large because it nests different segments of the FS. The propagator in an interacting system can be decomposed into coherent and incoherent parts: G ≡ G coh + G incoh . Then the bubble susceptibility can be rewritten as the sum of two contributions: (i) one that comes from the product of the coherent (quasiparticle) parts of G, (ii) another that comes from the scattering of the incoherent part with itself and with the coherent part It has been approximated in the literature by using the ARPES band structure in the expression The cos-like shape of the q1D orbitals causes strong nesting at q 1D ∼ (±π, ±2π/3), (±2π/3, ±π), as can be seen from purely intra-orbital d xz and d yz components. Other peaks benefiting from this q1D nature are q 1D near the M point and q 1D ∼ (±2π/3, ±2π/3) that corresponds to the neutron scattering observations in Ref. The d xy intra-orbital component exhibits a wide plateau around the antiferromagnetic (AFM) nesting vector q AFM = (±π, ±π) that connects states near vHSs. Moreover, these states also induce strong nearly ferromagnetic (nFM) fluctuations at small q nFM . The corresponding AFM and nFM instabilities compete in LDA, but in QP and LDA+DMFT the nFM peak is strongly suppressed by electron correlations, in agreement with inelastic neutron-scattering observations In the LDA calculation, the dominant component of χ rable susceptibilities as can be seen from the right panel of Fig. The Cooper pairing susceptibility, to lowest order, is obtained from Fig. where Γ d/m denotes p-h irreducible amplitudes for all scattering processes in density and magnetic channels. Here, we use the random phase approximation (RPA), which approximates the irreducible vertex functions with uniform and static (momentum and frequency independent) ones, as was done to study superconductivity in the cuprates The Cooper pairing interaction can be written in term of these susceptibilities, Eq. ( Before showing results of detailed calculations in Fig. In the singlet channel, the overall pairing interaction is repulsive, requiring a sign changing gap symmetry. The dominant nesting vectors of the d xy orbital corresponds to the plateau near q AFM . Although the nesting condition seems poor, it is the leading wave vector for fluctuations because it connects the FS states around vHSs. Hence, a gap function with large superconducting gap value at the FS patches around vHSs would have a much lower energy than the normal state, making a gap function with d-wave cos k x -cos k y symmetry a prime candidate. In the LDA calculation, the nFM peak promotes degenerate gap functions with p-wave sin k x or sin k y symmetries. To satisfy Pauli's principle, these spin-singlet intra-orbital odd-parity states are odd in frequency and therefore have a vanishing equal-time order parameter The d xz (d yz ) q1D orbitals have dominant nesting vectors at q 1D , which is compatible with a singlet gap of the form cos k x (cos k y ) with nodes on the FS near k x = ±π/2 (k y = ±π/2). If the two orbitals are out of phase, then the resulting gap function has d-wave cos k x -cos k y symmetry, while an in-phase gap function would rather have ans ± symmetry Coupling all the orbitals together, the most probable singlet gap symmetry has cos k x -cos k y d-wave symmetry. In the triplet channel, the pairing interaction has both attractive and repulsive components, involving particle and hole momenta ( K ↑, K ↓) (for the S z = 0 case). The attractive (repulsive) parts are maximum when the transferred momentum kk (k + k) is equal to a nesting vector and ω m = ω m (-ω m ) For (d xz , d yz ) orbitals, attractive and repulsive parts of the interaction pair different states. For example, for d xz (red curves in Fig. With all orbitals included, the most probable gap symmetry in the triplet channel has an odd-frequency ∆ 0 + ∆ 1 (cos k x + cos k y ) extended s-wave symmetry. All intra-orbital pairing described so far are non-local. Considering the inter-orbital pairing, a local pairing mechanism becomes possible. Even in the presence of electronic repulsion, such pairing arises from Hund's coupling and promotes spin-triplet inter-orbital states that are odd under exchange of orbitals with an almost uniform momentum dependence (see SM for a detailed analysis of the pairing interaction components promoting inter-orbital Cooper pairing). Such states have been discussed in the context of SRO To tell apart all these possibilities, we performed an un- biased calculation by searching the leading eigenvalues and corresponding gap functions of the linearized normal-state Eliashberg equation for different combinations of J s and U s Although we calculated several leading eigenvectors In summary, we performed a systematic search for superconducting states of SRO from a LDA+DMFT electronic structure combined with static vertex functions (RPA). Using spin and charge fluctuation mediated pairing, we found that in proximity to a magnetic instability, the spin-singlet d-wave state is favored by AFM fluctuations. Further away from the magnetic instability, charge fluctuations become sizeable, promoting two spin-triplet states: an odd-frequency s-wave state and a doubly degenerate odd-orbital state that pairs electrons between d xy and (d yz , d xz ). Both states are interesting candidates for superconductivity in SRO. Consequences on physical observables of these two pairing states should be studied in details. Supplemental Materials: Superconducting Symmetries of Sr 2 RuO 4 from First-Principles Electronic Structure In this Supplemental Material, we show in the first section the non-interacting LDA bands, with and without spin-orbit coupling (SOC). This allows us to argue that SOC does not substantially modify the susceptibilities in either the particleparticle or particle-hole channels. The second section recalls the Eliashberg equation and pairing vertex entering the calculations. The third section explains the difference between the present and the standard uses of the Eliashberg theory. The fourth section discusses the properties of the various gap functions. The fifth section presents the leading eigenvalues and the symmetry of the corresponding eigenvectors for various Stoner factors. Finally, the last section presents a detailed analysis of the pairing interaction components promoting inter-orbital Cooper pairing. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) was neglected in this work because it necessitates a more general formulation of the pairing vertex, yet to be developed. Moreover, we believe that including it would only generate modest consequences on the results of this work and this section explains why. In the p-p channel, the main changes occurs between Γ and X, which are precisely the nearly degenerate points encircled in black on Fig. In the p-h channel, there is a slight difference all around the Brillouin zone between LDA and LDA+SOC because of various changes in the FS. Nevertheless, all the leading peaks keep similar positions, even though some are a bit suppressed. Thus no significant changes in the gap functions are expected. The effect of SOC was argued not to affect the correlationinduced renormalizations incorporated through dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) In an interacting system, the propagating particle-hole excitations interact with their environment through their selfenergy cloud and with each other by exchanging multiple real or virtual p-h excitations. According to the Bethe-Salpeter equation, the dressed susceptibilities can be decomposed into the bubble susceptibility and the vertex corrections as shown in the Fig. In the p-h channel, the dressed susceptibility includes the vertex correction part as well. Calculating this part requires the irreducible vertex function Γ ph , as shown in Fig. where U s (U s ) is the local and static screened intra-orbital (inter-orbital) on-site Coulomb repulsion. Because of rotational invariance, one has U s = U s -2J s and J s is the Hund's coupling. This approximation corresponds to the lowest order of parquet equations for the vertex and to the random phase approximation for the density and magnetic susceptibilities. The dressing of spin and charge fluctuations is performed using Eq. ( The parameters U s and J s are different from the bare parameters (U and J) due to screening effects. The values of U s and J s are unknown. By studying the effect of the Stoner factors, we can tune the distance from a magnetic instability. The chosen physical range is described in the main text. A superconducting transition to a singlet (triplet) state is signaled by an instability in the dressed susceptibility in p-p channel. For pairs with vanishing center of mass frequencymomentum, the condition for a phase transition is given in the form of an eigenvalue problem known as the linearized FIG. In spin-and charge-fluctuation theory, the pairing vertex for singlet (s) and triplet (t) channels are given by Fig. From Eq. (S2), the eigenvectors ∆ with largest eigenvalue λ are called leading gap functions. Each irreducible representation of the system's group symmetry has a specific eigenvalue. Using Arnoldi's algorithm, we obtain the leading gap functions in decreasing order of λ. It is worth mentioning that the standard Eliashberg equation is usually solved in the superconducting phase, however Eq. ( In our calculation, the full matrix structure in fermionic frequencies is kept. This allows us to capture both even-and odd-frequency gap functions. However, because of relatively narrow peaks in momentum space, we decided to keep only two possible values of fermionic frequencies and to consider the largest possible k-point grid. For some cases, we checked that increasing the number of fermionic Matsubara frequencies does not change the order of the leading gap function. Note that we have considered 1024 positive Matsubara frequencies in evaluating the bare particle-hole susceptibility, i.e, in Eq. ( The gap function, entering the Eliashberg equation Eq. (S2), is a two-electrons condensate, or Cooper pair, written as ∆(1, 2), with the shortcut 1 ≡ (r 1 , τ 1 , l 1 , σ 1 ) where position is r 1 , imaginary time is τ 1 , orbital index l 1 and spin σ 1 . The two spatial (imaginary time) coordinates can be Fourier transformed, yielding a center of mass momentum q (bosonic frequency ν n ) and a relative momentum k (fermionic frequency ω n ). With vanishing center of mass and thermodynamic equilibrium, we have (q, iν n ) = 0 so that the elements of the gap function become ∆ σ1σ2 Kl1l2 with K ≡ (k, iω n ). The normal state of SRO is invariant under any spacial transformation g of the D 4h point group. An operator ĝ of the group acts as follows where R(g) ∈ O( As explained in Ref. S10, the orthogonality of the irreps allows to construct the character projection operator Pp of the irrep p using the character table of D 4h . Therefore, a gap function transforming as the irrep q satisfies where χp (g) is the character of transformation g associated to irrep p. Since spin is independent of momentum when spinorbit coupling is neglected, the gap function can be spindiagonalized into singlet (s) and triplet (t). They are odd and even solutions under spin exchange Ŝ. Thereby The gap function is not diagonal in orbital indices in general. It thus opens the possibility to be even or odd under orbital exchange Ô, that is Let us define the operator T such that it transforms iω n into -iω n . Like all other operators above, when we apply this operator twice, it is the identity, which means its eigenvalues are ±1. Thus, we have Given the definition of time-ordered product and the anticommutation of fermions, the identity ∆(1, 2) = -∆(2, 1) has to be satisfied. This implies the following constraint on the operators we just defined [S11] with ∆ l1;l2 ≡ ∆ s/t Kl1l2 an intra-orbital (inter-orbital) component if l 1 = l 2 (l 1 = l 2 ). The relative contribution of all orbital components reveals in what orbital the Cooper pairs are mostly hosted. A superconducting state that binds preferably an electron from orbital l 1 with one from orbital l 2 has dominant ∆ l1l2 and ∆ l2l1 components. The gap function is said to be intra-orbital if the leading component has l 1 = l 2 and inter-orbital otherwise. The superconducting order parameters, or gap functions ∆, are the eigenvectors of the Γ pp χ 0 pp matrices. They are For a given set of parameters J s /U s and S m , the gap function with largest eigenvalue is considered the leading instability. Fig. The first column of Table The last column gives the symmetry name including angular momentum. To help understand the spatial structure of these gaps, Fig. For each set of parameters studied, the eigenvector with largest eigenvalue was used to construct the phase diagram of Fig. inter-orbital density-density interactions are equal U s = U s , hence electrons can hop locally between different orbitals without any extra energy cost. This degeneracy is lifted for a finite J s , decreasing the charge (orbital) fluctuations. On the other hand, a larger Hund's coupling increases the spinfluctuations as seen from the last equation. Since, the interorbital pairing interaction is given by summation of the charge and spin fluctuation (see Eq. 1), the role of the Hund's coupling is not trivial. Nevertheless, assuming U s = U s -2J s , then for J s /U s ∼ 0.25, one can see that the mm; ll component of the ladder function is larger than the lm; lm component. Indeed, for J s /U s = 0.25, the coefficient (-U s + 2J s ) vanishes while U s (2U s -J s ) is large. A similar analysis can be done for Γ t pp (0) Klm;K ml . The only difference is that mm; ll component of the ladder function appears with positive coefficient while lm; lm has negative coefficient leading to a repulsive pairing interaction. Since, Γ t pp (0) Klm;K ml connect ∆ lm to ∆ ml , it leads to a odd-inter-orbital pairing.