We investigated LaFeAsO single crystals by means of synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy under pressure up to 7.5 GPa and down to 13 K and provide a microscopic phase diagram. We found a continuous suppression of the magnetic hyperfine field with increasing pressure and it completely vanishes at ∼ 7.5 GPa which is in contrast to the behavior in polycrystalline samples where the magnetic order vanishes at ∼ 20 GPa. The different behavior of the polycrystalline samples might be due to As-vacancies. Our results are in qualitative agreement with density functional theory calculations where a reduction of the magnetic moment with increasing pressure was found. We found that among different samples at ambient pressure the magnetic phase transition temperature as well as the low-temperature magnetic hyperfine field decrease with increasing unit cell volume. LaFeAsO as a member of the 1111 family is one of the most studied compounds of the iron-based superconductors. It offers high superconducting transition temperatures in the case of F-substitution Upon cooling LaFeAsO exhibit a structural phase transition from P 4/nmm to Cmma at 145 K and shows spin density wave order below 127 K. A LaFeAsO single crystal was investigated by means of synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy (SMS), also known as nuclear resonant forward scattering at the beamline 3ID-B of the Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The single crystal growth is described in detail elsewhere. Synchrotron Mössbauer spectra for representative pressures and temperatures are shown in Fig. spherical. Therefore the FeAs tetrahedra is uniformly compressed with increasing pressure. Additionally this indicates a hydrostatic pressure condition. In the magnetic phase the quadrupole splitting is ∼ 0.34 mm/s at 0.5 GPa and decreases to ∼ 0.3 mm/s and ∼ 0.2 mm/s at 4 GPa and 6.4 GPa, respectively. At ambient pressure in polycrystalline samples in the magnetic phase quadrupole splittings of 0.12 to 0.3 mm/s were reported which are in fair agreement with our results. 2 GPa an extraction of the MVF was not possible due to small magnetic hyperfine fields. Thus the MVF was set to one during the analysis of those pressures in the magnetic phase transition region. However, this does not influence the analysis of the low-temperature data. is the highest temperature with 100 % MVF. For 6.4 and 7.2 GPa no magnetic volume fraction was extractable from the data and therefore only T onset N is shown. Line is a guide to the eye only. Data point at ambient pressure is taken from Ref. The low-temperature magnetic hyperfine field as a function of pressure is shown in Fig. duced to zero at 7.5 GPa. For this pressure an Fe-As distance of ∼ 2.37 Å can be extrapolated from reported room temperature data. FIG. It was shown that the Fe magnetic moment and thus the magnetic hyperfine field are related to the Fe-As distance which controls the Fe 3d -As 4p hybridization strength. Resistivity measurements on polycrystalline samples show a linear reduction of the magnetic phase transition temperature between 0 and 2 GPa followed by an upturn. The large difference between single and polycrystals may be due to the granular and inhomogeneous nature and O-deficiency at the grain boundaries of the latter. It was pointed out by McElroy et al. that in polycrystalline samples the reduction in the resistivity at lower temperatures is very broad and it goes to zero only at 12 GPa which is maybe caused by tiny amounts of O-deficient sample volumes. It was shown in LaFeAs 1-x O 0.9 F 0.1 that As-vacancies act as magnetic defects with a magnetic moment of 0.8 μ B /Fe due to a spin polarization of the Fe 3d electrons if the Fe 3d -As 4p hybridization is sufficiently strong enough. In summary we conducted synchrotron Mössbauer experiments at pressures up to 7.5 GPa and at temperatures between 13 and 125 K and provide a microscopic phase diagram of LaFeAsO single crystals under pressure. At the magnetic phase transition an increase in the quadrupole splitting was observed which is most likely of magnetic origin. The magnetic hyperfine field is continuously suppressed to zero at ∼ 7.5 GPa which corresponds to a Fe-As distance of ∼ 2.37 Å. Our results indicate that single and polycrystalline samples behave qualitatively similar up to 2 GPa but differ at higher pressures. Possible cause in polycrystalline samples could be due to their granular and inhomogeneous nature and O-deficiency at the grain boundaries. Another possibil-ity in polycrystalline samples could be As-vacancies acting as magnetic centers as shown in Ref. 