Increasing demand of ethylene oxide and the cost of versatile chemical ethene has been a driving force for understanding mechanism of epoxidation to develop highly selective catalytic process. Direct epoxidation is a proposed mechanism which in theory provides 100% selectivity. A key aspect of this mechanism is an electrophilic oxygen (O ele ) species forming on the Ag surface. In the past two and half decades, large number of theoretical and experimental investigations have tried to elucidate formation of O ele on Ag surface with little success. Equipped with this rich literature on Ag-O interactions, we investigate the same using periodic DFT calculations to further understand how silver surface and oxygen interact with each other from a chemical standpoint. Based on energetics, Löwdin charges, topologies and pdos data described in this study, we scrutinize the established notions of O ele . Our study provides no evidence in support of O ele being an atomic species nor a diatomic molecular species. In fact, a triatomic molecular species described in this work bears multiple signatures which are very convincing evidence for considering it as the most sought for electrophilic entity. Silver catalyzed ethene (En) epoxidation by oxygen to produce ethylene oxide (EtO) is one of the most well-known kinetically controlled reaction in chemistry. It is also one of the most studied example in discipline of heterogeneous catalysis, owing to the great economic importance of EtO as well as En. To search for O ele which is a key to direct epoxidation, we have modeled Ag-O interactions at various monolayer concentrations of O on Ag(100) surface. For an electrophilic oxygen to exist on Ag surface, it should have following two characteristic chemical features. Firstly, it should have a positive charge and secondly, it should be a covalently bonded species with empty states in the energy range 0-6 eV. We have investigated interaction of O with Ag(100) surface by employing Kohn-Sham formulation of DFT. The interaction between electrons and ions was modeled with Projector Augmented Wave pseudopotential with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchangecorrelation within generalized gradient approximation, as implemented in the plane wave code, Quantum ESPRESSO. As we focused on silver-oxygen interaction, the system was chosen in such a way that it can be exhaustively studied at optimal computational expenses. In a 2X2 slab, based on symmetry arguments, three distinct surface sites exist. Also the calculations are carried out under periodic boundary conditions and thus the system can be repeated infinitely to model macroscopic surface. But as unit cell for such macroscopic model consists of surface created by four Ag atoms, inclusion of single oxygen atom on surface is equivalent to 1/4 monolayer (ML) coverage of oxygen which is equivalent to the model of pristine silver surface coated with 1/4 ML of oxygen under experimental conditions. Under these circumstances, our model enables us to study 0.25 ML (one oxygen), 0.5 ML (two oxygen atoms), 0.75 ML (three oxygen atoms) and 1 ML (four oxygen atoms). As attaining 1 ML is very difficult under experimental conditions and adding four atoms in such a small system results in severe distortions, we have not included cases of the same in this study. We have considered all possible configurations under 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 monolayers, where oxygen atom or molecule can occupy unique positions. Thus, it is ensured that all types of silver-oxygen bonding configurations are investigated. A small modeled system has obvious disadvantages when it comes to elucidation of reaction intermediates and mechanisms. However, we have defined the goal of this study, to investigate adsorption of oxygen on silver and to understand the nature of bonding in such interactions. Hence, this small system provides a modest starting point. In the following section, we discuss the interaction between O species and Ag(100) surface as a function of increasing concentration of O. As noted earlier, the surface was modeled by considering four layers of Ag(100) with 2x2 supercell. The bottom most layer is fixed. Thus, our simulation box contains Out of these three surface configurations, oxygen adsorbed at hollow site (4FH) is energetically the most preffered configuration followed by the bridge position (2FB) and the least stable is on-top site (1FT). Ag-O bond length increases with coordination and is noted in Table As none of the atomic oxygen species possess any compatible states above E f for accepting π-electrons from ethene, we conclude that single atomic oxygen species should be precluded as contributing factor in the direct epoxidation. pdos along with the configuration for atomically adsorbed oxygens is shown in Fig. Hence, discussion in this section will focus on the molecularly adsorbed oxygen. In case of molecularly adsorbed oxygen, pdos for all the cases are very similar, exhibiting signature of molecular oxygen which is considerably different than that of atomically adsorbed oxygen. Further, the most stable molecularly adsorbed oxygen also exhibit more delocalisation This emphasizes nature of Ag-O interactions which do not favor formation of well defined molecules but weakly bonded moieties with maximum possible coordination for each atom involved. Löwdin charges preclude consideration of any oxygen species studied here as an electrophile from ionic standpoint. Further, lack of empty states near E f emphasis their inability to accept π electrons from ethene. Thus, these configurations cannot be considered as electrophiles from covalent standpoint also. Owing to this analysis, such dissociatively adsorbed diatomic molecular oxygen species should be precluded as contributing factor in direct epoxidation. In case of 0.75 ML, we have modeled the system by adsorbing three atomic oxygen (3O), combination of atomic and diatomic molecular oxygen (O 2 O) and triatomic molecular oxygen hollow site has the lowest energy. However, if we consider ten most stable configurations they are dominated by adsorption of triatomic molecular oxygen as evident from TableIII Keen observation of Fig. Few caveats should be noted when we are closing our discussions. Ethylene epoxidation is one of the most investigated reactions in heterogeneous catalysis. Two types of oxygen species, electrophilic and nucleophilic oxygen were envisaged. Although, many experiments and simulations could bring out signatures of nucleophilic oxygen, so far electrophilic oxygen remains a mystery. In the present work, we investigate interaction be-tween Ag(100) surface and oxygen as a function of monolayer concentration. Our extensive investigations reveal that at 0.25ML and 0.5ML the two signatures associated with electrophilic oxygen species viz. positive charge on oxygen and empty states near Fermi level are missing and so we can not consider these atomically or molecularly adsorbed oxygen as an electrophilic oxygen required for direct epoxidation. On the other hand, adsorbed O 3 species at 0.75 ML concentration bares signatures relevant for electrophilic oxygen. Middle oxygen in all adsorbed O 3 have significant positive charge as evident from their Löwdin charges as well as all these configurations have empty states in between 3.5 -5.5 eV required to accept π electrons from ethene to form EtO. Thus, our investigations bring out situations corresponding to electrophilic oxygen required for direct epoxidation. energy (∆E), Ag-O coordination along with bond length, O-O bond lengths, and Löwdin charges on oxygen for various configurations of oxygen at 0.5 ML coverage. Two configurations (O O(2) and O 2 O(5)) are not included on the basis of their similar pdos nature.