Aluminium alloy AA7075 (Al-Zn-Mg-Cu) specimens were prepared using selective laser melting, also known as powder bed fusion additive manufacturing. In the as-manufactured state, which represents a locally rapidly solidified condition, the prevalence of a previously unreported icosahedral quasicrystal with 5-fold symmetry was observed. The icosahedral quasicrystal, which has been termed -phase (nu-phase), was comprised of Zn, Cu and Mg. The 7xxx series aluminium (Al) alloys based on the Al-Zn-Mg(-Cu) system are undoubtedly one of the most significant alloy systems of the last century Owing to the complexity of joining and producing complex shapes with age-hardenable aluminium alloys, the commercial advent of additive manufacturing permits the design and production of complex components in net-shape. The ability to produce high strength and light weight components from commodity materials (such as Al-Zn-Mg-Cu) provides the impetus for exploring the additive manufacturing of alloys such as Al-alloy AA7075 In the study herein, AA7075 powder was supplied by LPW Technology, with a powder size distribution of ~20-63 μm. Selective laser melting (SLM) was carried out using a Concept Laser M-Lab Cusing-R, and specimen production employed a laser power of 95 W, laser scan speed of 200mm/s, layer thickness of 25μm and a hatch distance of 80 μm. The SLM process was carried out in argon purged atmosphere, producing cubes of 15 x 15 x 15 mm upon an aluminium build plate. The elemental compositions of the AA7075 powder and the SLM AA7075 were determined using Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) by an accredited laboratory (Spectrometer Services, VIC. Australia). The composition of the AA7075 powder was (in wt. %) Al, 4.7 Zn, 2.13 Mg, 1.3 Cu, 0.09 Si, 0.13 Fe, 0.2 Cr. The composition of the final SLM AA7075 cubes was (in wt. %) Al, 3.62 Zn, 1.85 Mg, 1.31 Cu, 0.1 Si, 0.13 Fe, 0.2 Cr. It is evident that there was some loss of both Zn and Mg in the SLM process. The preparation of specimens for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out by mechanically thinning alloy samples to 200 μm thickness, followed by punching them to 3 mm discs and finally ion milling to get electron transparent regions using Gatan 691 precision ion polishing system at -100 ̊C. An FEI ® Tecnai G2 T20 and an FEI ® Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN FEG TEM, both operated at 200 kV, were used for the imaging, electron diffraction and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS). An FEI ® Titan 3 80-300 fitted with two (TEM and STEM) CEOS spherical aberration correctors operating at 300 kV was used for aberration corrected bright field imaging. Prior to TEM imaging, specimens were plasma cleaned in an Ar and O2 gas mixture for 2 min using a Gatan ® Solarus 950 advanced plasma system. A Bruker X-flash X-ray detector was employed for energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS), and analysis was performed using Bruker Esprit 1.9 X-ray software. The nanostructure of SLM AA7075 is shown in Figure In order to determine the local chemistry associated with -phase, Scanning TEM coupled with EDXS was carried out on a particle colony, as shown in Figure It can be observed (Figure Employing high resolution Bright Field Scanning TEM (BF-STEM) and aberration correction, direct imaging of the icosahedral quasicrystal structure was possible (Figure A salient point that merits comment, is that whilst 7xxx series Al-alloys have been in service in critical of applications for decades, there is no prior evidence of the -phase reported herein. This reveals that the complexity of physical metallurgy -even for well-studied systems -continues to present itself and is abetted by advanced manufacturing and characterisation techniques. In a similar vein, a new low temperature phase in the age hardening sequence of 7xxx series Al-alloys was only recently revealed using advanced synchrotron characterisation 