Ion diffusion is a central part of materials physics of fabrication, deformation, phase transformation, structure stability and electrochemical devices. Conventional theory focuses on the defects that mediate diffusion and explains how their populations influenced by oxidation, reduction, irradiation and doping can enhance diffusion. However, we have found the same influences can also elevate their mobility by orders of magnitude in several prototypical transition-metal oxides. First-principles calculation fundamentally connects the latter observation to migrating ion's local structure, which is inherently soft and has a broken symmetry, making it susceptible to electron or hole localization, thereby realizing a lower saddle-point energy. This finding resolves an unanswered question in physical ceramics of the past 30 years: why cation diffusion against the prediction of classical nonstoichiometric defect physics is enhanced in reduced zirconia, ceria and structurally related ceramics? It also suggests the saddle-point electron-phonon interaction that enables a negative-U state is akin to the counterweight effect that enables a trebuchet. This simple picture for the transitional state explains why enhanced kinetics mediated by radical-like-ion migration occurs often, especially under extreme conditions. Atomic diffusion is a fundamental process that enables changes of shape, composition and structure, and is thus important for many applications. This includes standard materials problems such as fabrication, microstructure, functionality and stability. (1-4) But it also includes emergent materials problems especially those We studied cation (M=Zr, Ce) exchange with its vacancy at (1⁄21⁄20) in four models (Fig. involving extreme conditions, e.g., field-assisted sintering/processing In practical terms, the question we will address is the following: is diffusion faster or slower in a reduced oxide than in an unreduced one, and why? This is an interesting question because reduction-generated oxygen vacancies and electrons have opposite effects on ion diffusion, for example that of cation. First, concerning the mobility, while a reduced cation with a lower valence should experience less electrostatic interaction and diffuse faster, it also has a larger ionic size which hampers diffusion. Second, concerning the defect population, more oxygen vacancies will leave fewer cation vacancies according to the thermodynamics of the Schottky pair, which comprises a stoichiometric set of cation vacancy and anion vacancy. Thus, cations that move by exchange with neighboring cation vacancies will diffuse less. These competing effects are further complicated by aliovalent dopants-and their charge-compensating defects-that are often added to transition metal oxides to increase their technological appeal. Recently, we have demonstrated that atmospheric and electrical reduction can enhance cation diffusion by many orders of magnitude. We found oxygen vacancy and electron localization synergistically lower cation's migration barrier over the saddle point. Energetically, the lowered barrier is mostly attributed to a strong tendency for electron localization on the migrating cation at the saddle point. This is reminiscent of a negative-U state To understand why synergism can greatly enhance cation mobility/diffusion in reduced zirconia and ceria, we now reexamine the size and charge effect. Although the removal of one lattice oxygen creates a more open pathway, it also leaves the migrating cation less screened, which raises the electrostatic energy. Likewise, while reduction can lower the electrostatic repulsion, it also increases the size of the migrating cation making it more difficult to pass through the crowded saddle point. V is available for a reduced cation, then both cation size and charge screening are less a problem. Although this explanation seems reasonable, it is countered by the fact that Y 3+ , with a lower valence and a larger size just like Zr 3+ , has a diffusivity comparable to that of Zr 4+ in Zr1-xYxO2-x/2. In cubic BaTiO3, M 4+ =Ti 4+ is the slowest diffusing ion and O 2-is the fastest one 29 . It is also known that A-site vacancy and oxygen vacancy are the most common defects in perovskites. Therefore, we studied their effects on Ti's exchange with Ti's own vacancy. Two cases were considered. First, for an exchange along the (100) direction, we used a similar set of models for M 4/3+ as before (see A1-D1 in Fig. There are several interesting findings here. First, in most cases Ti does not proceed along a straight line even when there is mirror symmetry and no blocking ion is in the way, e.g., in Model C1 and D1. This reflects a strong tendency for the saddle-point Ti 4/3+ , which is small in size yet high in valence, to bond with O 2-nearby. Second, there is a nearly monotonic correlation between a decreasing migration barrier and an increasing saddle-point Ti-Ba distance. Indeed, cation reduction and grain boundary mobility is >1,000 times faster than that in air ] [ ] MM ++ of 1.7×10 -4 for Zr0.852Y0.148O1.926/Zr0.942Y0.058O1.971 at 1200 o C in an oxygen partial pressure of 10 -10 atm (which is representative for 5% H2); small enhancement factors of 1.5-2 were indeed observed for their grain boundary mobilities in 5% H2 over those in air ] [ ] MM ++ approaching 1, the enhancement is always larger in ceria than in zirconia under the same set of atmospheres The above discussion demonstrates that forming M 3+ can enhance cation diffusion and such an effect is especially potent for Ce 3+ . Furthermore, according to Fig. Enhanced mass transport in Ce-containing alloy oxides, which must involve not only Ce 3/4+ diffusion but also diffusion of all other cations, can thus be understood. The Finally, we point to several technologically important observations that have gone unexplained until now. (1) Field-assisted sintering: It refers to enhanced sintering under a large slow-varying DC voltage and pressure (the so-called spark plasma sintering) (43), a DC voltage and a constant heating rate (the so-called flash sintering) (2) Valence-change (resistance) memory: Resistance memory relying on the formation, rupture and reconnection of conducting filaments has been built using thin films of Ta2O5, HfO2 and TiO2, among others. Although O 2-is usually the fast diffusing species in these oxides, unexpectedly fast cation diffusion when the device is nominally at room temperature has also been reported. (3) Suboxide at Zr/ZrO2 interface: Offering diffusional accommodation of the oxidation strain/stress, the suboxide layer can maintain the integrity of the oxide scale and is crucial for the oxidation resistance of Zr metal. (4) Oxygen gas evolution in Li-ion battery: Li-rich cathodes (e.g., Li1.2Ni0.13Co0.13Mn0.54O2) relies on oxygen ion redox (O 2-/O -) to deliver high capacities, yet it suffers from continuous oxygen loss and oxygen gas evolution during high-voltage charging/cycling. To summarize, we have shown that the synergetic enhancement of cation mobility from lattice vacancy (oxygen or A-site cation) and cation reduction is largely due to extra-electron localization and energy-level lowering at the saddle point cation, as if there is an electronic trebuchet effect to aid the transitional state. For cations of d 0 or f 0 electronic configurations, this is also akin to a negative U effect that benefits from asymmetric and soft saddle-point configuration. This finding can be generalized to anions, which may experience enhanced diffusion with the aid of extra-hole localization under oxidizing conditions. This picture of enhanced kinetics mediated by radical-like-ion migration may explain many dynamic observations in oxides and other ceramics under common and extreme (e.g., irradiation during in situ transmission electron microscopy and in nuclear reactors) operating conditions. preselected a target cation next to the cation vacancy and promoted electron localization around it at the ground state by first displacing the neighboring oxygen ions outward by 0.1-1.0 Å, then let the system relax to reach convergence (residue atomic forces less than 0.05 eV/Å). Other models containing oxygen vacancy or Ba vacancy were studied by removing one O or Ba atom from the supercell, respectively. To track cation migration, the climbing-image nudged-elastic-band (NEB) method implemented in VASP was used with a fixed supercell size and shape. DFT calculations always specify the Fermi level, which is used to determine electron state occupancy. However, to compare electron states in different structural states, such as ground state and saddle-point state, or states with and without one missing cation or O, it is convenient if we can find a reference energy level that is relatively insensitive to the structures/defects. All the structures studied here comprise of cation polyhedra bounded by oxygen ions that are (edge-) interconnected into a continuous three-dimensional network. Moreover, their valence bands are mainly made of O2p orbitals. Therefore, we may regard the valence band manifold as representative of network's electronic states. The overall electronic energy of this network, which is continuous, should be relatively insensitive to isolated structural defects/distortions. In this work, we used the valence band maximum as the reference energy to compare electron energies of different structural states. 