Accessing fluid infiltration in nanogranular coatings is an outstanding challenge, of relevance for applications ranging from nanomedicine to catalysis. A sensing platform, allowing to quantify the amount of fluid infiltrated in a nanogranular ultrathin coating, with thickness in the 10 to 40 nm range, is here proposed and theoretically investigated by multiscale modelling. The scheme relies on impulsive photoacoustic excitation of hypersonic mechanical breathing modes in engineered gas-phase synthesised nanogranular metallic ultathin films and time-resolved acousto-optical read-out of the breathing modes frequency shift upon liquid infiltration. A superior sensitivity, exceeding 26x10 3 cm 2 /g, is predicted upon equivalent areal mass loading of a few ng/mm 2 . The capability of the present scheme to discriminate among different infiltration patterns is discussed. The platform is an ideal tool to investigate nanofluidics in granular materials and naturally serves as a distributed nanogetter coating, integrating fluid sensing capabilities. The proposed scheme is readily extendable to other nanoscale and mesoscale porous materials. Nanofluidics in nanoporous coatings is an emerging topic at the forefront of nanotechnology. The subject, at the cross-road of physics, material science and engineering, is of relevance both scientifically, 1,2 fluid dynamics at the nanoscale differing significantly from its macroscale counterpart, and from a technological stand point, where applications have been proposed throughout disparate fields, ranging from biotechnology This issue is primarily tackled by conventional enviromental ellipsometric (EE) porosimetry In this work we propose a novel sensing platform aimed at investigating fluid infiltra-tion in nanogranular coatings. We engineer, via atomistic simulations, a gas-phase synthesised nanogranular metallic coating with openporosity, specifically tailored for efficient ultrafast photoacoustic detection of the filling fluid. The detection scheme relies on impulsive photoacoustic excitation of the device mechanical breathing modes -in the 50 GHz frequency range -and time-resolved acousto-optical readout of the frequency shift upon fluid infiltration. From an applicative stand point, the gas-phase synthesised nanogranular metallic scaffold is readily exploitable as a distributed nanogetter coating, integrating fluid sensing capabilities and viable for multi-functionality. Film's effective properties. The physical properties of the granular film have been retrieved by importing the raw xyz Molecular Dynamics (MD) results into MATLAB and by dividing the 3D simulation domain in small voxels. The average pore sizes have been computed by using an ImageJ plugin (BoneJ) We consider a gas-phase synthesised Ag nanoparticles (NPs) ultrathin film deposited on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). It was recently demonstrated that the morphology of these films may be characterised by interconnected, channel-like pores, The key parameter to tune the porosity of the film is the Kinetic Energy per atom (KE) of the NPs during the deposition process. Indeed, the higher the KE, the higher the NPs deformation upon landing and, consequently, the film's filling factor. Assuming an average NPs diameter of 7 nm domain, for a total of ∼ 0.9 million atoms. In gas-phase NP sources, such as a SCBD apparatus, the KE of the NPs can be tuned by varying the source's geometrical parameters Among the simulated granular films, the best geometrical features for device engineering are achieved for a deposition KE of 0.1eV/at. Indeed, the connected pores morphology, together with the lower FF =0.64 and the biggest pores of this film -4 nm average pore diameter -yield maximum sensitivity and higher storage capacity while minimising the pinning-related issues, which impede fluid infiltration inside the film. Finally, a value of KE = 0.1 eV/at. should prevent in-depth NPs implantation in PDMS, as is expected for instance for KE=0.5 eV/at. The sensor working principle relies on ultrafast photoacousics, The acoustic oscillations are ultimately encoded in the relative reflectivity/transmissivity variations, ∆I/I 0 , as measured by a time-delayed probe pulse, the time-delay being with respect to the instant of the pump-pulse arrival t=0. ) where θ(t) is the Heaviside step function, τ n , f n , φ n and A n the breathing mode life-time, frequency, phase and amplitude contribution to the optical signal respectively. Calculating the magnitude of the Fourier transform (FT) of the time resolved trace given by Eq. 1, under the assumption f n >> 1/τ n , we obtain the following resonance line shape: We refer the reader to SI for further details on this point. The quantities ruling the resonance, and of relevance to the present discussion, are f n , τ n and their interplay synthesised by the quality factor Q n . With this notion in mind, we now inspect the device acoustic properties within the frame of the effective medium approximation (EMA). The granular NPs thin film, weather fluid-infiltrated or not, is modelled as an effective homogeneous and isotropic thin film of effective density, ρ * , and effective stiffness tensor, C * . The longitudinal sound velocity is v N P = C * 11 /ρ * , where C * 11 is the first element of the film effective stiffness tensor. The acoustic impedance reads Z = C * 11 ρ * . The granular film adheres on a PDMS substrate of acoustic impedance Z S < Z. Within this frame, the relevant breathing mode parameters read: We refer the reader to SI for further details on the model and equations derivation. A "dry" device is characterised by a resonance centred at a frequency f dry and with decaytime τ dry (we dropped the mode index n for brevity). Upon fluid infiltration in the granular film, both ρ * and C * 11 increase, leading to a resonance of frequency f wet and lifetime τ wet . For the sake of exemplification we here anticipate results that will be derived further on. Figure In general, the detection strategy is based on resolving the resonance frequencies between the wet and dry configurations, linking ∆f to the amount of filling fluid. We here illustrate the strategy for the paradigmatic case of water adsorption, the idea being alike for other fluids. We chose water owing to its relevance in biology and bio-related applications. We consider the optimised device, i.e., the one obtained with KE of 0.1eV/at. The interconnected porous structure and pores size allow for a homogeneous water distribution in the whole accessible volume, thus justifying an EMA approach (see SI for further information on this point); other infiltration scenarios will be addressed further on. The device is therefore considered as an effective homogeneous and isotropic film of effective density, ρ * , effective shear, G * , and bulk, K * , modulus (the effective stiffness tensor C * being completely defined by G * and K * within the EMA). These quantities depend of the amount of infiltrated water. The density ρ * is obtained as a weighted mean of the silver and water densities (ρ Ag and ρ w respectively) on the corresponding occupied volume in the scaffold: ρ * (l) = ρ Ag FF + ρ w (1 -FF ) l. The relative loading, l = V w /V void , is the infiltrated water volume, V w , normalized against the total volume available for infiltration, V void . G * and K * are retrieved numerically solving Budiansky equations: 52 where the index i runs over the N = 3 materials composing the effective film (i = Ag, water, voids); K i and G i are the constituents bulk and shear modulus; c i are the constituents normalised concentrations: c Ag = FF , c water = (1 -FF ) l and c voids = (1 -FF ) (1 -l). We stress that K * = K * (l) and G * = G * (l), are both functions of the loading l. This dependence has been omitted in Eq. 6 for ease of visualisation. C * 11 is a function of l through the equality C * 11 = K * + 4G * /3. All the abovementioned materials parameters are reported in SI. We are therefore in the position to calculate f n , τ n and Q n of the first two breathing modes, The results are reported in Figure We now focus on the device sensitivity issue. Making the necessary changes from Ref. 53 as a sound definition to quantify the device's sensitivity to liquid infiltration. Provided the linearity of f (l) (see Figure f n (l), the sensitivity reads S l ≈ ∆f (l=1) 1 1 f (0) = 0.05. Furthermore, the sensitivity S l is thickness-and modeindependent: from Eq. 3 S l = v N P (l=1)-v N P (l=0) where no dependence on h and n appears. On the contrary Q is mode-dependent, as shown in the insets of Figure g. The latter figure can be further increased, since it scales as 1/h (S l is h-independent). A minimum value of h in excess of 14 nm is a realistic figure, granting a film with a fully developed granularity. The frequency vs loading curves are well within the detectability range of current ultrafast photo-acoustic technology. In Figure As opposed to Inter Digital Transducer (IDT) technology, within the present sensing scheme acoustic wave generation, detection and sensing of the infiltrated fluid take place in the same active region, identified by the probe beam spot size. This fact favours miniaturization and allows working with minute quantities of total infiltrated fluid. For instance, assuming a typical probe beam diameter of 10 μm a fully infiltrated active area is tantamount to ∼1 femtoliter of infiltrated fluid. In the previous discussion we assumed a homogeneous infiltration scheme. We now argue that the proposed sensing platform may be exploited to gain insight into the fluid infiltration pattern, a yet unsolved issue in nanoporous materials and forming the object of extensive research. The "water layer on top" (L-TOP) scenario consists of a water infiltrated layer sitting on top of an empty one (see inset at bottom-left corner of Figure The f (l) curves thus allow discriminating between homogeneous and layered infiltration scenarios. As for the latter, the L-TOP and L- BOT cases may be differentiated on the basis of the τ (l) (or Q(l)) curves. This proves the potential of the present strategy in uncovering the fluid infiltration pattern in nanoporous materials. We designed a novel sensing platform allowing to quantify the amount of fluid infiltrated in a nanoporous coating. The platform is based on a gas-phase synthesised nanogranular metallic coating with open-porosity, specifically engineered via molecular-dynamics for efficient ultrafast photoacoustic detection of the filling fluid. For the paradigmatic case of water filling we predict a sensitivity exceeding 26×10 3 cm 2 /g, upon equivalent areal mass loading of few ng/mm 2 , outperforming current microbalance-based technology by three orders of magnitude. The predictions are robust, the theoretical frame having been recently benchmarked against experiments, Finally, we showed that the proposed sensing scheme allows discriminating among differ-ent filling patterns, providing a means to investigate pinning-related issues of relevance for nanoporous membrane wettability. The present scheme is general and easily implementable. It may be expanded to other emerging gas-phase synthesized granular materials This value is obtained accounting for the typical fluences and repetition rates in use in Fiber-Laser or Ti:sapphire oscillator based set-ups. This is at variance with respect to the problem of separating two peaks from a signal which is the superposition of them, such as resolving the two diffraction peaks in a double slit optical diffraction experiment.