We use functional renormalization group method to study a three-orbital model for superconducting Sr2RuO4. Although the pairing symmetry is found to be chiral p-wave, the atomic spin-orbit coupling induces near-nodes for quasiparticle excitations. Our theory explains a major experimental puzzle between d-wave-like feature observed in thermal experiments and the chiral p-wave triplet pairing revealed in nuclear-magnetic-resonance and Kerr effect. The layered perovskite ruthenate Sr 2 RuO 4 is one of the rare candidate materials that is expected to carry chiral p-wave pairing in the superconducting (SC) state. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) In experiments, however, low-energy quasi-particle excitations deep in the SC state, characteristic of gap nodes on the FS (forming nodal lines along the direction perpendicular to the RuO 2 plane), are observed in specific heat, However, such a gap structure is not yet enough to explain the linear specific heat and thermal conductivity at the measured low temperatures. Models with SOC were previously studied by using weak coupling RG and random phase approximation. The outstanding puzzle of the chiral p-wave pairing revealed in NMR and Kerr effect and the d-wave-like behavior indicated in thermal experiments motivates us to perform more careful microscopic investigations. We consider a comprehensive model including all of the three orbitals and the atomic SOC. Our main results are summarized in Figs. We now specify the model Hamiltonian H = H 0 + H I for Sr 2 RuO 4 . The free part can be written as Here T is the fermion spinor, with c kas annihilating an electron of momentum k and spin s ∈ (↑, ↓) on orbital a ∈ (1, 2, 3) ↔ (d xz , d yz , d xy ). In the single-particle Hamiltonian h k , k is a matrix in the orbital basis, L is the orbital angular momentum, and σ/2 is the spin angular momentum. The SOC parameter is λ = 0.032 eV, where i denotes the lattice site, n ia = s c † ias c ias , U is the intra-orbital repulsion, U is the inter-orbital repulsion, J is Hund's rule coupling, and J is the pair hopping term. The interactions can lead to competing collective fluctuations in particle-hole (PH) and particle-particle (PP) channels, which we handle by SMFRG. Following the general idea of FRG, The technical details can be found elsewhere, Discussions: We consider the bare interaction parameters (U, U , J, J ) = (0.4, 0.16, 0.04, 0.04) eV. The results are qualitatively robust against fine tuning of interactions and SOC around the present setting.[39] Fig. Fig. [39] Here we show the projection of the p x + ip y pairing function (favored in the SC state) in the band basis in Fig. [39] (ii) Figure In Fig. where Ψ(x) is the digamma function, T c0 = 1.5K is assumed to be the transition temperature in the disorder-free material. We get ζ/T c ∼ 0.1 for T c = 1.39 K according to Eq.3. Using this value of ζ, the result for the chiral p-wave (green line) deviates from the data (symbols) in view of the curvature in the intermediate temperature window. However, if we assume ζ/T c = 0.5, the result (blue line) is in much better agreement with the data, suggesting that either the sample in the experiment is dirtier than the estimate according to Eq.3, or the clean limit T c0 might be even higher than 1.5K. In comparison, the d-wave fits (dashed lines) for both scattering rates deviate from the data. The spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 is shown in Fig. [39] Of course, if the probing temperature T 0 is reduced further, so that T 0 ∆ min , κ/T is eventually suppressed. [39] At this stage the d-wave and chiral p-wave behave most differently. Measurement at such low temperatures is important to close the issue, but might be a challenge in experiment. Foundation of FCZ also acknowledges the support by the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (under Grant No. XDB28000000). WSW also acknowledges the support by K. C. Wong Magna Fundation of Ningbo University.