Some layered silicates are composed of positive ions, surrounded by layers of ions with opposite sign. Mica muscovite is a particularly interesting material, because there exist fossil and experimental evidence for nonlinear excitations transporting localized energy and charge along the cation rows within the potassium layers. This evidence suggest that there are different kinds of excitations with different energies and properties. Some of the authors proposed recently a one-dimensional model based in physical principles and the silicate structure. The main characteristic of the model is that it has a hard substrate potential and two different repulsion terms, between ions and nuclei. In a previous work with this model, it was found the propagation of crowdions, i.e., lattice kinks in a lattice with substrate potential that transport mass and charge. They have a single specific velocity and energy coherent with the experimental data. In the present work we perform a much more thorough search for nonlinear excitations in the same model using the pseudospectral method to obtain exact nanopteron solutions, which are single kinks with tails, crowdions and bi-crowdions. We analyze their velocities, energies and stability or instability and the possible reasons for the latter. We relate the different excitations with their possible origin from recoils from different beta decays and with the fossil tracks. We explore the consequences of some variation of the physical parameters because their values are not perfectly known. Through a different method, we also have found stationary and moving breathers, that is, localized nonlinear excitations with an internal vibration. Moving breathers have small amplitude and energy, which is also coherent with the fossil evidence. Some fossil dark tracks in a layered silicate, mica muscovite, have been identified with localized excitations that travel through the rows of atoms within layers. Also, experiments show that these excitations are able to expel atoms from the surface of the mineral and transport charge. The different tracks that can be observed suggest that different kinds of excitations exist. In this paper we use a model where the potentials have been obtained from the physical properties and the structure of the mineral. We make a systematic search for the possible nonlinear excitations and find different ones. Some imply the movement of charge and mass, others have smaller energy and are only vibrational. Some are localized, but others are coupled to low amplitude plane waves. We explore the energies, velocities and stability of these solutions and explain how they can be produced by the recoil after different radioactive decays of the isotope a) archilla@us.es Muscovite is a layered silicate that has been from long ago of interest for different reasons. It was the second material 1 for which nuclear tracks from fission fragments were observed, the first material for which fossil nuclear tracks were discovered 2 . Also fossil tracks from different elementary swift particles as positrons and muons could be observed 3 . These tracks were formed by the precipitation of excess impurity of Fe growing by accretion into the mineral magnetite and can be viewed without instruments. Many other tracks were in the closest-packed directions of the K + plane and were attributed to some kind of quasi one-dimensional lattice excitations, whose exact nature is not well known. See Ref. In this article we use powerful numerical techniques to perform a more systematic search of nonlinear waves in the same model. We have found other solitary waves as kinks, double kinks and nanopterons with different energies and velocities. However, among them only the faster entities as one single kink, two double kinks and fast nanopterons are stable. Their approximate velocity is about 5 times the sound velocity in the system. We have also found stationary breathers that cannot be moved, and also small amplitude moving breathers that propagate smoothly through the lattice. The physical consequences of these findings are analyzed. The generic solutions found are nanopterons, i..e, nonlocal solutions that can be described as the coupling of a kink and a plane wave. Nanopterons can be considered as an approximation to a physical solution, but can also be of interest by themselves It should be stressed that finding localized nonradiating travelling-wave solutions in lattices with an onsite potential was and remains an important problem in the physics of nonlinear waves. Discreteness of the media seriously obstructs existence of exact moving topological solitons The outline of the article is as follows: we describe the mineral and previous results in Sect. II and the details of the model in Sect. III. Section IV describes the peculiarity of the phonon spectrum and the phonon different velocities. Section. V explains the pseudo-spectral method for calculating travelling solitary waves with precision. In Sect. VI, we describe the characteristics of the nanopterons and kinks obtained, their velocities and energies. Their stability is analyzed in Sect. VII. In Sect. VIII we explore the consequences of changing the strength of the interaction or the on-site potential. In Sect. IX the properties of some double kinks or 2crowdions are presented. Breathers are studied in Sect. X and the article finishes with the conclusions in Sect. XI. In this section we describe the silicate structure of muscovite, the physics of the model, previous results, and some considerations about the possible existence of different nonlinear excitations in the material and the model. Most silicates are formed by the basic building block of a tetrahedron formed by the cation silicon surrounded by oxygen anions at the vertices. Often those oxygen anions are shared with other tetrahedra forming sheets of several layers, sometimes tetrahedra sheets, joined with other ones or with octahedra sheets, are sandwiched between tetrahedra sheets bringing about thicker layers. These sheets can be joined together by van der Waals forces. Often, substitutions of silicon by other cations like aluminium with different charge are common and therefore the sheets have a net electrical charge. Ions of different sign are therefore brought in to neutralize the charge and the forces between sheets become stronger and predominantly electrostatic. The result is a layer of ions that are coupled to the silicate sheets but less stronger that the silicate structure of the sheets. The inter-layer ions are kept in place at specific places where the attraction of the silicate layer is stronger. If we consider the ion lattice, it can be viewed as subjected to an on-site potential where the ions interact between them through electrical repulsion. It is a natural and important example where on-site potentials become important in determining the properties of a lattice. The layered silicate mica muscovite is of particular interest in this article. It consists of a silicate layer with the structure of tetrahedra-octahedratetrahedra. Substitution of Si +4 by Al +3 results in a net negative electrical charge, which is compensated by the introduction of a cation layer made out of K + . Often, there are also different substitutional impurities which have different properties, however we will refer in this article to the ideal structure. A model with realistic potentials was constructed starting from the simplest model with only electrostatic repulsion between K + ions 31 and later augmented with a Ziegler-Biersack-Littmark (ZBL) short-range repulsive potential between K + ions 32 , which was important for describing the interaction at very short distances bringing about reasonable minimal distances for energetic excitations The resulting periodic potential, which we will use in this article, could be expressed as a cosine Fourier series with five terms and was able to reproduce approximately the absorption infrared frequency 110 cm -1 obtained experimentally In this paper we expand the search to other nonlinear localized waves in the same model for mica muscovite. The reason for that is partly theoretical, as a peculiar characteristic of the on-site potential is that it is hard for relatively small amplitudes and later becomes soft. This hard-soft characteristic does not appear as a mathematical curiosity but as a consequence of constructing a potential based on physical laws of a particular system. The same can be said about the interaction potential between ions, which is obtained simply by electrostatic repulsion and short range universal ZBL repulsion, which describes the electrostatic repulsion between the nuclei screened by the electron shell. On the other hand the dark tracks in muscovite that are attributed to nonlinear lattice excitations are not equal, for example, some are strong and continuous and other are faint and discontinuous and are scattered at 60 • from the strong ones The terminology is not uniform partly due to different characteristics of a excitation depending of the variable used. The word soliton is used also for kinks, because the bond compressions and the velocities are solitons, i.e., their amplitudes tend to zero at ±∞, and breathers can be seen as envelope solitons with an internal vibration. Kinks and crowdions are the same entity in a system with an external potential as the one studied here. A method for finding kinks was developed in Breathers are found by continuation from the continuous limit. There are site-centered ones that are very stable and have a wide range of frequencies. They are however not movable but they can have relevance in other phenomena as the experimentally observed fast reaction kinetics in muscovite There is also interest in the study of the possibility of excitation and propagation of solitons, discrete breathers and kinks in two-dimensional lattices. Different interatomic potentials, including discrete sine-Gordon and Lennard-Jones As stated above the model and parameters correspond to the system described in detail in Refs. where the first term corresponds to the Coulomb repulsion between ions and the second Yukawa-type potential is the ZBL potential which describes the Coulomb repulsion between nuclei screened by the electron shell with It has been obtained using empirical potentials without change for V (u n ) due to its periodicity. The kinetic energy of each particle is given by with m K =39.1 amu being the mass of a potassium atom. It will be taken as the unit of mass u M = m K in scaled variables, in which the kinetic energy is simply 1 2 un 2 . The scaled unit of time u τ can now be obtained from Therefore, the total energy is given in scaled units by: (5) The equations of motion have the following form: (6) with n = 1, 2, . . . , N . The periodic boundary conditions u n+N = u n + Q are applied with Q being the topological charge that will be explained below. (upper oscillating curve), phase velocity V ph (monotonic function) and group velocity Vg (lower oscillating curve). It can be seen that for any value of the velocity of a solitary wave there is a plane wave with the same phase velocity for which the wavenumber q and the frequency can be immediately deduced. The wavenumber q can be considered in the extended zone but it also has a representative in the first Brillouin Zone. The group velocity Vg is zero at q = 0 and q = π, having the maximum value Vg ≃ 0.4091 at q = 0.4733π. Bottom: Plane wave associated with the sliding kink with velocity s = 0.825 found in Sect. VI where it can be seen the plane wave with phase velocity V = s and q = 1.77π, in the extended zone (smaller wavelength), and its representative in the 1st Brillouin zone, with q ′ = q -2π = -0.23π (larger wavelength) and velocity V ′ = -6.37. The minimum velocity in the first Brillouin zone is 1.68. The system described by Eq. ( with where q is the phonon wavevector. The frequency ω 0 = 4.48 corresponds to linear oscillations of the isolated particle and c s = √ 2 is the sound velocity for the system without substrate, i.e., it is both the group and phase velocity for q → 0, and it is also the maximum phonon velocity in the system without substrate. The wavevectors q correspond to plane waves cos[qn -ω(q)t] and sin[qn -ω(q)t] and due to the periodic boundary conditions they become discrete variables q n = 2πm/N , for any integer m. As the wavenumbers q and q + 2πn are equivalent, it is usually reduced to the first Brillouin zone q ∈ [-π, π] or the positive part of it for symmetry. However, the wavevectors in the extended zone are important in this system. The phonon spectrum is bounded from below by ω 0 and therefore the phase velocity V ph = ω(q)/q tends to ∞ when q → 0. This is an important property for Klein-Gordon system (systems with substrate potential) very different from FPU systems (without substrate). Note also, that V ph is different for the wavevector q and q + 2π in spite of representing indistinguishable phonons. This brings about that the phase velocities although bounded from below in the first Brillouin zone by V ph (π) ≃ 1.68, they are not in the extended zone. They have however a representative in the first Brillouin zone as can be seen in Fig. However, the group velocity is zero at q = 0 and q = ±π and has a maximum value which is easy to calculate V g,max ≃ 0.4091 for q = 0.4733π. The phonon dispersion law and the phase and group velocities can be seen in Fig. We look for the travelling-wave solutions of Eq. 6 with velocity s given by u n (t) = u(n -st) ≡ u(z). For the unknown function u(z) the set of ordinary ODEs transform to the following differential-delay equation with the advanced and retarded terms: Specific boundary conditions for this model will be discussed later in this section. Unfortunately, there is no clear analytical technique for finding solutions of such equations, so that we have to use numerical methods. A very accurate and simple method for solving these equations and finding soliton solutions has been developed in We look for the solution u(z) in the form where the second term is a Fourier series of plane waves with wavenumbers q m = 2πm/L and represents any periodic function with period L in z with coefficients c m that have to be determined. The period L is chosen very large so that the influence of boundaries would be negligible. The integer part of L will effectively play the role of the chain length in the original system Eq. ( The topological charge is defined as Q = a 2 -a 1 , where Q = -1 is called an antikink and corresponds to a shift in position of a lattice site after the kink has passed, i.e., to a moving interstitial, while Q = 1 corresponds to the opposite phenomena, i.e., a moving vacancy. For simplicity we will use the term kink for both entities clarifying the topological charge when necessary. In order to extend the method to multi-soliton solutions where l = 0, ±2, . . . , ±(P -1) if P is odd and l = ±1, ±3, . . . , ±(P -1) if P is even. Here μ and δ are trial parameters which will be determined below for each iteration step by using various minimization techniques. The parameter μ describes the inverse width of one kink while the parameter δ can be considered as the distance between the adjacent kinks. We substitute the ansatz Eq. ( In this section we apply the pseudospectral method defined above to the differential-delay equation Eq. ( which measures the amplitude of the tail oscillations in the right end interval ξ. The length of this interval was taken to be ξ = L/8. For non-oscillating (monotonic) solutions the function Eq. ( A. Description of solutions: profiles, amplitudes, velocities and energies The typical solution of Eq. ( The branches amplitude-velocity in each pair as seen in Fig. Figure If the velocity s is fixed, then two different solutions that belong to one pair of curves differ by the amplitude and the wavelength of the oscillating tail. Depending on the pair of branches they may also differ by the behaviour near the solutions center. The typical nanopteron profiles are given in Fig. The wavelength of the nanopteron tail approximately equals to 2π/q * , where the wavenumber q * is the root of the equation sq * = ω(q * ) and ω(q) is the dispersion law given in Eq. (7). For the two nanopterons with s = 3.9 given in Fig. The A(s) behaviour for this lattice is different from the analogous figure for the discrete Klein-Gordon lattice with harmonic interactions It appears that within the range of velocities 0 < s < 4, the dependence A(s) hits the A = 0 axis at several points, namely s 1 = 2.73025, s 2 = 1.51338, s 3 = 0.82501, s 4 = 0.67820, s 5 = 0.42719, . . .. As far as velocities s > 4 are concerned, we did not detect any zeroes of the A(s) dependence up to s = 12. We did not continue into smaller velocity values because of the bad convergence of the numerical scheme, which is very likely due to entering into the phonon group velocities zone. Examples of non-oscillating solitons for two values of the sliding velocity are given in Fig. If the length L is changed the dependence A(s) also changes, but insignificantly. The sliding velocities (those at which A(s) = 0) do not change. This is logical, because when A(s) = 0 the boundary conditions become irrelevant. It has not been possible to find other nonoscillating bound states in spite of trying different δ in the initial ansatz Eq. ( We set the zero of the energy at the equilibrium distances, that is, the energy is given by E = H -U 0 , where U 0 is the sum of the potential interactions at the equilibrium distances, U 0 = [ n U (u n -u n-1 )] u=0 . Note that the on-site potential V (u n ) is already zero for u n = 0. The values of scaled and physical velocities are given in Tab. I. Note that in spite of the different velocities of the sliding solitons, their energies appear to vary by less than 1%. This is logical because the ions need to have the same energy to overcome the same potential barrier and they need the same energy increase to be two of them fairly close in the same potential well. Stability of the moving sliding kinks with Q = -1 has been checked by integrating numerically the dynamical equations of motion where the exact or perturbed solution of Eq. ( where ǫ is the perturbation parameter. The displacement field u n (0) was kept unchanged. Alternatively, the displacement field u n can be excited in the similar manner while the velocity field was undistorted. Although, the two methods seem quite different they lead to similar results for the stability as can be seen in Fig. A different perturbation can be done with a random variation of the initial displacements or velocities: (15) un (0) → ǫ(ξ n -1/2) + un (0), n = 1, 2, . . . , N , (16) where {ξ n } N l n=1 ∈ [0, 1] are random numbers. This perturbation is of the order of the thermal velocities at room temperature for ǫ ≃ 0.1. The kink also shows significant robustness. The center of mass dynamics is given in Fig. The stability of nanopterons depends on many details such as speed, amplitude and also the lattice size. Generically speaking, nanopterons with fast velocities s 2.5 -3 can travel 10-25 times the whole lattice before getting pinned, while slower nanopterons s 2 travel much shorter distances or get pinned in the lattice from the very beginning. If the nanopteron speed is close to the sliding velocity, it can be significantly robust, travelling successfully around the lattice with N = 40 more than 60 times (see Fig. conditions has managed to travel much shorter distance as shown in Fig. To get better understanding of the nanopteron and kink stability, we have performed the global stability studies. For that, we need to follow each of the branches that appear in Fig. For example, in the case shown by Fig. The logarithmic dependence of this critical time is given in Fig. • Only the nanopterons from the lower branches can be truly stable, the survival time for the upper branch solutions never exceeds 10 2 That means it can hardly travel more than 100 lattice sites. On the contrary, the lower branch solutions can be extremely robust with t s > 2 × 10 5 (the computation was stopped at those times). • The intervals of high nanopteron stability are positioned at the lower parts of the A(s) dependencies (for small amplitudes). • High robustness of the nanopterons is seen for the high-speed branches, especially for the branches 1,2 and 4. The branch 4 contains a non-radiating kink, however the most stable solutions are nanopterons with velocities s ∈ [2.805, 2.807] that slightly exceed the non-radiating kink velocity s 1 . This can be understood easily as the faster nanopteron can slow down because of disorder keeping its stability. The intervals of the extremely high kink robustness are very close to the respective minima of the A(s) curve for the pairs 1 and 2. Thus, the most stable nanopterons have the smallest tail amplitude. However, as commented above, this is not true for the branches that contain the sliding velocity, where nanopterons with A > 0 are more stable. • Nanopterons starting from the branch 5 and further on appear to be much less robust (see Figs. We also note that random perturbations of the initial conditions (16) give qualitatively the same result as the homogeneous perturbations. The survival times are plotted as circles in Fig. The change of the lattice size does not bring any principal changes to the stability picture. As expected there are changes of the nanopteron tail amplitudes A(s) for the same velocities with respect to the lattice size, which tend to disappear in the vicinity of the sliding kinks. The nanopterons are more robust for the lowest part of the A(s) dependencies, while nanopterons that belong to the top branches are much less stable. A general conclusion is that it seems that both sliding kinks and nanopterons are only stable at large velocities of the order of the fastest and only stable crowdion with s 1 = 2.73 and q = 0.584π which is close to twice the speed of sound in the lattice without substrate 2c s and above five times larger than the group velocities. This is also valid for the double crowdions described in Sect. IX. We have not a mathematical proof but the reason for it seems evident looking at Fig. The wavenumber associated with the tail of both the crowdion and bi-crowdion do not coincide although it is not very far from the magic wave number q = 2π/3 52 which shows very good propagation in FPU lattices because it is an exact solution of the FPU lattice when the interaction potential can be approximated to a polynomial of degree four Although the values of the parameters in the system have been obtained from physical consideration, it is interesting to know what happens if they change. A. Change of the magnitude of the on-site potential Suppose γ = 1 in Eq. (2), then there is not a significant change in the global picture, only there are different values of the sliding velocities as represented in Fig. If the short range ZBL potential is suppressed in Eq. (2) there are no localized solution with velocity s > 1. The picture for smaller velocities in quite complicated because the branches of the different non-local solutions are very dense. The main conclusion can be that the shortrange potential is an important factor for the existence of kinks with fast velocity. We have also studied the case with topological charge Q = -2 which corresponds to a travelling state with two extra particles or a double crowdion. There exist bi-crowdions that consist of two kinks with a distance between them. We have managed to obtain solutions with different distances as different velocities, as shown in Fig. Note that N-crowdions have been recently found with molecular dynamics in FPU Morse lattices The large energy of a double crowdion can only be provided by one type of β decay of 40 K: electron capture followed by conversion electron, where the nucleus decay to an excited state of The properties of the repulsive interaction potential which corresponds to our physical model imply that it is very steep when the ions approach but there is no In this section, we describe first stationary breathers, their stabilities and energies and, second, the small amplitude moving breathers that we have found in the system. The breathers becomes more localized as the frequency increases and the Floquet eigenvalues move away from unity. The asymmetric bond centered mode is however always unstable and exists until the frequency is close to twice the top of the phonon band. We construct stationary breathers starting from the anticontinuous limit where n, can be any of the oscillators, but we will use n = 0. This study is also interesting to better understand the properties of the substrate potential and the system as a whole. The potential profile and the frequency of a single oscillator as a function of the amplitude is represented in Fig. frequency of the nonlinear oscillator increases with the amplitude. By a continuation method, increasing the coupling at small intervals, it is possible to obtain breathers from a frequency close to the top of the phonon band to the resonance frequency 2ω 0 with the second harmonic of the lowest frequency of the phonon band. Breathers are typical mode-π with a staggered profile, both site-centered (Sievers Takeno or ST) can be moved with several methods, for that it is necessary that the breather is not extremely stable and a pair of Floquet eigenvalues are close to the unity, meaning that other solution is close. Then, a perturbation with the momenta of the eigenvector corresponding to the instability eigenvalue of a localized mode can bring about breather movability. This is not the case, as the eigenvalues can clearly be identified with the phonon band exp(iω phon T b ) = exp(i2πω phon /ω b ) without pinning mode. Numerical attempts to perturb the breathers with many variants used usually in the literature as the discrete gradient and others have failed. Also the introduction of the expansion of the interaction to more neighbours which has been shown to enhance mobility has not been successful. However, we have observed the smooth movement of small amplitude and energy breathers produced by some simple but meaningful initial conditions as compressing two particles with some asymmetry. A large stationary breather is produced but also a small moving breather that survives more than one thousand periods even rebounding into the large stationary breather. The velocities and energies of the moving breathers are small, a typical example shown in Fig. In this article we have investigated the existence of localized nonlinear waves in a model for the potassium ions in muscovite mica with potentials obtained from physical properties and empirical potentials fitted for other properties of the material or for short range collisions. The motivation is the fossil and experimental evidence that nonlinear excitations can travel long distances along the closed packed lines of the potassium layer. We have performed a systematic study of the travelling waves in this system and we have found a wide range of nanopterons and non-radiating kinks. The only stable ones being a single crowdion and two double crowdions with velocities about five times the sound velocity. Nanopterons of small tail amplitude can be even more stable than the sliding kinks. A necessary condition for kinks and nanopterons stability is that their velocity corresponds to a phonon wavenumber in the first Brillouin zone. We have also constructed stationary breathers that cannot be moved, but that can be of interest for other properties of the crystal. There are, also, small amplitude breathers that can be produced by simple physical conditions, with much smaller energies than the crowdions and bi-crowdions and with a long survival time. Among the nonlinear waves that we have found, only the single crowdion had been described previously with a less rigorous method. Crowdions and bi-crowdions are also natural charge carriers in an ionic crystal. Nanopterons with small amplitude tails and high stability may play an important role as long-lived transient states. An interesting subject for future work is the study of charge transport along the lattice close-packed lines as electron or hole hopping coupled with some lattice excitations. We are working in a tight-binding model with these characteristics which will be published in due time. We adventure the hypothesis that the high energy single and double crowdions could be the primary charge carriers along lattice lines, but not of the secondary charge carriers that are scattered by it, which could be breathers coupled to a charge. E. C. H. Silk and R. S. Barnes, "Examination of fission fragment tracks with an electron microscope," Phylos. Mag. 4, 970-971 (1959). P. B. Price and R. M. Walker, "Observation of fossil particle tracks in natural micas," Nature 196, 732-734 (1962). F. M. Russell, "The observation in mica of tracks of charged particles from neutrino interactions," Phys. Lett.B 25, 298-300 (1967). F. M. Russell, "Tracks in mica, years later," in Quodons in mica, Springer Ser. Mat. Sci., Vol. 221, edited by J. F. R. Archilla et al. (Springer, Cham, 2015) pp. 3-33. 5 F. M. Russell and J. C. Eilbeck, "Evidence for moving breathers in a layered crystal insulator at 300 K," Europhys. Lett. 78,