We discover many new crystalline solid materials with fast single crystal Li ion conductivity at room temperature, discovered through density functional theory simulations guided by machine learning-based methods. The discovery of new solid Li superionic conductors is of critical importance to the development of safe all-solid-state Li-ion batteries. With a predictive universal structure-property relationship for fast ion conduction not well understood, the search for new solid Li ion conductors has relied largely on trial-and-error computational and experimental searches over the last several decades. In this work, we perform a guided search of materials space with a machine learning (ML)-based prediction model for material selection and density functional theory molecular dynamics (DFT-MD) simulations for calculating ionic conductivity. These materials are screened from over 12,000 experimentally synthesized and characterized candidates with very diverse structures and compositions. When compared to a random search of materials space, we find that the ML-guided search is 2.7 times more likely to identify fast Li ion conductors, with at least a 45x improvement in the log-average of room temperature Li ion conductivity. The F1 score of the ML-based model is 0.50, 3.5 times better than the F1 score expected from completely random guesswork. In a head-to-head competition against six Ph.D. students working in the field, we find that the ML-based model doubles the F1 score of human experts in its ability to identify fast Li-ion conductors from atomistic structure with a thousandfold increase in speed, clearly demonstrating the utility of this model for the research community. In addition to having high predicted Li-ion conductivity, all materials reported here lack transition metals to enhance stability against reduction by Li metal anode, and are predicted to exhibit low electronic conduction, high stability against oxidation, and high thermodynamic stability, making them promising candidates for solid-state electrolyte applications on these several essential metrics. All-solid-state Li-ion batteries (SSLIBs) hold promise as safer, longer lasting, and higher energy dense alternatives to today's commercialized LIBs with liquid electrolytes. However, the design of SSLIBs remains a challenge, with the principal technological bottleneck in realizing these devices being the solid electrolyte. A high performance solid electrolyte material must satisfy several criteria simultaneously: it must possess fast Li-ion conduction, negligible electronic conduction, a wide electrochemical window, robust chemical stability against side reactions with the electrodes, and high mechanical rigidity to suppress dendritic growth on the anode. The material should also be cheap and easy to manufacture. Given these many constraints, searching for promising new materials that satisfy all requirements through the trial-and-error searches has yielded slow progress. The earliest efforts to discover fast Li-ion conducting solids began in the 1970s Leveraging atomic and electronic structure data from the Materials Project database, Following the guess-and-check paradigm, one would begin to test these materials for fast ion conduction at random, or according to his/her best scientific intuition. To identify the subset of these materials most likely to exhibit fast ionic conductivity, we have instead developed Screening this list of 317 candidate materials identifies 21 crystalline compounds that are predicted to be fast ion conductors with robust structural and electrochemical stability, representing a 99.8% reduction in the entire space of known Li-containing materials. One of these 21 materials, LiCl, has been reported to exhibit poor RT Li conduction (~10 -9 S/cm), In this work, we perform DFT molecular dynamics (DFT-MD) calculations As a further test of the model's efficacy, we provided the same list of materials to a group of six graduate students working in the field and asked them to identify the best ion conductors. We found the F1 score of the model outperformed the F1 score of the intuition of the students by approximately two times, while each prediction was made approximately 1,000 times faster. This result suggests ML-based approaches to materials selection may provide significant acceleration over the guess-and-check research paradigm of the past. Furthermore, these results provide confidence in our data-driven superionic prediction model, as well as compelling evidence in the promise of machine learning-based approaches to materials discovery. We first perform DFT-MD on the 19 most promising new candidate materials for solid electrolyte applications that are all predicted to be fast ion conductors by our ML-based model Eq. ( We simulate the candidate materials for a range of times on the tens to hundreds of picoseconds timescale; see Table To probe for melting, we also calculate the MSD of the sublattice atoms and assume melting if sustained, non-zero diffusivity is observed in both Li and the sublattice (the smallest diffusivity that can be resolved through DFT-MD at 900K is approximately 0.01 Å N /ps). To assess the degree of convergence in G 88 , we compute the standard deviation in diffusivities when measured from different starting times in the MSD data. We compute the slope of the MSD data for every starting time from t = 0 to up to 75% of the total run time, in 100 fs increments. We compute one standard deviation above and below the mean diffusivity across all starting times to represent the approximate upper and lower limits of the distribution of diffusivities one may observe under these simulation conditions. The diffusivity as measured from t = 0 and the mean diffusivity across all starting times are not necessarily equivalent, and thus the upper and lower uncertainties are not necessarily symmetric around the value predicted from t = 0. Ionic transport in crystalline solids is modeled here as a stochastic phenomenon governed by a Boltzmann (Arrhenius) factor that is exponential in a single energy barrier between equilibrium sites, E a : Ionic hopping becomes exponentially less likely as the energy barrier increases, and at 900 K (k B T = 78 meV) hopping may not happen on the tens to hundreds of picoseconds timescale if the barrier is much above 0.4 eV (0 1].c/].]de = 0.006). Thus, high temperature MD simulations are not well-suited to predict a numerical value for ionic conductivity in medium-to high barrier systems because the statistical behavior is not captured on typical DFT simulation timescales. Numerical values can only be predicted through MD in low barrier systems, and even then are still approximate due to the stochastic nature of hopping. Our approach is most suited for high throughput calculations in which the main goal is identifying whether or not materials are superionic conductors, i.e. for making binary predictions of superionic vs. non-superionic conduction. From the diffusivity G 88 , we convert to the average of the diagonal elements of the ionic conductivity tensor f 88 via the Einstein relation: 12 where n is the concentration of Li atoms and q is the charge on the Li atoms. We measure the effective Li charge q using the Bader charge analysis methods of Henkelman et al. It stands to reason that fast Li conduction will not be observed at RT if it is not observed in these favorable conditions. Our approach therefore should not identify false negatives (materials with poor conduction at high temperature but fast conduction at RT), although there is a risk of identifying false positives (materials with fast conduction at high temperature but poor conduction at RT). To ensure favorable scaling to room temperature and guard against the identification of false positives, we simulate DFT-MD again at alternate temperatures if significant Li diffusion has been observed at the initial simulation temperature. The line connecting the two or three diffusivities on an Arrhenius plot of log 10 (f) versus inverse temperature is employed here to extrapolate down to RT without direct calculation of E a . This assumes Arrhenius scaling applies and there are no structural phase changes or non-structural superionic transitions (where conductivity changes abruptly as new ionic pathways become energetically accessible or inaccessible without any significant sublattice rearrangement) A flowchart describing this process is shown in Fig. The ultimate metric of the utility of materials selection models is the improvement in likelihood of successfully identifying positive examples over the background probability of these materials. To quantify the superiority of our model to completely random guesswork, we must know the diffusion is observed on this timescale, the materials are immediately considered poor ion conductors and no further simulation is performed. If materials exhibit Li diffusion at 900K, they are simulated again at alternate temperatures so a simple two-or three-point Arrhenius extrapolation to room temperature can be made. If melting is observed in the ML-selected materials at 900K, the simulation is restarted at a lower temperature. Randomly chosen materials that exhibit melting at 900K are discarded immediately for computational efficiency; this occurred in two randomly chosen materials. Select material from pool of 317 based on ML conductivity prediction Select material randomly from pool of 317 Was melting observed at simulation temperature? Was melting observed at simulation temperature? Terminate study and select new material Is any Li motion observed on the 10-100ps timescale? Simulate again at lower temperature No Simulate at alternate temperature(s) Was melting observed at simulation temperature? Assume Arrhenius scaling and extrapolate conductivity to room temperature No likelihood of discovering a superionic material by chance with no scientific intuition involved. In 1978, Huggins and Rabenau questioned "whether there is anything fundamentally different in such materials, or whether they merely exhibit extreme values of 'normal' behavior." Experience would tell us that the likelihood of chance discoveries is low, given that only a handful of fast Li conductors have been discovered since the search began nearly 40 years ago. However, we are probing for superionic conduction in a very specific way: we are pulling from a potentially biased group of 317 known materials in the Materials Project database, introducing Li vacancies, and simulating finite computational cells at high temperature. Therefore, this question is best answered by doing a straight-across comparison of high temperature DFT-MD simulations for a similar number of structures chosen at random from the same population. To accomplish this, we perform a control experiment where we simulate 21 structures chosen uniformly at random from among the 317 materials that satisfy all prerequisite screening criteria (band gap > 1 eV, predicted oxidation potential > 4 V, energy above convex hull = 0 eV, no transition metals) and simulate MD under the same procedure. These 21 structures and their predicted superionic likelihoods according to the ML model are the following: LiLa melting at 900K or due to extremely slow or failed electronic convergence, in some cases due to electronic bandgap closure during the simulation. Of the remaining 21 randomly chosen materials we successfully simulate, 20 have a negative ML-based superionic prediction (below <50%) so we do not expect them to conduct. The only material of these 21 random materials that is predicted by our ML-based algorithm to conduct is LiSO 3 F. The computational parameters used in these randomly chosen simulations are also provided in Table In this work we report a total of 4.3 nanoseconds of molecular dynamics simulation, with a mean simulation time of 74.9 picoseconds and mean computational cell size of 99.1 atoms. The total volume of data reported here corresponds to approximately 330,000 GPU-hours of simulation. The computed ionic conductivities for the ML-chosen candidate materials and the randomly chosen materials are provided in the Arrhenius diagram on Fig. Our simulations show ten of the simulated candidate materials exhibit significant Li conduction at high temperature. After applying Arrhenius scaling and extrapolating to RT, eight of these materials are predicted to exhibit superionic conductivity (>10 The rightmost column of Table The results of the simulation on the randomly selected materials are listed in with Li diffusivities at 900 K of 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0.04, and 0.02 Å N /ps respectively. The remaining 16 structures showed no observable Li conduction on the timescale of tens to hundreds of picoseconds. See Supporting Information for computational parameters and simulation times. The five materials that exhibited diffusion at 900K were simulated again at alternate temperatures. After constructing the conductivity extrapolation, the conductivities in three of these materials (LiSO 3 F, Li 6 Ho(BO 3 ) 3 , and LiSbO 3 ) were found to extrapolate to above 10 -4 S/cm at room temperature. The remaining two, however, showed zero diffusion during simulation at 700K. Using typical values for the Li concentration and Bader charge, we estimate that zero Li diffusion after 50ps of simulation at 700K likely corresponds to an ionic conductivity of 10 -9 S/cm or less. Therefore, the RT conductivity of these two materials is predicted to be far below 10 -4 S/cm when the assumed 700K conductivity is factored into the extrapolation. Between the ML-guided search and the random search, we identify twelve materials total that are predicted by our DFT-MD simulations to exhibit significant Li ion conduction at RT (and the DFT-MD of Zevgolis et al. critical criteria beyond fast ionic conductivity to make them useful as solid-state electrolytes in Li-ion batteries: all materials possess DFT-predicted band gaps greater than 1 eV to ensure limited electronic conduction, are free from transition metal elements which may easily reduce in contact with a Li metal anode, exhibit high predicted electrochemical stability against oxidation by cathodes (>4 V vs. Li/Li + ), and sit on the convex hull of their phase diagrams to ensure robust structural (phase) stability. Two of the materials discovered here (Li 2 B 2 S 5 and Li 5 B 7 S 13 ) belong to the Li-B-S system, which appears to be a promising class of materials for realizing fast conducting, electrochemically stable, low mass solid electrolyte materials. Li 3 ErCl 6 , an Er-substituted analog to the fast-conducting Li 3 InCl 6 , appears to be a promising Li conductor with a predicted RT ionic conductivity of 3×10 -4 S/cm, although the high atomic mass and low earth abundance of Er makes it a less attractive candidate for battery applications. Li 3 ErCl 6 was first studied and characterized in 1996 as a potential fast Li ion conductor We discover four oxygen-based materials predicted to be fast RT ion conductors: Li 2 HIO, LiSO 3 F, Li 6 Ho(BO 3 ) 3 , and LiSbO 3 . These materials may be particularly promising candidates for further experimental studies, given that oxide materials can often be synthesized in atmospheric conditions. LiSbO3, LiSO 3 F, and Li 2 HIO were first studied in 1954, 1977, and 1994, respectively, It is also possible that the bulk ionic conductivity of the material is fast, which is accurately modeled by DFT-MD, but it becomes a poor ion conductor under the experimental conditions of ref. [ 39 ], e.g. due to defects, stoichiometric variations, or microstructural effects. The calculations performed here suggest that this material warrants a revisit of the experimental results. Quantifying the accuracy of the original ML-based model should be done based on its performance on a randomly-sampled test set, not on a test set consisting only of positive predictions. The 21 randomly chosen materials that were simulated here provide such a set. On this set, the model correctly predicts the DFT-validated material label 19/21 times, yielding an overall predictive accuracy of 90.5%. This value is similar to the 90.0% model accuracy predicted via leave-one-out cross-validation in the original model building process. As an additional performance metric, we compare the likelihood of discovering a RT superionic conductor under the ML-guided screening versus random searching. The random search yields three fast conductors and 18 non-conductors. This yields a baseline superionic probability of 3/21 = 14.3%. To make a fair comparison to the ML-guided case where materials that melted at 900K were not discarded, we do not consider in the statistics those ML-chosen materials that melted at 900K. Two of the eight ML-chosen RT superionic conductors melted at 900K (LiMgB 3 (H 9 N) 2 and Li 2 HIO). Removing these two materials from the count, the ML model identifies six fast conductors, two marginal conductors, and ten non-conductors. Counting the marginal cases as one half, this gives an ML-guided conductor discovery rate of 7/18 = 38.9%. Therefore, applying the ML-based model to screen candidate materials before experimentation yields an expected 0.389/0.143 = 2.7x improvement in discovery rate. In Figure We perform a test of the model's predictive power against human intuition, which is likely to identify fast conducting materials at a higher rate than the background distribution of ion conductors. Several design principles for predicting superionic diffusion have been reported recently, To understand the precision of human intuition, we polled six Ph.D. students in the Department of Materials Science & Engineering at Stanford University to test their ability to predict superionic conduction in the 21 randomly chosen materials. The students are all actively engaged in research involving ion conductors. The students were allowed to take as much time as necessary to make predictions and could access any structural information about the candidate materials, including space and point groups. After making predictions, we calculated their average precision and recall on the data set; the average precision was 0. We study 20 materials based on the predictions of our data-driven model, and a control group of 21 chosen at random from the same population. When choosing materials for study based on the predictions of our data-driven model, we observe a significant increase in RT Li conductivity than when simulating materials chosen at random. After removing cases from both populations that melted at 900K, 28% of the MLselected materials exhibited a predicted RT conductivity of 1 mS/cm or higher with small Li vacancy concentrations, compared to only 5% of materials selected at random. The rate of negative outcomes (no ionic motion) in the simulations during the ML-guided material simulation was 56%, while the randomly chosen materials demonstrated a negative outcome rate of 86%. The log-average of RT predicted conductivity in the ML-guided case is at least 45 times higher if non-conducting cases are assumed to have an RT ionic conductivity ≤ 10 1U mS/cm (3.1×10 1c versus 6.8×10 1U mS/cm). In Fig. While DFT-MD is taken here to be ground truth, the logistic regression model utilized in this work is trained on experimental measurements, where grain boundaries, contaminants, and other uncharacterized factors may have altered the result. This may mean the model is best suited to guide experimental searches, as the model has a built-in bias towards expected results under experimental conditions. In contrast, our DFT-MD simulates conductivity in single crystal bulk systems with small Li vacancy concentrations. Although DFT-MD is well-suited to make predictions under these conditions, its predictions have potential to deviate from the ground truth for the ML model. For example, the conflicting DFT-MD and experimental reports for RT Li ion conductivity in Li 6 Ho(BO 3 ) 3 between this work and ref. Guided by machine learning methods, we discover many new solid materials with predicted superionic Li ion conduction (≥10 -4 S/cm) at room temperature: Li 5 B 7 S 13 , Li 2 B 2 S 5 , Li 3 ErCl 6 , LiSO 3 F, Li 3 InCl 6 , Li 2 HIO, LiMgB 3 (H 9 N) 2 , and CsLi 2 BS 3 . Two additional materials show marginal RT conduction: Sr 2 LiCBr 3 N 2 and LiErSe 2 . One of these materials, Li 5 B 7 S 13 , has a DFT-MD predicted RT Li conductivity (120 mS/cm) an order of magnitude larger than the fastest known Li ion conductors. A search over randomly chosen materials identifies two additional materials with promising predicted RT ionic conductivities: Li 6 Ho(BO 3 ) 3 , and LiSbO 3 . In addition to high ionic conductivities, all these materials have high band gaps, high thermodynamic stability, and no transition metals, making them promising candidates for solidstate electrolytes in SSLIBs. These materials represent many exciting new candidates for solid electrolytes in SSLIBs, and we encourage subsequent experimental investigations into the properties of these materials. Compared to the machine learning-guided search, the control experiment of searching for fast ion conductors through random guesses yields significantly lower quality results. Screening with our ML-based model improves the likelihood of superionic discovery by nearly three times, with a more than 45x improvement in log-average of RT ionic conductivity. Additionally, the model outperforms the intuition of Ph.D. students actively working on ion conductors by more than a factor of two. This is a significant acceleration beyond trial-and-error research and provides confidence in our ML-based approach to materials screening. These results are summarized in the data we report here we expect to drive significant improvements to ML-based models for Li conduction. The improvement over random guessing provided by our ML-based model for predicting Li ion conductivity underscores the importance of thorough data reporting, centralized data collection, and careful data analysis for materials. Although significant improvements have been made in the last several years thanks to incentives provided by the Materials Genome Initiative, 43 there are still many materials properties, especially experimentally expensive properties like ionic conductivity, without any comprehensive data repository. This work demonstrates that learning on even small sets of materials data (40 samples) can offer a significant advantage in screening efforts. To that end, we encourage efforts to continue centralizing and learning on diverse types of data on materials. Machine learning-assisted discovery of many new solid Li-ion conducting materials Table When no Li motion is observed during the course of the DFT-MD simulation, there is no information on which to base an ionic conductivity estimate. However, it is possible to bound this estimate by considering what the ionic conductivity would be if one inter-site Li hop was observed immediately at the end of the simulation. This corresponds to an upper bound on conductivity, as many more picoseconds of simulation time may be required before this hop is actually observed. We first apply the mean squared displacement approach to computing diffusivity formula, eq. ( We convert to ionic conductivity using the Einstein relation assuming the Li Bader charge q = +1.0, and the Li concentration n = 0.0137Å ;< (the average Li concentration across all materials simulated here). This gives an upper bound 900K ionic conductivity of =(900?) = (0.00127Å ) /ps)(0.0137Å ;< )(1.6× 10 ;3B 7C) ) /(k E ×900K) 7 = 37mS/cm. Typically, poorly conducting materials will exhibit diffusion barriers of approximately E a = 0.5 eV or higher. Taking this to be a typical barrier, we extrapolate the estimated conductivity at 900K down to 293K assuming Arrhenius scaling: = J = = 5 K ;L M /N O P . This gives an upper bound RT conductivity under these conditions of approximately 10 -6 mS/cm. When computing the improvement in superionic discovery rate offered by the model over random guesswork, we remove cases that melted at 900 K from both data sets. In the ML-guided case, we discover that the two materials that melted at 900 K are in fact predicted by DFT to be fast RT conductors. We discover this by simulating these materials at increasingly lower temperatures until no melting is observed and then extrapolating to RT. This procedure was not followed for the randomly-selected cases. If we do not remove the melting cases from the ML-guided materials discovery statistics, the rate of discovery for RT superionic conductors becomes 9/20 = 45.0%. If we assume the "worst case scenario" that the two randomly-chosen cases that melted at 900 K are in fact fast Li-ion conductors RT, this would increase the background probability of superionic conductors from 3/21 = 14.3% to 5/23 = 21.7%. The F1 score of completely random guessing then correspondingly increases to 0.217. Under the "best case scenario" that they are not truly fast Liion conductors, the background probability falls to 3/23 = 13.0% and the corresponding F1 socre is 0.130. This potential variation in the discovery rates results in a potential variation in the expected improvement over random offered by the model. In the best case scenario, the expected improvement in discovery rate improves to 0.45/0.130 = 3.5x. Under the worst case scenario, the expected improvement falls to 0.45/0.217 = 2.1x. 4 Zhu et al. report simulate 21 materials as chosen at random and provide the computed values for diffusivity G 88 (average of diagonal elements in the diffusivity tensor), conductivity, average Li Bader charge, and the extrapolated RT ionic conductivity values.