Transition metal phosphorous trichalcogenides, M PX3 (M and X being transition metal and chalcogen elements respectively), have been the focus of substantial interest recently because they are unusual candidates undergoing Mott transition in the two-dimensional limit. Here we investigate material properties of the compounds with M = Mn and Ni employing ab-initio density functional and dynamical mean-field calculations, especially their electronic behavior under external pressure in the paramagnetic phase. Mott metal-insulator transitions (MIT) are found to be a common feature for both compounds, but their lattice structures show drastically different behaviors depending on the relevant orbital degrees of freedom, i.e. t2g or eg. Under pressure MnPS3 undergoes an isosymmetric structural transition in monoclinic space group by forming Mn-Mn dimers due to the strong direct overlap between the neighboring t2g orbitals, accompanied by a significant volume collapse and a spin-state transition. In contrast, NiPS3 and NiPSe3, with their active eg orbital degrees of freedom, do not show a structural change at the MIT pressure or deep in the metallic phase within the monoclinic symmetry. Hence NiPS3 and NiPSe3 become rare examples of materials hosting electronic bandwidth-controlled Mott MITs, thus showing promise for ultrafast resistivity switching behavior. Since the first identification of the Mott metal-insulator transition (MIT) by Mott and Peierls in 1937 Here we propose new candidates for the electronic bandwidth-controlled MIT without significant structural distortion among the emerging class of two-dimensional vdW materials. Our target is a series of transition metal phosphorous trichalcogenides M PX 3 (M = Mn, Ni, X = S, Se) Crystal structures versus pressure. Fig. In addition to the volume collapse, mostly from the discontinuous change of a, DFT+U simulations of MnPS 3 show a Mn-Mn dimerization along the b-direction with the tilting of the P 2 dimer as shown in Fig. Note that the previous experimental study suggested the formation of Mn zigzag chains in the high-P phase We note that the two compounds show markedly different pressure dependence of the lattice parameters even before the structural transition. By comparing Fig. It is clear that the t 2g states (a g and e g ) are mostly occupied, while the e g states are partially filled and show a narrow dip at the Fermi level at 30.4 GPa. The self-energies of the e g orbitals show poles at the Fermi level (see SM), confirming the presence of the paramagnetic Mott phase. Previously, it was suggested that NiPS 3 is a negative charge-transfer (NCT) insulator with a d 9 L 1 configuration (L denoting a S p-ligand hole) MIT driven by uniaxial pressure in NiPSe 3 . While the crit- ical pressure for the MIT in NiPS 3 can be reached in modern high-pressure experimental setups, a substitution of S by the more polarizable Se is expected to further reduce the critical pressure. Therefore the recently synthesized NiPSe 3 Volume collapse and MIT in MnPS 3 . We now address the volume-collapse transition in MnPS 3 . We first checked that once the optimized lattice parameters from DFT+U are employed, both DFT+U and eDMFT optimizations for the internal coordinates yield practically the same result. Fig. Summary. We report a theoretical study of the Mott MIT induced by external pressure in strongly correlated layered vdW materials. We comment that the Mott phases in other metal trisulfides, such as FePS 3 For unit cell optimizations and relaxations of initial internal coordinates, the Vienna ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP), which employs the projector-augmented wave (PAW) basis set Structural relaxations for all compounds were performed in the presence of the DFT+U eff (4 eV) on-site Coulomb interaction and a Néel-type antiferromagnetic order A fully charge-self-consistent dynamical meanfield method A continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo method in the hybridization-expansion limit (CT-HYB) was used to solve the auxiliary quantum impurity problem We comment that the choice of optimal values of the Coulomb interaction U is method-dependent. Other than the eDMFT approach chosen in this study, there are two widely employed first-principles methods using U to incorporate electron correlations; (a) DFT+U , and (b) DFT+DMFT with Wannierized correlated orbitals. Both methods use smaller values of U ( 4 eV) for the correlated d orbitals in transitionmetal compounds compared to eDMFT (10 eV) Secondly, for DFT+DMFT with Wannierized correlated orbitals, it is well known that the Wannier functions contain a substantial amount of p character from anions (oxygen or chalcogen ions) if a narrow Wannierization energy window that contains only the correlated subspace is chosen. Consequently the critical U becomes much smaller because of the mixing of p character, to be indeed of the order of the bandwidth W . Note that this approach is equivalent to solving Hubbard-type models, where only correlated orbital degrees of freedom are considered. Contrary to the aforementioned approaches, in the eDMFT formalism we are solving a generalized Anderson-lattice type Hamiltonian (actually the p-d type Hamiltonian), where the effective U eff that could be compared with the Hubbard-U in the Hubbard-type model is actually the p-d splitting. The advantage of using such p-d type Hamiltonian in DFT+DMFT is evident; the U values in such models are much more systemindependent for many transition-metal compounds, as demonstrated recently Gap-Exp. Specifically we notice that vdW functionals, except vdW-DF and vdW-DF2 functionals, show reasonable agreements with PBEsol results. vdW-DF and vdW-DF2 functionals tends to prefer larger volume (i.e. larger P estimated at the same volume compared to other functionals). This is because these functionals favor larger interlayer distances in the highpressure regime than conventional XC functionals. Overall, even though use of different vdW functional induces some quantitative differences, it does not seem to change our main conclusions in this work. We comment that, since vdW functionals favor larger cell volume, the inclusion of them should enhance the magnitude of critical pressures for structural/electronic transitions in both compounds, which is actually making the discrepancy between the theoretical prediction and experimental observation slightly worse in MnPS 3 . Hence we argue that PBEsol+U eff can be a more reasonable choice in this pressurized setup where the direct orbital overlap between layers becomes significant. Table I presents the comparison between PBEsol+U effand eDMFT-optimized atomic coordinates of MnPS 3 and NiPS 3 , both at ambient and high-pressure regimes. Here ambient and high-pressure results represent Mott-insulating and weakly correlated metallic phases, respectively, for both compounds. In eDMFT calculations, as commented in the manuscript, optimized cell parameters a, b, c, and monoclinic angle β from PBEsol+U eff were employed. This is due to the absence of stress tensor formalism implemented in any of full-potential linearized augmented plane wave codes, and in DFT+DMFT formalisms as well. Under this constraint, eDMFT-optimized atomic coordinates show very similar results with PBEsol+U eff ones despite different magnetization conditions; paramagnetic order for eDMFT, and antiferromagnetism (Néel order for MnPS 3 , zigzag order for NiPS 3 ) in PBEsol+U eff . However, the validity of employing DFT+U eff with a magnetic order in optimizing crystal structures of paramagnetic systems, especially the cell parameters, may need to be checked. This is because, like in MnPS 3 as shown in the manuscript, some structural phase transitions are strongly coupled to elastic deformations of the unit cell. One may even suspect that the discrepancy between the predicted and experimentally reported To resolve the issue mentioned above, energy landscapes from DFT+U eff and eDMFT in the cell parameter space need to be compared with each other. Even though full structural relaxations may not be possible within eDMFT formalism, several trials to compare DFT+U eff -and DMFT-optimized structures were performed, where DMFT calculations were done in the paramagnetic configuration. According to our result presented in the manuscript, NiPS 3 does not have a noticeable structural change at the MIT pressure of P 30 GPa, which is somewhat unusual. Hence, for a closer look on the structure-free MIT point, we computed a total energy curve versus cell volume for paramagnetic (PM) eDMFT near the MIT. For more accurate results, the rotationally invariant form of the Coulomb interaction (spin-flip and pair-hopping included) was employed at a lower temperature of T = 116 K. PM MIT is usually known to accompany a sudden volume change (as reported in Ref. As marked in Fig. Fig. We comment that, due to the increased computational cost of the CT-HYB impurity solver by the enhanced intermetallic hybridization in the pressurized setup, all eDMFT data points presented in Fig. Fig. As shown in Fig. ELECTRONIC STRUCTURES WITH A N ÉEL ORDER Ambient pressure cases for both compounds Fig. Note that, the use of the Ising-type Coulomb repulsion gives rise to the stabilization of magnetic order well above the Néel temperatures of both compounds, T N = 154 and 78 K for NiPS 3 and MnPS 3 , respectively As discussed in the main text, the pressure-induced MIT in MnPS 3 in the paramagnetic phase is a discontinuous transition accompanied by a spin-state transition and isosymmetric structural distortion with a volume collapse. Such discontinu- ous character does not change in the presence of magnetism, as shown in Fig. In the PM phase of NiPS 3 , the MIT can be indicated not only by the gap opening in the PDOS, but also by the change of electron self-energies Σ(ω). In Fig. In the AF-ordered phases, the gap opening is induced by the exchange splitting between the spin up and down components, i.e. (Σ up -Σ down ) (ω). In cases where Σ(ω) is weak compared to Σ(ω) and the frequency dependence of (Σ up -Σ down ) (ω) is small, then the eDMFT results become equivalent to the DFT+U eff results. Fig. 