We demonstrate that highly-ordered two-dimensional crystals of ligand-capped gold nanoparticles display a local photo-mechanical stiffness as high as that of solids such as graphite. In out-of equilibrium electron diffraction experiments, a strong temperature jump is induced in a thin film with a femtosecond laser pulse. The initial electronic excitation transfers energy to the underlying structural degrees of freedom, with a rate generally proportional to the stiffness of the material. With femtosecond small-angle electron diffraction, we observe the temporal evolution of the diffraction feature associated to the nearest-neighbor nanoparticle distance. The Debye-Waller decay for the octanethiol-capped nanoparticles supracrystal, in particular, is found to be unexpectedly fast, almost as fast as the stiffest solid known and observed by the same technique, i.e. graphite. Our observations unravel that local stiffness in a dense supramolecular assembly can be created by Van der Waals interactions up to a level comparable to crystalline systems characterized by covalent bonding. Two-dimensional supracrystals created by self-assembly of nanoparticles (NPs) offer a route toward engineering materials with specific functionalities The simultaneous characterization of the NP cores and their ligands shell, as well as of the short-range properties of the NPs assembly, has proven challenging so far In alkanethiol-capped NPs colloidal crystals, the local (i.e., short-range) mechanical properties are primarily affected by the local arrangement of NPs cores and organic ligands within single grains. For this, a scattering technique is required, which can combine Ångstroms (Å) spatial resolution with sensitivity to light elements. Effects of ligand chain length on NPs packing density or disorder have recently been explored in two-dimensional ligand-stabilized NPs supracrystals by Kim et al. Only recently, ultrafast small-angle electron diffraction has enabled to resolve both their static ordering properties and their photo-induced motions We conducted experiments on three different 2D nanoparticles supracrystals. Each sample is consisting of monodisperse gold NPs of the same size (∼5 nm) coated with different alkanethiols (R-SH, R = C n H 2n+1 ): 1-octanethiol (n=8), 1-dodecanethiol (n=12) and 1-octadecanethiol (n=18). Within the text, we will refer to these samples as C8, C12 and C18, respectively. Each NPs supracrystal monolayer was obtained by Langmuir-Schaefer deposition Structure retrieval methods based on the calculation of the angular Cross-Correlation Function (CCF) have proved effective in retrieving the local arrangement and the symmetry of the NPs in the supracrystal where I(s 1 , φ) represents the scattered intensity at the scattering vector s 1 and the angle ;  is the shift between the two angles, (inset of Fig. Fig. Thus, NPs in each grain arrange in crystallographic-like planes with distance d 1 = 2π s 1 (Fig. We analyzed the transient changes in the NPs hexagonal arrangement at s 1 for the C8 and the C12 supracrystals and compared their time responses (Fig. The transient change of I(s 1 ) for the C8 (red circles) and the C12 (orange squares) supracrystals is reported in Fig. The I(s 1 ) suppression for C8 and C12 is due to the energy transfer between the electronic excitation made by light and the underlying structural degrees of freedom of the supracrystal. In Fig. While our observations suggest that this scenario applies for the C12 supracrystal, where the relaxation follows a timescale τ = 12.1 ps, the dynamics observed in the C8 supracrystal is dramatically different and unexpected. In the C8 supracrystal, the intensity drop of the diffracted beam follows a Debye-Waller factor comparable to the one of graphite, which is to date the fastest ever observed in ultrafast electron diffraction To rationalize this result, one may consider that upon photoexcitation of a metallic system, the evolution of the electronic temperature and lattice temperature can be described via the popular two temperature model Contrarily to all systems described above, the structural modes of a self-assembled supracrystal are not an established concept. However, in the case of the gold nanoparticles assemblies investigated in this work, it is reasonable to assume that the only subsystem to which the initial electronic excitation can transfer energy to is the supracrystal structure itself. In fact, as demonstrated in We point out that the microscopic description of the collective modes responsible for such an energy transfer between the electronic excitation and the supracrystal, supporting our assumptions, is subject of current investigation. In fact, a complete theoretical framework is still lacking to date, despite increasing interest demonstrated -for example-by the postulated existence of short-range phonons in soft matter and liquids, also termed anakeons The photoinduced disorder observed in both C8 and C12 supracrystals is accompanied by annealing of NPs grains Next, we demonstrate for each sample the presence of a direct correlation between the observed Debye-Waller decay, and the symmetry of the NPs within the supracrystal grains. Ligand lengthdependent order-disorder correlations in the three supracrystals were explored in a series of simulations. The Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images of the C8, C12 and C18 samples measured with UED are displayed in Fig. With J 1 Bessel function of the first kind, d the NPs diameter, ρ the abscissa coordinate, λ the wavelength and z the sample-detector distance. Sphere lattice model (SLM) simulations are used to assign the different local distribution of the NPs within supracrystal grains (Fig. The similarity between (i) the [10°, 0] model with the C8, C12 samples, and (ii) the [10°, ±1 nm] model with the C18, is further confirmed by the radial averaged intensity plots in Fig. In this work, we reported that local mechanical stiffness can be created in supramolecular assemblies by Van der Waals forces to an extent comparable to systems characterized by strong covalent bonding. The key to our observation is a powerful technique which combines small-angle electron diffraction (Å spatial resolution) with ultrafast (fs) temporal resolution. Moreover, we demonstrate that the local symmetry of the NPs within the supracystal grains affects the short-range degree of coupling between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom. We point out that our small-angle scattering technique is sensitive to the short-range arrangement of a few nearest-neighbors (alkanethiol-capped gold NPs) within crystal grains, in samples that are overall characterized by the presence of discontinuities, as dislocations and grain boundaries. Thus, the transient response observed in each sample unveils information about photo-mechanical local stiffness, i.e. at the nearest/next nearest neighbor level. Because of the presence of defects and dislocations in the overall colloidal crystal, we remark that the observed stiffness is not expected to directly translate into a macroscopic mechanical property. Our results provide a seed for new theoretical models of structural collective modes in soft-matter systems. suggesting a strong coupling of the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom. When the ligand length increases (C12, orange squares) the system is characterized by a softer electron-phonon coupling, similar to soft metals such as Bismuth (grey crosses). Graphite data were digitized from The driving laser is a KMLabs Wyvern centered at a wavelength of 800 nm, with 0.65 mJ pulse energy, 50 fs pulse duration, at a repetition rate of 20 kHz. The shot-to-shot noise on the energy per pulse in the experiment is below 0.2%. Electrons are generated in a DC gun by back illumination of a silver-coated sapphire window on a high voltage (30 kV) photocathode with 266 nm light pulses. UV light is obtained from the fundamental driving laser by second and third harmonic generation. The photoemitted electron bunches are directed to the sample with a collimating solenoid lens (I = 25 A) and a focusing solenoid (I = 1.72 A). Their temporal chirp is compensated with a radiofrequency cavity operating in the TM 010 mode Gold nanoparticles coated with 1-octanethiol (C8), 1-decanethiol (C12), or 1-octanedecanethiol (C18) were synthesized The nanoparticle solution was precipitated with methanol and cleaned five times in acetone by centrifugation and redispersion in a sonication bath. The nanoparticles were dried in vacuum for storing and dissolved in toluene before use (for the case of C18-coated nanoparticles, they were slightly heated (~30 °C) to completely dissolve). 1-Octanethiol NPs: the analysis of the TEM image of Fig. Considering I(s, φ) the diffracted intensity at the scattering vector s and the azimuthal angle , the one- . The local symmetry of the NPs, within each supracrystal, can be obtained by applying this methodology in a region of the electron diffraction patterns very close to the central beam (DC), at small-angle. The intensity profile I(s 1 , φ) of the scattering at s 1 and the Fourier Spectrum F φ {I(s 1 , φ)} of the C8, C12, C18 samples are reported in Fig. The TEM images and the simulations (Fig. The CCFs are computed from the azimuthal scattered intensity at s 1 , I(s 1 , φ), through the the onedimensional Fourier transform F φ {I(s 1 , φ)} over the coordinate (see Experimental Section, main text). In Fig. This has already been demonstrated in a detailed study reported in A 14% and a 10% transient I(s 1 ) suppression is reported in Fig. The velocity of the I(s 1 ) suppression is directly related to the coupling strength between the electronic and structural degrees of freedom in each supracrystal, which significantly differs with the ligand length. As demonstrated by the CCF static analysis (Fig. 