La1.5Ca0.5CoIrO6 is a re-entrant spin-glass (SG) that exhibits antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic couplings at T ∼ 95 and ∼ 86 K, respectively, and at T ∼ 25 K a SG phase emerges. In this work we investigated the effect of hydrostatic pressure (P ) on La1.5Ca0.5CoIrO6 magnetic properties. By means of magnetization as a function of temperature measurements, carried under different applied pressures and/or magnetic fields, we have found that the freezing temperature of the SG phase exhibits an initial increase followed by a decrease with increasing P , and that the maximum P = 7.9 kbar was not sufficient to prevent the formation of the frozen state. Since the ordering temperatures of the antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic phases are also affected by P , we discuss the results here found in terms of changes on the balance between the magnetic phases. Double-perovskite (DP) compounds, with general formula A 2 BB'O 6 [A = rare-earth/alkaline-earth, B and B' = transition-metal (TM)] are the subject of great interest since the discovery of high T C ferrimagnetic (FIM) and halfmetallic behavior on A 2 FeMoO 6 Due to the intrinsic anti-site disorder (ASD) usually found at TM-sites on DP compounds, such class of materials frequently presents competing magnetic interactions and frustration, being thus prospective candidates to exhibit spinglass (SG)-like behavior. On La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 , the ∼9% of ASD at Co/Ir sites leads to competing antiferromagnetic (AFM) and ferromagnetic (FM) phases emerging at temperatures (T ) ∼ 95 and ∼ 86 K, respectively. At lower-T , a SG-phase appears, whose existence concomitant with the AFM/FM phases makes this a re-entrant SG (RSG) material The RSG behavior observed on La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 is associated to the frustration of Ir 4+ , caused by the AFM coupling of Co ions. This compound also exhibits compensation temperatures and spontaneous exchange bias effect, which are believed to be strongly related to the delicate balance between the multiple magnetic phases and to the RSG. To better understand the role played by the magnetic glassiness on this compounds physical properties, it is important to study how the magnetic interactions affect the SG phase. For conventional SG materials, a natural step on this investigation would be to change the concentration of the magnetic ions. For instance, for the canonical CuMn and AuFe systems, which refer to the early works on SG, changing the concentration of Mn or Fe affects the distances between the magnetic ions, which in turn alter the exchange magnetic interactions and leads to significant changes on the SG properties In the case of La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 , doping on the TM sites is not the proper method of investigation because, due to the strong correlation between structural, electronic and magnetic properties observed on such class of materials, it would not be possible to determine which of these parameters would be most affected by the insertion of different TM ions. On the other hand, applying pressure (P ) is a suitable way to study how the magnetic properties of this SG material would be affected when the distances between the TM ions vary. In this work we applied hydrostatic pressures on La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 , up to 7.9 kbar, and investigated its effect on its magnetic properties. We have found that application of P leads to changes on the freezing-T of the SG spins (T f ). Since the ordering T of the AFM and FM phases are also affected by P , we discuss our results in terms of the imbalance between the magnetic phases caused by the approximation of TM ions. For each investigated P , we performed T -dependent magnetization curves [M (T )] curves under different applied magnetic fields (H) and observed that, even for the maximum applied P , T f varies with H according to the Almeida-Thouless equation Polycrystalline La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 sample was synthesized by solid state reaction in a conventional tubular furnace and air atmosphere, as described elsewhere The magnetic properties under pressure (P < 8 kbar) were investigated in a Quantum Design MPMS3 magnetometer. Hydrostatic pressure conditions were achieved on a Cu-Be piston-cylinder type cell. Silicon oil was used as pressure transmitting medium and the P value on the sample region was evaluated from the shift of the superconducting critical temperature of a small lead piece. For each P , we measured M (T ) curves with at least three different H according to the zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) procedures. We systematically followed the same protocol for the acquisition of any of the curves, i.e., the same T -and H-sweeping rates and so on. Figure Inset of Fig. For P = 0.3, 1.1 and 7.9 kbar, it was performed magnetization as a function of H [M (H)] curves at T = 4 K, with a maximum applied H of 70 kOe, measured after cooling the system in zero H. Figure Here we must stress that all measurements were performed with La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 sample together with a Pb sample used as a sensor for P . Since it was not possible to measure M (H) curves only for Pb in order to subtract its contribution to the magnetization (i.e., we could not measure only Pb at the same P used to investigate La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 ), and taking into account that the variations on the M (H) curves obtained with different P are visible but small, one could not extract reliable quantitative information concerning the variation of some parameters with P , as the remanent magnetization and coercive field. The same argument holds for the M (T ) curves, for which it was observed interesting changes on the magnitude of the cusps related to the magnetic transitions. Despite the fact the magnetic signal of our La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 sample is of the order of ∼10 -2 emu while the signal of Pb together with the P cell is of ∼10 -5 emu, one can not state for sure that the variations on the magnitude of magnetic signal are related with changes in La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 mainly. As described above, application of pressure affects the magnitude of the AFM and FM phases present on La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 . Since the magnetic properties of the material are known to result from a delicate balance among these phases, the changes driven by P certainly affects the SG phase. Figure In order to further investigate the effect of P on the magnetic interactions present on La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 , we have performed for one selected P = 5.5 kbar M (T ) measurements with H = 750 and 1250 Oe, besides the 200, 500 and 1000 Oe above described. It was found a monotonic decrease of T f with increasing H, as seen on Fig. where the A parameter is related to the net magnetic interactions between the spins (J). Figure In conclusion, we have investigated the effect of hydrostatic pressure on the magnetic properties of La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 . Our results indicate that changes on T f are related to variations of the AFM and FM conventional magnetic couplings, caused by P . From M (T ) measurements performed under different H, we have observed that, even under the effect of P , T f evolves with H in accordance to the AT equation, as expected for SG systems. These results show that even the highest P here achieved (7.9 kbar) was not sufficient to prevent the emergence of the SG phase at low-T . An analogy can be made between the effect of pressure on La 1.5 Ca 0.5 CoIrO 6 and the chemical substitution on canonical SG materials, for which the insertion of magnetic ions have the effect of a chemical P , shortening the distances between the magnetic ions.