Issues pertinent to the miscibility gap at 800K in a Fe 73.7 Cr 26.3 alloy viz. the kinetics of the phase decomposition and borders of the latter were investigated by means of the Mössbauer-effect spectroscopy. The kinetics was revealed to well follow the Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-Kolgomarov equation testifying to a nucleation and growth mechanism underlying the decomposition. A solubility limit of Cr in the Fe matrix was determined to be 17.3(6) at.% and that of Fe in the Cr matrix was found as equal to 18.5(9) at.%. The results obtained have been compared with various theoretical predictions. Fe-Cr alloys have been of industrial and scientific interests since over a century. The former stems from their importance in the steel making industry while the latter from their interesting magnetic properties. Consequently they have been regarded as model alloys and were subject of numerous experimental and theoretical studies. An extensive review on the Fe-Cr alloy system was recently given by Xiong et. al. The investigation was carried out on a 25 m thick Fe 73.7 Cr 26.3 alloy foil in form a 20x20 mm rectangle obtained by a cold rolling a 100 m thick tape. Details of preparation of the latter are given elsewhere , where X=B or IS, X k is a change of X due to one Cr atom situated in 1NN (k=1) or in 2NN (k=2). This procedure has proved to work properly in different binary alloys of Fe including Fe-Cr ones e. g. A selection of the best-fit spectral parameters obtained with the two-shell model is displayed in Table , and the P(0,0) atomic configuration i.e. the one without Cr atoms within the 1NN-2NN vicinity of the probe Fe atoms. A dependence of the former on the annealing time can be seen in Fig. The measured <B>-values are in line with the Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-Kolgomarov equation (JMAK) equation testifying thereby to a nucleation and growth origin of the decomposition process. The value of the Avrami exponent, n, is close to 0.5, indicating by that the process responsible for the phase decomposition in this sample could be a diffusion-controlled thickening of plates after their edges have impinged Fig. The P(0,0)-values can be used to estimate Cr content in the Fe matrix. For a random distribution the following relationship holds: For the untreated alloy P(0,0)=0.059 which yields x=18.3(3) at% Cr via equ. (1). This is significantly less than the Cr concentration obtained from the chemical analysis viz. 26.3 at%. However, the latter is an average Cr concentration in the bulk, while the former gives its local value as seen by one particular atomic configuration. In any case, the discrepancy means that the distribution of Cr atoms in the initial state of the studied alloy was not random. In the course of annealing i.e. the phase decomposition the P(0,0)-values grow reaching the value of 0.13 (an average over the last three annealing times). The latter figure via the equ. (1) yields x=13.5(4) at.% Cr. That means that the Cr concentration, as seen by the Fe atoms having no Cr atoms within their 2-shells neighborhood, decreased by 4.8 The <B>-value in saturation equals to 283.7 kGs can be readily used to determine a solubility limit of Cr in the Fe matrix, x Cr . For that purpose one uses a monotonous dependence of <B> on the composition in Fe-rich Fe-Cr alloys Fig. Further comparison of our presently and earlier obtained experimental data can be made with calphad-based calculations of the full MG 