We consider dynamics of charged solitons in branched conducting polymers. An effective model based on the sine-Gordon equation on metric graphs is used for computing the charge transport and scattering of charge carriers at the polymer branching points. Condition for the ballistic charge carrier transportis revealed. Conducting polymers are the basic materials for organic electronics, including polymer based photovoltaics. Effective functionalization of such materials requires understanding the mechanisms for charge carrier transport and their optimal control. Considerable progress has been made in the study of charge transport mechanisms in conducing polymers during past three decades In this paper we consider dynamics of charged solitons in branched conducting polymers. Solitons as charge carriers in linear conducting polymers have been extensively studied earlier in the literature We note that particle [43] - To solve this equation, one needs to impose the boundary conditions at the branching point (vertex) of the graph and determine the asymptotic of the wave function at the branch ends. To formulate vertex boundary conditions (VBC) one can use the continuity of wave function and fundamental conservation laws such as energy, charge and momentum conservations. The asymptotic conditions at infinities can be written as -∞, and For the star graph in Fig where B 1 =(-∞, 0), B 2,3 =(0, +∞). From the conservation laws given by we have the boundary conditions at the branching point: (2.5) It was shown in Then the solution can be written as where with |ν| < 1 being the velocity of the kink. Thus dynamics of the charged solitons in branched conducting polymers is described in terms of the problem given by Eqs.(2.1), (2.2) and (2.5). In other words, within our model, solution of sine-Gordon equation on such graph describes the motion of charged kink solitons in branched conducting polymers. Detailed mathematical treatment of this problem was given recently in the Ref. (2.1), (2.2) and (2.5), one can compute different characteristics of the charge transport, such as time-evolution of the topological charge, reflection and transmission of charge carrying solitons at the polymer branching point. In the following for numerical computations we assume that β 1 = β 2 = β 2 = 1. Fig. The above approach can be extended for modeling of charged soliton dynamics in other branched polymers having more complicated branching topologies. Consider first the loop branched polymer which consists of two semi-infinite branches connected by two or more branches having finite lengths L 1 and L -2. Such polymer can be considered as a loop graph presented in Fig. We studied charged soliton dynamics in branched conducting polymers. A model based on the sine-Gordon equation on metric graphs is proposed for the analysis of charged solitons transport in conducting polymers with different branching topologies. Time-dependence of the topological charge and kink scattering at the branching point are analyzed. The regime when there is no backstattering of charged solitons at the polymer branching points is revealed. Such regime corresponds to the case, when the sine-Gordon equation on metric graph is completely integrable and charge and energy conservation rules are fulfilled. For the polymers having many branching points, such regime implies ballistic charge transport. When the conservation rules are broken, transmission of charge carriers through the polymer branched point is accompanied by reflection. Such regime corresponds to diffusive transport of charged solitons through the polymer network. Existing the regime, when the transmission of charge carriers through the branching point is reflectionless makes possible to achieve very high conductivity in the polymer based organic electronic devices. The above model is applicable for arbitrary branching topology, provided the polymer consists of at least three very long branches and other branching part is located between these three branches. Finally, we note that our model allows to consider also breathers in branched polymers, using the breather solutions of sine-Gordon equation on metric graphs. DYNAMICS OF SINE-GORDON SOLITONS IN BRANCHED POLYMERS: MODELING FOR STAR-SHAPED TOPOLOGYMost of the branched polymers synthesized so far, have star or dendritic hyperbranched structures, although some other architectures including those having fractal structure are available. Some of the hyperbranched topologies are presented in Fig.1. There are several models for charged soliton dynamics in conducting polymers, such as Su-Schrieffer-Heeger