The dynamics of antiferromagnets is a current hot topic in condensed matter physics and spintronics. However, the dynamics of insulating antiferromagnets cannot be excited by an electric current, which is a method usually used to manipulate ferromagnetic metals. Here, we propose to use the voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy gradient as an excitation source to manipulate insulating antiferromagnetic textures. We analytically and numerically study the dynamics of an antiferromagnetic skyrmion driven by a magnetic anisotropy gradient. Our analytical calculations demonstrate that such a magnetic anisotropy gradient can effectively drive an antiferromagnetic skyrmion towards the area of lower magnetic anisotropy. The micromagnetic simulations are in good agreement with our analytical solution. Furthermore, the magnetic anisotropy gradient induced velocity of an antiferromagnetic skyrmion is compared with that of a ferromagnetic skyrmion. Our results are useful for the understanding of antiferromagnetic skyrmion dynamics and may open a new way for the design of antiferromagnetic spintronic devices. Introduction. -Skyrmions are topologically protected magnetic textures that have been experimentally observed in chiral materials (for examples, MnSi Skyrmion-based racetrack memory On the other hand, antiferromagnets with compensated magnetic sublattices have attracted great attention Theoretical calculations demonstrate the existence of stable skyrmions in antiferromagnets In this work, we analytically and numerically study the magnetization dynamics of an AFM skyrmion under a voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy gradient. Such a magnetic anisotropy gradient is a new method to manipulate an AFM texture and could be used in the insulating AFM materials. Our results show that an AFM skyrmion will move towards the area with lower anisotropy, and the speed of an AFM skyrmion can reach 500 m/s driven by a magnetic anisotropy gradient in principle. -We consider an AFM film with two sublattices having magnetic moments M1(r, t) and M2(r, t), |M1| = |M2| = MS/2 with the saturation magnetization MS. The total magnetization is M(r, t) = M1(r, t) + M2(r, t) and the staggered magnetization is l(r, t) = M1(r, t) -M2(r, t), where the former is related to the canting of magnetic moments, and the latter gives the unit Néel vector n(r, t) = l(r, t)/l (l = |l(r, t)|) that could be used to describe configurations of AFM skyrmions. The AFM free energy can be written as where Ah and A stand for the homogeneous and inhomogeneous exchange constants, respectively, K is the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) constant, which changes linearly with the longitudinal spatial coordinate x [see Fig. where D is the DMI constant and n = sinθ(r)cosφex + sinθ(r)sinφey + cosθ(r)ez with the polar coordinates (r, φ). In this paper, the magnetic anisotropy gradient is assumed to be induced by applying a voltage to the sample with a wedged insulating layer [see Fig. Eq. ( where θ is the angle between n and the z-axis. Solving Eq. ( The variational derivatives of Eq. ( where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, and G1 and G2 are the damping parameters. Based on Eq. (4), one can numerically simulate the evolution of staggered magnetization in antiferromagnets and also obtain a dynamic equation expressed by the unit Néel vector n (see Ref. [63] for details) Our analytical solutions for an AFM skyrmion driven by a magnetic anisotropy gradient are obtained based on Eq. ( following, only a voltage-controlled PMA gradient along the x-direction is taken into account and other driving sources (e.g., currents) are not considered. Assuming that an AFM skyrmion is rigid and will eventually move steadily in the thin film, we take the scalar product of Eq. ( [63] for details), where u and d are calculated as, and α = G2/l. Equation (6a) shows that the AFM skyrmion moves towards the area with lower magnetic anisotropy and the velocity is proportional to 1/α and dK/dx. It also means that applying an opposite voltage can drive an AFM skyrmion towards the inverse direction since an opposite voltage results an inverse dK/dx It can be seen from Eq. ( where C is a constant, which equals the domain wall width parameter Δ = (A/K) 1/2 for the straight domain wall. Then we can find where Rs is the skyrmion radius and sinθ ≠ 0 only for r ≈ Rs given by where Dc = 4(AK) 1/2 /π. In order to obtain the coefficient C, Eq. ( and integrated over one period. Then, C is obtained as (see Ref. [63] for details) Substituting it into Eq. (6a), the velocity of skyrmion takes the form Eq. ( -In order to verify the analytical results, we now simulate the motion of the Néel-type AFM skyrmion based on Eq. (4). A metastable AFM skyrmion is relaxed initially and then a PMA gradient is applied. The velocity components are (vx, vy) = (Ṙx, Ṙy), where (Rx, Ry) is the guiding center of skyrmion and defined as Figure Figure [63] for details). The velocity of an AFM skyrmion is proportional to the anisotropy gradient dK/dx [see Fig. , as expected from Eq. ( The velocities of a FM skyrmion driven by a PMA gradient are also shown in Fig. The simulation details are given in Ref. [63] for details), where Q is the ferromagnetic topological number, According to Eq. ( with the same parameters. Moreover, the directions of AFM and FM skyrmion motion are significantly different. In particular, for a very small damping, a FM skyrmion moves almost along the ydirection, i.e., perpendicular to the gradient direction, similar to the case where the magnetic field gradient is adopted to drive a FM skyrmion , which shows that the FM skyrmion moves perpendicular to the gradient direction. The results are consistent with those reported in Ref. The velocities in Fig. These two advantages of the AFM skyrmion are due to the cancellation of the Magnus force. Since the magnetizations two sublattices are opposite, an AFM skyrmion can be seen as the combination of two skyrmions with the opposite ferromagnetic topological number Q, which equals ± 1 for an isolated skyrmion. The opposite Magnus forces (4πQez × v) acted on the skyrmion in each sublattice are counteracted perfectly, thus there is no skyrmion Hall effect, as reported in Refs. [63] for details), Eq. ( However, the FM skyrmion will be destroyed by touching the edge when it moves too fast due to large Magnus force. Our results can be extended to the antiferromagnetically exchange coupled bilayer system. As reported in Ref. 