GaV4S8 is a multiferroic semiconductor hosting magnetic cycloid (Cyc) and Néel-type skyrmion lattice (SkL) phases with a broad region of thermal and magnetic stability. Here, we use timeresolved magneto-optical Kerr spectroscopy and micro-magnetic simulations to demonstrate the coherent generation of collective spin excitations in the Cyc and SkL phases driven by an opticallyinduced modulation of uniaxial anisotropy. Our results shed light on spin-dynamics in anisotropic materials hosting skyrmions and pave a new pathway for the optical control of their magnetic order. The optical manipulation of topologically-nontrivial phases in quantum materials Skyrmions can be broadly classified into two varieties by their internal structure. Whirl-like Bloch-type Sks are typically found in chiral magnets The ultrafast-optical manipulation of magnetic states can generally be accomplished through mechanisms that leverage direct spin-photon In this letter, we report on ultrafast time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect (TR-MOKE) measurements that demonstrate the generation of coherent collective excitations of the magnetic cycloid (Cyc) and SkL states in the lacunar spinel GaV 4 S 8 . Our results reveal GHz oscillations of the magnetization, driven by a laser-induced thermal modulation of the uniaxial anisotropy. Additionally, we observe a photo-induced enhancement of the magnetization that originates from the light-driven switching between the Cyc and ferromagnetic phases. These experiments establish an alternative route towards the optical control of the dynamic magnetic character of novel spin textures, leveraging the intimate coupling between the lattice and spin degrees of freedom. GaV 4 S 8 is a multiferroic narrow-gap semiconductor belonging to a family of lacunar spinels consisting of an FCC lattice of tetrahedral (GaS 4 ) 5-and cubane (V 4 S 4 ) 5+ clusters, the latter carrying S = 1/2 spins. Below T JT = 44 K, a rhombohedral (C 3v ) distortion appears, with the rhombohedral axis oriented along one of the cubic body diagonals Unlike SkLs in chiral magnets, the Néel-type SkL in GaV 4 S 8 is pinned to the plane perpendicular to the rhombohedral axis We employed TR-MOKE spectroscopy to probe the magnetization dynamics of the ferromagnetic, Cyc, and SkL states. The pump and probe pulses (30 fs, 1.57 eV) were modulated at 100 kHz and 1.87 kHz and focused to 50 μm and 35 μm diameters, respectively, with an on-sample pump fluence of 0.67 μJ/cm 2 . The magnetic field and sample temperature were controlled with a superconducting-magnetic cryostat equipped with a variable-temperature insert. To detect the Kerr-rotation (KR) in the reflected probe beam, we used a polarizationsensitive bridge, the differential signal from which we measured directly at the intermodulation frequencies via a phase-sensitive-detection scheme. This allowed for rapid data acquisition, avoiding the response-time issues associated with cascaded lock-in-amplifier configurations. Figure The slow response of the spin-system to changes in the lattice is further exemplified by the magnetization dynamics just below T C . Figure To probe the dynamics of the Cyc and SkL phases, we fixed the sample temperature at 10 K and collected TR-MOKE traces for several external magnetic fields. The results are shown as black lines in Figure We now address two fundamental questions: Being a polar semiconductor, the electron and optical phonon subsystems in GaV 4 S 8 are strongly coupled, leading to a substantial increase in the lattice temperature following the pump pulse To justify the above description, we used the finitedifference time-domain method to solve the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation for the SkL state using the Mumax3 code where A ex = 0.0588 pJ/m is the exchange stiffness, M S = 28.8 kA/m is the saturation magnetization, K 1 = 10 kJ/m 3 is the (steady state) anisotropy constant, D = 0.043 mJ/m 2 is the DMI constant, L are Lifshitz-invariants corresponding to C 3v symmetry, êu is a unit vector in the direction of the easy axis, êext is a unit vector in the direction of the applied field, m = M/M S , and H d is the demagnetizing field. The material parameters were estimated from literature and match the experimental periodicity of the SkL state Figure We now construct a phenomenological model of the experimental TR-MOKE traces. From Figure where h (t) = e -t/τ1 -βe -t/τ2 and g (t) = [erf (αt) + 1]. Here, τ 1 and τ 2 are the demagnetization and remagnetization time-constants, β is a scaling parameter, α controls the spin-response time, and τ is the rate at which K 1 returns to the pre-time-zero value. Estimating τ 1 = 130 ps, τ 2 = τ = 2600 ps, and α = 0.05 from the experimental results, we obtain the curves plotted in green in Figure In summary, we have demonstrated the ultrafast optical generation of coherent collective spin excitations of the Cyc and SkL phases in GaV 4 S 8 , driven by an optically-induced modulation of the uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy. This indirect coupling between the optical pulse and the spin system is mediated by the lattice and represents a new mechanism by which magnetic excitations can be generated in skyrmion-host compounds with strong anisotropy. Furthermore, the peculiar nature of the magnetic ordering at the phase boundaries of GaV 4 S 8 allows for a transient enhancement of the magnetization driven by the optically-induced heating of the lattice. This study underscores the intimate coupling between the spin and lattice subsystems in GaV 4 S 8 , and may provide a framework for the optical control of topological magnetic objects in semiconductors. 