In the last decade the ns 2 cations (e.g., Pb 2+ and Sn 2+ ) based halides have emerged as one of the most exciting new classes of optoelectronic materials, as exemplified by for instance hybrid perovskite solar absorbers. These materials not only exhibit unprecedented performance in some cases, but they also appear to break new ground with their unexpected properties, such as extreme tolerance to defects. However, because of the relatively recent emergence of this class of materials, there remain many yet to be fully explored compounds. Here we assess a series of bismuth/antimony oxyhalides and chalcohalides using consistent first principles methods to ascertain their properties and obtain trends. Based on these calculations, we identify a subset consisting of three types of compounds that may be promising as solar absorbers, transparent conductors, and radiation detectors. Their electronic structure, connection to the crystal geometry, and impact on band-edge dispersion and carrier effective mass are discussed. Halides containing high-Z ns 2 cations (with electron configurations of [d 10 ]s 2 p 0 , e.g., Tl + , Pb 2+ and Bi 3+ ) have been found to possess unexpectedly good carrier transport properties. Depending on specific optical band gaps and other features of the band structure, they can be useful optoelectronic materials for various applications such as radiation detection, solar cells, etc. Based on the results, we found a series of candidates suitable for optoelectronic applications, including two types of compounds (BiSeCl/Br/I and Bi3Se4Br) as potential solar absorber materials, three types of compounds (Bi3Se4Br, BiSeCl/Br/I and BiOI) as potential radiation detection materials, and three types of compounds (BiOCl/Br, SbOF, and Sb4O5Cl2/Br2) as potential p-type transparent conducting materials. The calculated HSE+SOC band gaps of representative compounds are listed in Table As seen (Supplementary Fig. The calculated formation energies, band gaps and effective masses of electrons/holes for the 36 Bi and Sb based compounds are given in Fig. As shown in the middle panel of Fig. . There is also a clear trend in the bond valence sum (BVS) 36 plot shown in Fig. Suitable optical band gap is a primary prerequisite for specific optoelectronic applications, e.g. gaps in range 1.0-1.7 eV are optimum for solar absorber materials. A larger gap, greater than 1.5 eV is essential for room-temperature radiation detection applications in order to minimize noise due to thermally generated carriers. Band gaps near to or larger than 3 eV are needed for transparent conducting materials. In addition, small effective mass of electrons or holes is also necessary for good carrier mobility. These two compound properties enable us to identify candidates as potential optoelectronic materials, which then deserve further theoretical or experimental studies concerning their dopability, dielectric and other properties. Four out of 36 compounds (BiSeCl, BiSeBr, BiSeI and Bi3Se4Br) are found to possess optical band gaps in range of ~1.0-1.7 eV and electron or hole effective masses lower than m0. The band gaps and average carrier effective masses of the four compounds are given in histogram in Fig. The iso-structural compounds, BiSeCl, BiSeBr and BiSeI have similar electronic properties, including similar optical band gaps of approximately 1.47-1.48 eV, and similar transport effective masses of ~0.53-0.57 m0 and ~2.19-2.98 m0, for electrons and holes, respectively. This reflects the dominant role of the chalcogen in the upper valence band electronic structures. For comparison the cubic phase of CH3NH3PbI3 has reported effective masses of 0.35 m0 and 0.31 m0 for electrons and holes, respectively. Bi3Se4Br is another candidate absorber identified in the present calculations. In We note that due to matrix elements and selection rules the magnitude of the electronic gap is not always indicative of strong absorption that is needed for solar applications, and calculations of absorption spectra are needed to assess their potential use in solar cells. The calculated absorption spectra for the four potential solar absorbers show strong absorptions near the band gap (Fig. Seven (BiSCl, BiSBr, BiSI, BiOI, Bi3Se4Br, SbSI and SbSeI) of the 36 compounds show optical band gaps in range between 1.5-2.2 eV as well as electron or hole effective masses lower than m0. These are then potentially useful as room-temperature radiation detection materials as far as this screen is concerned. Since heavy atoms (high Z) are necessary for efficient absorption of high energy radiation, five Bi based compounds are favorable, whose band gaps and carrier effective masses are shown in Fig. Among the five compounds, Bi3Se4Br has been discussed above. BiSCl, BiSBr and BiSI adopt the same chain-like crystal structure as BiSeCl/Br/I with space group Pnma (No. 62). The band structure and partial DOS of BiSCl are shown in Fig. Within this group of compounds, the valence bands are mainly composed of anion p states (S-p and halogen-p). The contributions from halogen-p states near the VBM increase as the halogen ion changes from Cl to I. In addition, there are also antibonding contributions from the Bi-s states. Despite this, the valence bands are still relatively flat leading to large hole effective masses, typically larger than m0. The conduction bands are always dominated by the spatially extended Bi-p states, leading to low electron effective masses, less than m0. The disparity between electron and hole effective mass may not be a prohibitive condition for radiation detection applications, as these devices are often designed to collect only one type of charge carrier. It is known that high dielectric constants are favorable for long carrier lifetime, large diffusion length, and the higher μτ values via effective screening of charged defects. The calculated static dielectric constants (st, the high-frequency limit resulted from electronic polarization) for the five potential radiation detection materials are shown in Fig. For transparent conducting materials, we focus on finding p-type (hole conducting) examples, since these are rather scarce compared to n-type. While not reflecting a strictly intrinsic property, it should also be emphasized that successful development of a transparent conductor requires doping. This is a necessary criterion for a transparent conductor. The difficulty in doping most oxides p-type has been an important challenge in this field. Sb4O5Cl2 and Sb4O5Br2 adopt same layered structure with space group P21/c (No. 14) and atomic layers stacked along a axis. Among these, Sb4O5Br2 was previously suggested as p-type transparent conducting material based on density functional calculations. Motivated by recent results on halide semiconductors, and theoretical arguments about the origin of their performance, we selected a group of 36 chalcohalides and oxyhalides containing ns 2 Bi 3+ or Sb 3+ cation. Density functional results for band gap, effective mass of electrons and holes, and optical absorption are reported. BiSeCl/Br/I and Bi3Se4Br are found to possess optical band gaps of 1.47-1.69 eV and low electron or hole effective masses. They are promising solar absorber materials. Bi3Se4Br, BiSCl/Br/I and BiOI have band gaps in the range 1.69-2.08 eV, and low effective mass of electrons or holes, suitable for use as room-temperature radiation detection materials. BiOCl/Br, SbOF, and Sb4O5Cl2/Br2 have larger band gaps (>3.0 eV) and low hole effective mass, which makes them potential candidates as p-type transparent conducting materials. This suggests further study of the identified materials to assess other properties relevant to applications, such as dopability in the case of transparent conductors, and the possibility for obtaining high resistivity in the case of semiconductors for radiation detection. There are several common themes in the electronic structure of the identified compounds. The band gap is controlled by positions of the anion p-states which form the valence bands. The Bi or Sb s-states hybridize in antibonding combinations with halogen-p and chalcogen-p states near respective VBMs favoring high dispersion and lower hole effective mass. The CBM of the compounds is formed primarily from Bi or Sb p-states. There is also a tendency towards cross-gap hybridization between the cation pand anion p-states (band structure and DOS Figs. 3, 4, and 5). Cross-gap hybridization indicates covalency in the otherwise ionic materials, and possibility of large Born effective charge and static dielectric constant. The identified compounds do as a result have high dielectric constants. These large static dielectric constants are favorable for effective screening of charged defects and high mobility. Despite the complex chain or layered structures of these compounds, the valence and conduction band dispersion is a consequence of hybridization among the anion or cation p-states, favoring low carrier effective mass. The current work proposes a promising series of Bi and Sb based oxyhalides and chalcohalides, which may be appropriate for various optoelectronic applications. Further theoretical and experimental investigations will be necessary to ascertain their dopability, defect and dielectric behavior, the possibility of obtaining high resistivity for radiation detection, as well as device-level properties. All calculations are performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) using plane-wave pseudopotential method as implemented in the VASP code. 