Wide bandgap (~3.1 eV) La-doped BaSnO3 (LBSO) has attracted increasing attention as one of the transparent oxide semiconductors since its bulk single crystal shows a high carrier mobility (~320 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) with a high carrier concentration (~10 20 cm -3 ). For this reason, many researchers have fabricated LBSO epitaxial films thus far, but the obtainable carrier mobility is substantially low compared to that of single crystals due to the formation of the lattice/structural defects. Here we report that the mobility suppression in LBSO films can be lifted by a simple vacuum annealing process. The vacuum annealing of the LBSO films on MgO substrate increased the carrier concentrations due to the oxygen vacancy formation, which leads to simultaneous lateral grain growth. As a result, the carrier mobility was greatly improved by the vacuum annealing, which does not occur after heat treatment in air. These results expand our current knowledge on the point defect formation in epitaxial LBSO films and show that vacuum annealing is a powerful tool for enhancing the mobility values of LBSO films. Transparent oxide semiconductors (TOSs) are promising candidates for various future electronic devices such as transistors, solar cells, and display panels. In large scale production facilities, designing a clever post treating process is often more economical than improving the quality of as-deposited samples. In this regard, very interesting experimental results were released in 2015 and 2018. In one study, N2 environment at 1000 °C was used to create oxygen vacancies in the LBSO films on SrTiO3 substrates, and the μ increased from 41 cm 2 V -1 s -1 to 78 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . For optimizing the post annealing process, it is important to understand point defect formation in LBSO films because the μ-enhancement in LBSO films is triggered by oxygen vacancies. In stoichiometric BaSnO3, the oxidation states of its constituents are: In this study, we studied the effect of La-dopants on the formation of oxygen vacancy in LBSO films and investigated the feasibility of enhancing the μ of LBSO films using vacuum annealing. We expected that the vacuum annealing can trigger oxygen vacancy induced grain growth in LBSO films, and the resulting mobility enhancement can depend on the doping level of La ([La 3+ ]). According to our results, vacuum annealing significantly increased the μ of LBSO films. We also found that La-dopants increased the oxygen vacancy vs. lattice oxygen (VO/LO) ratio in as-deposited LBSO films and affected the vacuum annealing effect on LBSO films. The results of this study expand our current knowledge on the point defect formation in epitaxial LBSO films and show that vacuum annealing is a simple and effective method for enhancing the electron mobility of LBSO films. To confirm that vacuum annealing can induce grain growth in LBSO films, a 2 % LBSO film (~64 nm) was prepared and cut it into two pieces. We annealed one piece in air and the other piece in vacuum (< 10 -2 Pa) at 750 °C for 1 h. Then, we measured the lateral grain sizes of the films before and after the heat treatments using the RSM [Fig. In order to find the optimum vacuum annealing temperature, several 2 % LBSO films with similar thicknesses (~41 nm) and electrical properties were fabricated (Supplementary Table Interestingly, the vacuum annealing effect showed a strong thickness dependence as the mobility enhancement was noticeably larger in thinner films (Supplementary Figs. To find the effect of La-dopants on the vacuum annealing process, we annealed LBSO films (average thickness: 43 nm) with varying [La 3+ ] at 725 °C in vacuum for 30 min. Figure Interestingly, the μHall enhancement was much greater in films with ≤ 2 % doping compared to that in films with ≥ 5 % doping. While the highest as-deposited μHall was observed in the 5 % LBSO film, the highest μHall after vacuum annealing was observed in the 2 % LBSO film (35.5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 → 72.3 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ). Furthermore, while the annealed lateral grain size increased with [La 3+ ], and the lateral grain size enhancement did not change after 2% [La 3+ ] [Fig. The VO peak energies of the LBSO films increased after vacuum annealing, especially for films with higher [La 3+ ] [Fig. Unfortunately, although we successfully increased the μ of the LBSO films, the role of La-dopants in the oxygen vacancy formation mechanism in LBSO films is still unclear. In this regard, we believe that the role of threading dislocation in point defect formation is important. For example, in case of unintentionally VO doped BaSnO3-δ single crystal, vacuum annealing reduces the carrier concentration and therefore reduces the oxygen vacancy level. In summary, we examined the effect of vacuum annealing on the electron transport properties of the epitaxial LBSO films on (001) MgO substrates. The results clearly showed that the vacuum annealing is powerful technique to enhance the carrier mobility of LBSO films. We also found the oxygen vacancy vs. lattice oxygen (VO/LO) ratio in the vacuum annealed LBSO films was almost double as compared with the as-deposited LBSO films. In addition, lateral grain size of the LBSO films substantially increased after vacuum annealing whereas it remained almost unchanged after air annealing. These results clearly show that vacuum annealing triggers oxygen vacancy induced grain growth in the LBSO films. The vacuum annealing approach was very effective for films with small thicknesses. Therefore, it is a very good method for making LBSO film transistors since low thicknesses are desired for reducing the power consumption. We believe these results will be useful for designing low cost fabrication methods for high-mobility LBSO films or can be used to improve the carrier mobility of other perovskite stannates such as SrSnO3. ~1.35×10 20 cm -3 when the sample was annealed in the vacuum. The observed n is lower than [La 3+ ] (=2.87×10 20 cm -3 ), indicating the activation of La 3+ is low. (c) The Hall mobility (μHall) greatly increased with temperature when the sample was annealed in the vacuum up to ~80 cm 2 V -1 s -1 from the as-deposited mobility of ~40 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . From these results, we decided the optimum vacuum annealing temperature (725 °C). 