An approach to optimizing the Q factors of two-dimensional photonic crystal (2D-PC) nanocavities based on deep learning is proposed and demonstrated. We prepare a dataset consisting of 1000 nanocavities generated by randomly displacing the positions of many air holes of a base nanocavity and their Q factors calculated by a first-principle method. We train a four-layer neural network including a convolutional layer to recognize the relationship between the air holes' displacements and the Q factors using the prepared dataset. After the training, the neural network becomes able to estimate the Q factors from the air holes' displacements with an error of 13% in standard deviation. Crucially, the trained neural network can estimate the gradient of the Q factor with respect to the air holes' displacements very quickly based on back-propagation. A nanocavity structure with an extremely high Q factor of 1.58  10 9 is successfully obtained by optimizing the positions of 50 air holes over ~10 6 iterations, having taken advantage of the very fast evaluation of the gradient in high-dimensional parameter space. The obtained Q factor is more than one order of magnitude higher than that of the base cavity and more than twice that of the highest Q factors reported so far for cavities with similar modal volumes. This approach can optimize 2D-PC structures over a parameter space of a size unfeasibly large for previous optimization methods based solely on direct calculations. We believe this approach is also useful for improving other optical characteristics. Photonic nanocavities based on artificial defects in two-dimensional (2D) photonic crystal (PC) slabs have realized high quality (Q) factors from ~ thousand The fundamental design principle to increase the designed Q factor (Qdes) of 2D-PC nanocavities is well known: the wavevevtor components of the cavity electro-magnetic field within the light cone should be decreased as much as possible to reduce the radiation loss In this paper, we propose an approach to optimize 2D-PC nanocavities based on deep learning of the relationship between the nanocavities' structures and their Q factors. We prepare a dataset consisting of 1000 different nanocavities whose air hole's positions are randomly but symmetrically displaced. Their Q factors are calculated by a first-principle method where multiple parallel computation techniques can be fully utilized to reduce the computation time. Next, we train a four-layer artificial neural network (NN) including a convolutional layer using the dataset to recognize the relationship between the air hole displacement patterns and their Q factors. The trained NN becomes able to predict the gradient of the Q factor with respect to the air holes' displacements at a speed extremely faster than the first-principle calculation. This is used to optimize the displacements of many air holes (50) for large number of repetitions (>1,000,000). This optimization method demonstrates a very high Q factor that exceeds one billion. In general, automatic structural optimization with respect to target characteristic value(s) requires at least three steps; (a) select a set of parameters that represents the structure to be optimized, (b) calculate the gradient of the target characteristic value(s) with respect to the structural parameters, and (c) modify the structural parameters based on the calculated gradient. (b) and (c) are repeated until the target value(s) saturates. In step (a), selecting all parameters that have a strong correlation with the target characteristic(s) is important. In step (b), fast evaluation of the gradient is required to ensure enough repetition of the optimization. However, it is difficult to fulfill these requirements when the structures to be optimized have large degrees of freedom and requires a large computation cost for the evaluation of the gradient. This situation applies to Q factor optimization in 2D-PC nanocavities, and we utilize a deep neural network (DNN) (I) Select a base cavity structure to be optimized. (II) Select the type of structural parameter to be optimized. (e.g. air hole position, air hole size, air hole shape) (III) Generate many 2D-PC nanocavities from the base structure by randomly fluctuating all structural parameters selected in (II) in an area much larger than the cavity field. (IV) Calculate the Q factors of the nanocavities prepared in (I) by a first principle method, where many structures can be calculated separately in multiple parallel fashion to reduce the computation time. (V) Prepare an NN to learn the relationship between the structural parameters and the Q factors. (VI) Train the NN by the relationship between the subset of the parameters selected from (III) and the Q factors calculated in (IV). (VII) Find the best set of parameters that minimizes the error between the Q factors predicted by the NN and those calculated by the first principle method. (VIII) Starting from an initial cavity structure, gradually change the structural parameters selected in (VII) using the gradient of the Q factor with respect to the parameters predicted by the trained NN many times until the Q factor saturates. (IX) Check the true Q factor of the optimized structure obtained in (VIII) by the first principle calculation. In the followings, we describe the optimization of a two-step heterostructure nanocavity as an example. Figure In step (II), we selected the displacements of the air holes as the parameters to be optimized. This is because the displacement of the air holes can be implemented in the fabrication process more accurately than other parameters such as the air hole radii or shapes. The air holes' positions can be accurately controlled by the electron beam writing process, while their radii and shapes are largely influenced by an etching process that is more difficult to control. In step (III), we added random displacements to all air holes in the x and y directions in such a way that the symmetry of the structure was maintained. We maintained the symmetry because an asymmetry of a PC cavity increases the radiation loss In step (IV), we calculated the electromagnetic field and the Q factors of the fundamental resonant mode of the 1000 structures using the three-dimensional (3D) finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. A histogram of the calculated Q factors (QFDTD) is plotted in Fig. Figure The second layer was fully connected to the third layer with 200 units through a rectified linear unit (ReLU In step (VI), we trained this neural network using 900 data among the 1000 prepared in steps (III and IV), and left the remaining 100 data as test datasets. A test dataset is necessary to avoid overfitting, which is a situation in which an NN is too optimized to the training examples so that it cannot predict meaningful answers for the other input. It is important to maximize the generalization ability of an NN, which is an ability to predict meaningful answers to new inputs it has never seen during the training. Therefore, the generalization ability of an NN should be checked by using a test dataset at intervals The first term of Eq. ( E Qtest(train) = (10 σ test(train) -10 -σ test(train) )/2 An example of a learning curve [iteration of learning (optimization) v.s. prediction error] is shown in Fig. Next, we trained the NN by changing the input area size (Nx, Ny), and plotted the minimum EQtest (obtained during 1 million iterations of the learning steps) as a function of Nx and Ny in Fig 6 . It is seen in the figure that the prediction error is higher than 60% when (Nx, Ny) is as small as In step (VII), we performed a structural optimization of the nanocavity using the gradient method, where the gradient was calculated by the trained NN. More precisely, we took the advantage of the error back propagation method where λ′ is a control parameter. Then, we changed the structure (d ⃗ i,j ) step by step to reduce the loss L' based on the Momentum Figure In step (IX), we calculated the Q factors of the structures obtained in step (VIII) by the 3D-FDTD method. The results are summarized in Fig. It is seen in Fig. It is also interesting that the highest QFDTD was achieved by constraining the magnitude of the airholes' displacements to some extent by increasing λ′ in the loss function L' [Eq. ( Finally, we compare Fig. We have proposed and demonstrated a novel approach to optimize 2D-PC nanocavities based on deep learning of the relationship between the nanocavities' structures and their Q factors. We have successfully trained a neural network consisting of a convolutional layer and three fully connected layers using 1000 randomly generated nanocavities and their Q factors. After the training, the convolutional neural network has become able to predict the Q factors from the displacement patterns of air holes with an error of 13% in standard deviation. Structural optimization has been carried out by estimating the gradient of Q with respect to the air holes' displacements using the trained neural network. A nanocavity structure with an extremely high theoretical Q factor of 1.58  10 9 , which is 10 times larger than that of the manually optimized base structure, and more than twice the highest Q factor ever reported for 2D-PC cavities with similar modal volumes, has been successfully obtained. We attribute our unprecedentedly high Q factor to the ability of our method to optimize the nanocavity over a parameter space of a size unfeasibly large for previous methods based solely on direct calculations. We believe this approach is effective for the optimization of various types of 2D-PC nanocavity structures, not only for increasing Q factors but also for improving other target characteristics.