1H-phase monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides have spin-split electronic band structures near the K(K ) point due to strong spin-orbit coupling and intrinsic inversion symmetry breaking. In case of the monolayer MoX2 (X=S, Se, Te), the spin-split conduction bands cross near the K(K ) point. We show that the band crossing occurs not only along the high symmetry directions, but also along arbitrary directions due to a mirror reflection symmetry of the monolayer. As a result, n-doped monolayer MoX2 is a two-dimensional type-II nodal-line material. Dirac and Weyl semi-metals have been extensively investigated due to their unique topological properties The concepts of Dirac, Weyl, and nodal lines are applicable to two-dimension (2D) as well. Several theoretical calculations In this Section, we demonstrate that the 1H phase monolayer MoX 2 has the nodal line band crossing and that the crossing remains stable despite SOC due to its Mz mirror reflection symmetry [Fig. To check if the structure in Fig. In case of the 1H phase monolayer MoX 2 , it is invariant under the mirror reflection about the xy-plane (Fig. ( Since Mz does not modify the 2D crystal momentum k, this commutation relation implies that energy eigen-states with the crystal momentum k are eigenstates of Mz . Since the eigenvalue spectrum of Mz is discrete, the continuous variation of energy eigenstates as a function of k within an energy band cannot alter the eigenvalue of Mz (or mirror eigenvalue). Thus one finds that each energy band of H has a well defined mirror eigenvalue. Now, we consider the mirror eigenvalues of the two conduction bands depicted in Fig. where χ is spin up or down states, α is the ratio of each orbital wavefuntion and the superscript indicates at which atom the corresponding wavefunction is localized. X1 and X2 in the superscript denotes upper and lower X atoms. The subscript denotes, on the other hand, spherical harmonics information of the wavefunction. From the character table of the group C 3h Since the two conduction bands share the same orbital character but have opposite spin character, this means that the spin up and spin down conduction bands have different mirror eigenvalues (-i and +i, respectively). Therefore the two conduction bands satisfy the condition (ii) as well near the K point. This verifies that there exist band crossing along arbitrary directions near the K point and the resulting nodal line band crossing near the K point is stable topologically. An exactly same kind of analysis applies to the type-II nodal line structure band crossing near the K point as well since the wavefunction characters of the conduction band energy eigenstates at the K point is obtained by complex conjugation of the corresponding wavefunction characters at the K point. In the previous section, we showed that if the spin split bands are ordered as Fig. According to DFT calculation of 1H phase monolayer MoS 2 When such Fermi energy tuning is achieved, this kind of nodal line band crossing has the potential to show interesting physics. For instance, it is predicted In summary, we showed that the 1H phase monolayer MoX 2 has nodal line band crossing near the K(K ) point and this band crossing is protected along the arbitrary directions by mirror reflection symmetry about a 2D plane. As a result, n-doped monoyaler MoX 2 is predicted to be a type-II nodal line material with strong SOC.