The time evolution of the pore size distributions and mechanical properties of amorphous solids at constant pressure is studied using molecular dynamics simulations. The porous glasses were initially prepared at constant volume conditions via a rapid thermal quench from the liquid state to the glassy region and allowing for simultaneous phase separation and material solidification. We found that at constant pressure and low temperature, the porous network becomes more compact and the glassy systems relocate to progressively lower levels of the potential energy. Although the elastic modulus and the average glass density both increase with the waiting time, their dependence is described by the power-law function with the same exponent. Moreover, the results of numerical simulations demonstrated that under tensile loading at constant pressure, low-density porous samples become significantly deformed and break up into separate domains at high strain, while dense glasses form a nearly homogeneous solid material. Understanding the influence of pore morphology and porosity on mechanical and physical properties of metallic porous materials is important for structural applications, including wear-resistant tools and biomedical implants, as well as functional applications in catalysis and heat conduction Using molecular dynamics simulations, it was recently shown that rapid isochoric quenching of a glass-forming mixture from a high temperature liquid state across the glass transition leads to the formation of porous glassy media The mechanical properties and structural transformations of porous glasses at isochoric conditions were recently studied in the cases of shear, tension, and compression using molecular dynamics simulations In this paper, the structural relaxation of porous glasses that are initially prepared at constant volume, is studied in the N P T ensemble using molecular dynamics simulations. It will be shown that porous samples become significantly compressed under built-in tensile stresses, which is reflected in the time evolution of the average glass density and the shape of the pore size distribution functions. The slow aging process is also characterized by the gradual decrease in the potential energy. The mechanical properties are probed at different waiting times by imposing tensile strain at constant pressure. It is found that the functional form of the elastic modulus as a function of the average glass density holds for tensile loading at constant volume as well as at constant pressure and different waiting times. The analysis of the atomic configurations and pore size distributions helps to distinguish the process of breaking of the porous samples at large strain for lower average glass densities from the formation of a nearly homogeneous, high-density amorphous material. The paper is organized as follows. The details of molecular dynamics simulations as well as the preparation and deformation protocols are described in the next section. The analysis of the pore size distributions, potential energy, density profiles, and mechanical properties of porous glasses are presented in Sec. III. The brief summary is given in the last section. The molecular dynamics simulations described below were performed on a model glass former represented by the Kob-Andersen (KA) binary mixture with the following parametrization ε AA = 1.0, ε AB = 1.5, ε BB = 0.5, σ AB = 0.8, and σ BB = 0.88 The initial equilibration of the system in the periodic box of constant volume and the subsequent thermal quench across the glass transition is identical to the preparation procedure implemented in the previous MD studies After the porous glass samples were prepared at constant volume, the follow-up MD simulations were performed in the isothermal-isobaric (N P T ) ensemble, where P = 0 and The temperature T = 0.05 ε/k B was regulated via the Nosé-Hoover thermostat The maximum strain was varied from 100% to 400% depending on the average glass density. During the production runs, the pressure components, potential energy, system dimensions as well as atomic configurations were saved for the postprocessing analysis of the porous structure and mechanical properties. As discussed in the previous section, the formation of porous glassy systems occurs in the process of concurrent phase separation and material solidification after sufficiently deep thermal quench from a liquid state It should be particularly emphasized that the porous glass formation at constant volume and low temperature occurs at a negative pressure, which depends on the target temperature and the average glass density It is, therefore, expected that when the constraint of constant volume is relaxed and the simulations are instead performed at constant pressure, the porous samples will undergo isotropic compression, which is driven by the build-in tensile stresses. The evolution of atomic configurations at zero pressure and temperature T = 0.05 ε/k B is shown in Fig. A more quantitative analysis of the relaxation process under internal stresses at constant pressure, P = 0, can be performed by considering the time dependence of the average glass density and the potential energy. First, the variation of the average glass density as a function of the waiting time is plotted in Fig. The analysis of pore structure and porosity evolution in the systems under consideration is based on calculation of the pore size distribution (PSD) functions. To this end, the opensource Zeo++ software was utilized The implementation derives from a modification to the VORO++ software library, developed in Ref. For a given radius of the probe, one can identify the probe accessible regions of the voidspace network using a graph propagation algorithm. In practice, a variation of the Dijkstra shortest path algorithm is used The value of the probe radius was varied in a wide range and no significant variations in the results were observed for values less than 1.0 σ. The pore size distribution functions during the relaxation process at constant pressure are presented in Fig. The distribution functions presented in Fig. In agreement with the slow variation of the average glass density and potential energy at large waiting times, the PSDs at t = 5×10 4 τ and 2.5×10 5 τ are nearly the same, apart from statistical fluctuations. The case of higher density porous glass shown in Fig. We next discuss the mechanical response of the porous glass to tensile loading at constant pressure P = 0 and temperature T = 0.05 ε/k B . In Fig. In can be seen that both the slope of the linear region and the yield stress become larger with increasing average glass density. We comment that in contrast to a finite stress at zero strain in porous glasses prepared and strained at constant volume The elastic modulus, E, computed in the linear regime of deformation after the waiting time of 5 × 10 4 τ is shown in the inset to Fig. The representative snapshots of strained porous glasses after the waiting time of 5 × 10 4 τ are presented in Figs. The evolution of pore size distribution functions during tensile loading after the waiting time of 5 × 10 4 τ are shown in Fig. As shown above, a significant rearrangement of the material takes place during the tran-sition to zero-pressure state as well as in the process of mechanical loading. Therefore, it is important to quantify the temporal evolution of density variations in the systems. In our previous studies We numerically compute spatially-resolved density profiles along the direction of externally applied strain. The quantity of interest is denoted by ρ s (x) and defined as the number of atoms of either type, located in a bin with thickness b ≈ σ along the loading direction, and divided by the volume of the bin, b L y L z , where L y and L z are the box sizes in the two Cartesian directions perpendicular to the loading direction. Similar to the previous cases of tensile In contrast, at higher average glass densities, shown in Fig. In summary, dynamical evolution of porous glasses from a constant volume state to zero-pressure state and mechanical response properties of glasses at constant pressure were investigated using atomistic simulations. We found that the transition to the zero-pressure state is accompanied by significant increase in average density and corresponds to a transition to lower energy states. The temporal evolution of the pore distribution functions during structural relaxation at zero pressure were examined. It was revealed that a transition to configurations with a narrower pore-size distributions is energetically favorable as compared to the larger pores supported by built-in tensile stresses in the systems. Both constantvolume and constant pressure configurations, in the absence of deformation, show randomly distributed, isolated ensembles of pores at higher average glass densities, while interconnected porous structure is formed at lower densities. At constant pressure, the equilibrium configurations consist of narrower distributions of pores, which preserve, however, the major characteristics of pore-size distribution functions observed for samples equilibrated at constant volume. The mechanical response properties, studied at zero pressure, reveal a number of noteworthy features. First, we found the exponent in the power-law scaling of the elastic modulus with density is the same as in the case of tensile, compressive, and shear testing of the systems at constant volume. Consequently, the effect of built-in pressures on elastic properties manifests itself primarily in the corresponding porosity changes. Moreover, as our studies show, the mechanical loading of porous systems at constant pressure differs from that at fixed volume by the effect of total volume change. The evolutions of pore ensembles in the systems subjected to tension, is similar to the ones characteristic for the constant-volume loadings at smaller average densities. In these cases, pore growth and coalescence is favored as compared to the changes in the system volume. At higher densities, however, the total volume changes become the dominant effect in the response to the external loading. This manifests itself in distinctly different behavior of density profiles in the regime of higher densities as compared to the less dense samples. 