We report three different synthesis routes while maintaining similar reaction conditions to choose an effective way to precisely control the growth of ultrafine one-dimensional (1D) LiMn 2 O 4 in the form of nanorods. We developed a novel method of mixing the precursors through hydrothermal, yielding low dimensional precursors for effective solid state reaction to synthesize the nanorods. However, to achieve these, highly uniform β-MnO 2 nanorods were initially grown as one of the main precursors. The uniformity observed in as grown β-MnO 2 nanorods using hydrothermal technique help to attract minute LiOH particles upon mixing over its highly confined nano-regime surface. This facilitated the solid state reaction between MnO 2 and LiOH to develop one of the finest LiMn 2 O 4 nanorods with diameters of 10-80 nm possessing high surface area of 88.294 m 2 /g. We find superior charge storage behaviour for these finely ordered 1D nanostructures as supercapacitor electrodes in KOH with K 3 Fe(CN) 6 as electrolyte in contrast to Li 2 SO 4 . A high pseudo-capacitance of 653.5 F/g at 15 A/g is observed using galvanostatic discharge time with high retention capacity of 93% after 4000 cycles. The enhanced charge storage property may arise from the redox couple [Fe(CN) 6 ] 3-/[Fe(CN) 6 ] 4-and K + ions of the electrolyte. To the best of our knowledge, we demonstrate for the first time the effectiveness of a two-step hydrothermal method in tuning the supercapacitive behaviour of 1D LiMn 2 O 4 in redox additive electrolyte. To meet the increasing energy demands, natural resources (e.g. fossil fuels) are being depleted at a faster rate whence is the need for an alternate energy resource Preparation of LMO with high rate capability and capacitance is a challenge for researchers. Developing nanoscale materials is a solution to this and so the syntheses of nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes and nanochains have gained much interest among researchers In the current work, we followed a solid state reaction to grow LiMn 2 O 4 nanorods of 10-80 nm diameters, after a novel hydrothermal route for effectively mixing the precursors utilizing as synthesized β-MnO 2 nanorods. Hydrothermal technique was preferred for its simplicity and effectiveness Potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 ), Sodium nitrite (NaNO 2 ), Sulphuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ), Potassium hydroxide (KOH), Potassium ferricyanide (K 3 Fe(CN) 6 ), Lithium sulphate (Li 2 SO 4 ), Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and Super P carbon were procured from Sigma Aldrich and all the solutions were made with de-ionized water. In usual synthesis, 5 mM and 7.5 mM of KMnO 4 and NaNO 2 , respectively were mixed in 2:3 molar ratios in 37.5 ml of de-ionized water and magnetically stirred for nearly one hour to obtain dark red coloured solution. Then, 2.5 ml solution of 0.4 M H 2 SO 4 was prepared and added drop-wise at specified intervals of time so that there is a slow transition of this dark red coloured solution into light red. The solution was bolted inside 50 ml autoclave and heated at 170 0 C for 12 h. The autoclave was left to get cooled, normally. The final product was seen to be settled beneath the residual liquid. Finally, a reddish brown coloured product was collected after washing with de-ionized water for a couple of times and drying in air at 80 0 C. It was then heated for 350 0 C for 6 h to remove un-reacted impurities in way to obtain highly pure β-MnO 2 nanorods. For the synthesis of LiMn 2 O 4 nanorods, 0.4868 g of as synthesized β-MnO 2 nanorods was thoroughly mixed with 0.12 g LiOH•H 2 O in 40 ml of de-ionized water under continuous stirring. After half an hour, the solution was transferred to 50 ml teflon and sealed inside autoclave for hydrothermal process at 170 0 C for 12 h. Same as before, the final product was washed and dried in air to obtain fine black coloured powder. It was then kept for solid state reaction by heating at 750 0 C for 24 h. The final product was centrifuged, washed for several times and named as S1. In way to optimize the synthesis procedures, 4 mg LiOH•H 2 O was added at the start of the β-MnO 2 nanorods synthesis process along with KMnO 4 and NaNO 2 and the same synthesis steps were followed. The as obtained product was then allowed for solid state reaction at 750 0 C for 24 h and named as S2 after its centrifugation and cleaning. In another typical synthesis, different synthesis steps were as followed. 0.4868 g of as synthesized β-MnO 2 nanorods was thoroughly mixed with 0.12 g LiOH•H 2 O through vigorous grinding in agate mortar. Few drops of ethanol were added during grinding to make solution paste. The grinding was done until the mixture fully dried up at room temperature. The mixture was then kept in alumina boat and allowed for solid state reaction for 24 h at 750 0 C. The final product was centrifuged and washed for several times and named as S3. For the preparation of cathode material 8:1:1 weight ratio of LiMn 2 O 4 , super P carbon and PVDF were mixed by grinding in agate. Super P carbon and PVDF were added respectively to improve the conductivity and adhesiveness of LiMn 2 O 4 as the active material. N-Methyl-2pyrrolidone was added into the mixture to form gelatinous solution. 304 grade steel plate with 0.3 mm thickness was used as substrate upon which 0.7 mg of as prepared electrode material was coated uniformly within area of 1 cm 2 . The coated plate was then dried at 80 ̊C for 12h. Structural properties were evaluated using XRD and Raman analyses through 'PAN analytical X' Pert Pro diffractometer and 'LASER Raman spectrometer', respectively. Physical overviews of the samples were made through FESEM and HRTEM analyses using 'Quanta 200 FEG FE-SEM', and 'HR-TEM, JEM-2010', respectively. Electrochemical studies were carried on Biologic SP300. A three electrode system was employed with silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl, 3M KCl) and platinum wire as reference and counter electrodes respectively for as prepared cathode material as working electrode. To confirm the structure of the sample, obtained after the hydrothermal treatment of KMnO 4 , NaNO 2 and H 2 SO 4 compounds, XRD spectrum was obtained as presented in fig. Octahedral MnO 6 unit of as prepared LiMn 2 O 4 experiences vibrations in oxygen atoms from the spinel oxide ascribing to bands at 640 and 611cm -1 Figure Here, current (I) is in Ampere, discharge time (∆t) is in seconds, mass of the active material (m) is in grams and applied potential range (∆V) is in volts. Initial galvanostatic charge/discharge measurements for sample S1 at 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2 A/g is shown in fig. 8b to show a promising stability at initial cycling processes. In the above electrochemical analysis, two major drawbacks persist. First, being the low capacity and the other being a very high discharge time due to its low current density. A supercapacitor is known to deliver promising energy at relatively small time compared to batteries. To achieve this, high charge storage property is expected at promisingly high current density In advancement of our previous report Equation ( An effective synthesis procedure was successfully developed to achieve ultrafine LiMn 2 O 4 nanorods with no physical imperfections using as grown β-MnO 2 nanorods. This included a novel hydrothermal method to homogenously mix the precursors which finally resulted in the lithiated nanorods of 10-80 nm diameters. BET method was effectively employed for surface analysis to account for ultrafine growth of LiMn 2 O 4 nanorods with high surface area of 88.294 m 2 /g. Ultrafine confined morphologies exhibited better electrochemical kinetics and reveals that charge storage capacity is dependent on morphology of the electrode material. Confined morphologies could facilitate the charge accumulation at electrode/electrolyte interfaces by providing short diffusion path. Furthermore, LiMn 2 O 4 nanorods showed considerably better performance in KOH with K 3 Fe(CN) 6 as electrolyte compared to aqueous Li 2 SO 4 electrolyte with high pseudo-capacitance of 653.5 F/g at 15 A/g and stable capacity retention of 93% after 4000 cycles. It mainly stems from the enhanced redox activities of redox couple [Fe(CN) 6 ] 3-/[Fe(CN) 6 ] 4-and K + ions of the electrolyte. This combination of electrode and electrolyte may prove to be beneficial for developing next generation of supercapacitors.