We report a continuous phase transition between quantum-anomalous-Hall and trivial-insulator phases in a magnetic topological insulator upon magnetization rotation. The Hall conductivity transits from one plateau of quantized Hall conductivity e 2 /h to the other plateau of zero Hall conductivity. The transition curves taken at various temperatures cross almost at a single point, exemplifying the critical behavior of the transition. The slope of the transition curves follows a power-law temperature dependence with a critical exponent of -0.61. This suggests a common underlying origin in the plateau transitions between the QAH and quantum Hall systems, which is a percolation of one-dimensional chiral edge channels. A topological phase of matter may undergo a quantum phase transition accompanied by a change in a topological invariant number when material compositions or the sample dimensions are changed Three-dimensional topological insulator (3DTI) originating from strong spin-orbit interaction is one of the most distinguished topological phases of matter, which consists of an insulating bulk and a gapless surface state with a linear dispersion relation Theoretical works by Wang et al. In this Letter, we report a critical behavior of the topological quantum phase transition between the quantum anomalous Hall and trivial-insulator phases. To access the critical regime of the transition experimentally, a continuous and in situ control of ∆ ex is a key. We choose the magnetization angle as a knob to control ∆ ex following the earlier works Experiments were conducted using heterostructure films of (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 sandwiched by 2-nm-thick Cr-doped (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 layers [lower inset in Fig. When the magnetization is rotated away from the direction normal to the top/bottom surfaces, the temperature dependence of R xx demonstrates a remark-able metal-insulator transition behavior as shown in Fig. Topological aspects of the phase transition can be seen more clearly in the θ dependence of the Hall conductivity [Fig. The connection of the present QAH system to the QH system is further highlighted by a semi-circle plot in Fig. To discuss the critical behavior of the transition more quantitatively, we focus on the critical exponents. We analyzed the slope of σ xy [dσ xy /d(cos θ)] at the transition point which was evaluated by a linear fitting for each temperature. The slope plotted in log-scale decreases almost linearly with log T as shown in Fig. Apart from the critical regime, σ xx follows the Arrhenius-type T dependence in both QAH (θ = 0.0 • ) and trivial insulator (θ = 89.6 • ) phases as shown in Fig. Finally, we turn our eyes to the critical angle θ c where the transition takes place. Assuming that only the magnetization component perpendicular to the film contribute to the energy gap formation, θ c is given by ∆ 0 ex cos θ c = ∆ hy , where ∆ 0 ex is the exchange interaction energy when the magnetization is perpendicular to the film plane. Because ∆ hy is smaller in the thicker film In addition, occurrence of the phase transition itself suggests anisotropy in the exchange interaction. In the above discussion, effects of the in-plane magnetization component are not taken into account. The in-plane component, if it shows the exchange coupling with the surface conduction electron as the vertical component, shifts the dispersion relation in the momentum space. The direction of the shifts are opposite to each other on the top and bottom surfaces. Because of the opposite shifts, the energy gap of the QAH phase would not close except for θ = 90 • if the exchange interaction were fully isotropic (Supplemental Material [29]). Nevertheless, the phase transition upon magnetization rotation is possible if the exchange interaction is anisotropic. The facts that the transition is observed as a function of θ and that the observed values of cos θ c follow ∆ hy (t)/∆ 0 ex suggest highly anisotropic exchange interaction in the Cr-doped (Bi, Sb) 2 Te 3 film The quantitative agreement in Fig. To conclude, the present magneto-transport study establishes a way to approach the quantum critical point of the topological quantum phase transition between the QAH and trivial-insulator phases. We measured the critical exponent of the transition which quantitatively supports that the transition belongs to the same category as the QH plateau-plateau transition despite the different microscopic origins. Furthermore, the occurrence of the magnetization-rotation-driven phase transition itself suggests highly anisotropic nature of the exchange interaction. We believe that the present work paves a way for exploring the possible quantum critical phenomena among the expanding list of topological materials.