The impact of surface morphology on electronic structure of topological crystalline insulators is studied theoretically. As an example, the structure of topologically protected electronic states on a (001) (Pb,Sn)Se surface with terraces of atomic height is modeled. Within the envelope function model it is shown that valley mixing, the phenomenon responsible for the peculiar "double Dirac cone" shape of the surface state dispersion, depends crucially on the structure of the surface. By varying the width and the number of atomic layers in the terraces, a comprehensive explanation of recent experimental findings, i.e., the emergence of 1D states bound to odd-height atomic step edges as well as the collapse of "double Dirac cone" structure on a rough surface, is achieved. This approach allows us also to determine topological indices characterizing terraces and their interfaces. In the (001) surface of (Pb,Sn)Se the adjacent terraces turn out to be described by different values of the winding number topological invariant. In 2012 it was shown that some IV-VI compounds and their crystalline solid solutions, such as: SnTe, (Pb,Sn)Se and (Pb,Sn)Te, belong to a newly discovered class of topological matter. In these so called topological crystalline insulators (TCI) 1-4 the nontrivial topology of electronic bands is protected by {110} mirror planes. In the topological phase the band gap in the four L points of the Brillouin zone (BZ) of these rock salt crystals has to be inverted. This is always the case in SnTe, however, in the solid solutions the sign of the band gap can be tuned between normal and TCI phases by temperature, and Sn content, or pressure. This was demonstrated in (Pb,Sn)Se by ARPES, Lately it has been shown by ARPES that valey splitting can be substantially reduced by small terraces of a normal insulator deposited on the top of TCI surface. We show that in consistency with the previously studied case small odd-height terraces can reduce the splitting to zero. The splitting can be recovered, however, in the presence of very wide terraces, typical on a cleavage surface. In this case, results of our model show that the surface and odd-height terraces define domains of different topology characterized by opposite winding numbers. As a consequence, at the steps which form the domain boundaries we can find zero-energy one dimensional states of similar origin as edge states of graphene ribbons. where k = 0 is the X point. The basis of Pauli matrices τ are states arising from the L 1 (τ z = 1) and the L 2 (τ z = -1) valleys. Pauli matrices s operate between the Kramers partners within each of the valleys. The valley mixing is described by m and v x terms. In their absence the Hamiltonian describes a doubly degenerate Dirac cone. The dispersion of (1) is presented in Fig. The saddle points at Energies of crossings at X are E X = ±m. Following the notation of Ref. 10, the symmetries of the Hamiltonian are denoted by: where M x and M y are (1 10) and (110) mirror reflections, and Θ is the time reversal operator. While these symmetries allow more terms in (1), our comparison to TB calculations of (Pb,Sn)Se (001) surface states justifies restricting the Hamiltonian to just the four terms featured in the formula above. It is important to note, that there is a gauge freedom in defining H(k). Rotating the Hamiltonian by U θ = exp(iθτ z s x ) with any angle θ changes the form of (1), while leaving the operators (2) invariant. The energy dispersion given by the Hamiltonian (1): the cross section along high-symmetry lines (left) and a 3D plot of the dispersion in the vicinity of X (right). we choose a gauge in which mτ x is the only k-independent term. Furthermore, we recognize that the Hamiltonian exhibits chiral symmetry, i.e. ΓHΓ = -H, where Γ = τ y s z . Consequently, any closed contour in the two-dimensional k space of the crystal surface can be characterized by the 1D winding number ν topological invariant. To include the steps on the surface into the EF calculation we first present a simplified reasoning which we later verify by comparison to the empirical TB model. We will assume that every basis state of the τ subspace of (1), denoted as F Li (r) (i denotes the L valley, the spin index is omitted), can be expressed as a solution of an effective mass equation for one L valley only. where Ψ Li is a Bloch wavefunction from the L i valley. The complex envelope functions f is exponentially decaying for z → +∞ (bulk region). The Bloch wavefunctions consist of the edges of bulk conduction and valence bands. we calculate and Assuming that f is varying slowly within the distance of a 0 /2 we can approximate F L1 (r) ≈ -F L1 (r), F L2 (r) ≈ F L2 (r). This allows us to denote the operator of translation by t 3 as We note that -τ z is gauge invariant with respect to unitary transformation U θ . Let us now consider two vast terraces (labelled A and B) on the (001) face, separated by a step edge of single atomic height . While the surface states far from the terrace edge are described by the same Hamiltonian matrix (1), the basis states for these matrices should be F Li on one terrace and F Li on the other. To express the Hamiltonian of the full system in one basis we take H A = H and H B = (-τ z )H(-τ z ). Equivalently H B can be obtained from H A by substituting m → -m. We arrive at an interesting result that even though the states on each of the terraces are the same, due to their relative displacement it is justified to describe them by two different Hamiltonians with an inverted order of states. Note that T nt3 = (-τ z ) n , which equals 1 for even n and -τ z for odd n. This means that the surface states divide into two classes: the states which occupy terraces with even number of layers, and the states on terraces with odd number of layers. The appealing result (7) requires verification in a more realistic model which does not rely on the coarse description (3) of basis states. Therefore, we perform calculations of the (001) surface states in 18-orbital sp 3 d 5 TB approximation with spin-orbit interactions included. We choose parameters describing Pb 0.68 Sn 0.32 Se at temperature 100 K, derived according to the procedure described in Ref. 20. The basis states of (1) can now be expressed as superpositions of the four numerical TB eigenvectors |Φ i (k X1 ) (i numbers the states) describing surface states at X 1 = π/a 0 (1, 1, 0). A detailed description of the procedure of finding these superpositions is available in S4 of the Supplemental Material. The basis of (1) is defined by eigenspaces of diagonal operators τ z and s z . To find the eigenstates of the former we analyze |Φ i (k X1 ) Fourier transformed along the [001] axis. In this way we evaluate contributions of quasimomenta k = (π/a 0 , π/a 0 , k ⊥ ) into the states, including the vicinities of L 1 = π/a 0 (1, 1, 1) and L 2 = π/a 0 (1, 1, -1), i.e. the L valleys. In the Fourier basis we can project our states onto subspaces k ⊥ ∈ [0, 2π/a 0 ] and k ⊥ ∈ [-2π/a 0 , 0]. This allows us to find linear combinations of |Φ i that have maximal contribution from L 1 and minimal from L 2 and vice versa. These new states we assign as eigenstates of τ z . Since we expect the operator T t3 to be gauge invariant and to not mix the s degree of freedom, the evaluation of the eigenstates of s z is not relevant here. Nevertheless we perform it as a check of consistency. The calculation is outlined in S4 of the Supplemental Material. We compute the overlap matrix F s Li |T t3 |F s Lj with T t3 defined in the TB basis. We find that every |F s Li is orthogonal to all shifted basis states except for its counterpart T t3 |F s Li . The overlap matrix has the form -γτ z . For our choice of Pb 0.68 Sn 0.32 Se γ = 0.7. The overlap does not attain the absolute value of 1, firstly because one of the states occupies a space that comprises one atomic layer more, but also because the assumption that the basis states are constrained to separate L valleys is not very well satisfied, as seen in Fig. We conclude that approximation (7) more accurately describes systems in which valley splitting is small compared to the bulk band gap. However, it remains valid also in the case of a free (Pb,Sn)Se surface. This is further supported by results obtained from our model showing very good agreement with TB calculations (see the comparison in Fig. First, we consider the steps consisting of an odd number of layers (odd-height steps). In our model such a step edge between terraces is a sharp interface between two half planes, one described by H A , and the other by H B . For infinitely long terraces the quasimomentum k parallel to the step remains a good quantum number. This allows us to treat each H A(B) (k = const.) as a separate 1D problem. We recall that the toy model in Ref. 15 predicted states localized at the odd-height step edges. These states had k flat dispersion and existed only at quasimomenta contained between the two k Λ points. To determine the possible topological origin of the states at the interface we calculate the winding number ν associated with H A(B) (k = const.), describing 1D cuts through the 2D k-space. To find the explicit form of the states we use the EF approximation. In Hamiltonian (1) we substitute where x ⊥ points perpendicular to the step edge. We find that any two eigenfunctions of such a Hamiltonian localized around x ⊥ = 0 must necessarily belong to the same chiral subspace, associated with one of the projectors P ± = 1 2 (1 ± Γ) (which one exactly depends on the sign of ∆ν). We encounter an uncommon result, that even though there are two chiral states on the same edge, both must have E = 0, i.e., zero bias with respect to the energy of the Dirac crossings at k Λ . The proof can be found in S3 of the Supplemental Material. The vicinity of X 1 = π/a 0 (1, 1, 0) point can be treated by setting x = y, x ⊥ = x. Without loss of generality we will assume that v x > 0 and that m(x) has a negative sign for x < 0 and a positive sign for x > 0. We can now restrict our search for solutions to the P -chiral subspace. In the basis which diagonalizes Γ, obtained by rotation of the original basis by U = 1 √ 2 (τ z + τ y ), the EF equation for zero-energy modes becomes where Looking for the solutions in the form ψ(x) = e λx f 0 we find two modes on the x > 0 half plane where Modes on the x < 0 half plane can be obtained by switching m → -m, to find Depending on the value of k y the formulas (11) can describe two (for |k y | < k Λ ) or one (for |k y | > k Λ ) evanescent mode on each half-plane. In the first case the continuity condition is satisfied trivially, as the two linearly independent vectors (12) span the entire Hilbert space, so there is always a superposition of f ± -from the x > 0 half plane that will match any mode on the x < 0 half plane. We conclude, therefore, that it is possible to create two continuous EFs that are localized at the step edge for k y between the two protected crossings near X 1 . For k y = 0 there are two elegant orthogonal solutions of the EF equation where x +v 2 x ) . Note that localization length is inversely proportional to the saddle point energy E S . Figure , which shows away from the step and the symmetric point X an oscillation of the spin degree of freedom. To investigate the vicinity of X 2 = 2π/a 0 (1, -1, 0) we set x = -x, x ⊥ = y. In this case we don't find any states localized at step edges, as both Dirac points k Λ project onto k = 0. Next, we turn to steps between terraces of finite width. We assume a periodic sequence of alternating terraces that are infinite in the direction parallel to the steps but have finite widths d 1 and d 2 in the perpendicular direction. In this case the EF equation cannot be easily solved analytically. Let us first rewrite Hamiltonian (1) as where χ is a vector of 4 × 4 matrices. Now we can write the periodicity condition where f 0 is the wavefunction at the beginning of one of the terraces, H = mτ x + χ k , while χ ⊥ and χ are obtained by an appropriate rotation of χ. Equation ( The results for the vicinities of X 1 and X 2 , for d 1 = d 2 , are shown in Figs. In the vicinity of X 2 , while no flat states are formed, we observe that a zero-energy crossing appears at the projection of X 2 . The crossing persists for any terrace width. It's existence for wide terraces can be explained using the winding number argument. A step edge that is slightly tilted away from [11] is required to host two flat zero-energy modes between the projections of ±k Λ , as for that segment ∆ν = ±2. If we adiabatically return the step edge back to [11] the projections get closer and closer to each other, and the segment of flat states gets shorter, finally merging to one point (as in Fig. Our simple EF model shows very good agreement with the TB approach, while greatly reducing the computational cost. A comparison with TB calculations performed for the same terraces can be found in S5 of the Supplemental Material. The step edges along the [10] direction are more commonly found on the faces of cleaved crystals than the [11] ones discussed above. As shown in Fig. Results of realistic TB calculations performed for the same geometry of terraces exhibit remarkable resemblance to the results of the EF model (compare Figs. The TB calculations of surface spectral density were obtained using the recursive Green's function method. In this subsection we present results for states on the (001) (Pb,Sn)Se surface with protruding atomic islands of sizes of tens of lattice constants. Such surface morphology is characteristic for samples grown by molecular beam epitaxy. We believe that the qualitative aspects of the spectral function of such a surface can be judged by considering equations of the form (17) with χ corresponding to various directions of the step edge, and setting d 1 and d 2 of the order of tens of lattice constants or lower. Thus, we model the superficial disorder as a series of densely-spaced parallel atomic ridges. Although this model does not reflect the true geometry of the inhomogeneities on the surface, we use it first of all for the sake of its simplicity. In view of the lack of significant mixing of the two X valleys shown in the previous section, we believe that such approach is suitable for this problem. The results for different directions of step edges are shown on the leftmost panels of Fig. For the example of Pb 0.68 Sn 0.32 Se shown in Fig. Tight binding spectra of surface states of Pb0.68Sn0.32Se obtained in presence of 5 nm wide terraces of various heights. same Figure shows also that steps of triple height produce a slightly weaker suppression of valley splitting than the single height ones, as a result of a higher mismatch of the wavefunctions on adjacent terraces. Nevertheless we can confirm that surface states in the presence of steps of heights 1 and 3 belong to one class, while surface states in the presence of steps of height 2 and 0 (no steps) to the other. The oscillation of the valley splitting with the terrace height can be understood by recalling that the two interacting L valleys are separated in k space by distance of 2π/a 0 perpendicular to the (001) surface. As seen in Eqs. ( Our results suggest that roughness of the surface can considerably influence functionality of future topological devices, e.g., the topological transistor designed by Liu et al. The study presented here shows that the atomic steps on (001) surfaces of IV-VI TCIs greatly affect the topologically protected surface states. The proposed EF model relates both the observed collapse of the Dirac cone splitting on a rough surface and the formation of 1D zero-modes at the step edges, to the intervalley interaction. Our approach reproduces the results of exhaustive tight binding calculations In our case the neighboring terraces are described by a different value of winding number, leading to 1D states on the step edges. In this way our result bears resemblance to second order topological insulators, where 1D hinges between two insulating surfaces host linearly dispersing topologically protected states. which can be calculated using the fact that for |n and |m in the conduction band the matrix element equals: (the second term is zero, because if |n and |m are in the conduction band then Γ |m is in the valence band and therefore orthogonal to |n ). Taking the trace we find If we now repeat the evaluation of Tr h -1 ∂h ∂k but plugging Q instead of H we can rewrite the result (S15) as since in the flat band limit energies E n are constant across the k space. This concludes the proof of the equivalence of Eqs. ( To describe the surface states we use a simple envelope function model with the chiral symmetric k • p Hamiltonian where k = 0 is the X point. We can pick the chiral symmetry operator Γ = τ y s z such that ΓHΓ = -H. By applying a rotation U = 1 √ 2 (τ z + τ y ) we switch to a basis in which Γ is diagonal Γ = τ z s z , and the Hamiltonian takes the form The operator Γ defines two chiral subspaces: H equals zero within those subspaces, but has matrix elements mixing "+" and "-". We can evaluate and put it in matrix form To calculate the winding number we will need the following expression where and The phase φ has a branch cut on the ellipse defined by For large |k| the value of φ approaches ηπ. Plot of the function φ (for m, v x > 0, and η = 0) is shown on Fig. The function φ is odd with respect to m, which means that for a system with opposite sign of m the phases are -2π (winding number ν = 1) between the Dirac points and 0 outside of them. Although the strict definition of ν requires that it's calculated along a closed contour, e.g., a 1D cut through a Brillouin zone, we believe that in our case integration along k x ∈ (-∞, ∞) gives valid results. For k x away from X the surface states are hybrydized into bulk bands, which are well separated in energy. No nontrivial topology of surface states is expected outside the vicinity of X points. In conclusion, the m and -m regions are described by winding numbers -1 and +1. An interface between those two media can host two topologically protected states. Due to chiral symmetry their energies are necessarily E and -E. In the next section we will show, that in our system E = 0. The envelope function equation of an atomic step can be written as where x ⊥ is the axis perpendicular to the atomic step, and χ ⊥ and χ are defined by an appropriate rotation of k x (v x s y + v x τ y s z )k y v y s x . We can write now Let us act on Eq. (S25) with a projection operator associated with the "+" subspace. - If this equation has a solution for E = 0, then it exists only in the "-" subspace. -iP + χ ⊥ P - dP -Ψ dx ⊥ + P + (m sign x ⊥ τ x + χ k )P -Ψ = 0. (S27) We will denote h ⊥ = P + χ ⊥ P -, h = P + χ P -, h 0 (x ⊥ ) = P + (m sign x ⊥ )τ x P -, ψ = P -Ψ. (S28) In our case, explicitly where θ is the angle between [11] and the direction of the step edge. The equation becomes We look for independent modes if x ⊥ > 0 (denoted below by a subscript ">") where f > is ψ at x ⊥ = 0. The modes are solutions of the eigenequation: The modes for x ⊥ < 0 can be found by solving the equation after substituting m → -m or h > 0 → h < 0 = -h > 0 . The solutions can be obtained from the solutions of (S33), if we notice that Thus we get Let us assume two eigenvalues λ > exist and they both have a negative real part (describe evanescent modes on x ⊥ > 0 half-plane). Then λ < will have positive real parts, which will describe modes evanescent on x ⊥ < 0. The eigenvectors of any of these matrices, if linearly independent, will span the entire C 2 space, which means that the continuity condition between modes at both half-planes will always be satisfied. In such a case there will be two zero modes localized at the step edge and both will belong to the same chiral subspace "-". According to the winding number argument, there are at most two localized modes at the step edge. We can therefore conclude that the subspace "+" doesn't host any interface states. To verify this we investigate an equation analogous to Eq. (S27) for the "+" subspace The equation for a zero-energy mode ψ = P + Ψ is where The equation for eigenmodes can be now obtained by transforming (S33) to get This shows that where the primed quantities belong to the "+" subspace, while the unprimed ones to the "-" subspace. We can see now that if λ > describe evanescent modes then λ > modes explode in the x ⊥ → ∞ limit and cannot form a localized state. Thus, zero-energy modes exist only in the "-" subspace. Let us note that the designation of "+" and "-" is arbitrary, as their role changes upon changing the gauge: m(x ⊥ ) → -m(x ⊥ ) or Γ → -Γ. We will now check the simplest case h ⊥ = h x , h = h y , k y = 0. The eigenequation in the "-" subspace for x > 0 is The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are Without loss of generality we set m > 0. Then for both eigenvalues λ < 0, which means that in this case the two zero modes localized at the step edge belong to the chiral subspace "-". Let us recall now that states limited to one chiral subspace necessarily have zero energy. Solutions for x < 0 are The continuity condition is satisfied automatically as f ± < = f ± > . We can write the two solutions explicitly The case of k y = 0 is more difficult to solve explicitly. Still, the existence of zero modes can be proven by considering the addition of a k y -dependent term to the Hamiltonian as an adiabiatic deformation. Since the term doesn't break chiral symmetry, both zero-modes will still belong to subspace "-" and will not change their energy, provided that |k y | < m vy = |k Λ |. For larger |k y | the winding number is 0 (see Fig. The very same approach can be used to show that the zero modes exist for different directions of the step edge, as rotation of the Hamiltonian in k space can also be understood as a slow deformation. All such deformations can be seen as transformations to straight lines drawn on the complex phase plot (Fig. The case of [10] direction of the step edge requires more attention. If we consider a straight line which passes through X 1 , rotated from direction [11] to [01] we encounter no closing of the gap of the k • p Hamiltonian (S17). However, in a description involving the entire surface Brillouin zone, such a rotating straight line would enter the vicinity of X 2 , which features gap closings analogous to the vicinity X 1 . Nontheless, our tight binding calculation for [10] steps presented in the main text shows that there is no scattering between the X 1 and X 2 on the step edge. Therefore, we conclude that the vicinities of the two X points can be treated in this calculation as seperate systems, each characterized by its own winding number. For realistic predictions of the electronic states at the (001) surface we use a nearest-neighbour 18-orbital sp 3 d 5 tight binding (TB) model with spin-orbit interactions included. The solid solution (Pb,Sn)Se is modelled within the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) with parameters derived according to the procedure described in Ref. S3, which includes effects of temperature and strain on the band-structure. We choose parameters describing Pb 0.68 Sn 0.32 Se at a temperature of 100 K. In this section we show how to establish one to one correspondence between the basis states of the k • p Hamiltonian (S17), and the (001) surface states of (Pb,Sn)Se expressed in the tight binding approximation. Such calculation is necessary in order to inspect how the basis states of (S17) behave in presence of atomic steps. For the analysis we choose the point X 1 = π/a 0 (1, 1, 0). The basis of (S17), chosen after Ref. S4, is defined by eigenspaces of diagonal operators τ z and s z . τ z distinguishes between surface states at X 1 that can be unambiguously assigned to either the L 1 = π/a 0 (1, 1, 1) or the L 2 = π/a 0 (1, 1, -1) valley of the 3D reciprocal space. Eigenstates of s z are Kramers partners within each of the valleys. Operators of (1 10) and (110) mirror reflections (M x and M y ) and time reversal Θ are expressed as We begin our procedure by finding the eigenstates |Φ i (k X1 ) of the TB Hamiltonian of a thick slab, which are the four topological states on a selected surface, at the point X 1 . Next we create linear combinations of |Φ i (k X1 ) that can be assigned as eigenstates of τ z and s z . The lattice of a semi-infinite crystal is spanned by the primitive vectors T = lt 1 + mt 2 + nt 3 with integer l, m, n, with a restriction that n ≥ 0. We choose t 1 = a0 2 (1, -1, 0), t 2 = a0 2 (1, 1, 0), and t 3 = a0 2 (1, 0, 1), which results in (001) termination. In the tight binding approximation, ignoring the normalizing factor, we can write the surface state as where t are vectors lt 1 + mt 2 , φ α are the orthonormal Löwdin orbitals centered at each atom, a α,n k X are the calculated tight binding coefficients (α runs through spin-orbitals on both cation and anion in a single layer, n counts the layers). d α equals zero for a cation and a0 2 (1, 0, 0) for an anion. To find the contributions of the L valleys into states Φ we need to express them in reciprocal space representation, which is achieved by finding overlaps of Φ with 3D Bloch waves describing various quasimomenta k. The unnormalized 3D Bloch sum for a spin-orbital α is given by e ik•(t +nt3+dα) φ α (rtnt 3d α ). (S47) The overlap coefficient amounts to a Fourier transform of the tight binding amplitudes with k = k + k ⊥ , where k is lying on the plane of the surface Brillouin zone, and k ⊥ is perpendicular to it. The surface state Φ(k X1 , r) is constructed only of Bloch waves corresponding to quasimomenta k = (π/a 0 , π/a 0 , k ⊥ ). The formula (S48) can be easily computed numerically using the discrete Fourier transform, as the surface states vanish exponentially in the bulk of the crystal, and the coefficients a α,n k X can be cut off after a certain large n. Figure To find superpositions of |Φ i (k X1 ) belonging to each of the valleys we introduce a valley separating operator Ξ = P > -P < , where P > is the projection onto the subspace of k ⊥ ∈ [0, 2π/a 0 ], and P < = 1 -P > , and compute the matrix elements Φ i (k X1 )|Ξ|Φ j (k X1 ) . The states diagonalizing the resulting matrix are primarily composed of states from one valley (see Fig. In this way we get TB states {|F s Li } i∈{1,2},s=±1 that have the properties of basis states of Hamiltonian (S17). Their probability densities are shown in Fig. 