Continuous-wave-driven Kerr nonlinear microresonators give rise to self-organization in terms of dissipative Kerr solitons, which constitute optical frequency combs that can be used to generate low-noise microwave signals. Here, by applying either amplitude or phase modulation to the driving laser we create an intracavity potential trap to discipline the repetition rate of the solitons. We demonstrate that this effect gives rise to a novel spectral purification mechanism of the external microwave signal frequency, leading to reduced phase noise of the output signal. We experimentally observe that the microwave signal generated from disciplined solitons is injection-locked by the external drive at long time scales, but exhibits an unexpected suppression of the fast timing jitter. Counter-intuitively, this filtering takes place for frequencies that are substantially lower than the cavity decay rate. As a result, while the long-time-scale stability of the Kerr frequency comb's repetition rate is improved by more than 4 orders of magnitude, the purified microwave signal shows a reduction of the phase noise by 30 dB at offset frequencies above 10 kHz. Introduction.-Low-noise microwave signals play a vital role in a wide range of industrial and scientific applications, including telecommunication networks Recently, dissipative Kerr solitons (DKS) in optical microresonators In this work, we use DKS in a crystalline microresonator to purify a 14.09 GHz microwave signal. The phase noise of the purified signal approaches -130 dBc/Hz at 10 kHz offset frequency, which is at the level achieved by the state-of-the-art microresonator-based optoelectronic oscillators and the previously reported best results obtained with undisciplined DKS and narrowband RF filter A/PM offset freq. phase noise offset freq. phase noise FIG. constitutes in itself a f rep -stabilized frequency comb and a spectrally pure microwave generator into a single device. Experiment.-The experimental setup is shown in Fig. A 1555-nm laser is amplified by an Erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and 200 mW optical power is coupled into a z-cut magnesium fluoride (MgF 2 ) whispering-gallery-mode resonator with a FSR of 14.09 GHz via a tapered fiber. A single-soliton-state DKS comb is generated by scanning the laser over a resonance with a loaded quality-factor (Q) of 1.3 × 10 9 to reach the step-like range where solitons are formed The injection locking of the soliton repetition rate is implemented by applying amplitude modulation (AM) or phase modulation (PM) on the pump laser, at a frequency close to the FSR. Intuitive illustrations of how the injection locking works are presented in Fig. We acquire the locking range from the evolution of the RF spectrum, and repeat the measurement with varied modulation strength. As shown in Fig. Spectral purification effect.-To characterize the spectral purity at f rep , the out-coupled soliton stream is filtered by fiber Bragg grating filters (FBG) to suppress the pump light and then amplified by an EDFA and subsequently attenuated to ∼ 5 mW before being registered by a fast photodetector. We use a phase noise analyzer to measure the phase noise of the 14.09 GHz signal output by the photodetector. Fig. where Ãμ and A are the spectral and temporal envelopes of DKS respectively (related via A(t) = μ Ãμ e -iμD1t ), κ is the cavity loss rate, g is the single photon induced Kerr frequency shift, κ ex is the coupling rate and |s in | 2 denotes the power of the laser pumping the central mode, δ μ0/±1 is the Kronecker delta, and F[ ] μ represents the μ'th frequency component of the Fourier series. We include third oder dispersion in D int (μ). A pair of PM sidebands are included in the last term of the equation, where indicates the amplitude of the modulation sidebands, and Ω is the frequency difference between the FSR and the input microwave signal. Adapting the technique used in where ω in is the frequency of the input microwave signal. We use pump power of 200 mW and = 0.32 for the numerical simulation Conclusion.-We have experimentally and numerically demonstrated a novel phase noise purifying mechanism by disciplining dissipative solitons with potential traps. The comb repetition rate drift, which is a major limitation in microcavities, was thereby suppressed, while this parameter was stabilized to a reference oscillator. The high frequency noise of the trapping signal was selfpurified, at frequency offsets well below the cavity resonance bandwidth. Our technique reveals the unique dynamical stability of the self-organized temporal solitons. The exceptional phase noise level achieved with the purified microwaves shows that disciplined DKS are competitive with other state-of-the-art optical-microresonatorbased microwave oscillators in terms of generating low-noise microwave signals with miniaturized device. It could also facilitate the application of microcombs in coherently averaged dual-comb spectroscopy Supplementary material for "Spectral purification of microwave signals with disciplined dissipative Kerr solitons" In the main text we show the measured locking ranges with AM applied to the pump laser. We also measure the locking ranges with PM scheme and with varied PM strength, which are presented in Fig. We apply PM injection locking by modulating the pump laser with frequencies close to the cavity FSR (∼14.09 GHz) with an EOM. We measure the locking ranges at different laser-resonance detunings but with the same PM strength. For the measurement the laser-resonance detuning is tuned from high frequency (30 MHz) to low frequency (11.8 MHz), which we referred to as backward tuning. We observe that the locking ranges change dramatically and erratically as the detuning changes, as presented in Fig. We suspect that such behavior is induced by the mode coupling between different mode families With the phase response spectrum we can calculate the PM-to-PM transfer indices at particular PM frequencies. We choose discrete PM frequencies from 200 Hz to 1 MHz to simulate the transfer function shown in the main text. For comparison, we also carry out simulations of PM injection locking with larger and AM injection locking. The simulated results are summarized in Fig. To verify the simulated PM-to-PM noise transfer function, we implement PM on the input microwave signals via internal function of the synthesizer that is used to drive the optical phase modulator. The PM amplitude is set to be 0.1 radian, 1 radian and 2 radian respectively. After the soliton repetition rate is injection locked, the PM on the microwave signals is activated, and the in-phase-and-quadrature (IQ) demodulation function of the spectrum analyzer is utilized to measure the phase and amplitude responses of the microwave signals generated by the fast photodetector that detects the DKS repetition rate. The demodulation frequency on the analyzer is set equal to the synthesizer frequency and both devices are referenced to a common clock oscillator. In Fig. As shown in the main text, as the PM frequency on the input microwave signal increases, the phase deviation of the purified signal decreases. To quantify this effect, the phase deviation is extracted from the IQ measurement and the transfer function is obtained as 20 log 10 ∆φ (measured) (ω) ∆φ (in) (ω) . Eventually, the response amplitude is below the instrumental noise floor of the phase noise analyzer, which is evidently displayed as the flat floor on the transfer function at high frequencies. To increase the dynamical range of the measurement, the measurement is repeated with larger phase deviations (1 radian and 2 radians) on the modulation and re-take the IQ measurement. Fig. 