The reliability of atomistic simulations depends on the quality of the underlying energy models providing the source of physical information, for instance for the calculation of migration barriers in atomistic Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. Accurate (high-fidelity) methods are often available, but since they are usually computationally expensive, they must be replaced by less accurate (low-fidelity) models that introduce some degrees of approximation. Machine-learning techniques such as artificial neural networks are usually employed to work around this limitation and extract the needed parameters from large databases of high-fidelity data, but the latter are often computationally expensive to produce. This work introduces an alternative method based on the multifidelity approach, where correlations between high-fidelity and low-fidelity outputs are exploited to make an educated guess of the high-fidelity outcome based only on quick low-fidelity estimations, hence without the need of running full expensive high-fidelity calculations. With respect to neural networks, this approach is expected to require less training data because of the lower amount of fitting parameters involved. The method is tested on the prediction of ab initio formation and migration energies of vacancy diffusion in iron-copper alloys, and compared with the neural networks trained on the same database. Numerical simulations play an important role in understanding and predicting the phenomena driving the microstructure evolution of solid materials. These processes cover such a wide range of length and time scales that a true multiscale approach is necessary. Typically, electronic-structure calculations based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) are used to parameterize atomic-scale simulations, which in turn open the way to higher scales thanks to various modeling techniques This common parameterization problem is found in many branches of science: the parameters could be obtained with high-fidelity models that are very accurate, but so computationally expensive that their use is impractical. Therefore, they are replaced by low-fidelity models that introduce a certain degree of approximation but can provide all needed parameters with little computational effort In this context, machine learning (ML) algorithms can be very useful to extract data from the potentially large but for the most part inaccessible source of high-fidelity physical information, in a form that can be directly applied to the parameterization of higher-scale models This work suggests an alternative method to ANNs to achieve the same goal, i.e., maximizing the use of highfidelity data to ensure a full transfer of information across modeling scales. It relies on a multifidelity (MF) approach As a first test case, the MF approach is applied here to a DFT database of vacancy migration barriers in FeCu alloys, that was used to train the ANNs of previous works Multifidelity methods are a class of techniques that accelerate calculations by leveraging on the correlations between the output of accurate but computationally expensive models, and that of inexpensive but less accurate ones In the MF context, a model is defined as a function f : D → Y that maps an input to an output, where D ⊆ R d is the input domain (d ∈ N), and Y ⊆ R the output domain. Let z ∈ D be the input and y ∈ Y the output. A high-fidelity model, denoted with f (1) , yields an accurate approximation of the output of interest, whereas several low-fidelity models, denoted with f (k) (k ∈ N >1 ), provide less accurate estimations of the same output. Typically, since evaluating y = f (1) (z) is computationally expensive, it is unfeasible to sample y i at many inputs of interest z i . Therefore, f (1) is usually replaced with f (k) for one suitable choice of k that gives a sufficiently low error. Standard strategies to generate low-fidelity models are simplified models, projection methods, and data-fit surrogates However, this approach presents three main limitations. First, the low-fidelity replacement is often unable to meet the desired accuracy. Secondly, when generating a low-fidelity model f (k) by means of projection or data fit with a training set (z i , f (1) (z i )) i=1,••• ,T , the amount of training data points needs to be large even for low-dimensional problems (d ≈ 15). Finally, by selecting one low-fidelity model and discarding all the others, a large amount of information is lost. MF methods aim at overcoming such limitations by switching from model selection to model fusion, i.e., by combining all models to produce a better estimate of y. This can be done for instance via control variates The key idea is to improve the low-fidelity estimates by relying on the statistical dependency between f (k) and f (1) , instead of minimizing the errors f (k) (z)f (1) (z) . Mathematically, this can be achieved by creating an output-tooutput data-fit surrogate: , with i = 1, ..., T and k = 2, ..., m + 1. In the GPR context, G is assumed to follow a GP distribution with a prescribed covariance kernel, whose parameters are fitted by maximizing a given likelihood. The underlying assumption is that the models f (k) contain partial information on the full model f (1) , and that the missing information can be modeled as a normally-distributed systematic uncertainty term. Therefore, the availability of a large number of models contributes to better explain the total output variability, thus reducing the size of the training set. The accuracy of the fit can be then improved by including more low-fidelity models, as an alternative to adding more training data points. Moreover, the dimensionality and complexity of the model in Eq. ( The multifidelity approach is tested on the modeling of single-vacancy diffusion in FeCu dilute alloys, applicable for instance to the parameterization of AKMC simulations. The high-fidelity model is a large DFT database previously produced to train an ANN The low-fidelity inputs are given by two independent energy models used in the past to investigate diffusion and precipitation of Cu in Fe alloys: an interatomic potential based on the embedded-atom method (EAM) The multifidelity fitting is aimed at estimating: 1. The supercell formation energy E f , computed from the supercell total energy E * as: where E c Fe and E c Cu are the cohesive energy per atom in pure bcc Fe and pure bcc Cu obtained with either DFT (-8.31 and -3.68 eV) or EAM (-4.12 and -3.49 eV). mig i→f and E mig f→i , taken as the difference between the supercell energy at the saddle point and that in the initial or final state, respectively. 3. The energy difference between the final (f) and initial (i) state: ∆E = E f -E i . 4. The saddle-point energy computed from the migration barrier as: The rescaling in Eq. ( For each of the target quantities (E f , E mig , ∆E, E sad ), a Gaussian regression of the type in Eq. ( In most MF applications, the low-fidelity outputs are directly correlated with the high-fidelity ones. However, the energy associated to an arrangement of atoms depends in a highly non-linear fashion on the position of each atom. The use of descriptors is therefore essential to include information about atomic positions in the fitting. A brief explanation is provided here, and the reader is referred to a more general description of the descriptor framework in Descriptors are symmetry-invariant mathematical representations of a crystal structure that replace the conventional Cartesian coordinates while leaving the physical properties unchanged. They allow the essential features of the LAE to be comprised into a space of lower dimensionality, known as the descriptor space. In this framework, each atom in the supercell is assigned a series of coefficients (one for each descriptor) based on the surrounding LAE. These coefficients establish a correlation between the atomic configuration and the corresponding physical properties (e.g., the supercell energy), allowing for some kind of regression to be performed. This study relies exclusively on Gaussian regressions of the type in Eq. ( The neighbor density function is expanded in 4-D hyperspherical harmonics U jmm ′ as follows: where the sum runs over all neighbors b ∈ V(a) of the a th atom within a cutoff distance R cut , and w b is an arbitrary weight associated with the chemical species of b (in this work: R cut = 5 a 0 , w Fe = 1, and w Cu = 2). The power spectrum coefficients c a jmm ′ are computed as the inner product between the density and the hyperspherical functions. Index j can take only positive integer or half-integer values ( j = 0, 1 2 , 1, 3 2 , ...), and is limited for practical purposes to a maximal value j max = 7/2. The latter choice guarantees a satisfactory compromise between numerical precision and computational load. Once the c a j;m ′ m coefficients are known, the SO(4) bispectrum coefficients B a ll 1 l 2 where C ll 1 l 2 mm 1 m 2 are the Clebsch-Gordan (CG) coefficients. From the total set of 512 coefficients for j max = 7/2, the CG selection rules narrow them down to 30 coefficients only Finally, for each component i the corresponding coefficients of all atoms are summed to obtain a global coefficient ). The latter is used to seek a correlation with the supercell energy, and can be thus regarded as a low-fidelity energy estimation that contains information about mutual atomic interactions. This procedure hence yields 26 low-fidelity guesses that are added to the low-fidelity models (EAM and Soisson) mentioned in the previous section. For the targeted quantities obtained as energy differences or sums (E mig , ∆E, E sad ), the same transformations are applied to each D i . For instance, the high-fidelity ∆E is correlated to D f i -D i i , and by analogy for the other quantities. This is to avoid uncertainty propagation that would occur when computing ∆E from the formation energies. Building additional low-fidelity models with descriptors requires the availability of some low-fidelity estimations of the atomic positions. Interatomic potentials such as the EAM model do provide this information, as they allow for relaxation calculations, whereas rigid-lattice schemes such as pair-interaction models do not. However, positions corresponding to the rigid lattice can be taken as a rough low-fidelity guess of the atomic coordinates. This is tested in Fit E, among the fitting sessions listed in Table Several fitting sessions are performed, first with the energy guesses from the EAM potential and the Soisson model (E EAM , E S ), and then including the descriptor coefficients computed with the rigid-lattice or the EAM-relaxed atomic coordinates, respectively D i=1,...,n (x rigid ) and D i=1,...,n (x EAM ). The sessions are summarized in Table Table If the descriptor coefficients correlate well with the target quantities, and in particular with the supercell formation energy, they can provide valuable additional low-fidelity estimations. This correlation is checked by performing a multi-dimensional Gaussian regression on the 26 descriptor coefficients computed on the relaxed atomic positions, using a varying amount of training data points (N train ). The accuracy of the fitting is then validated on the remaining data. The validation results are shown in Table The MF framework described in Section 2 is applied to the prediction of the DFT target quantities with an increasing number of low-fidelity models: first with energy guesses only (Fit C and D), and then with the descriptor coefficients based on rigid-lattice positions (Fit E) and the EAM-relaxed positions (Fit F). Finally, all low-fidelity inputs are used in the last fitting (Fit G). Table Without descriptors, the performance of the MF model trained only on energy estimations (Fit C and D) is very poor, with a ≈ 1 eV mean error on the formation energy and low R-squared values on the other quantities. The addition of the Soisson model, which targets saddle-point interactions and is therefore expected to be more accurate on migration energies than the EAM model, improves the correlation and reduces the mean error, proving that the MF approach can successfully take advantage of several models at once. However, Fig. Including the descriptor coefficients in the low-fidelity input improves drastically the formation energy prediction, and moderately the migration barriers and the other quantities, with much better R-squared values. This confirms once more the strength of the MF approach, where the contributions of several low-fidelity models targeting different properties can be joined together to provide more accurate predictions. Fig. The results of this work prove that the MF framework can be successfully applied to build energy models for atomistic simulations, allowing for a higher degree of flexibility (by choosing or developing the needed low-fidelity models), and a likely substantial reduction of the computational requirements with respect to ANNs. If compared to the ANN accuracy with the same amount of training data (N train = 1300), the MF accuracy is not as good: (83 vs 48 meV on the formation energy, and 41.6 vs 23.5 meV on the migration barriers) . However, the MF predictions are already quite accurate with much fewer data points (N train = 300). The ANN performance with so few data points has not been tested in the corresponding previous works Thanks to the general character of the MF approach, the method is certainly suitable for developing lattice-free potentials, for instance by including forces among the target quantities. It is also worth noting that in the specific case of FeCu alloys, the thermodynamic properties stemming out of the EAM potential should be more accurate than the DFT PAW-PBE functionals, but thanks to the splitting of the migration energy according to Eq. (3), it could be possible to use ∆E EAM as a high-fidelity reference for the thermodynamic part, and E sad DFT for the kinetic part. Finally, it should be mentioned that although faster than DFT calculations, computing the descriptor coefficients for a given atomic configuration still requires more time than a EAM calculation (in the order of a few seconds as opposed to milliseconds This work presented multifidelity (MF) methods as an innovative machine-learning based approach for constructing energy models that can predict the static energy of a given arrangement of atoms, as well as the migration barriers of given jump events, to provide the relevant parameterization to atomistic simulations or analytical models while ensuring the best possible transfer of physical properties from ab initio calculations. MF makes use of several approximate (low-fidelity) models to learn predicting the outcome of an accurate (high-fidelity) model without the need for performing the actual time-consuming calculation. The method, tested on the prediction of DFT formation energies and migration barriers in dilute FeCu supercells, proved to be successful in describing the correlation between the high-fidelity and the low-fidelity values. Although the performance in terms of prediction accuracy is not as good as artificial neural networks (ANN), the MF mean prediction errors are already reasonably low with much smaller training datasets than ANNs, which shows that potentially the amount of high-fidelity data needed for training can be considerably reduced, with important savings of computational power. Furthermore, it has been shown that the more low-fidelity models, the more accurate the results. MF methods are indeed capable of combining together the information given by several models, which ensures a high degree of flexibility, while keeping the needed amount of high-fidelity calculations to its minimum. In this context, the use of descriptors has been necessary to describe the influence of the local atomic environment on the energetics. In conclusion, this work has demonstrated the applicability of MF methods to multiscale materials modeling and microstructure evolution simulations. They can contribute to improving the reliability of atomistic simulations by maximizing the amount of accurate DFT properties that can be transferred, with little approximation, to the higher modeling scales. Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission. The high-performance computational resources have been provided by Électricité de France (R&D).