We analyze the electric current and magnetic field driven domain wall motion in perpendicularly magnetized ultrathin ferromagnetic films in the presence of interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and both out-of-plane and in-plane uniaxial anisotropies. We obtain exact analytical Walker-type solutions in the form of one-dimensional domain walls moving with constant velocity due to both spin-transfer torques and out-of-plane magnetic field. These solutions are embedded into a larger family of propagating solutions found numerically. Within the considered model, we find the dependencies of the domain wall velocity on the material parameters and demonstrate that adding in-plane anisotropy may produce domain walls moving with velocities in excess of 500 m/s in realistic materials under moderate fields and currents. Introduction. In their seminal paper, Schryer and Walker discovered an exact analytical solution of the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation describing a moving one-dimensional (1D) domain wall (DW) Recently, out-of-plane magnetized ultrathin films with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) In this Rapid Communication, we report a new exact analytical solution for steady DW motion in outof-plane magnetized films analogous to the Walker solution for films with in-plane equilibrium magnetization. For this solution to exist, a small in-plane anisotropy is required in addition to the dominant out-of-plane anisotropy, while the film is still magnetized out-of-plane. We consider both current and field driven DW dynamics in the presence of interfacial DMI and show that this new solution can describe the DW motion observed in recent experiments At nonzero DMI strength, our solution fixes the angle of magnetization in the DW such that it acquires a strictly Néel profile. The solution also fixes the angle between the direction of the current and the DW normal. This angle depends on the relative strength of magnetic field and electric current, but, notably, is independent of the DMI strength. Moreover, in the absence of DMI we find an entire family of exact solutions for every angle between the DW normal and the in-plane easy axis. Although the dynamics in biaxial ferromagnets has been the subject of many works (see, e.g., We also demonstrate that one can achieve the highest propagation velocities for tiltless DWs, i. e., DWs which move along the current with the DW front strictly perpendicular to the current (Fig. Model. We consider an ultrathin ferromagnetic film of thickness d with interfacial DMI and two anisotropies: larger out-of-plane and smaller in-plane, and study the dynamic behavior of magnetic DWs due to an out-ofplane magnetic field and/or in-plane electric current. Our analysis is based on the LLG equation with spintransfer torques arXiv:1808.03772v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 18 Mar 2019 where r ∈ R 2 is the spatial coordinate in units of the exchange length ex = 2A/(μ 0 M 2 s ) and t is time in the units of (γμ 0 M s ) -1 , A is the exchange stiffness, M s is the saturation magnetization, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α is the Gilbert damping constant, β is the nonadiabatic spin-transfer torque constant, j = P J/ 8Ae 2 μ 0 M 2 s , J is the in-plane current density, P is the spin polarization of current, and h eff = -δE/δm with energy E in units of 2Ad given by Here m = (m , m z ), m = (m x , m y ), and we introduced the dimensionless parameters corresponding to the dimensional out-of-plane and in-plane anisotropy constants K z and K x , interfacial DMI constant D, and out-of-plane field H z , respectively: We assume k z > 1 and 0 < k x < k z -1 to ensure that m = ±ẑ are the only stable equilibria for h z = 0. The energy in Eq. ( DW profile. We study the dynamics of DWs moving due to either an applied magnetic field or a spin-transfer torque from an electric current. By a moving DW with normal velocity V in the direction of the unit vector n = (n x , n y ) we mean a 1D solution of (1) of the form m = m(r • n -V t). Substituting this traveling wave ansatz into Eq. ( where for convenience we defined p = (-sin φ, cos φ). Equations ( θ where θ = dθ/dξ and θ = d 2 θ/dξ 2 . This system of equations produces a Walker-type solution for a steadily moving DW: propagating with velocity where φ 0 solves The obtained front velocity depends on the propagation direction n, unless j • n = 0. In particular, at h z = 0 the velocity is maximal in the direction of j. The solution exists only when |h z | and j = |j| do not exceed critical values corresponding to Walker breakdown In the presence of DMI (κ = 0) the Walker solution obtained above is generally destroyed. Nevertheless, Eqs. ( where θ is given by Eq. ( for j = (j x , j y ), according to Eq. The DW energy E 0 is positive and is minimized by Furthermore, the DMI contribution is minimized by the "+" sign in Eq. ( We now consider two characteristic cases of moving DWs. For definiteness, we assume κ > 0 and fix the positive sign in Eq. ( Once again, this equation produces four distinct values of φ 0 ∈ (-π, π] for |h z | below the Walker breakdown field h c z . Due to the symmetry φ 0 → φ 0 +π, n → -n for j = 0, this still results in two distinct solutions (differing by 180 • rotations) with propagation velocities determined by Eq. In particular, the velocity V and angle φ 0 at small fields grow linear in h z , while for |h z | comparable to h c z they acquire a nonlinear character. The magnitude of |φ 0 | is a monotonically increasing function of |h z |, whose maximum |φ 0 | = π/4 is achieved at the Walker breakdown field |h z | = h c z . Also, the DMI part of the DW energy is, in fact, globally minimized by our sign choice in Eq. Next, we study the case of purely current driven DW motion with j = (j x , 0) along the in-plane easy axis. By Eq. ( x , where the critical "Walker breakdown" current is Eq. ( and another one obtained by changing φ 0 → π -φ 0 (and V → -V in the equation for the velocity). Focusing on the first solution and substituting the angle from Eq. ( In the purely current driven case the DW velocity in the horizontal direction V x = V / cos φ 0 takes a universal form V x = βj x /α [see Eq. ( For larger currents one would expect |φ 0 | to remain equal to π/2, consistent with the above static DW solution. Other traveling-wave solutions. As we just demonstrated, the Walker-type solutions obtained for κ = 0 exist only for certain specific directions of propagation determined by the solutions of Eqs. ( , where n is given by Eq. ( With no current, we carried out simulations for inplane anisotropy constant K x = 0.125 × 10 6 J/m 3 and applied field μ 0 H z = -25 mT, corresponding to |h z | comparable to the Walker breakdown field h c z and a relatively small k x For small values of k x the DW moves with velocity nearly independent of direction and its magnitude is close to the velocity of the Walker solution. In this case the DW velocity's dependence on propagation angle, V (φ 0 ), is well approximated by Eq. Similar results were obtained for current driven DW motion with no applied field. For example, for K x = 0.4×10 6 J/m 3 , β = 0.25, P = 1, and J x = 5×10 12 A/m 2 , we found that the DW velocity is given by Eq. ( Motion along the in-plane easy axis. The analysis of the Walker solution performed above indicates that one can also select the Walker solution moving in a prescribed direction given by angle φ 0 via an appropriate choice of the relationship between h z and j. Furthermore, according to Eq. ( This maximal velocity turns out to be independent of most of the material parameters, and the required field h z vanishes in the special case α = β. Furthermore, these solutions correspond to moving DWs with no tilt, contrary to those seen in Ref. Traveling waves for zero damping. It is interesting that the obtained Walker solution also allows one to construct steadily moving DW solutions at zero damping, α = 0, for any angle φ 0 by taking the limit α → 0, while choosing h z to satisfy Eq. ( in the direction of n in Eq. ( Conclusions. We have studied the model of ultrathin ferromagnetic film with interfacial DMI and two magnetic anisotropies. When the out-of-plane anisotropy is stronger than the in-plane anisotropy, we have found an exact 2D traveling wave DW solution [Eqs. 