The chiral induced spin selectivity (CISS) in layers of helical molecules gained considerable attention in the emerging field of spintronics, because the effect enables spin-filter devices under ambient conditions. Several theoretical studies have been carried out to explain this effect on a microscopic scale, but the origin of the effect is still controversial. In particular the role of spin-flip scattering during electron transport is an open issue. In this study we describe the electron and spin transport by rate equations including spin-dependent losses and spin-flip scattering. We reduce the problem to the solution of the Riccati differential equation to obtain analytical solutions. The results allow to determine and interpret the strength and scalability of CISS based spin-filters from experimental data or quantum mechanical models. For the helical systems studied experimentally so far it turns out that spin-flip scattering plays a minor role. In recent years it has been shown that electron transmission through monolayers of helical molecules adsorbed on various substrates show a preferred longitudinal spin orientation. This spin orientation depends on the enatiomeric chiral orientation of the molecules Although spin-flips are included in the rate equations, in their following discussion Fandreyer et al. could omit them for describing the propagation of a polarised electron beam through a vapor of chiral molecules as the detector cone in the related experiment In contrast to this gas phase experiment, for a transmission measurement through a film more scattering angles into the forward direction will contribute to the signal. Accordingly, we keep the spin-flip components and find that the evolution of the spin polarisation is mathematically equivalent to the Riccati equation. This equation has been used previously to describe related problems like the propagation of polarised light through optical media We define N 1 (x) as the expectation value of the number of electrons with spin up, i.e. spin parallel to the propagation direction along x, and N 2 (x) with the respective spin down or antiparallel spin. We then assume spin-dependent loss probabilities α 1 (x) and α 2 (x) per length unit while the electrons are traveling through the chiral layer. These losses may be caused by absorption in the molecule or by scattering out of the detector angle. We further assume a probability f 1 (x) per length for the electron to flip its spin from up to down and f 2 (x) vice versa. The physical origin of these contributions may be (multiple) scattering events with random spin-flip or spin-flip towards a preferred spin state. The inverse of the parameters α 1 , α 2 , f 1 , and f 2 denotes the mean free path of the respective process. For this configuration we can set up coupled differential equations In the following we abbreviate spatial derivatives in the form dN i (x) dx = N ′ i (x), and for convenience we omit to write the x dependency explicitly, e.g., N i (x) = N i . In an extension of the model of Fandreyer et al. we arrive at We rearrange these equations to Sum and difference of both equations yield We abbreviate α = α 1 +α 2 , which corresponds to twice the loss coefficent for unpolarised electrons, and f = f 1 + f 2 , which is accordingly twice the spin-flip scattering probability in both spin directions for unpolarised electrons. ∆α = α 1 -α 2 denotes the difference between the probabilities for electron loss in each spin state and ∆f = f 1 -f 2 is the difference in the probabilities for spin-flip forward scattering. Expressed with these coefficients the differential equations are We can replace ∆N by P N, because ∆N/N = (N 1 -N 2 )/(N 1 + N 2 ) = P defines the spin polarisation given by equation The change of the difference of the numbers of electrons in both spin channels can be rearranged to and by combination of equations (8a) and (8b) one obtains For physical reasons we are only interested in situations where N is non-zero. Thus the change of the spin polarisation with propagation is given by This nonlinear equation is independent of the number of electrons N. It describes the change of the spin polarisation as a function of propagation distance through the organic film due to loss and spin-flip processes. The equation is equivalent to Riccatis equation which is also used, e.g., to model the propagation of light in thin films for ellipsometry the Riccati equation can be transformed into the linear differential equation [29] where P * is a special solution to the Riccati equation and P is solution to equation Up to here, the derivation is not restricted to coefficients which are constant along x. In the following we obtain analytical solutions for constant values of ∆α, f , and ∆f . In the first place we look for spin polarisations P * which stay constant with propagation along x. These points with P ′ = 0 are called equilibrium points and are useful special solutions P * to solve the Riccati equation with the substition approach given by equations ( To avoid divisions by zero one has to treat some cases separately. If ∆α, ∆f and f are zero, no changes are made to the spin polarisation and every constant spin polarisation fulfills the differential equation which is always a stable solution. If ∆α is non-zero, the equation ( Only one of these two solutions is stable during propagation along x, namely P * -. Because of f ≥ |∆f | the solutions P * ± are always real, as expected for a spin polarisation value. This means that for all possible sets of parameters, an equilibrium point can be found. If only spin-flip processes are present, the differential equation ( This equation can be solved by an exponential function with an offset. The general solution takes the form where P 0 is the initial spin polarisation of electrons entering the helical molecules. For large distances, x → ∞, the spin polarisation P converges to the equilibrium point P * given by equation It is obvious from transmission experiments in gas phase where the upper sign is valid for P * + and the lower for P * -, respectively. This equation can be solved for γ = 0 by where C is determined by the initial spin polarisation P 0 at x = 0. The spin polarisation P (x) results from equation ( where x 0 can be obtained from the initial spin polarisation P 0 . One identifies the term in [ ]-brackets as hyperbolic cotangent for the upper sign and hyperbolic tangent functions for the lower sign, so we obtain for the two solutions Obviously, some solutions are not practical for spin polarisations being restricted to values in the interval This special case has also been proposed by Farago For completeness we will briefly discuss the case where γ = 0, which was previously excluded. One can show here that the spin-dependent spin-flip parameter and spindependent loss parameter must have equal absolute values but opposite sign ∆α = -∆f , and additionally that spin-flips can only occur in one direction f = |∆f |. The solution in this very special case is given by the boundary condition P 0 , where the upper sign is valid for ∆α > 0 and the lower for ∆α < 0, respectively. The flip effect and the losses do not fully cancel out and the spin polarisation converges to P = P * = ±1 in the direction which is preferred by the spin-flip process. One can use the results for the spin polarisation in order to calculate transmissions. The solution of equation (8a) can be obtained by integration with N 0 as the number of electrons at the start at x = 0. For the solution of interest with ∆α = 0, γ = 0 we arrive at with This equation describes the number of electrons as a function of the propagation length. The transmission T can be obtained from T (x) = N(x)/N 0 . Without spin-dependent attenuation ∆α = 0 one gets which is equivalent to the Lambert-Beer law. For completeness we mention the solution in the case of γ = 0: In practical experiments it is often hard to determine the absolute electron transmission of a thin film on a substrate. One measures usually relative transmissions according to a change in the initial spin P 0 before propagation through the film. The initial spin polarisation can be controlled for example by magnetization of a ferromagnetic substrate or differently circularly polarised radiation causing spin polarised photocurrents from substrates with strong spin-orbit coupling. In such a case one measures the asymmetry A(x) in the photoelectron signal where N LCP and N RCP are the transmitted electrons excited with left circularly polarised (LCP) light and right circularly polarised (LCP) light, respectively. For a non-chiral measurement geometry, i.e., the light is directed perpendicular onto the sample and no magnetic fields are present, the initial spin polarisation P 0 is inverted between the two circular polarisation states of the light (P LCP 0 = -P RCP 0 ). In the most interesting case with ∆α = 0, γ = 0 one obtains by inserting equation ( with γ = γ/2 and the starting condition x LCP 0 , where x LCP 0 is obtained from the respective initial spin polarisation P 0 from the substrate by equation which is consistent with previous models In the following we apply this model to data from previously published photoelectron experiments on dsDNA films on Au Göhler et al. Alike the spin measurement of the photo current from DNA coated gold surfaces with different molecular length Recently spin-dependent transmissions of electrons from Cu(332), Ag(110) and Au(111) substrates through enantiopure M-and P -heptahelicene monolayers ((M)- To approach the problem within the presented model we assume a substrate that inverses the spin polarisation of photoemitted electrons upon altering the circular polarisation state of the light as it is the case for Au(111). We take the difference in spin polarisation of the substrate ∆P 0 = P LCP 0 -P RCP 0 and compare it with the difference after transmission through a chiral layer ∆P H = P LCP H -P RCP H . If we assume only spin-flip processes we get from equation ( We assumed that the spin polarisation from the substrate is the same for the clean substrate as from the coated substrate before transmission through the film. We can use this to determine We can determine ∆f by taking the average of the spin polarisations P H from equation ( , We can now straight forward determine f and ∆f . f 1,2 have to be positive by its definition and thereby |∆f | is always smaller than f . This inequation, |∆f | ≤ f , results with equation and with equation Because ∆P H /∆P 0 is positive and smaller or equal 1 one can conclude If this inequality is not fulfilled, one must include spin-dependent absorption to model the data. The relevant values for the inequality obtained from previously reported measurements Analogue to the discussion on the DNA in the previous subsection, we employed a 2D fitting procedure to the spin polarisations from Au(111) -0.242 ± 0.006 0.267 ± 0.005 --(M)- opposite enantiomer. This enables us to include all data in a single fitting procedure and obtain sufficient statistics. Therefore we virtually inverted the circular polarisation state of the light and the spin for the (P ) enantiomer. The obtained curves and the spin polarisation data are depicted in figure The Riccati model can be compared to more sophisticated quantum mechanical models. The marks in the Figure As we found out in the previous sections, it is very hard to distinguish between spinflip and spin-dependent absorption processes by measurements of the electron spin as a function of the molecular length alone. The exponential function ( On the other hand this means that experiments measuring only transmission effects are hardly sensitive to depolarizing spin-flips by the parameter f and points out the necessity for direct spin measurements. The limiting factor in the proposed measurements is the reachable spin polarisation by photoemission with circularly polarised light. With an Au(111) substrate one reaches about 25% spin polarisation of the photocurrent with photons of an energy of 5.8 eV We have set up rate equations for the spin transport in chiral molecules with spin-dependent losses and spin-flip scattering. We derived from these equations a single differential equation which describes the longitudinal spin polarisation during propagation which is independent of the absolute numbers of spin-up and spin-down electrons. This equation is a Riccati equation, which can be solved fully analytically. The derivations in section 2.1 are even applicable to non-constant parameters and thus may be used for more complex assemblies. The coefficients in the Riccati equation describe the strength of the filter effect, as well as the probability for spin-flips. From these one does not only gain insight into the origin of the measured spin polarisation, but also obtains upper limits for the spin polarisation for very long molecules. The presented analytical solutions have been applied to discuss experimental data for DNA From the spin polarization as a function of the molecular length alone one can hardly distinguish, whether the spin effect is a spin-flipping effect or a spin filter effect, though the fits show a tendency towards a filter effect. We suggest that measurements as a function of the initial spin polarisations before entering the chiral molecules can help to distinguish these cases. We were able to show from such data for 