Organic-inorganic lead halide perovskites containing a mixture of iodide and bromide anions consistently perform better in donoracceptor heterojunction solar cells than the standard methylammonium lead triiodide material. This observation is counterintuitive, as it is generally expected for photovoltaic materials that heterogeneities and compositional disorder cause reduced carrier diffusion length and conversion efficiency. Here, we combine ultrafast photoinduced electroabsorption and broadband fluorescence upconversion spectroscopy measurements to scrutinize the carrier dynamics in mixed-cations, mixed-halide lead perovskite thin films. Our results evidence the formation of charge transfer excitons (CTE) across the boundaries of domains of various halide compositions. A global analysis of photoinduced transient Stark signals shows that CTE evolve gradually from Br-rich to I-rich domains over tens to hundreds of picoseconds. Rather than constituting recombination centres, boundaries between domains of various halide compositions appear then to favour charge carrier separation by driving photogenerated holes along channels of decreasing bromide content. Since their inception as very promising photovoltaic materials, lead halide perovskites have attracted a vast scientific interest across the fields of chemistry, solid-state physics, photonics, and material sciences. Power conversion efficiencies achieved with simple, solution-processed donoracceptor heterojunction devices based on this type of semiconductor now exceed 22%, Non-radiative electron-hole recombination in semiconductors usually occurs in presence of mid-bandgap states due to lattice imperfections or impurity atoms. The preparation of lead halide perovskites containing a mixture of organic methylammonium (MA + ) and formamidinium (FA + ), and inorganic cesium (Cs + ) and rubidium (Rb + ) cations, have shown to yield large monolithic grains, which dimensions can reach 1 μm, exceeding by far the typical 200 nm film thickness used in photovoltaic devices. The absence of grain boundaries along the transport path of the charge carriers improves significantly their diffusion length and must be beneficial to the photovoltaic conversion efficiency. Here, we used a combination of ultrafast transient absorption (TAS) and fluorescence up-conversion spectroscopy (FLUPS) techniques to study charge-and energy transfer processes taking place in transparent thin-films of lead halide perovskites of the composition MAyFA1-yPbI3-xBrx, containing a mixture of methylammonium (MA + ) and formamidinium (FA + ) cations, as well as mixed iodide (I -) and bromide (Br -) anions. The exploitation of the dynamics of transient photoinduced electroabsorption signals observed in TAS spectra allowed to evidence charge transfer between domains of various chemical compositions taking place in competition with energy transfer. These findings suggest that the separation of photogenerated carriers in regions characterized by a gradient of the valence band edge energy is at the origin of the improved efficiency of solar cells based on mixed halide perovskites. Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy was applied to solutionprocessed mixed MAyFA1-yPbI3-xBrx and standard MAPbI3 perovskite thin films spin-coated on glass. The mixed-cations, mixed-halides perovskite material was prepared from solution reactants with an initial stoichiometry corresponding to the fractions x = 0.45 and y = 0.15. The mean composition of the final solid material is not expected to be significantly different. However, a substantial heterogeneity of bromide and iodide ions distribution is evidenced by the absorption spectrum of mixed perovskite films. Fig. The ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectrum of the standard perovskite layer observed upon pulsed excitation of the sample at a pump wavelength lex = 390 nm (Fig. As a first step, we consider the oscillations observed in the spectral region between 500 and 630 nm in Fig. Figure The valence band maximum of lead halide perovskites is determined by the nature of the halide, due to the change from 4p (for Br -) to 5p (for I -) valence orbitals. As a result, the bandgap of the material is directly affected by the Br -/I -content ratio, while the effect of the cation proportion is limited. We can, therefore, go one step further by explaining the compositional range suggested by the oscillations of the electroabsorption signal: The first clear oscillation peaks at 530 nm correspond to the absorption maximum of MAyFA1-yPbBr3 for a large span of y fraction values. The last observable peak on Figure The presence of heterogeneous domains within mixed halide perovskite films raises questions about the way charge carriers travel through the material. In other words, it questions the nature of the interaction between those domains and its impact on charge separation and transport, a key process for device efficiencies, potentially accounting for the better performance of mixed perovskite-based solar cells. In such a context, we wish to decompose our time-series of transient absorbance spectra in a linear combination of the important processes underlying it. Those processes can then be identified and one can assess their role in the fate of charge carriers within the material. A straightforward way to When looking at Figure Moving to Figure To support the conclusion of inter-domain charge transfer in mixed perovskite materials, fluorescence up-conversion measurements at two different excitation energies have been performed on MAyFA1-yPbI3-xBrx perovskite films and are displayed in Figure In addition, knowing that the nature of the halide mostly affects the valence band, we state that the carrier under observation in those charge transfers is the hole, and not the electron. Scan direction Ultrafast transient absorption spectra of MAyFA1-yPbI3-xBrx thinfilms appear quite different from those obtained from the standard MAPbI3 material. Large oscillations are observed for the mixed halide perovskite samples in the visible range. These oscillations are characteristic of a photoinduced transient Stark effect and are fitted by the second derivative of the ground state absorbance spectrum of the material, which features several excitonic bands of domains of various mixed halide composition. The transient Stark signal asserts the formation of permanent dipoles upon photoexcitation, corresponding to charge transfer excitons (CTE) generated astride the boundaries of domains in the bulk of the semiconductor. A global analysis of transient absorbance data confirms that the mixed halide perovskite films contain heterogeneous domains characterized by different degrees of halide mixing. These exhibit different bandgap energies and excitonic peak positions, assigned to different mixed perovskite stoichiometries. The photogenerated carrier population in each of those domains furthermore undergoes CTE-mediated hole transfer from the largest (Br-rich) to the lowest (I-rich) bandgap domains. This scenario is supported by fluorescence upconversion measurements of MAyFA1-yPbI3-xBrx samples: Multisite emission is observed, assessing the presence of various radiative recombination energies, which confirms the occurrence of hetero-domains with different energetics. Alternatively, at lower excitation density, the main portion of the radiative relaxation occurs at 770 nm, corresponding to the steady-state emission wavelength. This demonstrates the presence of competing deactivation pathways, namely radiative recombination, statistically favoured at high fluence, and charge transfer towards neighbouring domains, dominating at low fluence. We furthermore suggest that, following their transfer, holes percolate along channels of decreasing bromide content until they reach their selective extracting layer. A random distribution of hetero-domains within the film implies that only a minority of photogenerated carriers are actually concerned by this effect. Still, such a mechanism for selective hole transfer across the active layer enhances the efficiency of charge separation and accounts for the superior performances of mixed halide perovskite systems. Our observations open the door to specific active layer engineering to achieve an optimum charge separation process. They suggest in particular that a gradient of the halide composition could be used to selectively drive the holes towards the iodide-rich side placed at the contact of the hole transporting material. Two different sample architectures were used, which were adapted to the spectroscopic techniques employed: Perovskite/glass and insulating layer/perovskite/insulating layer/gold samples were studied with ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) in transmission mode and broadband fluorescence up-conversion spectroscopy (FLUPS), respectively. The samples were prepared according to previously reported protocols with the exception of the concentration of the perovskite precursor solution which was kept at 0.7 M in order to obtain a thinner layer of the absorber material to facilitate the optical and spectroscopy measurements. Nippon Sheet Glass 10 Ω/sq substrates (for the fluorescence upconversion spectroscopy measurements), respectively microscope glass (transient absorbance spectroscopy experiments) were cleaned by ultra-sonication in a bath of 2% Hellmanex aqueous solution for 30 minutes. After rinsing with deionised water and ethanol, the substrates were further cleaned with UV ozone treatment for 15 min. The perovskite films were deposited on the substrate from a precursor solution containing MA0.15FA0.85PbI2.55Br0.45, on the one hand, and standard MAPbI3, on the other hand, in anhydrous DMF:DMSO 4:1 (v:v) at a concentration of 0.7 M. The perovskite solution was spin-coated in a two steps program at 1000 and 6000 rpm for 10 and 30 s, respectively. During the second step, 120 μL of chlorobenzene were poured on the spinning substrate 10 s prior to the end of the program. The substrates were then annealed at 100°C for 1 hour in a dry air-filled glove box. While the initial stoichiometry of the reactants used to prepare the mixed perovskite samples was precisely defined, the final composition of the material after crystallization is believed to be rather heterogeneous. Hence, the mixed cation, mixed halide perovskite material under study will be designated here by the formula MAyFA1-yPbI3-xBrx.. The insulating layers for the FLUPS samples were constituted by a first coating of pure poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) and a second layer of PMMA and alumina nanoparticles. Such insulating double layer was applied on bare FTO and on top of the perovskite. The PMMA layer was deposited by spin-coating for 20 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm, using a solution of 20 mg/mL of PMMA solution in toluene. The PMMA/ alumina mixed layer was deposited by spin-coating for 20 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm. The dispersion of alumina nanoparticles (Aldrich) was diluted 10:1 in volume with a PMMA solution in toluene (3 mg/ mL). Finally, to make sure the samples intended to be studied with FLUPS were properly working devices, a small gold electrode (120 mm-thick) was thermally evaporated under high vacuum onto each of them, allowing for photovoltaic characterization. The subsequent FLUPS measurements were carried out on the electrode-less area of the samples, in transmittance mode. Complete solar cell devices were prepared by depositing the perovskite solution precursor onto a FTO substrate (Nippon Sheet Glass 10 Ω/sq) comprising a 15 nm thin coating of SnO2 deposited by ALD as electron transporting layer. After annealing the perovskite layer, 100 nm of spiro-MeOTAD was spun to form the hole transporting material (HTM) layer. The HTM was doped at a molar ratio of 0.5, 0.03 and 3.3 with bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, Sigma Aldrich), tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tertbutylpyridine)-cobalt(III) (FK209, Dyenamo), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, Sigma Aldrich), respectively. Finally, a 70-80 nm-thick gold electrode was thermally evaporated on top of the HTM layer. Test solar cell elements had a 5 × 5 mm square geometry. Solar cells merit parameters were measured using a 300 W xenon light source (Ushio). The spectral mismatch between AM1.5G and the simulated illumination was reduced by the use of a AM1.5G filter (Newport). The light intensity was calibrated with a Si photodiode equipped with an IR-cutoff filter (KG3, Schott) and it was recorded prior to each measurement. Current-voltage characteristics of the cells were obtained by applying an external voltage bias, while measuring the current response with a digital source meter (Keithley 2400). The voltage scan rate was 10 mV s -1 . The cell area was defined by a 4 × 4 mm (0.16 cm 2 ) black metal mask. Ultrafast transient absorbance (TA) spectra of standard and mixed perovskites thin-films were acquired using femtosecond pumpprobe spectroscopy with a pump wavelength lex = 390 nm. The pump beam was obtained by frequency doubling the output of a chirped pulse amplified Ti:Sapphire laser (CPA-2001, Clark-MXR, 778 nm fundamental central wavelength, 120 fs pulse duration, 1 kHz repetition rate) in a BBO crystal, yielding 200 fs pulses. The probe beam was generated by directing a portion of the 778 nm fundamental output of the laser into a CaF2 crystal, yielding a white light continuum measured over a 400-780 nm spectral domain. The probe fluence at the sample was much lower than that of the pump (7-35 μJ cm -2 ). Similarly, the diameter of the probe beam was smaller to ensure homogeneous excitation of the probed area. The dynamics of the photo-induced signals were obtained with a computercontrolled delay-line on the pump path. The probe beam was split before the sample into a beam going through the sample (signal beam) and a reference beam. Both signal and reference beams were directed to respective spectrographs (Princeton Instruments, Spectra Pro 2150i) and detected pulse-to-pulse with 512×58 pixels back-thinned CCD cameras (Hamamatsu S07030-0906). The pump beam was chopped at half of the laser frequency (500 Hz) and a satisfying signal-to-noise ratio was obtained by typically averaging 3,000 spectra. The time resolution of the experiment was 250 fs. As it clearly emerges from Eq. S1, the EA signal can be decomposed into a linear combination of first and second derivatives of the linear absorption spectrum, with the amplitude of the latter contribution provided by the change in the permanent dipole moment. Global fits of transient absorbance data have been used in this work to assess the presence of inter-domain interactions. A comprehensive review of global analysis can be found elsewhere, In the present case, the choice between a parallel or sequential model was tricky. We selected the former, as some parts of the TA signal actually arise from a linear combination of individual processes (such as the bleaching dynamics, or the dynamics of the broad positive signal between 600-700 nm). However, we did not go as far as applying an actual kinetic model but focused on extracting the spectral range of individual dynamical processes. To perform a global fit, data must first be sampled, and an appropriate number of kinetic traces must be extracted. Then, the point is to apply a fitting equation, usually multiexponential, where all the traces are forced to evolve with the same time constant(s). This yields the following point by point procedure: 1) Extraction of kinetic traces every 10 nm, between 420 and 770 nm. 2) Individual fitting of a few sampled traces to obtain (i) an accurate fitting equation and (ii) a good initial guess for the global fit (faster convergence). Dynamic traces have been fitted with a tri-exponential function: The data presented in Table A xenon lamp equipped with AM1.5 G filter from Newport was used as the light source, together with a silicon reference diode equipped with a KG3 filter. A 4×4 mm (0.16 cm 2 ) black mask was employed throughtout the measurements. It is important to note that PCE values presented in Fig. 