Crystal lattice deformations can be described microscopically by explicitly accounting for the position of atoms or macroscopically by continuum elasticity. In this work, we report on the description of continuous elastic fields derived from an atomistic representation of crystalline structures that also include features typical of the microscopic scale. Analytic expressions for strain components are obtained from the complex amplitudes of the Fourier modes representing periodic lattice positions, which can be generally provided by atomistic modeling or experiments. The magnitude and phase of these amplitudes, together with the continuous description of strains, are able to characterize crystal rotations, lattice deformations, and dislocations. Moreover, combined with the so-called amplitude expansion of the phase-field crystal model, they provide a suitable tool for bridging microscopic to macroscopic scales. This study enables the in-depth analysis of elasticity effects for macro-and mesoscale systems taking microscopic details into account. Strains and defect-induced deformations have tremendous effects on the macroscopic properties of single and poly-crystalline materials Deformation of crystal lattices, although involving changes in the positions of atoms, are crucial for understanding the behavior of systems defined on larger length scales For some applications, however, continuum mechanics is not enough as neglecting the description of atoms leads to a crucial loss of information. For instance, this applies to contributions of the dislocation core to the elastic field An attempt to overcome the timescale limits of atomistic approaches, by focusing on diffusive timescales, lead to the development of the so-called phase-field crystal (PFC) model. It focuses on the dimensionless atomic density field difference, n, filtering out vibrations on lattice sites Although some intrinsic limitations for large deformations and tilts exist In this work we first show how to exploit the representation delivered by the complex amplitudes expansion of the PFC model to derive expressions for elastic field components independent of lattice symmetry and system dimensionality. In practice, we describe how to reconstruct strain and rotation fields from the atomic density provided that the complex amplitudes functions of the corresponding Fourier modes are known. Then, we consider numerical simulations for some generic systems involving strained/tilted crystals and apply the new framework in order to depict and analyse the resulting deformations. To this purpose, we numerically solve the equations of the APFC model directly delivering the amplitudes function. Standard simulations as well as simulations which extend the current state of the art for APFC and PFC approaches are presented and discussed. The combination of using a coarse-grained approach as APFC with the detailed analysis of deformations proposed here results in a bridging-scale framework enabling the study of elasticity effects from the micro-to macro-scale while describing microstructural evolution, at variance with many other methods focused only on some of these aspects at once. Moreover, using the APFC model allows us for its further assessment as a reliable coarse-grained method accounting for microscopic effects. The elastic field in presence of defects, derived from complex amplitudes as computed by APFC simulations, reproduce predictions of continuum mechanics as expected from PFC-based modeling The complex amplitude functions, η j , entering the APFC model (see Methods section) are connected to the deformation of a crystal u with respect to a reference lattice by the following equation: with {k j } a specific set of reciprocal space vectors describing the lattice of an undeformed crystal. Eq. (1) defines N independent equations. φ j 's are the real values corresponding to the amplitudes in a relaxed, unrotated crystal. They can be computed by the minimization of the energy functional in Eq. ( an order parameter which is constant in the solid/ordered phase, decreases at defects and interfaces, and vanishes when approaching the liquid/disordered phase. Eq. ( with φ j = arg(η j ) = arctan [Im(η j )/Re(η j )]. In order to determine the components of the deformation field u i from amplitudes (with i=x, y in 2D and i=x, y, z in 3D), Eq. ( with the two components of the displacement field obtained by index permutations on the group (i, j) = (x, y) and ij the 2D Levi-Civita symbol. In 3D, by selecting d = 3 amplitudes labelled by generic indexes l, m, and n, u i ≡ u 3D i and we obtain with the three components of the displacement field obtained by index permutations on the group (i, j, κ) = (x, y, z). Amplitudes must be chosen in order to have a non vanishing denominator of the prefactor entering Eq. ( Since |η j | 2 = φ 2 0 > 0 almost everywhere in the crystal phase, the terms ∂φ j /∂x i and then ε can be readily computed. |η j | 2 only vanishes exactly at the dislocation core position for some indexes, j, consistent with continuum elasticity theory. By exploiting the components of the displacement field, rotations of the crystal structure with respect to the reference orientation can also be evaluated as ω = ∇ × u. ω ij corresponds to the rotational angle in the x i -x j -plane. For d = 2, ω ij ≡ ω, describing the rotation in the two-dimensional domain. For the sake of readability, the expressions of ε and ω for d = 2, 3, as functions of ∂φ j /∂x i , are reported in the Supplementary Information S2. The resulting deformation fields deliver descriptions similar to advanced continuum theories, as e.g. in Refs. Let us consider pairs of dislocations in a 2D triangular lattice that form at the interface between layers of different atomic spacing in order to accommodate a misfit strain. As performed in Ref. The relaxation of such an initial condition until the defect shape is stationary in a square system of linear dimension L i = 40a tri is illustrated in Fig. Deeper insight can be obtained by focusing on the analysis of the elastic field as in Refs. ij a far-field predictor of the elastic field and ε core ij a correction due to the core effects. A decay ε ff ij ∼ r -1 , with r the distance from the dislocation core, is expected in agreement with continuum elasticity theory. The dislocation core effects are characterized by a decay ε core ij ∼ r -2 independently on the lattice symmetry, except for some high-symmetry nominal position of the core where ε core ij ∼ r p with p < -2 the elastic field components computed from η j . The scaling of these quantities is illustrated in Fig. The evaluation of the elastic field can be readily provided also in 3D regardless the lattice symmetry (see also Supplementary Information S2). We consider now a configuration with peculiar 3D features as shown in Fig. We focus here on the analysis of deformations and rotations in polycrystalline systems, which involve the evolution of small-angle GBs. We study first a simple system made of a straight GB forming between two crystals with a symmetric tilt. In particular, a rectangular domain, L x × L y with x = with δk j (θ) = k j • R(θ)k j and R(θ) the counterclockwise rotation matrix. A ±θ tilt is imposed for the left and the right part of the simulation domain respectively (see also Fig. A three-dimensional system involving rotations and consisting of a single spherical crystal that is rotated with respect to the larger single crystal surrounding it is shown in Fig. The analysis of polycrystalline systems allows us to summarize the main findings of this work. A continuous description of lattice deformations exploiting the complex amplitudes of Fourier modes representing the periodicity of crystal lattices has been derived. Deformation fields can then be readily computed from an atomistic representation of crystals, provided that amplitude functions can be extracted, without any ad-hoc post-processing procedure and independently of system dimensionality and lattice symmetry. This framework has been shown to achieve its full potential combined with the APFC approach. Other than trivially providing a direct access to amplitudes and allowing for describing either strain or rotated crystals, the APFC model easily allows for large length-scale simulations approaching the ones typical of continuum theories, still retaining essential microscopic features. This has been further demonstrated by show-ing that APFC encodes dislocation-core contributions to the elastic field, which are missing in standard continuum elasticity and usually requires more refined theories It is worth recalling that the limitation of the APFC model in describing large deformations The PFC model accounts for the lattice structure by means of a continuous periodic field n describing the dimensionless atomic probability density where ∆B 0 , B x 0 , v and t are parameters as in Ref. with n 0 (r) the average density, η j (r) the amplitude of each plane wave and k j the reciprocal space vector representing a specific crystal symmetry (see Supplementary Information S1). In the so-called amplitude expansion of the PFC model (APFC) with G j ≡ ∇ 2 +2ik j •∇ and A 2 ≡ 2 N j=1 |η j | 2 . The term f s ({η j }, {η * j }) corresponds to a complex polynomial of η j and η * j and depends on the specific crystalline symmetry as reported in Ref. The simulations reported in this work are performed with the aid of High Performance Computing facilities The elastic field of a dislocation can be described by continuum elasticity theory, provided that the dislocation character, namely edge, screw or mixed 