In this review, latest updates in the poly (ethylene oxide) based electrolytes are summarized. The ultimate goal of researchers globally is towards the development of free standing solid polymeric separator for energy storage devices. This single free standing solid polymeric separator may replace the liquid and separator (organic/Inorganic) used in existing efficient/smart energy technology. As an example polyethylene oxide (PEO) consist of an electron donor rich group which provides coordinating sites to the cation for migration. Owing to this exclusive structure PEO exhibits some remarkable properties such as; low glass transition temperature, excellent flexibility and ability to make complexation with various metal salts which are unattainable by another polymer host. Hence, the PEO is the most emerging candidate that have been examined or is currently under audition for application in energy storage devices. So, this review article first provides the detailed study of the PEO properties, characteristic of constituents of polymer electrolyte and suitable approaches for the modification of polymer electrolytes. Then, the synthesization and characterizations techniques are outlined. The structures, characteristics, and performance during charge-discharge of four types of electrolyte/separators which are Liquid, Plasticized, and dispersed/intercalated electrolyte are highlighted. The suitable ion transport mechanism proposed by researchers in different renowned group have been discussed for better understanding of the ion dynamics in such systems. Energy is the lifeblood of modern society. Global warming, finite fossil-fuel supplies and city pollution conspire to make the use of renewable energy, together with electric transportation, a global imperative So, controlled environment/climate has drawn the attention of scientific community towards development and replacement of fossil fuels by an alternative/efficient energy source such as solar, tidal and wind. In our modern society, an extensive global attention has been focused toward fulfilling the demand of alternative and miniaturized renewable energy storage/conversion devices (ESCDs) with high performance, durability to balance supply with demand. Energy storage is essential in order to restore it as electricity and the perfect approach is to convert chemical energy into electrical energy. The most convenient energy storage devices are batteries having portability of stored chemical energy with the ability to deliver this energy as electrical energy with high conversion efficiency without gaseous exhaust as with fossil fuels Lithium ion batteries (LIB) are expected to witness remarkable growth as an energy source for modern 24/7 lifestyle because of their application in the consumer market: cell phones, digital cameras, laptops, smartphones,UPS etc., also due to their 2-3 times energy storage per weight and volume as compared to earlier batteries. The first breakthrough in LIB done by John Goodenough and commercialization by the Sony corp. in 1991 has drawn much attention of researchers during the past two decades due to their much higher energy density than alkali metals. Goodenough said in a statement. "Cost, safety, energy density, rates of charge and discharge and cycle life are critical for battery-driven cars to be more widely adopted". A battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy and structure is composed of positive electrode as a cathode (LiCoO 2 ), a negative electrode as an anode (Graphite) and electrolyte, as shown in figure At, present, LIB is the ideal choice for the automotive sector by Companies including Tesla Inc. and Volkswagen AG due to ease of transportation, environmentally friendly, less cost Recently in 2017, John Goodenough, inventor of Li-ion battery has developed the first all-solid-state battery cells using sodium-or lithium-coated glass electrolyte and claimed that new battery cells have three times more energy density The following terms are used for studying the performance of an energy storage device. A battery is an electrochemical device that converts chemical energy into the electrical energy. It comprises of two electrodes (anode/cathode) with a separator sandwiched between both. The cathode is a positive electrode and reduction of chemical reaction occurs in it, along with acceptance of electrons from an external circuit. A separator provides a physical barrier to prevent the internal short circuiting of the battery and can be a solid/liquid/gel electrolyte. It allows transport of ions by providing a medium for flow. The anode is the negative electrode where oxidative chemical reactions occur, along with the release of electrons in an external circuit. Open circuit voltage is the thermodynamic voltage in the device when no external current is flowing within the system. Closed circuit voltage is the voltage of device when external current flows in the system. The charge is a mechanism of loading of energy when system reverses back. Discharge is the mechanism of unloading of stored energy to the system via an external load. Specific energy is the maximum energy of a cell that can be used per mass of the active material. Energy density is the maximum energy of a cell that can be stored per unit volume. C-rate is the measure of charging and discharging current of an electrochemical cell. Glass transition temperature is the temperature at which an amorphous polymer changes from glassy to rubbery phase and leads to enhancement in polymer flexibility. Polymer electrolytes have received remarkable research investment over last decades due to extreme demand of practical material application in devices and are an alternative approach to replace organic liquid based electrolytes. Lithium ion batteries are suitable as ESCDs due to growing demand in daily life. But some safety issues are concerned with them like poor thermal stability, flammable reaction products and leakage of electrolyte and internal short circuits Although the polymers are insulators, Wright and co -workers report in 1973 on poly ethylene oxide (PEO) and alkali metal salts (NaI) system confirmed non negligble conductvity in the polymers and that boosted the focus toward the developmet of the polymer electrolytes. Their technological importance was realized by Armand in early 1980's due to flexibility and deformability and introduced as solid polymer electrolytes Generally, in a polymer blend presence of two phases occurs, former one provides a conduction path to the ion and later one provides mechanical stability to the electrolyte. In this review, first of all the polymer electrolyte are divided into different parts followed by the principal requirements for the polymer host, salt, solvent, nanofiller, ionic liquid and nanoclay are discussed. Then the preparation technique and characterization techniques for polymer electrolytes are described in a systematic manner. And the reported results till date based on PEO based system with different modification approaches for improving the properties are introduced. In the last section proposed transport mechanism in the case of different systems of electrolytes are outlined. So far, PEO is the best polymer for the preparation of polymer electrolytes for fast ion transport due to its structure. Another man advantage of PEO is high solvation power, so it can form ccomplex easily with many alkalis salts and provides a direct path for cation migration due to the presence of (-CH 2 -CH 2 -Ӧ-) n in the polymer backbone. PEO is obtained by the ring-opening polymerization of ethylene oxide (-CH 2 -CH 2 -Ӧ-; Mol. Wt. 44 g/mol) (figure 4 a) The high dielectric constant of PEO (~4-5) evidences its suitability to dissolve various salts. Another superior property of PEO is high chain flexibility; it supports the faster transport of cation which is the core requirement for a fast ionic conductor. It is a semi crystalline material with about 70-85 % crystallinity and amorphous elastomeric phase at room temperature. PEO is a semi-crystalline polymer having crystalline phase as well as amorphous phase. As high ionic conductivity occurs in the amorphous regions above T g (glass transition temperature) and segmental motion of polymer chains promotes the ionic conductivity. The crystalline phase of PEO prevents the ion migration as it is supported by amorphous phase. Since, an amorphous arrangement of molecules lacks the long-range order and it reduces the chain reorganization tendency which supports fast ion transport. So, the main strategy at present is to suppress the crystallinity of PEO and enhancement of amorphous phase so that it can be employed as separator/ionic conductor in energy storage devices Poly (ethylene oxide) is a interesting polymer host due to its low glass transition temperature (-60 o C), high melting point (65 o C), excellent flexibility and low toxicity. Low glass transition temperature supports faster ion transport as above glass transition temperature polymer phase changes from rigid to a viscous phase which in turn enhances the polymer flexibility. The thermal stability of PEO can be improved by dispersing nanofiller or plasticizer which will decrease the T g and increase the degradation temperature of the polymer. This decrease in T g leads to fast ionic transport or the high ionic conductivity and degradation temperature increase enhances the thermal stability window. Although, PEO has several advantageous such as electrochemical, chemical, and physical properties, poor ionic conductivity makes them inadequate for applications. So, to overcome the above drawbacks various approaches are proposed based on the addition of materials with different properties (figure A simple battery system basically consists of three components, two electrodes (cathode and anode) and electrolyte/separator which play a dual role. So, during operation of a battery polymer electrolyte plays an important role as it provides a path for swimming of ion between both electrodes. For a successful battery system it becomes important to select suitable materials used for the preparation of polymer electrolytes such as polymer host, salt, solvent, nanofiller, nanoclay and an ionic liquid. Different materials have different properties which affect the overall function of electrolyte to do best in battery system and are discussed below: In LIB system electrolyte is sandwiched between electrodes and allows migration of Li ions during battery operation. So, the electrolyte is a major factor that affects the electrochemical properties. Polymer host must have some properties so that it can fulfill our criteria of suitable polymer electrolyte: As a good solvent is energetic for the better dissolution of salt and polymer via dipole-dipole interactions (Polymer----Solvent, Salt----Solvent). So, the solvent must possess basic characteristics such as high dielectric constant for batter dissolution of salt, low viscosity for faster ion motion, high electrochemical stability window, inert toward cell components and principle one is it must provide ionic conductive solid electrolyte interface layer on electrodes. The high dielectric constant of solvent is an important parameter as it prevents the formation of the ion pairs since; ion pairs do not play any role in ionic conductivity. The solvent must fully swell and stretch the polymer chains within this so that more favorable interaction can occur between the cation and electron donor group of host polymer For fulfilling the criterion of faster ion transport and high ionic conductivity salt plays an important role for the same. Besides solvent and polymer dissociation rate of salt affects directly the ionic conductivity. So, the salt must possess suitable properties such as; low lattice energy for more dissociation of salt, lower cation size for faster movement in the polymer matrix etc. One important requirement is the stability of anion towards electrodes and non-toxic nature. Also the high ionic conductivity and voltage stability window of the salt directly affects the overall conductivity of the electrolyte. As the mobility of ion plays an important role in determining conductivity so salt with smaller cation size and larger anion size are beneficial for obtaining optimal performance of an electrolyte. For better visibility all the properties have been coined in the pictorial diagram as shown below. The incorporation of ILs is recent promising approach adopted to enhance the mechanical and electrochemical properties. Basically, the ILs are molten salts with large anion at room temperature and bulky anion also supports the dissociation of salt in a polymer matrix which affects the electrochemical properties. On, the basis of their composition there are three types of ILs aprotic, protic and zwitter, and used for lithium batteries/supercaapcitor, fuel cells and ionic-liquid-based membranes, respectively Another effective approach to enhance the ionic conductivity of a polymer electrolyte based system is the incorporation of a plasticizer such as EC, DEC, PEG. Plasticizers are basically the low molecular weight substances and when added in polymer matrix increases its flexibility. The addition of plasticizer increases the free volume required for transport by penetrating between polymer chains. Since, plasticizers are of a small size so they easily penetrate in between the polymer chain. This modifies the polymer chain arrangement by disrupting the cohesive force between polymer chains. This increases the segmental motion of polymer chains and more free volume is created. As for fast ion transport polymer matric must possess high amorphous content. So to achieve the above the incorporation of plasticizer is the best approach which makes a significant enhancement of amorphous phase as well as better dissociation of salt into free cations and anions. The overall increase in the flexibility is an indication of decrease T g glass transition temperature and it evidences the increase in conductivity. So, the plasticizer must possess some properties for better performance of electrolyte in the application The addition of nanofiller in polymer electrolyte (PEs) not only enhances the conductivity but also improves the mechanical properties such as physical strength of PEs. The filler acts as a solid plasticizer that enhances the transport properties and reduces the crystallinity, glass transition temperature due to increase in the dielectric constant. Fillers with Lewis acid surface group interacts with both polymer and ion and reduces the ion coupling. The polymer provides the path for conduction of ions and filler affects the polymer stiffness to support the ionic transport. Among the large numbers of layered solids, clay minerals especially the smectite group are most widely used for the reinforcement of polymer matrices and thus for the fabrication of polymer nanocomposites because of their unique structure and reactivity together with their high strength and stiffness and high aspect ratio of each platelet. The clay layered silicate composites prevent the anion entry in polymer chain while support cation intercalation and increases the conductivity. The low ionic conductivity is generally due to concentration polarization because of simultaneous mobility of ions (cations and anions). So, the above problem can be resolved by nanoclay having high cation exchange capacity which permits the only cation in the polymer matrix. This suppresses the concentration polarization and formation of ion pairs which provides the suitable path for cation migration through intercalated channels of the clay Table Polymer electrolytes are the best candidate till date over the liquid electrolyte based systems in the commercialized market. A lot of research is focused toward the improvement in various properties of polymer electrolytes. There are three different types of polymer electrolytes based on their composition (i) Ionic liquid based polymer electrolyte, (ii) gel or plasticized polymer electrolyte and (iii) solid polymer electrolyte which is further classified into the dispersed and intercalated type solid polymer electrolyte on the basis of the formation of polymer matrix. All the types are discussed in detail as follows; ILs are basically room temperature molten salts which are composed of bulky asymmetric organic cations and organic/inorganic anions. ILs plays the role of plasticizers (which increase the amorphicity and flexibility of the SPEs) and also provide free charge carriers for conduction in SPEs. Unlike inorganic salts that require a solvent for dissociation into cation and anion, ionic liquids do not require any solvent for dissociation and are entirely composed of dissociated organic cations and inorganic/organic anions. Incorporation of ILs is the latest approach as a replacement for plasticizers for improving the conductivity of polymer electrolytes due to their beneficial unique properties such as; low vapor pressure, excellent chemical and thermal stability, non-flammability, and large ionic conductivities. ILs consists of weak Lewis acidic cations and weak Lewis basic anions, causing the interaction between the ions and the polymers to be weak relative to ion-coordinating conventional electrolytes Since the first report by Feuillade and Perche in 1975 gel polymer electrolyte become an attractive system for LIB applications SPE act as the separator, solvent as well as the electrolyte. SPE is basically a solvent free system with a polymer matrix with the cation of smaller radii as mobile species and bulky anion attached to a high molecular weight polymer chain. The optimized system of SPE is formed by dissolving a low lattice energy salt, host polymer with electron donating group in a solvent with a high dielectric constant for better dissolution of salt. Since, the first report by Wright in 1975 on poly (ethylene oxide) + alkali metal salt complexes (PEO) boosted the research towards the solid state ionic conductors. Further the application of polymer electrolyte in LIB by Armand in 1978 inspired the worldwide researchers. The polymer host provides the coordinating sites for cation migration in the electrolyte system. The interaction of salt with polymer dissociates it in cation/anion and when an electric filed is applied cation moves via segmental motion of polymer chains. The amorphous phase is a basic requirement for ion transport while crystallinity hinders the migration path of action. The ion conduction in SPE is mainly via the two mechanisms, (i) hopping, (ii) via polymer chain segmental motion. These types of electrolytes are also called dispersed solid electrolytes which are high conducting multiphase solid systems. They have a two phase mixture in which the first phase contains an ion conducting solid such as AgI, CuI etc. and the second phase contains inorganic insulating nanofiller such as Al 2 O 3 , SiO 2 , TiO 2 , BaTiO 3 and zeolite powders. Without changing the structural and chemical nature of compounds, a significant improvement in mechanical strength, hardness and stiffness of the polymer matrix has been achieved with the addition of nanofiller The pioneering work carried out by Toyota Central Research Laboratories on Nylon 6-Montmorillonite (MMT) nanocomposites in 1950. They obtained encouraging enhancements in mechanical properties along with heat distortion temperature and a decrease in permeability, with only few weight percentage content of MMT, by an in situ-polymerization method. Intercalated nanocomposites are formed when the polymer chains are inserted into the layered silicate structure with fixed inter-layer spacings. On the other hand, exfoliated nanocomposites are formed when the individual silicate layers are individually dispersed in the polymer matrix Solution Cast Technique is one of the easiest traditional methods for the preparation of polymer electrolytes. In this method, the polymer is dissolved in the compatible solvent (low boiling point and high dielectric constant e.g. acetonitrile, dimethyl form amide etc.) at room temperature followed by adding the required amount of non-aqueous salt in the polymer matrix. The quantity of salt is obtained the w.r.t amount of polymer host. After complete dissolution of polymer and salt a homogenous mixture is obtained. Then the nanofiller/plasticizer is dispersed in the mixture and further stirring is done till a homogenous solution is obtained. Then the resulting solution is casted on well cleaned petri-dishes (glass/poly propylene) in a controlled atmosphere and dried under room temperature for few days. Further the film can be dried in a vacuum oven at some temperature for complete removal of the solvent. Finally, a free standing mechanical stable polymer film with flexibility is obtained and kept in a vacuum desiccator to avoid from moisture absorption for further characterization Hot-press technique for preparation of polymer electrolyte is one of most emerging technique due to the advantage of no need of solvent. Generally, in this technique appropriate amount of polymer and salt are mixed physically and a homogenous powder obtained is heated to a temperature up to the melting point of polymer hoist with continuous mixing. Then the soft slurry obtained is pressed by placing it between two stainless steel electrodes for obtaining good quality polymer films. The Same procedure is followed for dispersion of nanofiller in the polymer salt system. First an optimized composition of polymer-salt is chosen for preparation of composite polymer electrolyte Characterization is an essential part to study the requirements of polymer electrolyte before complete application in energy storage device. However, it is customary to employ various techniques for the characterization of polymer nanocomposite materials such as, high mechanical strength, shape variation and high electrochemical properties. So, it becomes important to study the surface properties, electrical properties, structural properties and interfacial properties. Characterization results are helpful in correlating the ionic conductivity, crystallinity and transport properties of polymer electrolytes in a change of morphology and structural properties. Some technique often recommended for characterizing PNCs film is discussed briefly in sub-sections below: Morphological/Microstructural study X-ray diffraction is used to determine the atomic arrangement within a material. XRD can also be used to calculate the interpleader spacing and crystalline size which helps in understanding the various physical properties of materials. In the case of polymer electrolytes, XRD is used for calculating crystallinity and amount of amorphous phase content. Also the presence of sharp peaks indicates crystalline nature of sample while broads region shows amorphous content. The exterior and interior morphological studies of polymer electrolytes are studied by field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), while the presence of a various type of molecular intercation in the polymer system is identified by fourier transform infra-red spcetroscopy (FTIR). FTIR enabled us to obtain moleculat structure withour destructing the sample and position of interacion of the cation with the polymer in the case of the polymer blend. FTIR (Fourier Transform Infra-red Spectroscopy) also used for studying local molecular structure and functional group analysis and interaction between polymer chains and formation of complex FESEM provides us smothness, homogenity of the surface of the sample. FESEM (Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope) also used for investigating surface morphology, texture, topography (Done in high vacuum 10 -5 -10 -7 torr with 100 eV to 40 keV electron beam). The sample for FESEM requires is of conductive narure so on insulating samples ultrathin gold coating is done prior to mesuarement. Another advantage of the coating is that surafe resolution is improved. EDX can also be used along with FESEM to investigate the elemental composition of dopant in the polymer matrix. Elemental mapping is also of great interest to know the uniform dipsersion of nanopartilces added in the polymer host. The crystalline size, crystallinity and amorphous phase region can be obtained from the XRD. The crystallinity is obtained using the equation 1; Where, A area of crystalline peaks and A area of amorphous peaks The ionic conductvity of the polymer electrolyte is measured by impedance plot (Z'' vs. Z') by placing polymer electrolyte film between the two stainless steel (SS) blocking electrodes in the configuration SS|PE|SS. Prior to the meausrement the thiclness and of film and area of elecrodes need to be measured. Admittance analysis and dielectrc analysis is done by obtaining dielectric constant, dielctric loss using the real (Z') and imaginary part (Z") of impedance (figure Where,'t' is thickness of sample, A is area of electrodes and R is bulk resistance obtained by the intercept of spike or semicircle on the real axis. Further transforming the Nyquist plot data in to the dielectric data, real and imaginary parts of the complex conductivity can be obtained using the given equations 3 a & b: Where, σ is a real part of ac conductivity and σ " is imaginary part of ac conductivity, ω is 2πf, ε is a real part of dielectric constant and ε is imaginary part of dielectric constant As studied earlier that ionic conductivity is an important parameter for better performance of electrolytes. Another crucial parameter is ion transference number which for ideal electrolyte is unity. In the case of polymer electrolytes transport is usually by the movement of ions and ionic conductivity dominates while electronic conductivity is negligible. So, transference number enables us to calculate the contribution of both electrons and ions. For an ideal electrolyte t ion =1. Wagner AC impedance technique is used to obtain ion transference number by placing polymer film between stainless steel electrodes (SSǁPEǁSS). DC polarization technique is used to calculate the cation transference number by measuring the current and steady state resistance before and after polarization (LiǁPEǁLi). As low cation transference number affects the energy density and power density of battery and supercaapcitor due to less to and from the jump of the ion. Following equation4 & 5 are used for calculating the ion and cation trenaference number. Where, I t , is total initial current due to ions and electrons contribution and I e is residual current due to electrons contribution only. For cation transference number atmosphere Ar or N 2 . In the case of polymer electrolytes glass transition temperature, melting point and crystallinity enable us to obtain information regarding the transport of ions in the polymer matrix. Glass transition temperature (T g ) is when polymer phase changes by a step from glassy to rubbery or viscous phase and polymer flexibility increases. Glass transition temperature is a crucial parameter since it is linked with the polymer flexibility and directly correlated with the enhancement in the ionic conductivity. From the experimental measurements further parameters can be obtained that will be beneficial foe the study of polymer materials and correlation with the XRD and the impedance results. The crystallinity of the synthesized polymer can be obtained using equation 6 and is an important parameter since it is linked with the XRD which provide key insights for enhancement in the electrochemical properties. Where, ∆H is experimental melting enthalpy and ∆H is melting enthalpy for 100 % crystalline host polymer Another important technique for investigating the thermal stability and thermal degradation of polymer electrolytes is the Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (TGA) and it provides us the decomposition range of polymer salt and the whole polymer matrix. It can be operated in the dynamical and isothermal mode. Former one deals with the simple heating of the sample placed inside the alumina crucible up to ~500 o C at a fixed rate. While in the later one as the name suggests that isothermal means constant temperature. So, in this sample is kept for the sometime at constant temperature to study the thermal stability of the materials. One important parameter during the measurement of the both technique is scale rate value. Although it is not specified any value lower scan rate is always preferred for the proper analysis of the sample. The electrochemical performance of a battery and supercaapcitor enables us to measure the energy density, power density, specific capacity and cyclic stability. Galvano-static charge/discharge and cyclic voltammetry provide us above information's regarding the battery and supercaapcitor. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is done for measuring the specific power (P sp. ), specific energy (E sp. ) at different scan rate in a user defined voltage range. The galvano-static charge/discharge (CD) is beneficial for obtaining discharge capacitance and cyclic stability of the battery. Specific capacitance in the case of supercaapcitor can also be obtained by measuring the discharge time interval (∆ ) and current applied (i) as given below by equation 7-9; Where, i = discharge current, ∆t discharge time interval, m= mass of active material and ESR is inward resistance of cell The remarkable progress for a safe and alternative energy source with high energy density/capacity for the commercial industry can be achieved by lithium ion battery. But, there are safety issues faced by LIB using liquid or gel polymer electrolyte and can be accomplished using solid polymer electrolyte. Therefore, many methods have been reported to optimize the electrochemical properties and mechanical/morphological properties of polymer electrolytes which can satisfy the need of all solid-state lithium polymer electrolyte batteries. A review of the significant research findings on polymer electrolytes is reported below: The pioneering work on polymer electrolyte was started by Wright and coworkers who were the first to report the ionic conduction in PEO-alkali metal salt complexes. Later Armand in 1978 explored the various device applications of these materials. From last four decades a lot of salts were used to prepare the polymer salt system and The addition of salt in the polymer hots is one of simpel approach to enhance the conductvity, transference nymber and stability window. The role of salt is that it reduces the crystallinity and enhances the polymer chain segmentakl motion which supports fast ionic transport. One, an important parameter is glass transition tempearture which is directly related with the ionic conductvity. Above glass tranition tempearture a rigid syetm change into a rubbery system which provides shape flexibility to polymer electrolytes. So, over all salt plays a major role in polymer electrolyte system. The influence of viscosity-molar masses of PEO and fraction of salt was investigated on the ionic conductivity, thermal properties, crystalline structure and intermolecular interaction All SPEs shows amorphous phase content for lower salt content and is almost independent of the molar mass of PEO. XRD pattern of pure PEO exhibits two distinct peaks at 19 ((120) plane) and at 24 ((032) and (112) planes) and confirms the monoclinic crystalline structure. The pure polymer system and polymer salt system undergoes phase separation as evidenced by XRD (figure Boschin et al The highest ionic conductivity at 293 K was 4.5×10 -6 Scm -1 for NaTFSI(PEO) 9 , while at 343 K both NaTFSI (PEO) n and NaFSI(PEO) n with n = 20 and n = 9 show similar conductivities and follows a nonlinear, Vogel-Tammann-Fulcher (VTF) behavior on cooling which evidences the presence of amorphous phase. The conductivities for NaTFSI (PEO) (CH 2 rocking) and 860 cm -1 (C-O stretching), typical of neat PEO for both NaX(PEO) While, for NaTFSI(PEO) Polu et al Recently, the preparation of novel flexible and freestanding solid polymer electrolyte based on polyethylene oxide (PEO) and poly (vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) complexed with lithium nitrate (LiNO 3 ) was reported using solution casting method by Jinisha et al Another report by Karuppasamy et al The addition of salt in polymer matrix shifts the peak toward lower wavenumber side which indicates the interaction between cation and ether group of the polymer. The deconvoluted spectra of C-S of stretching of LiBNFSI evidence the increase of free ion concentration with increase of salt concentration. The XRD patter confirms the complete dissolution of salt in the polymer matrix and a decrease of peak intensity indicates the decrease of crystallinity. The increased amorphous phase supports fast ion conduction. DSC analysis also supported the XRD data and may be due to the weakening of interaction between polymer chains and salt which in turn reduces the amount of energy consumed to break the bond. The decrease of melting point toward lower temperature shows an increase of amorphous content (figure Anilkumar et al FESEM analysis of PEO shows cracks in the film which gets modified on blending with PVP and results in a flexible film. Further addition of salts in polymer matrix results in microstructure with pores (1.5 μm) which are required for fast ionic transport. The microstructure topography gets changed and is in correlation with XRD data. Thermo gravimetric analysis shows film stability up to 380 o C for all SPEs (figure The electrochemical stability window was apprx. 4 V obtained from CV and open circuit voltage for Mg ion cell was 1.46 V. The ionic conductivity, structure, and segmental motions of two types of high-crystallinity PEO/NaPF 6 electrolytes with ethylene oxide Ӧ/Na=8, 6 was investigated by the Luo et al Zhnag et al Michalska et al PEO Ma et al LiTNFSI) and poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) using solution cast technique. The obtained ionic conductivity value was 3.69 × 10 -4 S cm -1 at 90 °C and an anodic electrochemical stability at 4.0 V vs Li + /Li, and sufficient thermal stability (>350 °C). As shown in figure Judez et al Ibrahim et al Thiam et al shows the decrease of T m and ∆H m after cross-linking and it may be due to the constraint produced by the cross-linking which reduces the tendency of the chain re-organization. While, the hydrogenation does not affect the glass transition temperature. The highest ionic conductivity was 1.7×10 -4 S cm -1 and is highest of the r network electrolytes. It was concluded that the network electrolyte is better than the other modified polymer electrolytes. Table Ionic liquids are basically the low-temperature molten salts and are characterized by weak interactions, due to the combination of a large cation and a charge-delocalized anion. As the addition of salt to the pure polymer having insulating nature evidence the increase of ionic conductivity up to two or three order. So, the addition of an ionic liquid suppresses the crystallinity and promotes the release of more number of charge carriers. Another suitable approach is the incorporation of ionic liquid (EMITf, EMIM-TY, BMPyTFSI PYR 13 FSI EMIMTFSI, BMITFSI) having a bulky cation and large anion win the polymer host. Also, the incorporation of IL overall increases the ionic conductivity of electrolyte system Das et al with IL 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIMPF 6 ) via solution cast technique. Polarizing optical microscope (POM) shows spherulites (order of microns and millimeters) in the form of spherical aggregates of lamellae which evidence the polymer crystallinity in the absence of pronounced stress or flow and the spherulites grow radially which is a measure of the mechanism of crystallization in the polymer. It is observed that the growth is very fast for 10 wt. % salt concentration and diameter increased from ~100 μm (within 10 s) to 310 μm ( with time 120 s). The addition of ILs in polymer salt system reduces the spherulites size an increased the number of nucleating sites. The spherulites growth rate (G s ) obtained from the spherulite size vs. time plot for polymer salt system is 1.77 μm/sec and decreases to 0.67 μm/sec for polymer salt with the ionic liquid. The decline in G s value indicates the incorporation of IL in polymer salt system which hinders the spherulites growth rate of polymer PEO. Gupta et al S cm -1 for 20 % IL and electrochemical stability window was 3.34 V. Polu et al Balo et al The electrochemical stability window was around 4.6 V and is suitable for a battery application. The charge discharge of PEO + 20 wt. % LiTFSI + 12.5 wt. % EMIMTFSI was performed in the range 2.0-4.0 V with C/10 current rate. The discharge capacity at first cycle is around 56 mAh g -1 due to the formation of solid electrolyte interface and 110 mAh g -1 in 5th cycle, 120 mAh g -1 in the 10 th cycle. The discharge efficiency (η) was more than 98 % after 100 cycles and cyclic performance was same in both flat and bends condition. Cheng et al Chaurasia et al FTIR analysis provides the presence of possible complexation between ether group of PEO and the end groups of the imidazolium cation (EMIM + ) of IL (EMIM-TY). The changes in the C-O-C vibrations of PEO and C-H stretching vibrations of IL cation aromatic ring clearly indicate that the polymer PEO complexes with the ionic liquid through the ether group of PEO is getting loosely attached to the imidazolium ring of the IL cation (EMIM + ). The ionic conductivity of the polymer PEO is very poor (~5.8 × 10 -8 S cm -1 ) and increases considerably with the increasing amount of ionic liquid in the PEO membrane. At 40 wt. %, the ionic conductivity of the polymer electrolyte PEO+ EMIM-TY membrane is ~2.87× 10 -5 S cm -1 at 30 °C. The increase in conductivity was due to increased number of charge carriers provided by the higher concentration of ionic liquid. Yongxin et al Singh et al The electrochemical stability window was 4-5 V and shows the applicability of electrolyte for application in energy storage devices. Vries et al Simoneeti et al The preparation of PEO-LiTFSI based polymer electrolytes by incorporating different N-alkyl-Nmethylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, PYR1ATFSI ionic liquids was reported by Kim et al V for the Li + ion conducting polymer electrolyte. While, the stability window for Mg 2+ ion conducting polymer electrolyte is upto 4.8 V. The capacitance values calculate for both cells are ~0.03 F g -1 (for the Mg-system) and ~0.01 F g -1 (for the Li-system). The comparative analysis of both cells concludes that divalent Mg 2+ ions also play an active role in the formation of a double layer and helps in the neutralization of more negative charges gathered at the electrode. The effect of EMImTFSI on the electrical, electrochemical and interfacial properties of (PEO) 8 LiTFSI-10% NC based polymer electrolyte was reported by Karuppasamy et al Stress-strain behavior shows elongation and strain at break are 24 MPa and 8 % for electrolyte with 0 % IL. While after addition of IL the elongation and strain at break are 10 MPa and 12 %. This reduction in mechanical strength may be due to the higher plasticization and increased polymer chain flexibility (Figure As the addition of salt to the pure polymer having insulating nature evidence the increase of ionic conductivity up to two or three order. So, the addition of a low molecular weight plasticizer/ionic liquid suppresses the crystallinity and promotes the release of more number of charge carriers. There are various plasticizers such as, EC, PC, DEC, PEGDME, PEG, SN and ionic liquid which are reported for enhancing the conductivity and battery performance. The main role of plasticizer is to increase the free volume which provides an easy path to cation for migration within the electrolyte system. The enhances amorphous phase content is also related to the enhanced ionic conductivity and may be due to more dissociation of salts to release more free charge carriers which are required for a highly efficient system. The effect of poly ethylene glycol, propylene carbonate, ethylene carbonate and dimethyl carbonate on PEO-LiClO 4 based polymer electrolyte was reported by Das et al Kumar et al Raman analysis evidences the interaction of PEO with ionic liquid EMITf. Then the addition of salt in pure polymer reduces the peak at 1062 cm -1 and another peak appears at 1033 cm -1 corresponding to the SO 3 stretching mode of free triflate anions. The additional peaks observed in Raman (1033 cm -1 ) and FTIR (1016 cm -1 ) on the addition of EMITf are due to the vis-à-vis reduction of intensity of PEO peak at 1062 cm -1 and confirm the interaction of PEO with the ionic liquid EMITf. The thermal stability of pure PEO was ~340 °C and increases to ~375 °C on the addition of salt. Further addition of ILs in polymer salt complexes reduces thermal stability to ~350 °C due to the volatility of ILs. DSC analysis shows a decrease of melting peak corresponding to pure PEO from ~69 °C to ~62 °C on the addition of salt. Further addition of ILs decreases the endothermic peak indicates the disruption of the polymer chain. The crystallinity of pure PEO film decreases from ~89 % to 71 % on addition of salt. While, at high ILs content crystallinity was 22 %. (Addition of salt in pure polymer host increases the T g and it indicates the reduction in flexibility of PEO chains due to crosslinking of the polymer through the salt. Further, the addition of ILs decreases the T g suggesting an increase in polymer flexibility. The addition of salt increases the ionic conductivity and highest conductivity was ~3 × 10 -4 S cm -1 for 40 wt. % ILs content. The σ vs. 1/T variation shows a sudden jump at ~60-65 °C for all the polymer electrolyte films, which is attributed to jumping from semi-crystalline to amorphous (i.e. solid to liquid) phase transition at T m of PEO. The decease of height of this jump with increasing IL content is associated with enhancement of amorphous content and shows Arrhenius-type behavior. The lowest value of activation energy obtained was for 5 wt. % IL content and a further increase of IL content almost saturate the activation energy value. The total ionic transference number obtained was found to be >0.99, and evidence the dominant of ionic conduction in the polymer electrolyte. The effect of temperature and ionic liquid ion mobility was studded by using 7 Li NMR. The 7 Li NMR absorption spectra of polymer salt system show narrow line width with an increase of temperature to 100 °C. While, a decrease in the line width with a gradual increase in temperature evidences the increase in Li mobility with increasing temperature. A narrow line width for ILs doped polymer salt matrix reveals the increase in ion mobility as well as the role of IL as a plasticizer, hence the increase in polymer flexibility and a decrease of viscosity. The electrochemical stability window (ESW) was studied by the cyclic voltammetry and is in the range of -1.4 to 1.6 V (i.e. ~3.0 V) for polymer salt complex. Further, the addition of ILs increases the voltage window up to -2.6 to 2.3 V (i.e. ~4.9 V). Li et al While, the discharge capacity is 103 mAhg -1 after 500 cycles and capacity retention obtained was 81%. Zhu et al Natarajan et al as a plasticizer by a simple solution casting technique. The smoother surface seen by FESEM shows better ionic conductivity in case of composite gel polymer electrolyte. The thermogravimetric curves show improved thermal stability as compared to the pure PEO (figure Jayasekara et al Kim et al Ma et al The addition of plasticizer in (PEO) 9 -LiTf + 10 wt. % TiO 2 polymer matrix shows that meting point (T m ) decreases from 60 °C to 50 °C and glass transition temperature (T g ) from -46 °C to -50 °C on the addition of 50 wt. % plasticizer Bandara et al % alumina nanofiller and was 2.4 × 10 -4 , 3.3 × 10 -4 and 4.2 × 10 -4 S cm -1 at 0, 12 and 24 °C. The enhancement in conductivity may be due to the formation of conducting paths by the nanofiller surface. Also the activation energy was smaller for the 5 wt. % alumina and was 0.20 eV. This reduction in activation energy promotes fast ion transport or the high ionic conductivity. Chen et al The increase in conductivity was due to increase of the fraction of an amorphous phase and is supported by DSC data. The decrease of conductivity at the higher content of SN was due to non-ionic plastic crystal nature, which leads to insulating nature of SN and blocks the free ions. The SPE was thermally stable up to 255 o C and electrochemically upto 5.5 V. The cycling and rate performance of solid-state lithium battery Li/PEO 18 -LiTFSI-1% LGPS-10 % SN/LiFePO 4 is presented in fig. Pitawala et al for PEO-15 wt. % (LiCF 3 SO 3 ) + 20 wt. % DOP as reported by Klongkan As discussed above a lot of work was done by addition of ILs and plasticizer in the polymer salt sytems. Although they have sufficient ionic conductivity and stability window, poor mechanical strength and thermal stability lead the researchers to make a polymer electrolyte system with improved electrochemical and mechanical properties. The ultimate solution for the above is the preparation of solid polymer electrolytes by the addition of nanofiller and nanoclay. The addition of nanofiller will result in improved properties by the presence of various interactions between the surface group of nanofiller and the polymer salt system As, in previous we have discussed the polymer salt system and ionic liquid based system. The addition of ionic liquid/plasticizer imrpoves the ionic conductvity but mechnail properties get disturbed which affects the performance of abettery ssytem. So, the alternative of this draback is the use of nanofiller in the polymer salt ssytem and is one of the best approaches for improving the electrochemical properties as well as mechnaical properties. A lot of of work has been done towards enhancement of electrical conductvity, electrochemical stability window, thermals atbility and mechanical stability. Nanofillers are classified into two types on the basis of support to transport of ions in polymer matrix; one that is invlved in ionic transort is called active nanofiller (Li 10 GeP 2 S 12 (LGPS), Li The first report on the addition of nanofiller (α-alumina) in PEO-LiClO 4 polymer electrolyte was given by Weston and Steel in 1982 The effect of nano SiO 2 and TiO 2 fillers on the thermal, mechanical and electrochemical properties of PVA:PVdF:LiCF 3 SO 3 have been investigated by Hema et al., Wang et al Zhao et al Charge/discharge curve for cell LiFePO 4 /PEO 18 -LiTFSI-1% LGPS/Li shows high capacities of 158, 148, 138 and 99 mAh g -1 with current rate 0.1 C, 0.2 C, 0.5 C and 1 C at 60 o C, respectively, which makes them a promising candidate for application in Lithium ion battery. Ali et al Yoon et al Jung et al Also, conductivity increases with temperature to 2.6 × 10 -4 S cm -1 at 55 113.4 121.5 mAh g -1 at the 100 th cycle, corresponding to 81.9 91.3% of the initial values. Also, the capacity retention was improved with increasing the content of LAGP, which can be ascribed to the high electrochemical stability and good interfacial properties as LAGP may suppress harmful interfacial side reactions between the electrodes and the electrolyte, which results in good cycling stability. Mohanta et al Dam et al and it shows two mechanisms of conductivity (i) ion jumps from one site to its neighboring favorable vacant site, contributing towards the dc conductivity and (ii) short time period available the correlated forward backward hopping of mobile ions give rise to ac conductivity at high frequencies. Moremo et al Initially, the T g increases as NaTFSI concentration increases by promoting a loss of rigidity of the polymer backbones and may be due to stronger interaction and slowing of polymer segmental motion. While, at the highest concentration (i.e. 6:1) plasticization effect comes into picture due to the flexibility of the S-N-S bond in TFSI. Two peaks are observed in melting process in the 12:1-8:1 composition range and are assigned to the onset of small crystallites melting, allowing the growth of the larger ones which melt at a higher temperature. The T m peak, the crystallinity decreases due to plasticization action of salt observed for the second endothermic peak. Further addition of SiO 2 in polymer salt complex decreases the melting temperature which directly enhances the amorphous content and may be due to the interaction of nanofiller with polymer hoist via Lewis acid base interactions. The ionic conductivity decreases from 6:1 down to 20:1 for PEO:NaTFSI, and PEO 20 :NaTFSI and PEO 12 :NaTFSI system shows value 1.1 mS cm -1 and 1.3 mS cm -1 at 80 o C, respectively. A nonlinear effect was observed in conductivity data due to an increase of NaTFSI concentration and may be due to a compromise between amorphization effect of the salt and charge carrier number. The addition of nanofiller at 5 wt. % content shows no change in conductivity value and may be due to masking of the effect of nanofiller by the plasticizing action of TFSI -anion. At 10 wt. % nanofiller decrease in ionic conductivity may be due to blockage of ion conducting pathways. The sodium transport number was measured by applying a fixed DC voltage and following the DC current as a function of time. The sodium ion transference number increases up to the addition of 5 wt. % SiO 2 and then slightly decreases for higher filler concentration due to the interaction of nanofiller with sodium ion (figure Ganapatibhotla et al Here, hydrogen atoms in acidic and neutral particle filled electrolytes participate in three processes: vibration, segmental relaxation of PEO, and a rotational process consistent with a liquid analogue of the PEO 6 :LiClO 4 structure. On the basis of data. enhancement in conductivity was due to the formation of the hydrogen bonds between -OH groups on the acidic particles with the anions. These interaction leads to release of more free charge carriers which contribute in conduction while neutral particles are having basic groups form a hydrogen bond with cations through the ether group of polymer host, and thus either decrease or have no effect on conductivity. It is proposed in the mechanism that that Li ions hop from one coordination site to another, enabled by energy barriers that are accessible at room temperature. While, the basic sites in the neutral surface act as Li traps, interrupting the movement of Li. At eutectic composition, there is no surface chemistry dependence which is due to the stability of multiple layers of PEO 6 :LiClO 4 and PEO by acidic particles and neutral particles (which have both acidic and basic sites). At a composition of EO/Li = 8:1, acidic fillers enhance conductivity, Li transference number, and Li ion diffusivity more than neutral fillers at all temperatures with highest enhancement at 30 °C. At a composition of 14:1, fillers only enhance conductivity above the melting temperature of PEO, where acidic particles impact conductivity to a larger extent than neutral fillers. It is notable that the influence of surface chemistry nearly vanishes at the eutectic composition (EO/Li = 10:1). Above the eutectic temperature (50 °C), there is no statistically relevant difference, and below the eutectic temperature, the neutral particles are more efficient. These findings indicate that the mechanism of conductivity enhancement at the eutectic composition differs from other compositions. Vignarooban et al Lee et al Zhang et al While, peaks at 1.53 V and 2.05 V are associated with trace water molecule that exists in the SPE. The addition of nanofiller increases the initial oxidative decomposition up to 4.2V and may be due to absorption of trace water and unstable compounds present in polymer salt system. For polymer salt system, an average anodic current density reduces from initial 0.01 mAcm -2 to 0.003 mAcm Zhu et al Lin et al The electrochemical properties were tested between 2.5 and 4.1 V with a similar charge and discharge rates. Figure The ceramic-free CPE shows much lower capacity retention ( 50 mAh g -1 ) and much higher over potential indicating the slow Li + transport. For in-situ CPE cycle stability was more and after 80 cycles, >105 mAh g -1 of specific capacity can still be retained (figure Klongkan prepared a solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) using PEO-LiCF 3 SO 3 as host matrix, Al 2 O 3 as nanofiller and dioxyphthalate (DOP) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) as plasticizers by a ball milling method followed by a hot pressing process Sun et al Das et al [109] prepared PNC using PEO-PDMS+LiCF 3 SO 3 and Hectorite clay. The presence of ionpolymer, and ion-clay interaction was confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. The polymer clay interaction was confirmed and observed in terms of the shift in the peak position of 842 cm -1 and 857 cm -1 , and peak profile of 1061 cm -1 and 1232 cm -1 (figure The highest conductivity was 5.2×10 -5 Scm -1 for 1 wt. PNC. As layered silicates disrupt the crystallization of polymer so, regarding this Sunitha et al Mohapatra et al TEM analysis further evidences the intercalation/exfoliation in the clay galleries. DSC analysis shows a decrease in glass transition temperature with addition of clay and is an indication of enhancement in polymer flexibility. The thermal stability of prepared PNCs was upto 300 o C and may be due to barrier effect in which clay layers prevents decomposing of polymer salt complex. But at high content clay layers may accumulate the heat on the surface and decrease the degradation temperature. The highest conductivity obtained was 9.43×10 -4 Scm -1 for a 1 wt. % clay loading. The voltage stability was increased for 7.5 % clay loading and is 3 V. The ionic transference number achieved was 0.99 while, cation transference number was 0.50 much higher than polymer salt system which has 0.25-0.30 (figure Ratna et al Crystallinity is reduced after addition of salt in pure polymer and is due to the interaction of cation with polymer ether group as concluded by DSC (figure It was concluded that two effects are present in PEO/Li + /clay composite electrolytes: one reduces the crystallinity and the other favors the crystallinity. Former one dominates at low clay loading due to steric hindrance produced by the huge surface area of randomly oriented clay in the polymer matrix. At high clay loading later one dominates due to the expansion of the silicate layers and clay content which reduces the PEO---Li + interaction and crystallinity increases. The highest conductivity was obtained for 7.5 % clay loading due to the interaction of lithium cations with silicate layers which disrupts the strong intra-association between Li + ----BF 4 -and supports the fast migration of lithium ions. Recently Lin et al MPa which is large as compared to 1.25 MPa for PEO-LiTFSI electrolyte (figure The enhancement in conductivity was due to the presence of two face surfaces; the outer surface contains a -Si-O-Si-silica tetrahedral sheet, while the inner surface consists of -Al-OH groups from the octahedral sheet. HNT supports salt dissociation and cation gets coordinated with an outer layer having negative surface charge layer while anion gets adsorbed on the inner surface of HNT. The Lewis acid base interactions between the PEO---LiTFSI----HNT shorten the path for Li + via formation of 3D channels and a high speed pathway enhances the ionic conductivity. Also the battery was fabricated using SPE as electrolyte and stable discharge capacities were observed with an averaged value of 745 ± 21 mAhg -1 in the 100 discharge/charge cycles. The 87 % retention was observed compared to the second discharge capacity, and is close to 100% efficiency for each cycle. Zhang et al The electrochemical performance of Li/S cells was investigated using galvanostatic charge/discharge at 60 °C. The specific capacity of 998 mAh g -1 was obtained in the first discharge at 0.1 C, and a reversible capacity of 591 mAh g -1 is achieved in the second cycle (figure was obtained and is equivalent to 63.5 % capacity retention of initial discharge capacity. Figure Thakur et al Chaudhary et al For the complete understanding of improvement in properties of polymer electrolyte system it becomes crucial to know that, how the transport of ions occurs in the polymer matrix. For ion transport one important property possessed by polymer host is that it must have an electron rich donor group such as; ether group (-O -) as in the case of PEO and high dielectric constant (~4-5). This ether group will support the dissociation of salt via coordinating interaction to cation and making anion immobile which is supposed to attach with the polymer chain backbone. Further for complete dissociation of salt in a polymer matrix, it must have low lattice energy which will release number of free charge carriers for transport. As the conductivity is proportional to a number of free charge carriers, electric charge and charge carrier mobility (σ neμ). So, a number of free charge carriers is directly linked with the dissociation of salt and which is further affected by the lattice energy of salt and dielectric constant of the host polymer The addition of salt in the polymer host provides free ions for transport. Graham S. MacGlashan et al Basically, the addition of ILs in the polymer salt matrix reduces the intermolecular interaction between the polymer chains and hence increases the mobility and flexibility of polymer chain segment which results in increased amorphous content. The enhancement in the number density of charge carriers (n) on the incorporation of IL content evidences the enhancement in ionic conductivity. The Ionic liquid may get incorporated in the PEO matrix and two possibilities are: (i) liquid drop retaining its separate identity. They may be as "coalesced drops" giving continuous pathway or "uncoalasced drops". (ii) The IL cation (EMIM + ) complexed with ether oxygen C-O-C group of PEO is spread out uniformly throughout the membrane A plasticizer is a low molecular weight organic solvent that may be added to increase polymer segmental motion and flexibility and thereby improve the ionic conductivity of salts dissolved in the system (figure The ability of nanofiller to promote fast ion transport is due to using of its structure for ion conduction via surface interaction. More importantly, nanofiller also enhance a mechanical property which is an important property to prevent dendrite growth formation and is related to the modulus of the polymer electrolyte. As ceramic nanofiller supports fast ion transport in polymer electrolytes, so it becomes essential to know the role played by nanofiller in conduction. A report by Croce et al Another model was reported by Croce et al proposed a model addressing the role of the different surface group of filler in enhancing the transport properties and specific interaction of PEO+LiCF 3 SO 3 -Al 2 O 3 (basic, acidic and neutral) based composite polymer electrolytes. The addition of nanofiller helps in controlling the PEO chain crystallization kinetics, as well as leads to specific surface interactions with the electrolyte components. The Lewis acid groups of the added ceramics (e.g. the OH groups on the Al 2 O 3 surface) may compete with the Lewis-acid lithium cations for the formation of complexes with the PEO chains, as well as with the anions of the added LiX salt The structural modifications occurring at the ceramics surface, due to the specific actions of the polar surface groups of the inorganic filler, which may act as cross-linking centers for the PEO segments and for the X -anions and a Lewis acid-base interaction centers with the electrolyte ionic species which together increases the number of free ions. The former promotes the structure modifications, and later one enhances the salt dissociation by lowering the ionic coupling. The acidic surface group of filler favors the hydrogen bonding with anion and polymer chains segments. This results in an enhancement in salt dissociation and amorphous phase formation as observed in ionic conductivity measurement (figure While in the filler with the neutral surface the weak interactions with both polymer and anion of salt affect the ionic conductivity a little (figure Polymer-layered silicate nanocomposite has aroused much interest since Toyota's first successful formulation of Nylon 6-clay nanocomposite. The controleed parametres like conductvity and mobility can be achieved by incorporation of clay in the polymer which also prevents the mgration of the anion in the matrix. This also resulrts in the large intefacial area which hinders the polymer chain arrangement and increases amorphous content with mainintaing the mechanical properties. The incorporation of clays is a promising approach for enhancing ionic conductivity due to two properties (i) high cationic exchange capacity, (ii) ability for participating in intercalation and swelling processes, (iii) provides sigle ion conduction. The single ion conductionobtained in PNC with clay is due to layered starucre of clay. Then main advantage of the addition of clay is that cation gets easily intercalated in the clay galleries. One common approach to enhance the conduction is a modification of clay from hydrophilic to hydrophobic nature which increases the interlayer spacing expands. The growth of interlayer spacing is a major factor that provides the soft intercalation of polymer-salt complex in to the clay layers. The addition of clay in polymer electrolytes favors the cationic movement as cations will be allowed to move freely through the clay layers whereas the bulky and heavy anions are not authorized to pass through the clay layers. • Intercalated nanocomposites: it is the result of penetration of polymer matrix in the galliers between silicate layers and forms an alternate arrangement of polymer chains and silicate layer in a regular fashion. The above arrangement is independent of polymeer to clay ratio and the distance between each other is in the range of few nanometer (1-4 nm). XRD is used to identify intercalated structures due to the presence of alternate arrangement of polymer chains and clay. • Flocculated nanocomposites: they are the same as intercalated nanocomposites, except for the fact that some silicate layers are, sometimes, flocculated due to the edge-edge interactions between hydroxyl groups of the silicate. • Exfoliated nanocomposites: it is the result of the complete separation of individual layers of silicate layers and radnom dipserison with an average distance (>6 nm) in polymer matrix depanding on clay charge. Generally, the clay content in an exfoliated nanocomposite is much lower than in an intercalated nanocomposite and is preferred over intercalated as they provide the best property improvements. Also it depends on clay loading unlike the intercalated one. XRD patterns show no peak for this due to the absence of ordered arrangement and large spacing. Jing et al [139] investigated the free volume, structural transition and ionic conduction for PEO/LiClO 4 /clay (OREC) nanocomposite electrolytes. It was concluded that OREC content increases the ionic conductivity of PNC and is highest for 3 wt. % clay content. At this clay content increase in free volume was the maximum. XRD analysis showed an increase in the d-spacing by organic modification of the clay and this evidences polymer intercalation in clay. Also, the polymer chain is disturbed, and interaction of nano-rectorite with polymer matrix enhances the free volume. Conductivity mechanism is reported and explained on the basis of free volume theory. The addition of PEO hinders the interaction between cation and polymer leads to the release of more free ions. Also, the addition of OREC can create a higher interfacial area between the polymer matrix and the clay which provides a path for cation migration enhances the conductivity of nanocomposite. But, as OREC exceeds 3 % then ion movement is restricted due to the formation of two type of complexes and free volume decreases. Another model was proposed by Complex VI also evidences that anions (ClO 4 -) are immobile due to bulky size and for MMT loaded system anions stay outside the clay galleries. This supports the fast ionic conduction for cation via polymer chain segmental motion The electrolyte is a critical component of any energy storage/conversion device. The electrolyte plays the dual role by providing physical separation to electrodes and medium for to and fro swimming of ions enabling the transport. An ideal separator must possess some characteristic properties such as, minimum thickness, low internal resistance, shape flexibility, broad thermal/electrochemical stability window, mechanical stability and structural stability. However it is difficult to uphold all properties together but polyethylene oxide separators provide balanced properties amongst all polymers due to the presence of ether group and low glass transition temperature which enables us to build a high performance system. In this review, we have introduced the recent progress in the prospective of PEO based polymer electrolytes with a sharp focus on dispersed/intercalated type and ionic liquid/plasticizer incorporated polymer electrolyte for energy storage devices. The desirable properties of polymer host, salt, solvent, nanofiller, ionic liquid, plasticizer and nanoclay required for synthesization and good performance of electrolyte in the battery are summarized. In addition to this the preparation methods for the polymer electrolytes by various researchers are described and it also includes the required characterization for studying the surface properties, electrochemical properties, thermal properties, stability properties done in the area of polymer electrolytes. The key role of the ionic liquid, nanofiller, plasticizer and clay in the enhancement of electrochemical properties of polymer electrolyte in energy storage devices is reported. The reliable transport mechanism proposed by various researchers to explain the increase in transport properties are concluded with a sharp eye on the presence of various types of interaction like; polymer---salt, polymer---nanofiller, salt---nanofiller, polymer---ionic liquid, polymer----clay. The property of solvent, salt, nanofiller and plasticizer also affects the performance of polymer electrolyte. Salts with bulky anion size, high room temperature stability and low lattice energy are a beneficial candidate for achieving the high ionic conductivity. Salts with broader electrochemical stability window and environmentally friendly nature will fulfill the need for ideal salt for the polymer electrolyte. Also the role of solvent can't be neglected in the preparation of polymer electrolyte. The solvent must be of nonflammable nature, low viscosity and must be capable of complete dissolution of polymer chains inside which results in increased interaction of polymer chain with cations by swelling properly. Plasticizer with high dielectric constant and low viscosity is an alternative candidate for enhancing the properties of polymer electrolytes. Passive filler only supports indirectly the ion migration by providing addition al conducing pathways via Lewis acid base interactions and also dissociates the more salt. Instead of passive fillers, active fillers can be an alternative for the promotion of ions due to their supportive nature in ion transport and increased number of charge carriers. At present, ionic liquid based polymer electrolytes are interesting candidates for a separator in energy storage device. They provide improved conductivity and electrochemical properties due to the release of more free charge carriers and a decrease of crystallinity. Although ionic conductivity is higher for gel polymer electrolytes but poor mechanical properties bound them for practical applications in the high performance energy storage device. Low molecular weight Plasticizer incorporated polymer electrolytes are also used from last decade as a separator. They provide hindrance in polymer chain arrangement by penetrating inside the chain which increases the polymer chain flexibility and supports fast migration of ions which is characteristic of a high performance device. Also, the free volume by plasticizer provides an easy path to cation for migration. The addition of plasticizer also reduces the interaction of cation with polymer ether group which evidences the enhanced conductivity. But disturbance of mechanical properties affects the performance of the device and is one of the drawbacks of these types of systems. So, best alternative having balanced ionic conductivity and mechanical properties is solid polymer electrolyte which can be classified into two types based on the addition of nanofiller and nanoclay known as dispersed and intercalated type polymer electrolytes. Further nanofiller are two types on the basis of support to transport of ions in a polymer matrix; one that is involved in ionic transport is called active nanofiller and another which supports the polymer structure only and no active role in ion transport is passive filler. The high dielectric constant of nanofiller dissociates more salt and release more number of free charge carriers. Nanofiller mainly play a dual role here; one is to promote the ion migration by reducing the reorganization tendency of polymer and second is a decrease in ionic coupling due to Lewis acid base interactions. Improved conductivity values are obtained for the dispersed type polymer electrolyte along with suitable thermal and mechanical properties which make them as an alternative to the energy storage device. Clay intercalated polymer electrolyte is promising for a high energy storage system. The intercalation of clay in polymer chain increases the basal spacing which supports fast ion transport. Another advantage of the intercalated type polymer electrolyte is that single ion conductor can be obtained which is desirable in the case of polymer electrolytes, as anion is supposed to get trapped within the polymer chains. Clay blocks the anion outside the clay galleries and the only cation is transported inside. So, for the successful development of advanced polymer electrolyte with overall balancing properties solid polymer electrolytes are attractive and further optimizing the properties of solid polymer electrolyte can fulfill the dream of an ideal energy storage device using polymer electrolytes. In context to above one important thing we have to keep in mind is that cost and properties as well as safety must be in the relaxed zone of human beings. In the future, polymer electrolyte/separators with shape flexibility are needed due to lack of time and space by a human being. Even an interesting one is the development of a device which can be folded easily and can sustain for long in remote areas during the journey. There is also need to search the new method of battery fabrication including layer by layer deposition and some different physical structure which can provide advanced energy storage system. respectively, and discharge capacity degrades to 142.5 mAh g -1 after 20 cycles. The addition of 5 wt. % nanofiller gives discharges capacity value 157 mAh g -1 . The application of LiBOB and nano-sized metal oxides is a convenient and economical way to develop PEO based polymer electrolytes for 4V class cathodes.