The relaxation dynamics of glass-forming systems shows a multitude of features that are absent in normal liquids, such as non-exponential relaxation and a strong temperature-dependence of the relaxation time. Connecting these dynamic properties to the microscopic structure of the system is very challenging because of the presence of the structural disorder. Here we use computer simulations of a metallic glass-former to establish such a connection. By probing the temperature and wavevector dependence of the intermediate scattering function we find that the relaxation dynamics of the glassy melt is directly related to the local arrangement of icosahedral structures: Isolated icosahedra give rise to a flow-like stretched exponential relaxation whereas clusters of icosahedra lead to a compressed exponential relaxation that is reminiscent to the one found in a solid. Our results show that in metallic glass-formers these two types of relaxation processes can coexist and give rise to a surprisingly complex dynamics, insight that will allow to get a deeper understanding of the outstanding mechanical properties of metallic glasses. The relaxation dynamics of glass-forming liquids has been and still is a topic of intensive research Since in glass physics all dynamical features are a smooth function of temperature it must be expected that such internal stresses are in fact already present in the deeply supercooled melt and hence the compressed exponentials should be observable to some extent already at temperatures above T g , i.e. in the glassy melt. However, detecting in experiments the coexistence of such different relaxation behavior is not an easy task, since one first needs to identify observables that are related to the different relaxation mechanisms and then be able to measure their corresponding correlation functions. Furthermore it cannot be expected that all glass-forming systems will show such a coexistence and hence a wise choice on the material has to be made. Since for the case of metallic glasses one does indeed find a cross-over from stretched to compressed relaxation if temperature is decreased For metallic glasses it is well documented that local icosahedral clusters are important structural building blocks The studied Cu 50 Zr 50 system consists of N = 10000 atoms interacting via an embedded atom potential Here N is the number of particles considered, . is the thermal average, and r j (t) is the position of particle j at time t. In Fig. of large k particles has a pronounced vibrational character and in the SI we show that this feature is indeed also very pronounced in the glass state (see Fig. To describe the dynamics at these short times in a quantitative manner we fit the correlator with the simple Ansatz where "L" and "H" denote a low and high frequency mode, respectively and we have C L + C H = 1, i.e. we describe the motion of a particle as a superposition of two harmonic oscillators. The resulting fits are included in Fig. low q to the acoustic modes In order to put ω H and ω L in relation with typical frequencies in the system we show in Fig. Wave-vector dependence of the α-relaxation time. We plot τ (q)q as a function of q for different values of the connectivity k. Also included is the data for all Cu/Zr atoms and all atoms. The three panels correspond to different temperatures: (a) T =1100K, (b) T =1000K, and (c) T =950K. The solid lines are power-laws with exponent -1, the q dependence expected for a diffusive process. To understand the nature of this abrupt yielding we look at the q-dependence of the α-relaxation time τ as obtained from the fit with the KWW form. For a diffusive motion one expects that τ ∝ q -2 whereas for a ballistic displacement one has τ ∝ q -1 . To allow for a better distinction of these two cases we plot in Fig. If T is lowered to 1000K, panel (b), we find that now also the curves for small and intermediate k show a plateau, i.e. at this temperature also these icosahedra have become sufficiently rigid to be moved as a rigid block. For the icosahedra with large k one recognizes that τ decays somewhat slower than q -1 which implies a relaxation that is faster than a rigid translation dynamics. We see that for the largest k's this rapid relaxation dynamics is observed in a range 0.5 Å-1 ≤ q ≤ 2 Å-1 , i.e. it extents from about one interparticle distance up to distances that are on the order of the size of a few icosahedra, thus about one nm. From the fact that on these length scales the relaxation time is almost constant we can conclude that the underlying structure breaks up in a very abrupt manner, indicating a yielding process that is more similar to the one found in a solid that fractures than to the continuous transformation found in a liquid. Hence this suggests that high k icosahedra form rigid structures that are moved by the surrounding viscous medium which in turn is driven by local internal stresses. Comparing this data with the one at T = 1100K shows that the decrease of T affects more strongly the relaxation dynamics for the icosahedra with high k than the ones with low k. This implies that for this system the so-called α-scale universality predicted by mode-coupling theory If temperature is lowered even more, see data for T = 950K in panel (c), the unusual q-dependence found for large k is less pronounced and the relaxation dynamics becomes again more or less ballistic. At the same time the curves for low k show a plateau that is more pronounced than the one at higher T s which makes that on overall the k-dependence of τ becomes weaker, i.e. the relaxation dynamics of the system becomes more homogeneous. The likely reason for these changes is that a decrease in temperature will lead to high k icosahedra that are somewhat more rigid but that the viscosity, which is roughly proportional to τ , increases significantly. Hence the shear forces acting on the icosahedra will have increased substantially, making the latter to break up in a more continuous manner and thus leading to the disappearance of the faster than ballistic regime in τ (q). Thus we can conclude that the different mechanical properties of the icosahedra with different k make that the nature of their relaxation dynamics depends strongly on k as well as temperature. Also included in the graphs are the relaxation times as obtained for all the Cu atoms that are in the center of an icosahedron (black solid line) and one sees that the discussed change in transport mechanism makes that the q-dependence of τ for this population leads to the formation of a small shoulder at 1000K and a small hump at 950K. If all Cu atoms are considered (red line) one finds at high and intermediate temperatures only a weak shoulder and at the lowest temperature a pronounced plateau. In contrast to this the Zr atoms have at high and intermediate temperatures a q-dependence that is close to the one for a diffusive dynamics and only at the lowest temperature one can notice a weak shoulder (blue line). The same is true if one looks at the τ (q) • q when averaged over all atoms (solid green line). These results thus demonstrate that the described anomalous behavior in the relaxation dynamics is detectable also in real experiments that can only measure the system averaged quantities. So far we have discussed the relaxation dynamics of the particles in reciprocal space. Since in simulations one can also easily access the trajectories of the particles in real space we can use this information to check the interpretation of the q-space data. For this we have determined the self part of the van Hove function defined as This distribution is shown in Fig. For k > 0 we find that the distribution at distances larger than r > ∼ 1.0 Å and intermediate times has a much smaller slope than the one for k = 0 which shows that particles with high k explore these large distances on the same time scale, in agreement with the results shown in Fig. Our results show that even in the fluid state certain glassy systems can show a relaxation dynamics that is given by a compressed exponential, i.e. a time dependence that differs strongly from the usual stretched exponential found in viscous liquids. For the metallic glass-former investigated here these two type of relaxation dynamics do even coexist and can be directly related to the local atomic structure. The relative importance of the two relaxation mechanisms depends strongly on temperature as well as the length scale considered, i.e. the wave-vector,and becomes very pronounced at around the mode-coupling temperature of the system, and gives rise to a decoupling phenomena in the dynamics that is non-monotonic in temperature. It can be expected that the structural features that give rise to these different relaxation mechanisms in the liquid are also responsible for the interesting mechanical properties of metallic glasses, such as elasticity and ductility, in that the more rigid structures formed by the high k icosahedra are embedded by a softer surrounding that allows for localized plastic relaxation. Thus our findings show that a careful investigation of the wave-vector dependence of the relaxation dynamics allows to get deeper insight into the unique properties of metallic glasses, insight that will help to conceive other new materials that do have attractive mechanical properties. Methods Simulations have been carried out using the LAMMPS software The vibrational density of states was calculated by making a run at low temperatures and calculating the time Fourier transform of the velocity-autocorrelation function of the species of interest, i.e. Cu, Zr, and Cu atoms with different k. We have checked that this approach gives the same results as a direct diagonalization of the dynamical matrix. See SI for a comparison between the two methods. Figure In Fig. In Fig. 