Using a combination of numerical simulations and atom-probe tomography experiments, we determine the interfacial energy of Cu nanocrystals precipitated within the amorphous matrix of FINEMET (molar composition Fe72.89Si16.21B6.90Nb3Cu1). Specifically, we use the Langer-Schwartz model implemented in the software Thermocalc to carry out parametric simulations of growth and coarsening of Cu clusters for different interface energies. We have carried out atom-probe tomography (APT) experiments to determine the interface energy as the value for which the simulated particle size distribution best matches the experimental data. This combination of APT and precipitation modeling can be applied to other nanocrystals precipitated within amorphous matrices. The interfacial energy between precipitates and a matrix is an important property that determines many physical quantities of interest in precipitate-strengthened alloys ̶ from the critical radius, activation energy, and nucleation rate in the early stages of the process, to the coarsening rates of the nanoparticles formed in the matrix. Hence, models of nucleation and growth use interface energy as a key parameter Furthermore, the use of density functional theory calculations improves the accuracy of the computed interface energy values for planar interfaces In this article, we use atom-probe tomography (APT) and growth simulations to tackle the determination of interface energy of a crystalline-amorphous interface between precipitate and matrix, for the case of Cu clusters crystallized in an amorphous FINEMET-type alloy (composition Fe72.89Si16.21B6.90Nb3Cu1). The fundamental importance of the Cu clusters is that they serve as nucleation sites for the larger Fe3Si nanoparticles In our characterization procedure, amorphous FINEMET samples (Fe72.89Si16.21B6.90Nb3Cu1, atomic %) were annealed at 540 °C for one hour, after which the specimens were prepared and analyzed using APT. The atom probe analysis was performed on a Cameca LEAP 4000X Si instrument using laser pulsing and a 90 mm flight path. The base temperature was 57.3 K. Laser pulsing was performed at 625 kHz using energies from 30 -60 pJ at a detection rate of 6 to 30 ions per 1000 pulses. The standing bias during analysis was 1200 -7500 V. Transmission electron microscopy was performed on the specimens before and after APT analysis, providing additional constraints for generating the reconstruction [17] is computed using the Bekker model The number density of Cu clusters in our simulations stabilizes at 10 24 m -3 [Figure In conclusion, we have used APT and parametric simulations of growth in Thermocalc to determine an interface energy of 0.54/ m 2 for Cu crystalline clusters in amorphous FINEMET. In the process, we have shown that the growth of Cu clusters is highly sensitive to the interface energy value, and that the currently used Bekker model y (nm)