In this comment we point out that the experimental evidence for superconductivity presented by Thapa and Pandey in arXiv:1807.08572 is also consistent with a percolation transition. We propose simple follow-up experiments which would help to eliminate percolation as a possible explanation for the observed data. Room-temperature superconductivity is a prospect that has captivated the imagination of scientists and engineers since the discovery of superconductivity in 1911 by Kammerling Onnes. The signatures of technological interest are simple enough to state: a zero-resistance state. But there are other telltale features such as "perfect" diamagnetism (flux expulsion) that are expected from a superconductor. There has been a recent report by Thapa and Pandey It was subsequently noted by Skinner Here, we set aside the question of the origin of this unexplained noise correlation, and focus on the resistive transition itself. The question we wish to address is whether there is an alternate physical explanation that could give rise to this zero-resistance signature. Below, we describe one such scenario based on Figure Let us consider the possibility that there is a percolation transition (Figure We now argue that a percolative transition can plausibly lead to an apparent zero-resistance state. Figure The question arises as to how such a transition could take place and depend on temperature. Again, the percolation condition may be very sensitive to minute changes in separations between the nanoparticles. Further, alloying could change the temperature at which this transition occurs. Glass, gold, and silver all have different thermal expansion coefficients, from ∼ 9 × 10 -6 K -1 for glass, to 14 × 10 -6 K -1 for gold, and 18 × 10 -6 K -1 for silver. The differential thermal contraction with the substrate could easily drive the percolations transition, see e.g. The second major piece of evidence presented relates to the observed onset of diamagnetism below the critical temperature. Gold is a well-known diamagnetic material in bulk form We conclude by pointing out that further transport measurements, not described in the original manuscript, could help to elucidate what is going on. Specifically, we suggest measuring a series of two-terminal I-V characteristics as a function of temperature. There should be a resistance reduction at the superconducting transition, even taking into account the measurement lead resistance. A more sensitive probe of the scenario outlined above would involve measuring I-V curves between the current and voltage leads (e.g., between leads 1 and 2) to evaluate whether the voltage leads are electrically connected to the current paths between leads 1 and 4. Additionally, other permutations of voltage and current leads could help elucidate whether there are fully connected paths between all of the measuring leads.