For the development and optimization of novel light emitting materials, such as fluorescent proteins, dyes and semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), a reliable and robust analysis of the emission efficiency is crucial. The emission efficiency is typically quantified by the photoluminescence quantum yield (QY), defined by the ratio of emitted to absorbed photons. We show that this methodology suffers from a flaw that leads to underestimated QY values, presenting as a 'parasitic absorption'. This effect has not been described and/or corrected for in literature and is present already under common experimental conditions, therefore, it is highly relevant for a number of published studies. To correct for this effect, we propose a modification to the methodology and a correction procedure. The development of novel materials for optoelectronics and photovoltaics requires an accurate and robust methodology for evaluation of the emission efficiency. This property is best quantified in terms of the absolute quantum yield (QY), defined as the ratio of emitted to absorbed photons. This methodology suffers from a critical flaw, which is for a great part independent of the particular experimental or instrumental implementation. While many general guidelines exist for QY determination We demonstrate the artifact on the IS technique and show that it manifests itself in the underestimation of the QY, the magnitude of which depends on the absorption of the studied material. Hence, our findings have consequences not only for scientific studies where the QY is used to characterize and optimize new types of luminophors, but also in which the QY is used to uncover new photophysics, for example in quantum dots (QDs). Here, special care must be taken when comparing the QY of samples with diverse absorption as a result of different excitation energies We measure the QY using the standardized two-step IS measurement (Figure Here N and N * denote the integrated intensities at the excitation and emission wavelength respectively, I(λ) the detected spectrum and C the correction factor for the spectral response of the detection system. Using this setup, we measure the QY of three different light emitting materials: an organic dye and two types of inorganic QDs, all in a wide range of excitation wavelengths and for various material concentrations as commonly encountered in the literature. First we study Rhodamine 6G (R6G) in ethanol, which is a well-known fluorescent dye that is commonly used as a calibration standard for comparative QY measurements and has a high reported QY of about 95% QYs obtained at various R6G concentrations excited between 300 and 520 nm are shown in Fig. In addition to the R6G, we test the effect also on two suspensions of semiconductor QDs -Silicon QDs (Si QDs) and cadmium selenide based QDs (CdSe QDs). Both materials have very different optical properties from each other and from those of R6G, such as emission efficiency, absorption and emission spectra (Fig. QY of both types of QD materials decreases with longer excitation wavelengths (Fig. From these experiments, where we observe the same decrease of QY when the single-pass absorptance of the sample is lowered either by lowering the sample's concentration, shifting the excitation wavelength or by shortening the optical path, and this independently of the studied material or experimental setup, we conclude that it is an artifact of the QY methodology. This flaw becomes even more apparent, when we compare our measurements to the simulations of the QY experiment in the IS setup. For this we use an analytical model (AM), that describes the light inside the IS by uniformly distributed photon fluxes in a uniform IS geometry (Fig. First, we would like to show that part of this artifact originates from a statistical nature of the experiment, while AM and RTS approaches assumed a single (mean) value of number of absorbed and emitted photons N abs and N em , neglecting their statistical distribution. Through the QY definition by Eq. 1, these distributions give rise to a distribution of QY values, which as we will see in the following will no longer be centered around the value given by the means of N S and N Ref . To account for the distribution of photons in real exper-iment, we assume the number of emitted photons N em and number of photons transmitted through reference and through sample N Ref and N S , to be independent and normally distributed around a mean value μ with variance σ 2 , i.e. N ∼ N (x, μ, σ 2 ). We note that for very low photon counts (below N ∼100), one would need to consider Poisson distribution instead, which, however, will lead to the same output, as we have shown in Ref. ). The probability distribution of the QY values is then given by the ratio of the distributions of N em and N abs . By explicitly computing this ratio of distributions, it can be shown that the resulting probability distribution of QY values is 29 : where ). With parameter θ = σem σ abs and relative measurement uncertainties α i = σi μi , with i = abs, em. This distribution is a Cauchy-like distribution (discussed in greater detail in Ref. To better understand this mismatch, we separately look at the number of absorbed and emitted photons. In Fig. The shift in N abs evaluated from both dependencies in Fig. While the identified issues critically affects QY values for samples with lower absorption, we can correct for it as follows. First, we determine the critical absorption value A crit for each specific QY setup using a reference material -a fresh, high quality QY standard, such as R6G. Please note that it is essential to take a special care for re-absorption, possible lifetime changes, aggregation, etc. (see our detailed discussion above and FIG. in Supplementary Materials). Next, since the A crit can be expected in range 5-20% in a typical QY setup, one needs to measure QY dependence on the single-pass absorptance in a wide range of absorptances, set at least between 1 and 30%. Such a broad absorption range can be reached either by varying (i) the excitation wavelength, (ii) the samples concentration and/or (iii) the samples optical thickness, or by a combination of the above, since the artifact manifests itself independently of how the absorption is changed. A crit is given by the single-pass absorptance at which the measured QY deviates from the expected constant value, as shown in Figs. We applied this correction procedure to the QY measurements, presented in Figs. In conclusion, we report on a critical artifact generally present in the QY methodology, leading to underestimation of the QY value under common experimental conditions. This artifact is partly caused by skewed QY distribution resulting from statistical nature of the experiment Sample preparation: Rhodamine 6G (R6G) from Sigma-Aldrich was dissolved in UV-grade ethanol (Merck KGaA, Uvasol), from which different concentrations were prepared by dilution. The concentration was estimated by comparison of the measured absorption coefficients with the value specified by Birge in Ref. Single-pass absorptance: Transmittance of the sample (T S ) and reference (T Ref ) was measured using a dual-beam spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer, Lambda 950), from which the samples single-pass absorptance was evaluated: A = 1 -T S /T Ref . For this, it is assumed that the reflectance of the sample and reference is the same. Setup 1 : For determination of the QY we use a standard integrating sphere (IS) setup, shown schematically in Figs. is verified using ray-tracing simulations (see discussion on Fig. Setup 2 : The integrating sphere (IS) of 10 cm diameter has the inner surface covered by the Spectraflect T M coating. The excitation is provided by a laser-driven light source (LDLS, Energetiq, EQ-99X) coupled to the 15cm monochromator (Acton SpectraPro SP-2150i). The monochromatized light (bandwidth of about 10 nm) is guided to the IS via a silica fiber bundle. The output signal from the IS is collected by another fused-silica fiber bundle placed in the direction perpendicular to the excitation axis and is shielded by three baffles against the direct visibility of both the excitation source and the sample. The end of the fiber bundle (which has a stripe-like shape) is imaged to the input slit of an imaging spectrograph (focal length of 30 cm) and a liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD camera is used for detection. The spectral sensitivity of the complete apparatus is calibrated over the broad UV-NIR spectral range (300-1100 nm) using two radiation standards (Newport Oriel): a 45-W tungsten halogen lamp (above 400 nm) and a deuterium lamp (below 400 nm). Special attention is paid to avoiding stray-light effects in the spectrometer. the ESIF, EU Operational Programme Research, Development and Education, and from the Center of Advanced Aerospace Technology (CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 019/0000826), Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague (GD). The authors would like to the thank prof. T. Gregorkiewicz (University of Amsterdam) for facilitating this project, S. Regli and J. Veinot (University of Alberta, Canada) for providing the Si QDs, I. Sychugov (KTH-Royal Institute of Technology) for an independent control measurement and M. Hink (University of Amsterdam) for assistance with the time-resolved measurements. Finally, access to computing and storage facilities owned by parties and projects contributing to the National Grid Infrastructure MetaCentrum provided under the program "Projects of Large Research, Development, and Innovations Infrastructures" (CESNET LM2015042) is greatly appreciated. Absorption, photoluminescence (PL) spectra and decay are shown in Fig. The maximum QY that we find experimentally for R6G in Fig. Despite the fact that our geometry leads to slightly underestimated QY values, we note that our simulations (solid lines Fig. For the ray tracing simulation (RTS) we model the geometry of our experimental setup as shown in Fig. Photons interacting with any surface or absorbing volume are attenuated and scattered according to an appropriate phenomenological model: (i) The IS surface, baffle and the cuvettes cap are modeled by a Lambertian model with reflectance at both wavelengths set to 0.97; (ii) Scattering on glass and aluminum parts is modeled according to Fresnel equations for unpolarized light; (iii) Scattering/absorption in the volume of the active sample is modelled according to the radiative transfer equation where we set the absorption coefficient in the range 0.02 cm -1 to 2 cm -1 to study single-pass absorption values between 2% and 87%, respectively. An example of the path of an excitation photon is depicted in Fig. The input and output port geometries containing the excitation source and sensor are depicted in Fig. Within the cone set by the NA, the sensor measures the flux impinging on it from different directions. This cone is divided into a disjunct set of cells (pixels) each of which accumulates weights of excitation and emission photons coming from the associated directions. The resulting accumulated values in all cells are regarded as realizations of the same underlying random variable for which we estimate the mean and variance. They represent the incoming flux on the sensor, which is directly analogous to the measured photons count in the real experiment. For estimating the QY we follow the methodology of the physical experiment described in Eq. 1 (main text) using a test and a reference sample, where the latter does not absorb. The cuvette in the setup is modeled according to a typical commercially available cuvette (Hellma Analytics). There are several material interfaces (Air/Glass, Glass/Air, Glass/Liquid, Air/Liquid) which are accounted for in order to achieve appropriate accuracy of our model (depicted in Fig. The cuvette holder is made of aluminum and serves also as a baffle preventing light going from cuvette directly towards output port. Reflectance of aluminum at λ exc and λ em wavelengths is computed from Fresnel equa-tions. In this approach we simplify the setup illustrated in Figure 