We propose an easy and robust strategy for the versatile integration of 2D material flakes on plasmonic nanoholes by means of controlled deposition of MoS2 via electrophoretic process. The method can be applied both to simple metallic flat nanostructures and to complex 3D metallic structures both comprising nanoholes. The deposition method allows the decoration of large ordered arrays of plasmonic structures with single or few layers of MoS2. We show that the plasmonic field generated by the nanohole can interact significantly with the 2D layer, thus representing an ideal system for hybrid 2D-Material/Plasmonic investigation. The controlled and ordered integration of 2D materials on plasmonic nanostructures opens a pathway towards, for instance, enhanced light emission; strong coupling from plasmonic hybrid structures; hot electron generation; and sensors based on 2D materials. In the last decade, intensive research efforts have been devoted to the investigation of twodimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene and various transition metal chalcogenides (TMDCs). Regarding the latter, an extensive interest from researchers raised in the last years to explore potential physical phenomena, especially on light-matter interaction, such as multiexciton photoluminescence (PL), interlayer exciton coupling, strong coupling and valley polarization effect. We think that the structures that can be easily prepared with this method can find several interesting applications in all the present fields of research in which 2D materials are the core. For example, the controlled/ordered integration of 2D materials on plasmonic nanostructures can pave the way to new investigations on enhanced light emission from TMDCs, The deposition process is illustrated in Fig. Table1: Zeta potential and electrophoretic mobility of the MoS2 flakes measured by DLS in water and ethanol. Values are reported as average number (n=3) ± SD. Zeta potential (mV) -39,57 ± 0,38 -3,66 ± 0,28 Electrophoretic Mobility (μmcm/Vs) -3,10 ± 0,03 -0,54 ± 0,04 The charged nature of the flakes suggests the possible deposition of MoS2 by means of applied voltage, hence realizing an electrophoretic deposition (Fig. 1-Top Panel): 1) the plasmonic holes are prepared on a Si3N4 membrane (see methods for details on the nanohole fabrication process); 2) the sample to be deposited is first cleaned in oxygen plasma for 60 seconds to facilitate the process; 3) the sample is placed at ground state in a microfluidic chamber equipped with two Pt coated electrodes; 4) MoS2 flakes dispersed in H2O is injected in the Cis side of the chamber while in Trans side only MilliQ H2O is present; 5) a suitable voltage is applied for optimized time allowing the electrophoretic deposition; and 6) the chamber is opened and the sample rinsed in EtOH, and the controlled deposition is achieved. In principle this method can be used on every nanostructure comprising a nanohole; in our case, anyway, we observe that the process presents some critical aspects. Firstly we investigated the deposition method on large rectangular arrays of metallic nanoholes. In this configuration, the substrate is a Si3N4 membrane coated with 100 nm thick gold film where holes of 100 nm diameters were prepared by means of FIB lithography. As can be observed in Fig. This can be due to the electric field configuration inside our chamber and it can be probably overcome increasing the dimension of the system. We also compared this deposition process with a simple drop cast (20 L of MoS2 in H2O let dry and rinsed in EtOH) over the same structure. As expected, in this latter case (See SI) the substrate results to be coated randomly even though a large number of holes are still coated. Repeating the electrophoretic deposition process over several identical samples we observe a bad reproducibility in term of quality of the deposited flakes. In fact, also testing several duration of applied voltage, it seems hard to control the number of layers that cover the different nanoholes. As will be reported later, it is possible to obtain over 80 % of metallic holes covered with MoS2 but the number of holes decorated with a single layer flake are low. The evaluation of number of deposited layers will be reported later by means of Raman measurements where the discrimination among single-or few-layer flakes is possible. Decreasing the vertical dimension down to 1 μm and increasing the diameter of the nanochannel (see detail in methods section) it has been possible to obtain the ordered deposition. Anyway, the voltage required is significantly higher respect to the previous case and in order to achieve a high percentage of deposited antennas voltage up to 15 V is needed. Fig. Regardless, we think that this can be improved acting on electrophoretic process conditions and on the exfoliation procedure to obtain better-quality, single-layer flakes in solution. Indeed, herein, we chose to follow a Li-intercalation protocol that with respect to liquid-phase exfoliation, can provide stable suspensions without any surfactant (that may hamper both anchoring and plasmonic behavior) and with higher exfoliation degree, In summary, we presented a method for hybrid plasmonic 2D material structure preparation. The fabrication procedure allows to obtain ordered structures over large array using a low-cost procedure and without the use of complex lithographic processes. This strategy can be applied to not only MoS2 but also many 2D materials for which their net charge of their surface can be used to guide the electrophoretic process. We believe that such an approach can be interesting for the realization of new hybrid devices for use in several applications, including photoluminescence, strong coupling and valley-polarization studies. With respect to previously reported hybrid plasmonic nanostructures, our scheme significantly reduces the complexity of fabrication, leading to a more robust and lowcost approach for the integration of 2D materials with plasmonic nanopores. In a glove-box (water < 1 ppm, O2 < 10 ppm), LiBH4 (0.109 g, 5 mmol) and MoS2 (0.320 g, 2 mmol) were grounded in a mortar and subsequently transferred in a Schlenk-tube, which then was brought outside of the glove-box and connected to a Schlenk-line. This mixture was heated in a sand bath at 330°C for 4 days under nitrogen. Afterwards, the Schlenk-tube was brought again inside the dry-box, where it was newly grounded with additional LiBH4 (0.109 g, 5 mmol). The sample was subsequently heated for 3 days at 330°C under nitrogen. The intercalation product was added in a single shot in 270 ml of degassed water and the resulting suspension was bath-sonicated for 1 h to facilitate the exfoliation. In order to remove the LiOH produced, the suspension was equally divided into six centrifugation tubes (45 ml/tube) and centrifuged at 10000 rpm (23478g) for 20 min for three times, replacing the supernatant with clean solvent. To select the flake size, the suspension purified by LiOH, was progressively centrifuged at 8000 (15026g -8K fraction), 6000 (8452g -6K), 4000 (3757g -4K), 3000 (2113g -3K), 2000 (939g -2K) and 1000 rpm (235g -1K), by collecting each time the top 2/3 of the supernatant and by replacing it with ultrapure water. The fabrication of the metallic nanoholes follows simple and robust procedures for the 2D and 3D geometry. In both cases the substrate was a Si3N4 membrane (100 nm thick) prepared on a Silicon chip. The 2D holes have been prepared by means of FIB milling with a current of 80 pA. After the milling a thin layer of gold, ca. 100 nm, has been deposited on the top side of the membrane. The fabrication of 3D nanoholes array follows the procedure illustrated in Ref. 24. A thin layer of S1813 optical resist is spinned on top of the membrane with a final thickness equal to the height of the structure we want to obtain. This layer is exposed by secondary electron during the FIB milling of the nanoholes from the bottom of the membrane, and after the development in acetone and a final metal deposition (ca. 40 nm) a 3D hollow antenna is obtained. For these experiment 3D antennas with inner diameter between 30 and 100 nm and final heigth between 1000 and 2000 nm have been prepared. We investigate the plasmonic properties of the structure by means of finite element method (FEM) simulations by using of the RF Module in Comsol Multiphysics taking into account the geometries that can actually be fabricated. Here we consider a hole of 100 nm diameter into Si3N4//Au 100//50 nm membrane. In the case of 3D antennas we consider an antenna with height equal tio 1000n m and, inner and outer diameter of 100 nm and 300 nm, respectively. A top single layer of MoS2 has been considered in both the cases. The refractive indexes of Au and MoS2 were taken from the works of Rakić et al and Zhang et al. 