We characterize asymmetric growth of magnetic bubble domains in perpendicularly magnetized Co/Ni multi-layers grown on PtxIr1-x seedlayers by application of perpendicular and in-plane magnetic fields. Using a refined model of domain wall creep that incorporates contributions from the anisotropic elastic energy, ε, and a chirality-dependent prefactor, v0, we elucidate factors that govern the mobility of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls as a function of seedlayer composition. The interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction magnitude is found to decrease monotonically with xIr, which is independently confirmed by Brillouin light scattering (BLS). Moreover, the persistence of significant asymmetry in velocity curves across the full composition range supports previous assertions that a chirality-dependent attempt frequency akin to chiral damping could play a critical role in the observed trends. This work helps resolve fundamental questions about the factors governing Dzyaloshinskii DW creep and demonstrates varying Pt-Ir seedlayer composition as a method to tune DMI. Recent observations that topologically protected magnetic features like skyrmions and chiral domain walls (DWs) can be manipulated with spin current has renewed interest in developing spintronic devices for energy efficient nonvolatile memory and logic applications In the isotropic case, σ (Θ) = 0. However, in cases of anisotropic DW energy as found in Dzyaloshinskii DWs subject to H x here, σ (Θ) becomes comparable in magnitude σ(Θ). This description based only on elastic energy of the domain wall demonstrated that significant curve asymmetry should exist due exclusively to iDMI and was able to explain some of the perplexing experimental data. In this paper, we use an augmented model for Dzyaloshinskii DW creep to fit experimental measurements of asymmetric domain growth in Co/Ni multilayers grown on Pt-Ir alloy seedlayers. The model incorporates elastic energy of the domain wall based on its dispersive stiffness where κ is a creep scaling constant that does not depend on H x . σ is calculated using the dispersive stiffness model of Pellegren et al. in the limit of a vanishingly small deformation lengthscale, L as justified later. Co/Ni films were prepared using DC magnetron sputtering from 5 in. targets onto 3 in. Si (001) substrates with native oxide. The working pressure was fixed at 2.5 mTorr Ar. The film stack is Substrate/TaN(3)/Pt(3.5)/Pt x Ir 1-x (1.2)/ [Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)] 2 /Co(0.2)/Ta(0.8)/TaN We used Brillouin Light Scattering spectroscopy (BLS) to establish an independent measure of the magnitude of the DMI. The laser had a wavelength of 532 nm. Damon-Eshbach spin-waves experience a non-reciprocal frequency-shift ∆f Ms k in the presence of DMI. The spectroscopic splitting factor is estimated as g || = 2.19 To further examine the impact of chiral weight and iDMI via the elastic energy, we have prepared the following films: TaN(3)/Pt(2.5)/[Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)] 2 /Co(0.2)/Ir(2.5)/TaN Velocity curves and asymmetry for these samples are shown in Figure In summary, we have shown a monotonic increase of D with X P t in Pt x Ir 1-x seedlayer alloys. Moreover, we show that the impact of DMI on elastic energy is insufficient to explain the trends in velocity curves seen experimentally. The results are fit well when a chiralitydependent attempt frequency is included in the model -something speculated to originate from chiral damping or, more recently, a chiral gyromagnetic ratio. This work has been funded by the DARPA Topological Excitations in Electronics (TEE) program and also funded (in part) by the Dowd Fellowship from the College of Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University. The authors would like to thank Philip and Marsha Dowd for their financial support and encouragement as well as 