We present angle-dependent high-frequency EPR studies on a single-crystal of a trigonal Mn 3 III cluster with an unusual structure in which the local magnetic easy-axes of the constituent Mn III ions are tilted significantly away from the molecular C3 axis towards the 'magic-angle' of 54.7 degrees, resulting in an almost complete cancelation of the 2 nd -order axial magnetic anisotropy, DS ̂z2 , associated with the ferromagnetically coupled total spin ST = 6 ground state. This contrasts the situation in many related Mn 3 III single-molecule magnets (SMMs) that have been studied intensively in the past, for which the local Mn III anisotropy tensors are reasonably parallel, resulting in substantial barriers to magnetization relaxation (Ueff ~ 30-35 cm -1 ) and magnetization blocking below about 2.5 K. The suppression of the 2 nd -order anisotropy [note that the rhombic term, E(S ̂x 2 -S ̂y 2 ), is also zero on symmetry grounds] in the present case results in a situation in which the zero-field splitting (ZFS) of the ST = 6 ground state is dominated by 4 th -and higherorder interactions. This provides a unique opportunity to study in depth how molecular geometry The synthesis of bistable magnetic molecules, or single-molecule magnets (SMMs), relies on the ability to control the microscopic structural details that dictate the overall molecular magnetic anisotropy. Hamiltonian, H ̂axial = DS ̂z2 , where S ̂z is the z-component spin operator) and ST the total spin associated with the magnetic ground state of the molecule. However, this requires coupling multiple anisotropic ions, which is not only synthetically challenging, but also leads to a dilution of the 2 nd order axial molecular anisotropy that, in the best case, scales as D  1/ST. However, molecular symmetry still dictates which interactions are allowed. In this regard, trigonal molecules provide a relatively simple case that can effectively demonstrate the interplay between molecular structure, exchange, and local single-ion anisotropy. The article is organized as follows. An overview of the Mn3 molecule is given in Section II, highlighting the important structural features that give rise to the three-fold pattern observed in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements described in Section III. Simulations of the experimental EPR results based on the so-called Giant Spin Approximation (GSA) are presented in Section IV, revealing a significant trigonal contribution to the magnetic anisotropy, and an unusually small 2 nd -order axial term. These findings require consideration of a Multi-Spin (MS) description, in which the local anisotropies of the constituent atoms are considered along with the exchange coupling between them. This framework is introduced in Section V, along with a mapping between the MS and GSA Hamiltonians using an irreducible tensor operator representation, providing important microscopic insights into the structural factors that influence the total molecular anisotropy. Conclusions are then presented in Section VI. This investigation focuses on a ferromagnetically coupled Mn 3 III triangular molecule (see Fig. HFEPR measurements were performed using a cavity perturbation technique, with a Millimeterwave Vector Network Analyzer (MVNA) employed as a source and detector. The stacked plots in Fig. population of excited states within the ST = 6 ground multiplet, were not considered in this figure. The apparent three-fold pattern effectively demonstrates the molecular C3 symmetry inherent to the system [the slow oscillation with 360 ° periodicity in  is due to a few degrees of unavoidable misalignment of the flat crystal with respect to the lab frame; this is addressed in the simulation in Fig. For the case of exchange-coupled spins, it is common practice to describe a magnetic molecule using an effective Hamiltonian given by the GSA. In the case of Mn3 containing three s = 2 sites, this description is particularly advantageous since only the ST = 6 multiplet need be considered, where the lowest (2ST + 1) = 13 energy levels contain the majority of the Boltzmann population at low temperatures; this of course assumes strong ferromagnetic coupling, so that the ST = 6 ground state is well isolated. Such an approach is computationally convenient when compared to the MS description, which requires consideration of (2s + 1) n = 125 states, where n = 3 in the current case. The Zero-Field Splitting (ZFS) of the ground multiplet is well described by an expansion of the GSA Hamiltonian in terms of Extended Stevens Operators (ESOs): The O ̂k q terms are comprised of spin operators of rank k, with q specifying the rotational symmetry, which are parameterized by their accompanying B k q coefficients. The sum includes non-zero contributions for k ≤ 2S T , with the more familiar 2 nd -order parameters D = 3B 2 0 and E = B 2 From the above symmetry related arguments, this expansion could include terms up to k = 12. However, including axial terms (q = 0) up to k = 4 and off-diagonal terms (q > 0) up to k = 6 provides a satisfactory description of the ZFS for Mn3 (vide infra). From the above experimental results, the obtained best simulation parameters are given in Table To have a functional SMM, it is desirable to have a large negative D while minimizing all of the off-diagonal (q  0) terms to prevent QTM via mixing of spin projection states, particularly those on opposite sides of the barrier. However, in the present case, the near magic angle tilting of the local Mn III ZFS tensors in fact acts to suppress the 2 nd -order axial anisotropy, D, while giving rise to sizeable 4 th and 6 th order trigonal (and hexagonal) q = 3 (q = 6) terms. To understand how this comes about, it is necessary to move to a multi-spin description. For N spin sites, the exchange coupled multi-spin Hamiltonian is given by: 8,10,19,33 where the indices i and j refer to the N sites in the molecule, with associated spin ŝi, and local 2 ndorder anisotropy specified by the tensor d ⃡ (assumed to be the same at all three sites in the present the Euler angles thus allows us to impose symmetry constraints on the system; note here that we use the 'zyz' Euler convention. In general, the spin Hamiltonian has a symmetry that is higher than the spatial symmetry of the molecule. For example, the special case of  = 0 gives a MS Hamiltonian with cylindrical D∞h symmetry, because all of the local anisotropy projects onto a single axis (the molecular C3 axis). For  = 90 o , the MS Hamiltonian has a hexagonal D6h symmetry while, for all 0 <  < 90 o , the MS Hamiltonian adopts an D3d symmetry. These latter two cases acquire a higher symmetry than the molecule because of the additional time-reversal invariance of the spin-orbit interaction. While the above qualitative arguments are appealing, we seek a quantitative correspondence between the MS and GSA parameterizations. To accomplish this, we take a perturbative approach following the procedure developed by Waldmann and Güdel, We first reframe the problem by casting the local anisotropies as a perturbation to the isotropic exchange coupling. This allows us to calculate the matrix elements from the MS Hamiltonian up to 2 nd order, such that equivalent operators can be generated in the subspace where: in which τS specifies a single spin multiplet within the full Hilbert space described by the multispin basis, while |SM⟩ specifies a single spin subspace spanned by the GSA introduced in Eq. ( For a given S in the giant spin subspace, the case M = M′ describes diagonal matrix elements. Similarly, matrix elements originating from within the same spin-multiplet have the same τ and S. Here, the label τ completely specifies the spin state in the MS description, and serves to simplify the more conventional coupled basis given by |S 1 S 2 S 12 S 3 SM⟩. where, in which the sum is taken over the GSA substates. We begin by breaking up the MS Hamiltonian as: where the 0 th order isotropic exchange interaction is given by H ̂0 [2 nd term in Eq. ( specifies the local anisotropies parameterized by d and e [1 st term in Eq. ( in which the leading term gives the energy due to exchange (H ̂0), the 1 st order perturbation considers mixing of M states due to intra-spin multiplet matrix elements (for a given τS state), while the 2 nd order perturbation considers inter-multiplet mixing between states τS and τ′′S ′′ , as illustrated in the Zeeman diagram of Fig. In terms of the MS anisotropy parameterization in Eq. ( where the projection factor described in Eq. (A9) has Γ k=2 (s) ≈ .0909 for s = 2 and S = 6 (see expressions in Table Moreover, the molecular C3 symmetry dictates that the k = 2, q = 2 GSA parameter E = B 2 2 = 0. According to the perturbative approach in Eq. ( From Eq. ( At the magic angle, β = 54.7 °, the 2 nd -order axial molecular anisotropy is completely suppressed, i.e., Dmol = 0. However, in spite of this suppression, the energy eigenvalues obtained via exact diagonalization of the MS Hamiltonian avoid complete convergence, as seen in Fig. Since e = 0, and the C3 molecular symmetry forbids rhombic anisotropy (i.e., B 2 2 = 0), this suggests the importance of higher order inter-multiplet 'S-mixing' effects. As noted above, such anisotropies are normally obscured in EPR experiments due to the dominant k = 2 contributions to the GSA anisotropy. However, the suppression of D mol in the present case affords a rare opportunity to characterize the higher order trigonal anisotropy via EPR, thus justifying the need to consider the 2 nd -order (of rank k = 4) perturbative expansion of Eq. ( We next consider how inter-multiplet S-mixing gives rise to k = 4 ESOs in the GSA of Eq. ( The 2 nd order perturbation derivation addressed in Appendix A gives: where the Γ k 1 ,k projection coefficients relate the MS operators of order k1 = 2 to the GSA operators of order k = 4; the summation is over excited states, "S", as seen in Eq. (A11) [see also Eq. A.19]. Referencing the tabulated products of Wigner-3j and 6j symbols, given by the d q 1 q 2 q k 1 k 2 k values, Before explicitly relating the experimental GSA parameters in Eq. ( The obtained single-ion anisotropy parameters, d and e (Table These findings are in good agreement with the present investigation. In fact, examination of the structure in Fig. When considering previous work on related trigonal Mn 3 III molecules, (Triangle 2). In the β = 0 case, it was shown numerically and argued on group theoretic/symmetry grounds that any trigonal GSA terms must be identically zero. On the other hand, for the β = 8.5° case, inclusion of a small B 4 3 was required to replicate QTM rates measured at certain avoided level crossings. QTM) are very pronounced (see below). It is therefore no surprise that the present Mn3 compound does not show any evidence for slow magnetization relaxation at low temperatures. Comparison between the GSA and MS parameterizations of the present tilted Mn3 complex with three closely related molecules (Triangle #1, Triangle simulate, requiring very significant computational resources. The effect is most pronounced at low temperatures due to exchange averaging at elevated temperatures. For this reason, it is only the ground state resonance at ~1.5 T that is significantly affected by intermolecular interactions for temperatures below ~15 K. Overall, the correspondence between experiment and simulations is highly satisfactory, both in terms of the resonance positions and spectral weight (integrated intensity). . By contrast, the lowest excited quasi doublet consists of one state that is mostly M = -5 (with a small admixture of -2), and another state that is mostly M = +5 (with a small admixture of +2). Components that make up less than 1% of the total composition have been omitted for clarity. For example, the ground states have 0.0196% contributions from M = ±3 and 0.00348% from M = 0. Finally, Fig. We present the results of detailed two-axis, angle-dependent high-field EPR studies of a single crystal of an unusual Mn 3 III triangular nanomagnet displaying rigorous C3 symmetry. Unlike similar triangles studied in the past, the easy-axes of the individual Mn III ions in this particular molecule are tilted very close to the so-called 'magic angle' of m = 54.7 o . This combined with the trigonal symmetry results in a situation in which the 1 st order spin-orbit anisotropy (quadratic in terms of spin operators, i.e., S ̂⋅ D ⃡ ⋅ S ̂) is almost completely suppressed. Consequently, the overall magneto-anisotropy is dominated by 2 nd and higher-order trigonal spin-orbit interaction terms (4 th and higher order in terms of spin operators). The angle-dependent EPR studies offer a powerful and direct means of visualizing these anisotropy terms, providing unique opportunities to study indepth how molecular geometry (i.e. symmetry) influences magnetic anisotropy. We employ theoretical irreducible tensor operator methods that improve significantly on previous numerical methods applied to trigonal Mn3 clusters in order to gain microscopic insights into the molecular anisotropy. We find that the easy-axis tilting leads to a dramatic compression of the effective energy barrier to magnetization reversal, thus accounting for the absence of single-molecule magnet behavior found in related Mn 3 III systems. Laboratory, which is supported by the National Science Foundation (DMR-1157490 and DMR-1644779) and the State of Florida. In this Appendix, we derive the expressions given in Eqs. ( A general cartesian operator O ̂(S), which is a function of spin operators S, can be expanded into ITOs as [34]: O ̂(S) = ∑ ∑ c kq T ̂q(k) (S), Here, k denotes the rank of the spherical tensor, with its q th component running from -k to k. Note that the more commonly used Stevens operators For compactness and ease of comparison with prior works, the proceeding derivations follow the convention used in [34] and [37] where a general tensor operator's rank 'k' is in the superscript, while its degree 'q' is in the subscript, i.e., T ̂qk . where the indices s i=1,2,3 have been used to denote Wigner rotations for spin sites where α = 0°, 120°, 240°, to preserve the C3 symmetry of the molecule. As an example, if we focus on one Mn site for an arbitrary tilt angle β, using the 'zyz' Euler rotation convention, 