We report magnetotransport measurements and its scaling analysis for the optimally electron doped Sr(Fe 0.88 Co 0.12 ) 2 As 2 system. We observe that both the Kohler's and modified Kohler's scalings are violated. Interestingly, the Hall angle displays quadratic temperature dependence (cotθ H ∝ T 2 ) similar to many cuprates and heavy fermion systems. The fact that this T 2 dependence is seen in spite of the violation of modified Kohler's scaling suggests that the Hall angle and magnetoresistance are not governed by the same scattering mechanism. We also observe a linear magnetoresistance in this system, which does not harbour a spin density wave (SDW) ground state. Implications of our observations are discussed in the context of spin fluctuations in strongly correlated electron systems. Copper oxide superconductors were the only high-T C materials until 2008, when superconductivity at ≈ 26 K was discovered in a fluorine doped oxypnictide La(O 1-x F x )FeAs Sr(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 has few unique features among the 122 family of iron based superconductors (FeSC). For example, magneto-structural transitions do not split upon doping Interestingly, despite having small values of Residual Resistivity Ratio, which are very similar ( ~ 3) to other members of the 122 families of FeSCs, quantum oscillations in the resistivity have been observed at magnetic fields as low as 12 Tesla It is well known that structural details are crucial to the physics of iron based superconductors We report magnetotransport measurements and its scaling analysis in an optimally doped (x = 0.12) composition of the Sr(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 series. Scaling analysis is a powerful tool to find commonalities and differences in different classes of materials. In the past, many cuprates and heavy fermion systems were shown to have similar magnetotransport scaling behavior, indicating that underlying mechanism behind their unconventional properties might be similar Kohler's rule is often violated in the strange metal phase of high-T C cuprates, heavy fermions and iron based superconductors In many cuprates and heavy fermions, magnetoresistance was shown to scale not by (H/ ρ xx (0)) 2 , but by tanθ H where tanθ H = ρ xy /ρ xx Single crystals of Sr(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 (x = 0.12) were grown using FeAs as flux. Here, x = 0.12 is actual composition of the crystals determined by Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDX). Details of single crystal growth and characterization can be found elsewhere Magnetotransport measurements were carried out in a 9 Tesla Quantum Design PPMS. Electrical contacts on the sample surface were made using a gold wire of 25 micron diameter and silver epoxy. To remove any exfoliating layers, samples were slightly polished before the measurements. Magnetic field was applied along the crystallographic c axis and electrical current in the ab plane. Polarity of the magnetic field was reversed at each measurement and the Hall resistivity was extracted as the asymmetric component of the signal i.e. ρ xy = [ρ(+H) -ρ(-H)]/2. Since magnetoresistance in these systems is very small at high temperatures, especially in the paramagnetic phase, averaging routines were employed to enable the scaling analysis. Main panel of Figure x P x ) 2 Figure Figure Magnetoresistance curves do not collapse on top of each other implying that both scalings are violated in the entire temperature range. As stated previously, Kohler's rule reads: ∆ρ/ρ 0 ∝ (H/ρ xx (0)) 2 . In the Drude picture, it can be written as: ∆ρ/ρ 0 ∝ mH/ne 2 τ, where m is the electronic mass, τ is the relaxation time and H is the applied magnetic field. Kohler's rule is found to be valid for a number of simple metals Unfortunately, to pin down the exact reason for the violation of Kohler's rule is also not straight forward, especially in complex systems such as the FeSCs because any one or more of the above mentioned factors may be responsible for the violation. For example, it is well known that FeSCs are multiband systems which would mean that carrier concentration is not constant with temperature, which is again an unfavourable condition for the Kohler's scaling. As stated previously, we also see strongly temperature dependent Hall coefficient, see Figure Evidently, a good fit is obtained in most of the temperature range; however the fit begins to deviate from T 2 behavior at low temperatures around 40 K. We suspect that this deviation is due to the proximity to superconducting transition. Note that even in some high-T C cuprates, modified Kohler's scaling was shown to be invalid even when cotθ H had quadratic temperature dependence Magnetotransport behavior of the electron doped 122 families appears to be different from that of the isovalently doped systems. For example, it is known that the parent compound BaFe 2 As 2 and the optimally doped composition (x = 0.074) of the Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 series do not obey modified Kohler's scaling x Co x ) 2 As 2 series is an interesting exception here These observations imply that the scenario of separation of scattering times may not be applicable to the electron doped 122 families of Ba(Fe We now turn our attention to the phenomena of linear magnetoresistance (LMR). As is evident from Figure This linear magnetoresistance is often explained using the quantum linear magnetoresistance (QLM) model of Abrikosov Doubts have been raised on the applicability of QLM model to iron based superconductors Another relevant model is due to Koshelev In summary, we have carried out magnetotransport measurements and the scaling analysis in the optimally electron doped Sr(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 (x = 0.12) system. We observed that both the Kohler's and modified Kohler's scalings do not work for this system. Interestingly, Hall angle displays quadratic temperature dependence. These observations imply that the Hall angle and magnetoresistance are not governed by the same scattering process. We also observed linear magnetoresistance in this system. This suggests that linear magnetoresistance is possibly a generic feature of the paramagnetic phase of the electron doped 122 systems. 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 series is ~ 25 K