We report a new approach to integrating high-κ dielectrics in both bottom-and top-gated MoS2 field-effect transistors (FETs) through thermal oxidation and mechanical assembly of layered twodimensional (2D) TaS2. Combined X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), optical microscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and capacitance-voltage (C-V) measurements confirm that multilayer TaS2 flakes can be uniformly transformed to Ta2O5 with a high dielectric constant of ~ 15.5 via thermal oxidation, while preserving the geometry and ultra-smooth surfaces of 2D TMDs. Top-gated MoS2 FETs fabricated using the thermally oxidized Ta2O5 as gate dielectric demonstrate a high current on/off ratio approaching 10 6 , a subthreshold swing (SS) down to 61 mV/dec, and a field-effect mobility exceeding 60 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at room temperature, indicating high dielectric quality and low interface trap density. Layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2, MoSe2, and WSe2 have recently emerged as promising post-silicon electronic materials because they have not only demonstrated a multitude of graphene-like properties desirable for flexible electronics including a relatively high carrier mobility, mechanical flexibility, and chemical and thermal stability, but also offer the significant advantage of a substantial band gap essential for low-power digital electronics. In this article, we present a new strategy to integrate high-κ dielectric into MoS2 field-effect transistors through mechanical assembly of Ta2O5 chemically transformed from 2D TaS2. In contrast to relatively inert semiconducting TMDs such as MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2, metallic TMDs such as TaS2 are prone to surface oxidation in ambient environment. To chemically transform TaS2 2D metal into Ta2O5 high-κ dielectric, TaS2 flakes were first mechanically exfoliated on SiO2/Si substrate and subsequently oxidized by heating on a hot plate at 300°C for 3 hours in air. The chemical transformation of TaS2 into Ta2O5 was confirmed by Xray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Figure To extract the dielectric constant of the Ta2O5 synthesized by thermal oxidation, we fabricated capacitors consisting of an ultrathin Ta2O5 dielectric layer sandwiched between top and bottom metal electrodes as schematically illustrated in Figure The nearly voltage independent capacitance shows negligible hysteresis, indicating that the Ta2O5 dielectric is of high quality because charge traps in the dielectric and at the interfaces usually introduce non-negligible hysteresis. To exclude the background capacitance (e.g. the cable capacitance), we plot the total capacitance as a function of area for capacitors fabricated using the same piece of Ta2O5 with uniform thickness, as shown in figure , where ε0 is the permittivity of the free space, and κ and t are the dielectric constant and thickness of the Ta2O5, respectively. Figure To further evaluate the quality of the thermally oxidized Ta2O5 as a high-κ dielectric for 2D electronics, we first fabricated MoS2 FETs with an ultrathin Ta2O5 dielectric and a multilayer graphene (M-Gr) gate as schematically shown in Figure / Here Cit and Cox are the interfacial and oxide capacitances, respectively. For practical application of MoS2 as a channel material in integrated circuits, top-gated MoS2 FETs with high-κ gate dielectric are needed to individually control each device. A significant advantage of this approach to integrating high-κ dielectrics in 2D electronics is that it circumvents a major challenge encountered in the ALD growth of high-κ dielectrics on TMDs due to the lack of dangling bonds on semiconducting TMD surfaces. contact resistance and the resistance of the under-lapped regions. Rs may also partially contribute to the current saturation in the output characteristics because the effective drain-source bias voltage given by Vds_eff =Vds -2RsIds is also reduced at high Ids. As shown in Figure In summary, we have demonstrated integration of ultrathin Ta2O5 chemically transformed from 2D TaS2 in both bottom-gated and top-gated MoS2 FETs as a high-κ gate dielectric. These devices show desirable FET characteristics such as a high on/off ratio, absence of hysteresis, a nearly ideal subthreshold swing, and a relatively high mobility, indicating high dielectric and interface quality. The newly developed dielectric integration strategy via chemical transformation of 2D materials to high-κ dielectrics in conjunction with polymer-based dry transfer techniques overcomes a significant challenge of dielectric integration in semiconducting TMD devices, and is applicable to a wide range of 2D materials. This approach is also scalable when combined with large area synthesis techniques such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and liquid exfoliation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was performed using a Kratos Axis Ultra XPS system with a monochromatic Al source. Because TaS2 is sensitive to air, the samples were mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals right before XPS measurement and then immediately inserted into the XPS chamber to avoid oxidation unless specified otherwise in the manuscript. Pass energy of 20 eV with 0.1 eV scanning step was used for photoelectron detection. The C 1s reference line at the binding energy of 284.6 eV was used to calibrate the charging effect. For C-V measurement, parallel-plate capacitors were fabricated by sandwiching an ultrathin Ta2O5 between a pair of metal electrodes. First, bottom electrodes consisting of 10 nm of platinum (Pt) with 5 nm of titanium (Ti) adhesion layer were patterned on Si substrates with 290 nm of thermal oxide using electron beam lithography followed by electron beam deposition and lift-off. Next, TaS2 flakes were produced by mechanical exfoliation of commercial available TaS2 crystals on Poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps and subsequently transferred on top of the Pt electrodes. To fabricate MoS2 FETs with Ta2O5 gate dielectric and graphite bottom gate, thin graphite flakes were first mechanically exfoliated and transferred onto Si/SiO2 substrates as bottom gates. Subsequently, multilayer TaS2 flakes were produced by mechanical exfoliation from commercially available TaS2 crystals on PDMS stamps and subsequently transferred onto top of the graphite gates using a home-built precision transfer stage. The substrates were then heated at 300°C for 3 