Liquid phase epitaxy of an 18 nm thick Yttrium Iron garnet (YIG) film is achieved. Its magnetic properties are investigated in the 100 -400 K temperature range, as well as the influence of a 3 nm thick Pt overlayer on them. The saturation magnetization and the magnetocrystalline cubic anisotropy of the bare YIG film behave similarly to bulk YIG. A damping parameter of only a few 10 -4 is measured, together with a low inhomogeneous contribution to the ferromagnetic resonance linewidth. The magnetic relaxation increases upon decreasing temperature, which can be partly ascribed to impurity relaxation mechanisms. While it does not change its cubic anisotropy, the Pt capping strongly affects the uniaxial perpendicular anisotropy of the YIG film, in particular at low temperatures. The interfacial coupling in the YIG/Pt heterostructure is also revealed by an increase of the linewidth, which substantially grows by lowering the temperature. Yttrium Iron garnet (Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 , YIG) is the marvel material for ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) Due to this renew of interest for YIG thin films, lots of efforts have been put in the last few years to produce ultrathin films with high epitaxial and dynamical qualities. Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a technique of choice to deposit ultrathin YIG layers ablated from stoichiometric targets on Gd 3 Ga 5 O 12 (GGG) substrates Here, we demonstrate that the growth of a YIG film as thin as 18 nm and of high quality can be achieved by LPE. We present a detailed investigation of its magnetic properties, including relaxation, as a function of temperature, as well as the effect of a 3 nm thick Pt overlayer on them. The ultrathin YIG film under consideration was grown by LPE from PbO and B 2 O 3 flux on a 1 inch (111)-oriented GGG substrate. High-purity oxides (6N) were used. The key parameter is the growth rate that depends on the growth temperature. To get an ultrathin YIG film, a very low growth rate is required which means that the growth temperature has to be close to the saturation temperature (small supercooling). For the selected sample, the growth rate was around 1 nm/s. Another important parameter is the speed of the substrate rotation during the growth process that must be controlled. The quality of the utrathin YIG film was checked by atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements from which a surface roughness of about 0.25 nm was determined (see inset in Fig. Broadband FMR on a millimeter-size slab of the grown film was used to investigate its magnetic relaxation at room temperature. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the resonance line measured in in-plane magnetized configuration as a function of the excitation frequency is shown in Fig. PROPERTIES FOR THE BARE YIG FILM The temperature dependence of the saturation magnetization for the bare YIG film measured by means of a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer and a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) is displayed in Fig. Next, the anisotropy constants were extracted from FMR measurements performed in a X-band cavity (magnetic field swept at fixed frequency f = 9.3 GHz). We note that the slab used in this experiment has a slightly larger inhomogeneous contribution to the linewidth than the one measured by broadband FMR. Using the Makino's procedure The origin of K U in micrometer-thick LPE grown YIG films has been discussed in detail in the eighties. Two main contributions were identified, namely, the growth and the stress anisotropies. For pure YIG films, the growth anisotropy is mainly induced by the Pb impurities from solvent. It has been established that it raises with the Pb content Moreover, a value of the gyromagnetic ratio nearly independent of temperature was extracted from the angular fit of the resonance field, |γ| = 1.7685±0.002 s -1 Oe -1 . This value is consistent with the one deduced from the broadband FMR measurements, |γ| = 1.771±0.0007 s -1 Oe -1 . Another interesting feature is the temperature dependence of the magnetic relaxation. Fig. where A(T ) is a frequency-independent prefactor and τ a temperature-dependent time constant. The total FMR linewidth ∆H FWHM = ∆H 0 + 4παf |γ| + ∆H SR is displayed in the inset in Fig. PROPERTIES FOR THE YIG/PT HETEROSTRUCTURE Next, we are interested in the influence of a thin overlayer of Pt on the magnetic properties of our ultrathin YIG film. Using electron beam evaporation, a 3 nm thick Pt layer was evaporated on top of the YIG film after a very soft in situ dry etching of its surface. Similarly to the bare YIG film, the obtained YIG/Pt heterostructure was then studied at Xband as a function of temperature. The main results of this characterization are compared to those obtained on the bare YIG film in Fig. As expected, the interfacial coupling between YIG and Pt also leads to the increase of the FMR linewidth In sum, this study demonstrates that the LPE growth method can be used to produce YIG films with thickness below 20 nm and good structural parameters. Surface induced contributions to the anisotropy and relaxation are present in these ultrathin films. The effect of a Pt overlayer proves that the interfacial coupling with this heavy metal is efficient. In fact, similar batches of ultrathin LPE grown YIG films have already been used to study the transport of angular momentum in non-local YIG/Pt devices using spin-to-charge interconversion We would like to thank Philippe Eliès and Franc ̧ois Michaux from the PIMM-DRX platform at UBO for their help with the AFM characterization and the X-ray reflectometry.