Carrier Selective (CS) Silicon solar cells are increasingly explored as a low cost alternative to PN junction Silicon solar cells. While the recent trends on power conversion efficiency are encouraging, the temperature coefficient and hence the power output under elevated temperatures are not well explored for such solar cells. Here, we address this issue through detailed numerical simulations to explore the influence of interface and material parameters on the temperature coefficient. Our results indicate that irrespective of the interface quality, the temperature coefficient of CS solar cells improves with an increase in band discontinuities. Interestingly, contrary to the trends related to efficiency, our results indicate that the temperature coefficient of CS solar cells is more critically affected by the interface quality of the minority carrier extraction layer than the majority carrier extraction layer. These insights have important implications towards the choice of optimal material and processing conditions for Si based CS solar cells. Si based CS solar cells are considered as a good candidate to challenge the market dominance of conventional PN junction based solar cells. The perceived competitiveness stems from a few advantages like -(a) large band gap materials used as CS layers provides carrier selectivity through appropriate band offsets In this manuscript, the temperature coefficient for CS based solar cells is established through detailed modeling and is then compared with the well-established HIT and PERC solar cell technologies. For this, we first develop an analytical model to predict the functional dependence of temperature coefficient on important parameters like band discontinuity and interface quality (Section II). These predictions are then validated through detailed numerical simulations (Section III). Our results indicate that the temperature coefficient is limited by V oc for smaller band discontinuities and it follows the trend of FF for larger magnitudes of band discontinuity. Additionally, unlike efficiency Figure where STC denotes the standard test conditions, which assumes T=298K in this manuscript. The efficiency of a solar cell, in turn, depends on the open circuit potential (V oc ), short circuit current (J sc ), and the fill factor (FF) ( Here the terms in the RHS denote temperature coefficients of V oc (TCV oc ), J sc (TCJ sc ), and FF (TCFF), respectively. Note that each of these temperature coefficients is defined against the respective parameter at STC. As such, good estimates for the temperature coefficient of efficiency can be obtained through detailed knowledge about the temperature variation of parameters like V oc , J sc , and FF. With this aim, and to develop quantitative insights, we first explore the effect ESL/Si interface parameters on TCη with ideal conditions assumed for Si/HSL interface (i.e., zero band offset for holes, perfect electron blocking, and lack of any interface trap states). : It is well known that the temperature coefficient of solar cell is dominated by the temperature sensitivity of V oc V oc,min = 2kT q ln ( 2Gw Si c ns D it E g,Si n i ). Here, V oc,max and V oc,min are the maximum and minimum values of V oc respectively, G is the carrier generation rate in Silicon, τ b is the effective bulk life time in Silicon (the combined effects of SRH, radiative, and Auger recombinations), N A is the acceptor doping in Silicon, n i is the intrinsic carrier concentration in Silicon, D it is the interface defect density at the ESL/Si interface and E g,Si is the bandgap of Silicon. Note that V oc,max is influenced only by the bulk lifetime while V oc,min is entirely dictated by the interface recombination. Although eq. ( Equations ( ∂V oc ∂T , is negative. The smaller the magnitude of temperature coefficient for V oc , the better is its performance at high temperature. Although the above discussion allows us to estimate the asymptotic limits of TCV oc , it still lacks quantitative information of the functional dependence of TCV oc on various parameters like band offset ΔE c , interface state density D it , etc. To obtain the same, we rely on the modified analytical model for V oc reported in ref. Hence, the current through the ESL, which is J sc , is given as (5) The above equation can be conveniently interpreted in terms of the supply of electrons ( n s on the RHS) and the factor e -ΔE c kT denotes the probability of carriers crossing the barrier due to band offset (i.e., for ΔE c > 0. Otherwise, the current will be limited by the diffusion of electrons from bulk to Si/ESL interface). It has been recently shown that the band bending in Si (ψ Si ) at the Si/ETL interface increases with increase in ΔE c Finally, the temperature coefficient of efficiency which is the sum of the temperature coefficients of V oc , J sc and FF is significantly affected by the V oc for lower band discontinuities. For these cases, the FF too follows V oc trends. For larger band discontinuity (> 0.4eV) the temperature coefficient is dictated by FF, as over the barrier transport of carriers at maximum power point increases with temperature. The analysis in this section predicts that temperature coefficient of efficiency improves with increase in ΔE c . Interestingly, the temperature coefficient might become positive for large ΔE c , however, the overall efficiency could still be lower than the corresponding values for small ΔE c . Therefore, there is an optimal band offset considering both the tradeoff between efficiency and temperature coefficient, which will be explored in detail using numerical simulations. In the previous section, we used the analytical model to explore the variation of temperature coefficient as a function of band discontinuity and interface quality. The model predicts that TCη closely follows the features of TCV oc . In this section we discuss the results of detailed numerical simulations. Current-Voltage characteristics of the modeled device was obtained through self-consistent solution of Poisson and drift diffusion equations The influence of band offset on the interface recombination is highlighted in Fig. Figure Figure The temperature coefficient of J sc (Fig. The previous section detailed the influence of minority carrier extraction interface on the temperature coefficients. Here, we extend the same to majority carrier extraction interface (i.e., c-Si/HTL). The effects of temperature and band discontinuity (i.e., ΔE v ) at c-Si/HSL interface on the normalized solar cell performance metrics are shown in Fig. The trends in J sc can be explained by using Fig. The combined effect of interface non-idealities at ESL/Si and HSL/Si interfaces on temperature coefficient is shown in Fig. To summarize, here we addressed the temperature coefficient of Si based CS layers as a function of the band discontinuity and interface quality. Through an analytical model we explored the functional dependence of temperature coefficient on such material and interface properties. These predications were validated using detailed numerical simulations. The results show that the temperature coefficient improves with band discontinuity if the interface quality is imperfect. Further for larger band discontinuity the temperature coefficient improves due to the increase in over the barrier transport with temperature irrespective of the interface quality. In addition, our results show that the passivation quality at the minority carrier layer interface is more critical than the majority layer interface and that the temperature coefficient is not cumulative, i.e., the temperature coefficient of a structure with traps at both interfaces is better than the sum of the temperature coefficient of separate device structures with traps being present at only one interface (either ESL/Si or HSL/Si). Finally our results indicate that with appropriate design, CS solar cells can achieve temperature coefficients better than PERC solar cellsalthough they might still be inferior to HIT solar cells. These interesting insights could be of broad interest to the community towards the optimization of process and material considerations for Si based CS solar cells.