We theoretically propose a method for on-demand generation of traveling Schrödinger cat states, namely, quantum superpositions of distinct coherent states of traveling fields. This method is based on deterministic generation of intracavity cat states using a Kerr-nonlinear parametric oscillator (KPO) via quantum adiabatic evolution. We show that the cat states generated inside a KPO can be released into an output mode by controlling the parametric pump amplitude dynamically. We further show that the quality of the traveling cat states can be improved by using a shortcut-toadiabaticity technique. Quantum superposition is one of the most strange and intriguing concepts in quantum mechanics and a useful resource for quantum information processing. Superpositions of macroscopically distinct states are often referred to as Schrödinger cat states, or cat states for short, named after Schrödinger's famous gedankenexperiment with a cat in a superposition of alive and dead states Such cat states have been generated experimentally by various approaches. In the optical regime, cat states of small size, which are sometimes called Schrödinger kittens, have been generated by subtracting one photon from squeezed states of light In the microwave regime, cat states of larger size have been generated experimentally In this paper, we propose a simple alternative method for on-demand generation of traveling cat states. Our method is based on a recent theoretical result that a Kerr-nonlinear parametric oscillator (KPO) can generate intracavity cat states deterministically via quantum adiabatic evolution The coupled system of a KPO and an output mode is depicted in Fig. Coupled system of a KPO and an output mode. The KPO is implemented by a Josephson parametric oscillator (JPO) plementation is supposed where a † and a are the creation and annihilation operators for the KPO, p(t) is the time-dependent pump amplitude, K is the magnitude of the Kerr coefficient [24], ∆ = ω KPOω p /2 is the detuning frequency (ω KPO is the one-photon resonance frequency of the KPO), b † (ω) and b(ω) are the creation and annihilation operators for photons of frequency (or wave number) ω p /2 + ω in the output mode, and κ ex is the energy decay rate of the KPO due to its coupling to the output mode. Here we assume no internal loss of the KPO, which is discussed later. Hereafter, we consider the resonance case (∆ = 0). If the KPO is a closed system (κ ex = 0), a cat state |α 0 + |-α 0 can be generated from the vacuum state |0 via quantum adiabatic evolution by gradually increasing p(t) from zero to p 0 = Kα 2 0 Our idea is based on the fact that any quantum state inside a linear cavity results in a traveling pulse in the same quantum state through the leak to the output mode, where the pulse shape is exponential corresponding to the exponential decay Our solution is to switch off the parametric pumping as p(t) ∝ exp(-κ ex t) after the cat-state preparation. Then the Kerr term and the pumping term are cancelled out each other, and hence the KPO can be regarded as a linear cavity. This is confirmed as follows. Suppose that at time t 0 , the KPO is prepared in a cat state |α 0 + |-α 0 , where α 0 = p 0 /K and p 0 = p(t 0 ). Since H KPO (t) in Eq. ( , where a|±α 0 = ±α 0 |±α 0 To examine the above method quantitatively, we numerically solve the Schrödinger equation with the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( We first introduce the annihilation operator with respect to the position z: Then, we move to the interaction picture with the unitary operator U (t) = e -iHoutt as follows: A pulse-mode operator for the interval [0, T ] is defined as where f p (z) is the normalized envelope function for the output pulse satisfying Next, we divide the interval [0, T ] into J small intervals [z j-1 , z j ] (j = 1, 2, . . . , J), where the intervals ∆z j = z jz j-1 are set to small values Then, the commutation relation and the normalization condition ing the integration with respect to z to the summation with respect to j, we obtain The Hamiltonian at time t ∈ [z j-1 , z j ] is given by We numerically solve the Schrödinger equation with the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The dimensionless parameter A p is used for tuning the photon number of the traveling cat state. We set the photon number to about 2, which is large enough for the two coherent states being distinct but small enough to solve the Schrödinger equation numerically. The bandwidth, B, of the LPF We obtain the density operator, ρ, describing the quantum state of the output pulse using the moments M m,n = b †m p b n p with b p in Eq. Using the density matrix, we calculate the correspond- The imperfection of the generated traveling cat state may be partially due to the leak during the initial catstate preparation. We can speed up the preparation by setting the LPF bandwidth B to a larger value, e.g., B = K. Then, however, nonadiabatic effects degrade the cat state. The simulation results for B = K are shown in Fig. To mitigate the nonadiabatic effects, we can use the technique called shortcut to adiabaticity where |φ n is the n-th instantaneous eigenstate of the slowly varying Hamiltonian and the dot denotes the time derivative. In the present case, the counterdiabatic Hamiltonian is approximately given by [26, 31] The physical meaning of the counterdiabatic Hamiltonian is to add the imaginary pump amplitude p ′ (t) to the real one p(t). This is experimentally possible by controlling the phase of the pump field. The simulation results with the shortcut-toadiabaticity technique are shown in Figs. So far, internal loss of the KPO has not been taken into account. However, any actual devices have internal loss, and it degrades the coherence of the cat states. Here we briefly examine the effect of the internal loss in the superconducting-circuit implementation of the KPO Assuming that K/(2π) = 10 MHz and ω KPO /(2π) = 10 GHz as typical values, κ ex = 0.2K in the present simulations corresponds to the external quality factor, Q ex = ω KPO /κ ex , of 5 × 10 3 . On the other hand, the probability of losing a photon inside the KPO, which gives an upper bound on the infidelity due to the internal loss, is approximately given by κ in I t , where κ in is the internal-loss rate and ex in all the cases. Thus, in order to have an intra-KPO photon-loss probability below, e.g., 10%, the required condition is κ in I t ≈ 10κ in /K ≤ 0.1, which is equivalent to the internal quality factor of Q in ≥ 10 5 . These values of Q ex and Q in seem feasible with current technologies. We have shown that the cat states deterministically generated inside a KPO via quantum adiabatic evolution can be released into an output mode by controlling the pump amplitude properly. Thus, on-demand generation of traveling cat states can be realized using a KPO. We have further shown that a shortcut-to-adiabaticity technique, where the phase of the pump field is controlled dynamically in time, can improve the quality of the traveling cat state significantly. The traveling cat states generated by a KPO can be directly observed by, e.g., homodyne or heterodyne detection of the output field. Thus, this can be used for experimentally demonstrating the ability of a KPO to generate cat states deterministically. In the simulation presented in the main text, we truncate the photon number in the output mode at 6, which is sufficiently large to express a cat state with average photon number of 2. Then, the state vector |ψ describing the coupled system is represented as follows: ψ 6 (n, j 1 , j 2 , j 3 , j 4 , j 5 , j 6 )|n |j 1 , j 2 , j 3 , j 4 , j 5 , j 6 , where the first and second ket vectors represent the Fock states of the KPO and the output mode, respectively, and N l (l = 0, 1, . . . , 6) is the number at which the photon number in the KPO is truncated when the photon number in the output mode is l. In the present simulations, we set N 0 = N 1 = N 2 = 6, N 3 = 5, N 4 = 4, N 5 = 3, and N 6 = 2. The second ket vector is defined with the creation operators, e.g., as follows: where the normalization factor N is defined as Using this representation, we numerically solved the Schrödinger equation with the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Since the photon number in the KPO is large (small) in the first (second) half of the whole process, we set correspondingly the intervals ∆z j to small (large) values. More concretely, we set ∆z j = (T /2)/(4J/5) for j = 1, 2, • • • , 4J/5 and ∆z j = (T /2)/(J/5) for j = 4J/5 + 1, 4J/5 + 2, • • • , J. (So we set J to multiples of 5.) We use the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method for numerically solving the Schrödinger equation, where the time steps are set to about 0.1K -1 . These time steps are defined by dividing ∆z j by appropriate integers. As mentioned in the main text, We set J = 80 in the present simulations. The following results show that this value of J is sufficiently large. Figure 