We report the observations of unexpected layer-dependent, strong, and anisotropic second harmonic generations (SHGs) in atomically thin ReS 2 . Appreciable (negligible ) SHGs are obtained from even (odd) numbers of ReS 2 layers, which is opposite to the layer-dependence of SHGs in group VI transition metal dichalcogenides, such as MoS 2 and WS 2 . The results are analyzed from ReS 2 's crystal structure, implying second harmonic polarizations generated from the interlayer coupling. Pumped by a telecomband laser, SHG from the bilayer ReS 2 is almost one order of magnitude larger than that from the monolayer WS 2 . The estimated second-order nonlinear susceptibility of 900 pm/V is remarkably high among those reported in two-dimensional materials. The laser polarization dependence of ReS 2 's SHG is strongly anisotropic and indicates its distorted lattice structure with more unequal and non-zero second-order susceptibility elements. Atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) as one of the most important two-dimensional (2D) materials have drawn more and more attentions because of their intriguing physical and chemical properties resulting from structural symmetry and interlayer coupling. We implement the SHG measurements in a reflection geometry with a normal incidence excitation. A fiber-based pulsed laser is chosen as the fundamental pump radiation, which is centered around 1558 nm and has a repetition rate of 18.5 MHz and a pulse width of 8.8 ps. The pulsed laser is focused by an 50× objective lens with a numerical aperture of 0.75 into a spot size of about 2 μm on the sample. The SH signal scattered from the ReS 2 sample is collected by the same objective lens, which is then examined by a spectrometer mounted with a cooled silicon CCD. The reflected pump laser is filtered out from the SH signal by a dichroic mirror. Atomically thin ReS 2 flakes are mechanically exfoliated on a fused silica or on a silicon covered with 300 nm silicon oxide. Figure Polarization-dependent SHG is a useful technique to investigate the crystal symmetry of 2D materials. We measure the polarization dependences of the SH signals from the even numbers of ReS 2 layers. In the measurements, the pump laser is converted into different linear polarizations by passing a circularly polarized laser through a rotated polarizer. Another polarizer is placed in the signal collection path, whose direction is rotated accordingly to detect SH radiation components parallel or perpendicular to the polarization of the pump laser. Figure The maximum SH intensity is obtained when the laser polarization is along the x-axis. Since the anisotropic properties, the maximum SH intensities of the parallel and perpendicular components have a ratio of ∼2, which yields an anisotropic distribution of the total SH intensity. This is different from that obtained from a group VI TMDC, which has an isotropic total SHG intensity. The polarization dependent SH intensities could be analyzed from the second-order nonlinear susceptibility tensor d. We describe the SH polarizations P from the matrix calculation of P = dE in the x-y coordinate defined in Figure P y (2ω) For the electrical field components (E x , E y , E z ) at the focus plane, because of the low numerical aperture of the used objective lens, E z could be neglected. Considering an electrical field E 0 of the pump laser polarized along a direction with an angle θ to the x axis, there are expressions of E x = E 0 cos(θ) and E y = E 0 sin(θ). The generated SH polarization components (P x , P y , P z ) can be regarded as electrical dipoles oscillating at the SH frequency. The SH signal radiated from P z can not be collected by the objective lens with low numerical aperture. Therefore, only P x and P y contribute to the detected SH intensity. The parallel and perpendicular components of the SH intensities could be described as By exploiting Eqs. ( The SHG efficiency in the bilayer ReS 2 is evaluated as well. We first compare it with the SHG from a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown monolayer WS 2 . With the same conditions of laser excitation and signal collection as well as the same pump power, we measure SHGs from the bilayer ReS 2 and monolayer WS 2 . Figure Correspondingly, there are multiple peaks in the SH spectra, locating between the range of 775 nm and 779 nm. While monolayer WS 2 is reported to have the highest second-order nonlinearity among the TMDCs, ReS 2 is estimated as 900 pm/V. Because of resonant enhancement via the excitonic effect, the bilayer ReS 2 has an effective nonlinear susceptibility that is remarkably large among the 2D materials when pumped by a telecom-band laser. In summary, we experimentally observed unexpected layer-dependent, strong, and anisotropic SHGs in atomically thin ReS 2 . Different from the well-studied group VI TMDCs, ReS 2 as the group VII TMDC has a distorted CdCl 2 crystal structure. While its monolayer, other odd numbers of layers and bulk crystal belong to C i space group and have inversion symmetry, the inversion symmetries in even numbers of layers are broken. Thus, ReS 2 presents strong (negligible) SHG in even (odd) layer thickness, which is opposite to layer-dependence of SHG in group VI TMDCs. The exactly zero SHG in ReS 2 monolayer and strong SHGs in even numbers of ReS 2 layers indicate the unexpected strong interlayer coupling, which generated appreciable SH polarizations. In a bilayer ReS 2 , we obtain an effective second-order nonlinear susceptibility of 900 pm/V pumped by a telecom-band laser, which is remarkably high among those reported in 2D materials. The laser polarization dependence of ReS 2 's SHG is strongly anisotropic and indicates its distorted lattice structure with more unequal and non-zero second-order susceptibility elements. Our results not only reveal another distinct property between group VI and group VII TMDCs, but also open up opportunities for studying piezoelectricity and valley-dependent physics in even numbers of ReS 2 layers arising from the broken inversion symmetry.