The production of flexible and robust thermal neutron detectors with improved properties as compared to the commercial ZnS:Ag based phosphors is here pursued, exploiting a siloxane binder, whose intrinsic properties as related to the chemical features of the functional groups and to the optical properties are investigated and tailored in correlation with the final performances of the detectors. Two different siloxanes either with pendant phenyl groups or with aliphatic groups have been used, the former being intrinsically fluorescent and with higher polarizability than the latter. Moreover, 6 LiF crystals have been synthesized by co-precipitation method and the solvent/co-solvent ratio has been changed in order to tune the crystal size. Then, the size effect on the detector efficiency to thermal neutrons has been investigated as related to the energy loss of thermal neutron reaction products inside the crystal and the dispersion homogeneity of the crystals into the composite. To complete the characterization of the produced flexible detectors, the response to γ-rays has been measured and compared to a commercial detector. The careful choice of both the base resin and the 6 LiF crystals size allows to produce flexible detector for thermal neutrons with performances comparable to the commercial standard and with higher mechanical robustness and stability. The detection of thermal neutrons is increasingly important for several fields of interest, spanning from nuclear waste repositories monitoring, fissile materials illicit traffic inspection at borders, nuclear physics research dedicated plants, with special reference to Radioactive Ion Beams production, Neutron Spallation Source and other safety control related fields Li metal (enrichment 95%) was purchased from Spectra 2000, while ZnS:Ag (EJ-600) was acquired from Eljen Technology. The resins vinyl terminated (22%-25%) diphenylsiloxane-dimethylsiloxane (PDV-2331 labelled as PSS-22) and vinyl terminated polydimethylsiloxane (DMS-V21) were purchased from Gelest Inc. The preparation of 6 LiF crystals started from 6 Li metal that was cut from an ingot and made to react with heated diluted hydrochloric acid, producing 6 LiCl. To obtain different crystallites size, the produced 6 LiCl white salt was dissolved in different ratios of water: ethanol mixture, namely 1:0, 1:1, 1:3, 0:1. A solution of ammonium fluoride NH4F 0.2 M, dissolved in the same mixture, was added dropwise to the 6 LiCl solution. After few hours of stirring, the solution was centrifuged and the solids washed several times with distilled water; the 6 LiF crystals were recovered after drying at 40°C under vacuum for several hours. Fig. In order to investigate on the role of the polysiloxane matrix in the enhancement of the scintillation yield a photoluminescence analysis has been performed on both the bare resins and on composites obtained by mixing the resin with 5% wt. of ZnS:Ag. From the emission and excitation spectra reported in Fig. In order to investigate the thermal neutron sensitivity of the produced composites, the scintillation pulses have been analysed through the charge integration method (1) where Qtail is the integral of the signal tail and Qshort is the integral of the fast component. Thermal neutron signals are characterized by higher values of PSP, as defined in Eq. 1, with respect to background noise or γ-rays. In Fig. Thermal neutrons detection efficiency is defined as the ratio between the number of thermal neutron induced events on the detector and the number of impinging thermal neutrons, hence several parameters should be considered, besides the source activity, such as the thickness of the moderator, the distance from the source, the solid angle of the detector and the signal-to-noise ratio that depends on light output, the PMT gain and the acquisition threshold. In the present experiment, we calculated the relative efficiency of our samples with respect to the commercial standard EJ-420. This relative efficiency has been evaluated by counting the thermal neutrons induced events identified by pulse shape discrimination method in a defined acquisition time interval and in a given detector-source configuration, once the best condition (i.e. acquisition threshold, signal-to-noise rejection, signal integration gates) for signal processing were properly set. The ratio between the thermal neutron counts in different samples with respect to the counts in the standard EJ-420 define our "relative efficiency". As illustrated in Fig. The very low thickness of the prepared detectors should lead to limited sensitivity to impinging γ-rays, which mainly interact with atomic electrons by Compton scattering. Nevertheless, the evaluation of the sensitivity to γ-rays is an important issue to assess the reliability of the detector, since the release of neutrons is often accompanied by γ-rays, leading to spurious signals. In Fig. Flexible and robust thermal neutron scintillation sensors have been produced by exploiting the outstanding thermal and mechanical properties featured by silicon based polymers. These detectors showed very similar performances with respect to the commercial ones in terms of neutron counting and low sensitivity to γ-rays. Two polysiloxane resins, namely polydimethylsiloxane and polymethylphenylsiloxane, with different polarizability of substituents have been tested as matrix, entrapping commercial luminescent EJ-600 powder (ZnS activated with Ag) and 6 LiF crystals as thermal neutron absorber. The crystals have been synthesised by a co-precipitation route and different crystal dimensions ranging from hundreds of nm to tens of μm have been obtained by varying the water to ethanol ratio in the solvent. This synthetic approach has been pursued to evaluate if the decrease in crystals size improves the final light output of the detector, taking into account that the residual energy of the capture reaction products (alpha particles and tritons) escaping from the crystals is strongly dependent on the path through the crystal itself. The results of this work showed that the expected improvement of the light output for smaller crystals can be jeopardized by a bad crystals distribution inside the matrix and the effect is different for the two used resins. In the low polarity polydimethylsiloxane resin, the dispersion of 6 LiF grains is not homogeneous independently on the used synthetic route, as clearly evidenced by SEM and BSE analyses, and it is characterized by the formation of aggregates whose size is comparable to the range of the reaction products, ultimately portending a remarkable low light output. In the case of the higher polarizability polymethylphenylsiloxane resin, the dispersion is optimal for crystals with size in the order of some μm (W:EtOH 1:1 volume ratio). On the other hand, nanoparticles of 6 LiF, obtained with a W:EtOH 0:1 volume ratio, undergo clustering and segregation in large agglomerates, thus hampering the exit of ionizing particles and their interaction with EJ-600 grains. BSE analyses have well evidenced these features and the detection efficiency foreseen on the basis of the composite morphology has been confirmed by measurements with a moderated 237 Cf source. Possible energy transfer effects from the fluorescent phenyl containing matrix to the ZnS:Ag luminophore has been also investigated by excitation/fluorescence analyses, but a negligible variation in the emission features has been detected, owing to the very intense luminescence of ZnS:Ag. Therefore, after a careful choice of both the resin and the crystallites size to obtain a good dispersion of the different components, a thin, flexible and mechanically robust detector has been produced, with performances comparable to the best commercially available standard as thermal neutron counter. The γ-rays response has been eventually evaluated, to test for possible misleading signals, and compared to the standard detector. Although a higher sensitivity as related to the standard has been evidenced, the response of the produced detector to γ-rays is still very low and possible interference with the signal from thermal neutrons is negligible. The fabrication of this type of device paves the way towards thermal neutron detection in extremely harsh environment, where resistance to high temperature and intense vibrations is mandatory. Meanwhile, it enables the built-up of multiple radiation detector, where the flexible sensor in the desired shape can be wrapped around or sandwiched between other radiation detectors, albeit maintaining a unique, distinct response in terms of scintillation pulse decay time.