The purpose of this paper is to obtain the temperature field inside a cylinder filled in with a dense non scattering semi-transparent medium from directional intensity data by solving the inverse radiative transfer equation. This equation is solved in a first approach with the help of a discrete scheme and the solution is then exactly obtained by separating the physical set on two disjoint domains on which a Laplace transform is applied, followed by the resolution of a 1 st kind Fredholm equation. The determination of a temperature field inside an axisymmetric semi-transparent medium from optical infrared measurements has been studied many decades ago, especially for gaseous media where the refractive index can be ignored, in the sense where it remains close to one for a large scale of wavelengths. Indeed, the energetic spectral and/or directional radiative flux emerging from such a medium allows the reconstruction of the internal thermal distribution generating this flux, and from this basic principle Milne Siewert Nevertheless, for dense media such as glasses, of significantly higher absorption coefficients, the refractive index is much greater than one and such effects can no longer be ignored. Although several papers have been devoted to the restitution of the inner temperature field, or the radiative source field, for plane dense media parallel slabs so as for Cartesian and cylindrical geometry devices, Viskanta et al. Ertürk et al. In the case of axisymmetric systems, most of the authors recommend to use both spectral and directional measurements: Natterer That is why one should prefer directional monochromatic intensities when reconstructing a complete thermal field inside a dense cylinder. In this paper, we determine the complete temperature field expression inside a cylinder of radius R filled with a dense semi-transparent medium of non unit refractive index nλ . We first solve the associated inverse problem by using a numerical approach. It is shown that a simple LU decomposition of the associated matrix gives accurate results only in a restricted area and fails in the complement region n R x λ > , even for perfect theoretical non noisy outgoing intensities. This later observation crudely differs from what happens in media of unit refractive index such as gaseous atmospheres, where a simple LU decomposition gives exact results everywhere in the cylinder for non noisy data, and no regularization need be applied on the input data. When the refractive index is 1, a simple TSVD The exact solution of the integral equation governing the related temperature field is proposed by separating the whole problem into two disjoint calculations on two separate sets. This allows us to finally show that the problem does not belong to the "missing data problems", as frequently mentioned, although a discussion on the eigenvalues of the operator's kernel demonstrate why this solution is impossible to obtain in a practical way. One considers a cylinder of radius R filled with dense absorbing-emitting but non scattering semitransparent medium (STM), such as glass or crystal, mainly characterised by its spectral absorption coefficient κ λ and its spectral refractive index nλ . The medium (amorphous or not) being supposed made of dense bulk material without heterogeneity, is weakly or not scattering, and its absorption and refraction fields do not strongly depend on the inner temperature for relatively large temperature scales. Furthermore, the absorption (and refraction) spectrum of dense media being extremely smooth on the major part of the semi-transparency band, spectral measurements of the emerging intensities emitted by the body will present an extremely bad sensitivity relatively to the wavelength, and angular collected monochromatic (simulated) data have been preferred to a spectral intensities set, at a wavelength where the lateral surface of the cylinder is not opaque. The cylinder is submitted to a given spatial temperature field (function of the radial position r and the longitudinal one z along the cylinder's axis), and emits an infrared radiation which is collected and converted into emerging intensities, function of the spatial position, and also depending on the absorption coefficient, the refractive index and the temperature field. The directional intensities are collected in a tomographic plane perpendicular to the cylinder's axis at a given z, which allows the problem to be considered as one-dimensional, i.e. the emerging intensities at a given z are only depending on the geometric variable x due to the revolution symmetry. Since the refractive index is assumed to be strictly greater than one, the reflection coefficients at the lateral specular surface between the semi-transparent medium and the surrounding environment, given by the Fresnel formulae, are function of the local position x. The geometrical path in the tomographic plane for a particular emerging ray consists in a complete series of broken lines as illustrated on Fig. 1a The outgoing intensity ( ) at position x is given by the classical expression In this expression, ( ) is the directional monochromatic intensity emerging from the cylinder in a plane orthogonal to the cylinder's axis z → , for a given angle φ (between the emerging ray at abscissa x and the normal to the lateral surface of the cylinder at this point), simply related to the spatial position x by , as depicted on the schematic figure , and Eq. ( The unknown function is , the useful data being the discrete set ( ) x g , where the mean reflection factor is defined by ( ) . In the previous expression, the subscript ⊥ stands for the reflection factor related to the perpendicular polarisation, while the subscript denotes the parallel polarisation. The behaviour of the directional emerging intensity with respect to the local position x inside the cylinder has been reported on Figs 2a-b, when the internal temperature field inside the cylinder is assumed linear, with ( ) The physical model being fully described, the following section shall be now devoted to the numerical discretization of Eq. ( The continuous Eq. ( In each cell, the temperature is supposed constant, For a refractive index strictly greater than 1, x n , and it exists an integer p strictly lower than i, i.e. [ ] . This simply means that for a refractive index very close to 1, x n x i i ≈ λ and this point belongs to the cell which contains xi , i.e. x n A simple analysis shows that the corresponding integer p is defined by λ where E stands for the integer part of a real number x, with ( ) . Hence defining the index q by , the discrete form of Eq. ( x g N has to be extrapolated, for instance from the other values. Defining the index t as , while if t = N, it reduces to: Hence Eqs. ( ) In all what follows, the numerical applications will be done for a cylinder of radius R = 24 cm, filled with a semi-transparent medium characterised by its refractive index , the temperature field being given by ( ) . The method fails however in the area n R x λ > , even with exact non noisy data. The results are oscillatory and inaccurate with an error increasing rapidly with the grid refinement. However, the complete temperature field is correctly evaluated for N lower than 27 in this particular situation. For 6 2 N ≤ and perfect data, the retrieved Planck function field cannot be distinguished from the exact Planck function at all internal point inside the medium, while as soon as 7 2 N ≥ , the retrieved field is of poor quality in the neighbourhood of the lateral surface of the cylinder. This threshold value of the number of cells, below which the reconstructed field is correctly determined for perfect data, is strongly depending on the refractive index of the medium, as clearly shown on figures 4a and 4b. In these examples, the number of cells is set to dense media, the temperature field cannot be estimated in an important area of the cylinder when using a simple LU decomposition. This is particularly true for internal temperature fields of complex shape inside highly refracting media, when using a consequent number of data. The previous numerical inversion procedure has been then applied to a noisy data set with , where ( ) is a perfect non noisy data set obtained from a direct calculation, r a random number such that 1 r 1 -≤ ≤ and δ a parameter characterizing the noise intensity. The corresponding results, for the same internal temperature field and thermo-physical constants, are depicted on the two following figures 5a-b for various noise intensity parameters when the number of cells is 100 and 27 corresponding to the above determined threshold value. For a large number of cells, the numerical procedure is unable to produce satisfactory results even for an insignificant value of the noise intensity, while for a number of cells close to the threshold value, the results are acceptable on the partial area for very small additive perturbations. In all cases however the temperature field cannot be here obtained in the particular area n R x λ > . and belongs then to the class of missing data problems. Applying a singular value decomposition (SVD) of matrix C, i.e. ( ) , where U and V are two orthogonal matrices, the solution of Eq. ( Then is depicted on figures 5a and 5b. For refractive indices not too high, exemplified here on Fig. By using the following variables change and introducing functions F and G defined by In Eq. ( and the classical theorems on the Laplace transform can no longer be applied. To avoid this difficulty, an origin translation is applied by introducing The boundary values of these functions can be written explicitly: Eq. ( . Applying a Laplace transform to Eq. ( ( ) ( ) With the help of the previous variables and functions changes, the right member of Eq. ( . Replacing H ~ by its value in terms of g and L 0 λ functions and using the two successive variables changes defined by , one finally obtains (after a straightforward calculation) : where ' g is the derivative of the data set g. Equation ( Note that the complete data set g on the whole set [ ] R , 0 must be used to compute the temperature field in the zone , and that this field depends on the temperature field in the region . Under this form, Eq. ( where Φ is the unknown function defined on One can notice that from the exact definition of the g function given by Eq. ( where the h function is defined by Under this latter form, it is therefore obvious that the inversion of Eq. ( . Note also that function h cannot be simply related to the experimental set g and cannot be applied at this stage from a practical point of view to determine the temperature field. From the exact expression (17) of function h it is easy to prove that Eq. ( The restitution of the temperature field, so as the evolution of the function h, analogous to the data g set , when no perturbation is done on the exact g data. The numerical computation of Eq. ( Function ψ is completely known on [ ] R , 0 so that Eq. ( , where ψ is the data function of the equation, ( ) the kernel of the integral equation and The detailed behaviour of the exact ψ function with respect to the absorption coefficient is depicted on the figures 9a-b . Before examining the particular properties of Eq. ( When nλ is very close to 1, or equivalently when the number of cells is small, Eq. ( . Introducing the new parameter and variables n , so as the two following functions ( ) , easily leads to the simplified equation Eq. ( , in the sense where ( ) ( ) two symmetric left K G and right K D associated kernels are defined by It can be shown that they can be expressed as follows: ) is the hyperbolic cosine integral Since Chi is a strictly growing function for x > 0, ( ) ) is a strictly positive and from the previous definition of Chi, ( ) ) is obviously a continuous function on ] ] ] ] . Furthermore, a simple analysis shows that if K G , D reaches a minimal value, where K G , D stands indifferently either for K D or K G , this value is located on the straight line ' z w = . Then for the right kernel is a strictly positive function that reaches a minimal value at a given ( ) ] [ . Obviously, ψ is a L2 -function on [ ] 1 0 , , so that it guaranties The exact eigenfunctions and eigenvalues cannot be obtained in an analytical way, so that we shall only determine a numerical approximation of the solution by using the method presented in annex 2. As an example, the 10 first eigenvalues of the right kernel are listed below, with respect to the numerical , the first one excepted, quickly tend towards zero with n. This main result is strongly amplified when the refractive index increases. Since , the first eigen value λ 2 1 1 has a high magnitude for large absorption coefficients, while the other eigenvalues rapidly tend towards zero. It is then not surprising that the convergence of the eigenvalues is extremely slow. For the considered example, the convergence is only reached for the four first eigenvalues with a 4000 points quadrature. At such an order, because of multiple round-off errors, a Given, Householder or Jacobi reduction completely fails in finding the eigen-elements, and a SVD appears to be the best technique in finding the complete eigen-elements. Nevertheless, due to the extremely slow convergence of the eigenvalues up to a very high quadrature order, the partial sum ( ) ( ) is not correctly evaluated in most cases. Now, one knows that an exact solution of the problem exists and that no spectral intensities theoretically need to be added to the directional ones to obtain a complete solution on the set . This means that determining the temperature field inside a cylinder with only directional intensity data, does not belong to the class of "missing data" problem, and that it has a theoretical exact solution. However, from a practical point of view, this exact solution is unreachable for at least two reasons: the experimental data are never perfect, and particularly to this case, the problem is extremely ill-posed because of the intrinsic properties of the kernel governing the Fredholm equation on the set where a smooth regularisation is most often powerful. Even with sophisticated filtering treatments applied to experimental data, or at the limit case of perfect non noisy data, a numerical approximate solution is very hard to obtain on the , even when using a discretization of the integral equation, followed by a SVD of the discrete operator and zeroing of its too small singular values. This limitation is essentially critical for media with high refractive indices and of internal temperature fields of complex shape. On the other hand, for usual dense media with indices not too far from 1.5, and smooth internal temperature fields, a SVD and zeroing works very well in practice with no noisy data. Finally, we can note that a little refinement can be provided to the search of the temperature field on by adding spectral measurements. Indeed, integrating Eq. ( gives for the 1 st order moment: That is, after a simple integration: which is an integral equation of the form , where G is a constant for a given wavelength and K is the kernel depending only on one variable for the same wavelength. Then a discrete form of Eq. ( In this paper, we proved than an exact solution of the problem which consists in determining the temperature field inside a cylinder filled with a dense semi-transparent medium of non unit refractive index, only from directional emerging intensity data, can be theoretically found in the complete domain , because of the intrinsic properties of the kernel governing the integral equation to be solved to obtain the corresponding temperature field. Indeed, the ordered eigenvalues of the symmetrised right kernel are such that the first one corresponds to the operator's norm, so that all the other ones quickly tend towards zero since their sum equals the operator's trace minus its norm, quantity extremely close to zero for all absorption coefficients and refractive indices: hence, due to a very slow convergence in the eigenvalues computation, high order quadratures have to be used leading to extremely ill-conditioned discrete operators, for which standard Householder reductions fail in determining the associate eigen functions and solution. That particular behaviour of the kernel and its eigen-elements also explain why a SVD followed by a zeroing of the smallest singular values generally gives poor approximate solutions for high refractive indices and/or absorption coefficients. This means, in other practical words, that in spite of sophisticated filtering and/or regularisation procedures on noisy experimental data, an acceptable approximate solution of the initial problem on the whole set [ ] R 0 , cannot be exhibited unless a judicious regularisation of the governing operator itself be applied. writing , where the Dk are obtained from the linear system: The different quantities appearing in the I ki integrals are defined by the following relations: The integral in I ki being non analytical is computed numerically with a Gauss quadrature. For i = 1, the integral I 1 k simply reduces to: . Note here that for the numerical calculation ' h N is forced to have a finite value since one should have ∞ = -' h N . With the help of a numerical quadrature, the eigen-elements are solution of the discrete equation , introducing the C matrix condition number