We consider the surface states of a spherical topological insulator piecewise-terminated by superconductivity or ferromagnetism over various regions of the spherical surface. Such terminations gap the surface states by breaking U(1) particle-number symmetry or time-reversal symmetry, respectively. Interfaces and trijunctions between differently terminated surface regions can host propagating and bound Majorana modes, and the finite size of the spherical system makes it easily amenable to numerical analysis via exact diagonalization of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian within a truncated Hilbert space. Creative termination patterning therefore allows one to prototype a variety of Majorana circuits, calculating energy spectra and plotting eigenfunctions over the spherical surface. We develop the computational framework for this approach, establishing a virtual breadboard for Majorana circuitry, and apply it to circuits of interest, including the Majorana analog of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The study of symmetry protected topological phenomena 1-4 has experienced tremendous growth over the past decade with the theoretical prediction Since these circuits of Majorana excitations live exclusively on the TI surface, it is important to study TI surface states in the presence of realistic material effects such as disorder, proximity effects, and interactions. However, numerical analysis of such effects has proved challenging due to the fermion-doubling theorem In this paper, we build upon such efforts by implementing Majorana circuits on the surface of a spherical topological insulator. Chiral Majorana channels are realized at the interface of surface regions with different gapping terms. Such interfaces act as wires for the propagation of Majorana modes. In order to include regions gapped via proximity-induced superconductivity, we have extended the approach of Neupert et al. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we develop the formulation for our numerical calculation. Starting with the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation appropriate to the spherical TI surface, we establish basis states, define a framework for inputting surface termination patterns, compute matrix elements, calculate energy spectra and eigenstates, and derive expressions for quasiparticle density and quasiparticle current density. In Sec. III, we demonstrate the utility of our nu-merics by implementing a series of termination patterns and studying the resulting Majorana circuits, from propagating equatorial modes, to polar bound states, to a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. In Sec. IV, we summarize our results and outline future directions. Consider a spherical topological insulator (TI) terminated by either superconductivity or ferromagnetism over different regions of the spherical surface. We seek solutions to the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation for the resulting surface, characterized by a piecewiseuniform proximity-induced superconducting order parameter ∆ and out-of-surface magnetization M . The ∆ = M = 0 case can be solved exactly The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation (1) where H is the single-particle Hamiltonian, μ is the chemical potential, ∆ is the proximity-induced superconducting order parameter, and T is the time-reversal operator. Note that Ψ is a 4-component Nambu spinor and H BdG is a 4 × 4 matrix since H, ∆, and T are all, in general, 2 × 2 matrices acting on spin space. In what follows, we make use of two sets of Pauli matrices, σ i acting on spin space and τ i acting on particle-hole space. The coordinate system for our spins is defined locally over the spherical surface, with σ 1 , σ 2 , and σ 3 referring to the φ (east), -θ (north), and r (out-of-surface) directions respectively. With these definitions, T = -iσ 2 K (where K denotes complex conjugation) and where M is the proximity-induced magnetization vector (in units of energy). Here H 0 is the Hamiltonian of the bare TI surface, a two-dimensional massless Dirac Hamiltonian in spherical geometry, which was shown by Imura et al. where v is the slope of the Dirac cone and R is the radius of the spherical surface. Plugging Eq. (3) into Eq. ( because as long as M is a real function of angles θ and φ. In this work, we consider only s-wave superconductivity (scalar ∆) and out-of-surface magnetization (M = M r), so but the formalism and numerics can be easily adapted to other situations. The single-particle Hamiltonian, H 0 , of the unterminated spherical TI surface yields exact solutions indexed by quantum numbers n, m, and λ, where n is a nonnegative integer, m = -s, -s + 1, ..., s (where s = n + 1 2 ), and λ = ±1. Neupert et al. where the 2(n + 1)-fold degenerate eigenvalues are and the spinor eigenstates take the form with where the L -and S -operators are defined in terms of the spinor coordinates We can therefore write down solutions to the Bogoliubovde Gennes equation for the unterminated case where ∆ = M = 0. In this case, and where we have introduced a fourth quantum number, γ = ±1. The bare (unterminated) energy spectrum takes the form with bare (unterminated) eigenstates where the zeros denote two-component spinor zeros. Such eigenstates are orthogonal and we normalize over the unit sphere. These bare eigenstates provide the basis that we will use to study the full (piecewise terminated by ∆ or M ) BdG Hamiltonian. In principle, since n is unbounded from above, there are an infinite number of them. However, as discussed in Refs. 20 and 27, the bulk band gap provides a natural cutoff, Λ, for the single-particle energy spectrum. Thus, following Refs. 20 and 27, we truncate our Hilbert space at n = n max ≡ ⌊ RΛ v -1⌋, where the brackets denote the greatest integer or floor function. Doing so limits the number of single-particle states to N = 2(n max + 1)(n max + 2), such that there are 2N states in the BdG problem. Since a principal aim of our work is to use the spherical model as a computational aid to study the flat TI surface, we are primarily interested in the large R, and therefore large n max , limit. From this point of view, Hilbert space truncation at finite n max is a computational approximation that serves to limit the angular resolution of our results. Trading computation time (which increases quickly with increasing n max ) versus angular resolution, we work with n max = 10, which yields 528 BdG states. Inspection of Eqs. ( where the A k are complex numbers and the p k , q k , and r k are integers. Such polynomials were dubbed SCE (sincos-exp) polynomials in Ref. 27. Thus, in our numerics, it is convenient to store each basis state component as a 4×N SCE matrix of A-p-q-r parameters, where N SCE is the number of terms in that SCE polynomial. Since the set of SCE polynomials is closed under addition, multiplication, and complex conjugation, such data structures are easily manipulated and (as shown in the next section) efficiently integrated to compute matrix elements. With basis states in hand, we proceed to evaluate the matrix elements of the full BdG Hamiltonian, H BdG , in the basis of the eigenstates Ψ λγ 0 nm of the bare (unterminated) BdG Hamiltonian, H 0 BdG . If i and j index the 2N basis states, these matrix elements take the form where and If M and ∆ are general functions of θ and φ, the 2D integral over the unit sphere in Eq. ( where the A-p-q-r constants are those appropriate to the entire integrand, including the sin θ measure. If we specify that all boundaries between regions must be segments of lines of longitude or latitude, then Eq. ( where and we can take advantage of the fact that the I φ integral is easily evaluated analytically. In the present work, we consider only termination patterns with regions bounded by segments of meridians (lines of longitude) and the equator. Thus, we need only evaluate I θ from 0 to π/2 and from π/2 to π. It is straightforward to show that the latter integral is equal to the former with p and q indices interchanged. Thus, computation of matrix elements reduces to the numerical evaluation of I N (p, q) for a limited set of whole number indices p and q. In practice, we pre-compute these once for all required indices and save to a look-up table, eliminating the need to do any numerical integration on the fly, which vastly speeds up the computation of matrix elements and allows us to maximize the dimensionality of our Hilbert space. Matrix element computation yields the 2N × 2N matrix, H ij . In the present work, with n max = 10, this is a 528 × 528 matrix. We diagonalize it numerically to obtain the 2N eigenvalues and eigenvectors. The eigenvalues, E j , are the energy levels of H BdG . The 2N components of eigenvector v j are the coefficients that define eigenstate Ψ j as a linear combination of the 2N bare eigenstates. Each of the 2N eigenstates computed in this manner is a four-component Nambu spinor, where each component is a function of θ and φ that can be expressed as an SCE polynomial (see Eq. ( Since quasiparticle density is conserved, the quasiparticle current density functional, j[Ψ], is obtained from the quasiparticle density functional via the continuity equation where Ψ is the wave function, a four-component Nambu spinor. Plugging in for ρ and noting that i∂Ψ/∂t = H BdG Ψ, yields which becomes (32) once we have inserted H BdG via Eqs. ( this reduces to Thus, the quasiparticle current density functional is simply where the eastward component, j 1 , and the northward component, j 2 , take the form (Note that the minus signs are due to a sign convention, originally introduced in Ref. 20, in the definition of the single-particle Dirac Hamiltonian.) If the components of Ψ are defined such that Once the 2N eigenstates, Ψ j , have been computed as per Sec. II D, it is straightforward to compute the quasiparticle density and quasiparticle current density for each, and then to plot these over the surface of the unit sphere. We have developed a computational utility to apply the procedure described in Sec. II to any piecewise-uniform M -∆ surface termination pattern with region boundaries that are either meridian segments or equator segments. Here we explore the results of applying this utility to a number of simple termination patterns. Throughout, we consider the case where the chemical potential is fixed at the Dirac point (μ = 0), and we truncate our Hilbert space at n max = 10 (528 BdG states). The simplest termination pattern, of course, is no termination at all. In this case, the energy spectrum is given directly by Eqs. ( Terminating the entire sphere with an s-wave superconductor of order parameter ∆ and constant phase breaks particle number conservation and opens up a gap from -∆ to ∆. Similarly, terminating the entire sphere with an out-of-surface magnetization M breaks time reversal symmetry and opens up a gap from -M to M . Numerics-generated spectra for these two cases are plot-ted in Fig. By applying different terminations to the northern and southern hemispheres, it is possible to introduce propagating interface states at the equator, with energies that fall within the gap. (Several of these are discussed in figure 18.2 of Ref. 4. Here we demonstrate them with our numerics.) A ∆-terminated northern hemisphere with an M -terminated southern hemisphere (referred to in what follows as a ∆/M configuration) yields a chiral Majorana mode propagating eastward around the equator. The resulting energy spectrum is shown in Fig. These simple two-region patterns provide helpful rulesof-thumb for understanding the propagating Majorana currents associated with more complex termination patterns. The basic rules are as follows: (1) ∆/M and ∆/-M interfaces are single-lane one-way streets for Majorana current, oriented such that an M region is to one's right, or a -M region is to one's left, as one flows along with the current. (2) M /-M interfaces are two-lane one-way streets for Majorana current, hosting two copropagating Majorana modes flowing such that the M region is to one's right and the -M region is to one's left as one flows along with the current. Such interfaces can be thought of as M /∆/-M double-interfaces, with an infinitely-narrow ∆-median separating lanes. (3) Josephson junction interfaces of the form ∆ 1 /∆ 2 only support propagating Majorana modes when their phase difference is π. Such π-junction interfaces are two-lane two-way streets that support Majorana current in both directions. Increasingly complex surface termination patterns can support interface states of increasing complexity, but for such a state to support current flow, there must exist a closed interface-path that satisfies the above traffic rules. Fu and Kane Our numerics provide a convenient way to explore the nature of this polar-trijunction system. Consider a trace across the Fu-Kane phase diagram for φ 2 = π/2, shown in green in the figure. By varying φ 1 from 0 to 2π in steps of π/32, we have calculated the energy spectra and eigenstates for every step along this trace. The energy spectra are plotted versus φ 1 in Fig. 2 ). These are the polar Majorana bound states. Since our numerics compute not just energy levels but also eigenstates, it is straightforward and instructive to plot quasiparticle density corresponding to an MBS eigenstate as we move through the shaded MBS region of the phase diagram. We do so in Fig. 8 , 5π 4 , 11π 8 , 3π 2 . For φ 1 < π, there are no MBS. For φ 1 = π, the interface between region 1 and region 3 becomes a π-junction since φ 1 -φ 3 = π. As discussed in Sec. III A, this allows Majorana current to flow along that interface, which it does as the MBS are created at the poles. Fig. Now that we have seen how simple two-region and three-region termination patterns can be used to demonstrate the nature of propagating and bound Majorana states, let us consider a slightly more complex termination pattern that illustrates how propagating Majorana modes can be used to probe Majorana bound states. We begin by constructing our probe, a spherical-TI-surface Majorana-current analog of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer We can explore this effect further by computing quasiparticle current density right at the south pole as a function of phase φ 1 . Results for the φ 2 = π/2 case that we have been considering are plotted as the green curve in Fig. In this work, we numerically solved the Bogoliubovde Gennes equation for a spherical topological insulator surface characterized by a piecewise-uniform proximityinduced superconducting order parameter and out-ofsurface magnetization. The interface of two independent gapping terms forms a domain wall that carries Majorana excitations. By using different patterning of these gapping terms, one can implement both bound-state and propagating Majorana modes. We developed a computational framework that allows us to prototype a wide variety of Majorana circuits simply by specifying the surface termination pattern in an input file. Using exact diagonalization, we computed the energy spectra and eigenstates of Majorana excitations at domain wall interfaces and trijunctions. For each computed eigenstate, our numerics generates plots of quasiparticle density and quasiparticle current density over the surface of the sphere, some of which were presented in this paper. We used this utility to investigate the non-Abelian nature of Majorana excitations by probing their braiding properties. To this end, we implemented a Mach-Zehnder interferometer cir-cuit with equatorial interferometer arms surrounding a polar trijunction. By manipulating the phases of the superconducting order parameters, we were able to tune in a Majorana bound state that acts as a π-flux within the area of the interferometer. We computed the interference signatures in the quasiparticle current density and found results consistent with the Fu-Kane trijunction phase diagram The cases considered in this paper are just a sample of the many surface termination patterns that can be probed using the computational utility developed herein. Possibilities for studying increasingly complex Majorana circuits are limited only by computation time and imagination. Since the large radius limit of the spherical geometry reproduces flat manifold physics The main strength of our work lies in the numerical flexibility of our computational framework, which will make it possible, in the future, to add realistic effects of disorder and interactions, and study how they may alter transport signatures in experiments. The role of disorder in (unterminated) TI surface states has recently been studied in Ref. 27. Extending the framework developed in this paper to include disorder will allow us to study its effects on the braiding and transport signatures of Majorana circuits, effects which we expect to play a key role in understanding experimental probes of the non-Abelian nature of Majorana excitations. Our formalism is also well-suited to include interaction effects 20 on these braiding and transport signatures, providing an additional path forward for future work. Another interesting direction will be to consider the effect of the proximity of unconventional and topological superconductors on the surface states, and to study the interface excitations arising therefrom. J. E.Moore, Nature 464, 194 (2010) M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82,