Based on first principles calculations, we reveal that the origin of ferromagnetism caused by sp electrons in graphene with vacancies can be traced to electrons partially filling sp 2 * -antibonding and p * z -nonbonding states, which are induced by the vacancies and appear near the Fermi level. Because the spatial wavefunctions of the both states are composed of atomic orbitals in an antisymmetric configuration, their spin wavefunctions should be symmetric according to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle, leading to electrons partially filling these states in spin polarization. Since this p * z state originates not from interactions between the atoms but from the unpaired pz orbitals due to the removal of pz orbitals on the minority sublattice, the p * z state is constrained, distributed on the atoms of the majority sublattice, and decays gradually from the vacancy as ∼ 1/r. According to these characteristics, we concluded that the p * z state plays a critical role in magnetic ordering in graphene with vacancies. If the vacancy concentration in graphene is large enough to cause the decay-length regions to overlap, constraining the p * z orbital components as little as possible on the minority sublattice atoms in the overlap regions results in the vacancy-induced p * z states being coherent. The coherent process in the overlap region leads to the wavefunctions in all the involved regions antisymmetrized, consequently causing ferromagnetism according to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle. This unusual mechanism concerned with the origin of sp-electron magnetism and magnetic ordering has never before been reported and is distinctly different from conventional mechanisms. Consequently, we can explain how such a weak magnetization with such a high critical temperature can be experimentally observed in proton-irradiated graphene. The present work examines the origin of magnetism in nominally nonmagnetic materials with only sp-electrons, which is the one of the most controversial issues in modern materials science 1-5 , by considering graphene containing vacancies as an example. Magnetism induced by removing a single p z orbital from the π-electron systems, such as graphene or graphite, have been observed by experiments at room temperature and have been predicted by calculations. Even though it was still debated for FM or PM in irradiated graphene, we would focus on the serious difficulties met by theoretical study in the following two fronts: first, the origin of magnetism in sp electron materials (n < 3), and second, how such small magnetization (three or four orders of magnitude smaller than conventional magnets) and such long-range magnetic coupling (a distance of 20 Å between vacancies) can be ferromagnetic at room temperature On the first front, the current explanation is based on Hund's rule On the second front, if Heisenberg's model is used to explain magnetic ordering in such materials, the contradictions exist for weak magnetization (three or four orders of magnitude smaller than that in classic magnets such iron), long-range magnetic orders (that is, a low vacancy concentration Clearly, there must be more substantial physics behind the magnetism in nominally nonmagnetic materials (without d or f electrons) and there must be an unusual mechanism different from the conventional mechanism in df -electron solids. This is a great challenge and requires a root-and-branch rework of magnetic theory In the present study, we report that the magnetism in graphene with vacancies can be traced to electrons partially occupying sp 2 * -antibonding states or p * znonbonding states because the spatial wavefunctions of the both states are antisymmetric and their spin wavefunctions should be symmetric according to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle. This is the origin of the magnetism induced by sp electrons. It has been recognized that the nonbonding state (or zero mode in literature These states (labeled by sp 2 * and p * z in the present work) contributing to magentism were also reported in the previous investigations The analyses were performed using our first principles calculations concerning the frame work of the spin density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) A. A short summary and statements for the present study The main results (the MM and the long and short distance between three atoms surrounding the vacancy in the ground state) of graphene with a single vacancy in different vacancy concentration (for 2×2∼8×8-sized unit cells) are summarized in Table Even though the vacancy concentrations in which magnetism in graphene can be experimentally observed Note that all the atomic configurations listed in Table I are planar. Even though it has also been reported from first principles calculations 42 that a nonplanar metastable state exists, we will not treat this state because we are focusing only on the origin of magnetism of sp-electrons, the planar configurations are in the ground state and can already be used to reveal the origin of the magnetism in nonmagnetic materials. We will not perform calculations for the exchange energy based on any conventional magnetic models. This is because the vacancy concentration in proton-irradiated graphene, in which ferromagnetism has been observed, corresponds to a large distance between vacancies. A suitable simulation for this system requires a large supercell and is computationally intensive. In addition, such a long-range coupling is beyond any current magnetic models. The observed magnetization in the protonirradiated graphene is three or four orders of magnitude smaller than that of conventional magnets but with a high transition temperature (higher than room temperature). This is very difficult to be understood using the conventional magnetic theory. In other words, this type of ferromagnetism must have a distinctly different mechanism than that of conventional ferromagnetism. Significant conclusions could not be obtained from calculations based on the conventional magnetic theory; therefore, according to the nature of the nonbonding states, we did not perform calculations but rather postulated a possible ferromagnetic mechanism that is distinctly different from conventional mechanisms. It is instructive to start the analysis of graphene in 2×2-sized cell with a single-atom vacancy, because its magnetism is almost entirely derived from a p z state near the Fermi level, i.e. 0.9 μ B of the total 1.0 μ B per vacancy, which is favorable to revealing the origin of the magnetism within sp-electron materials. The main magnetic contribution for the other cases (3×3 ∼ 8×8) switches from the p z states to an sp 2 state of the dangling bonds. However, for the 2×2 case, the sp 2 state contributes little to the magnetism, 0. The atomic structure of the 2×2-sized cell of seven carbon atoms, g-C 7 , is shown in Fig. The DOS and band structures for g-C 7 are shown in Figs. Comparing the two DOSs (the black solids and red dashed lines) in Fig. Our orbital analysis indicates that the red band near the Fermi level primarily consists of the p z orbitals of atoms 1, 2, 3 and 7, which belong to the same sublattice of graphene (referred to as sublattice A or the majority sublattice), while the removed atom (vacancy) belongs to the other sublattice (referred to as sublattice B or the minority sublattice), as do atoms 4, 5 and 6, which contribute little to the red states near the Fermi level. According to the symmetry of the atoms surrounding the vacancy, as shown in Fig. Here E 0 and t are an on-site energy of the p z orbital and a hopping energy between the nearest neighbors, respectively. The eigenvalue of the nonbonding state is E nonbonding = E 0 , and the eigenfunction is (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, -1.0) ignoring the normalization coefficients. That is, it is a state with zero binding energy, consisting only of the orbitals of the atom-groups A123 and A7 in an antisymmetric manner, without any contribution from atom-group B456, indicating that the nonbonding state is created by unpaired p z orbitals of atom-groups A123 and A7, not by a direct interaction between them because only the 1NN interaction was considered. Even though the state has a zero binding energy, occupying the nonbonding state still tends to stabilize the system as a way for electrons to synchronously appear in the two atom groups. Most importantly, the nonbonding state consists of orbitals from A123 and A7 in an antisymmetric manner. This antisymmetric combination can be understood in the following way: if the interaction exists only between the nearest neighbors, no direct hopping exists between A123 and A7. Because there is direct hopping between A123 and B456, as well as between A7 and B456, the interaction for the nonbonding state could be thought of a hopping bridged via B456. Therefore, the hopping between A123 and A7 with a zero binding energy can be realized via the B456 bridge. We call this bridge hopping. However, because there are no real electrons on B456 for the nonbonding state, the wavefunction of the bridge hopping state should consist of orbitals from two involved atom-groups in an antisymmetric manner. This is the physics behind a state without any direct interaction but with an antisymmetric constraint for its wavefunction, as shown in Figs. We have seen that the MM in g-C 7 should primarily be traced to the red band (the p * z nonbonding state) with a small component traced to the blue band (sp 2 * ) near the Fermi level. The sp 2 * state will be discussed in more detail in the next subsection; here we list its main features. The orbital analysis indicates that the sp 2 * state arises from the interaction between the sp 2 dangling bonds of the three atoms surrounding the vacancy. The three bands with the features of the sp 2 dangling bonds are identified by the color blue in Fig. It is well known that the nonbonding state and the antibonding state consist of antisymmetric orbitals. Thus, the MM of the sp electrons in g-C 7 can be understood. According to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle of quantum mechanics, if a spatial wavefunction of a state is antisymmetric, its spin component should be symmetric The calculated DOS and band structures for graphene with a vacancy in a 3×3-sized cell, g-C 17 , are shown in Figs. At first glance, two green bands near the Fermi level in Fig. We then take g-C 17 as an example to answer this question. In g-3×3, the Dirac point (the two bands contact each other) appears not at K and K', but degenerated at the Γ point of the 3×3 BZ. This is expected because of the so-called BZ folding. The relationship of the unit cells and BZs of graphene between the 1×1-and 3×3sized cells is shown in Figs. The folding relationship can be also obtained by considering the relationship of the primitive vectors between the 3×3-and 1×1-sized cells. The corresponding primitive vectors of the 3×3-sized cell, a 1 and a 2 , are three times those of the 1×1-sized cell, a 1 and a 2 , i.e., a 1 = 3a 1 , and a 2 = 3a 2 . Therefore, the relationship of the primitive vectors of the reciprocal lattice between the two lattices should be b 1 = 1/3b 1 and b 2 = 1/3b 2 . The K and K' points for the 1×1-sized cell can be represented by b 1 and b 2 as K = 2/3b 1 +1/3b 2 and K = 1/3b 1 +2/3b 2 . Therefore, by means of the primitive vectors of the reciprocal lattice for the 3×3-sized cell, b 1 and b 2 , they should be written as K = 2/3b 1 + 1/3b 2 = 2 b 1 + b 2 and K = 1/3b 1 + 2/3b 2 = b 1 + 2 b 2 . K and K are the two reciprocal lattice vectors for the 3×3-size cell. One end-point of a reciprocal lattice vector is the center of its Brillouin zone, the Γ point. That is, both K and K' of the 1 × 1-sized cell are folded to and degenerated at one point, the Γ point of the 3×3-sized cell. This is also valid for all cells with sizes of 3n×3n. The Dirac point for g-C 17 is fourfold degenerated be-cause both the K and K' point of the 1×1 BZ are folded to the Γ point of the 3×3 BZ. Furthermore, it can be seen from Fig. For this discussion, we again use the TB model. In the 1×1-sized cell of graphene, the Bloch sums at sites A and B (labeled in Fig. and respectively. They form the so-called π and π * states in the symmetric and antisymmetric types, respectively, (ignoring the normalization coefficients) as and Because the 3×3-sized cell is only artificially extended from 1×1-sized cell, the bands' properties (bonding and antibonding) should be maintained, the π and π * bands along the M-Γ axis for g-3×3 should still be composed of the π and π * in g-1×1. For the BZ relationship between g-1×1 and g-3×3, please refer to Fig. and /3 for all R lattice vectors satisfying n 1 -n 2 = 3n with n as an integer and e iK•R -e iK •R = 0. Therefore, the two-fold degenerate bands along the M-Γ axis of g-3×3 are independent of all lattice vectors R . Therefore, removing one atom from graphene (creating a vacancy) in a 3n×3nsized cell will not significantly affect the one Dirac point and the involved bands (green) if it is modeled using the TB model. Note that the green bands have nearly no spin polarization, as shown in Fig. The MM of g-C 7 are primarily derived from the p * z nonbonding states, while the main magnetic contributor in g-C 17 is the sp 2 * blue bands near the Fermi level. Now, we focus on the blue bands in g-C 17 . The orbital analysis indicates that the blue bands consist of sp 2 -type orbitals of the three C atoms surrounding the vacancy, atoms 1, 2, and 3. From our previous investigations of g-C 14 N 3 To illustrate the resulting three (one bonding and two antibonding) states, a TB model is again taken into account. For three atoms each with only a dangling bond orbital, the Hamiltonian is Here E 0 and t are the energy of the dangling bond and the interaction between the dangling bonds, respectively. We can obtain the energy of the bonding state as E 1 = E 0 -2t and those of the doublet degenerated antibonding states as E 2 = E 3 = E 0 +t. The difference between g-C 17 (g-C 7 ) and g-C 14 N 3 (g-C 4 N 3 ) is that the MSC and MAC bands are partially occupied in the cases of g-C 17 and g-C 7 , while in the cases of g-C 4 N 3 and g-C 14 N 3 , both bands are nearly fully occupied. This is because g-C 14 N 3 (g-C 4 N 3 ) has more three electrons than g-C 17 (g-C 7 ) and is a +1e hole system, while g-C 17 (g-C 7 ) is a +4e hole system. Therefore, the Fermi level is lowered relative to the top of the MSC and MAC bands in g-C 17 (g-C 7 ). The features of the MSC and MAC antibonding states in the charge distribution at Γ are shown in Figs. Note that previous calculations attributed the magnetic contribution of the sp 2 -type states in graphene with vacancies to JTD For cell sizes larger than 4×4, the optimized atomic structure for graphene with a vacancy has a JTD. That is, two of the three atoms surrounding the vacancy move closer to each other, while the third one moves away, forming thus an isosceles triangle with one short and two long sides. The rest of the atoms in the unit cell experience only minor change due to JTD, whereas the relevant electronic structures are not significantly affected by the minor change. As in g-C 7 and g-C 17 , the vacancy-induced sp 2 and p z bands are again shown in blue and red, respectively, in the band structure in Fig. The main contributor to the magnetism in g-C 31 is the blue bands near the Fermi level, as shown in Figs. The vacancy-induced sp 2 * states are formed by the interaction between all three atoms surrounding the vacancy, forming one bonding and two antibonding states and identified by the color blue in Fig. To further illustrate the antisymmetric nature of MSC, we built a TB model of three sp 2 dangling bonds on three atoms with a JTD; only one sp 2 dangling bond for each atom of the three atoms was taken into account. The Hamiltonian of the TB model can be easily written as Here t 1 and t 2 are the interactions between two atoms on the long and short sides of an isosceles triangle, respectively, with t 2 > t 1 . One can obtain , 1, 1 and (0, -1, 1), respectively, clearly showing the antisymmetric combination for E 2 and E 3 . This means that, if the three unsaturated dangling bonds interact with each other, they would form one bonding state with a symmetric orbital combination and two antibonding states each with an antisymmetric orbital combination. Clearly, the two antibonding states, E 2 and E 3 , correspond to MSC and MAC respectively, while E 1 corresponds to the sp 2 bonding state. Therefore, we can understand the magnetism contributed by the MSC state: JTD breaks the constrain of the C 3V symmetry, therefore lifting the degeneration of MSC and MAC at Γ. The MSC sp 2 * band (blue) is therefore lower in energy than the p * z -nonbonding state due to s-orbital components in the sp 2 * states; the majority of the MSC band is fully filled by one electron, leaving its minority band completely empty and contributing 1.0 μ B according to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle of the quantum mechanics. Electronic structures for 5×5 ∼ 8×8-sized cells of graphene with a vacancy are similar to the corresponding structures for the 2×2 ∼ 4×4-sized cells. Importantly, the MM in these cases are derived from the antibonding and nonbonding states. Here we briefly discuss the magnetism-concerned electronic structures in the 5×5 ∼ 8×8-sized cells by means of DOS, as shown in Figs. Similar to the 4×4 case, the peaks of the majority antibonding states (labeled by sp 2 * as shown in Fig. Conversely, the peak width of the p * z -nonbonding states, which lie around -0.2 and ∼ 0.0 eV for the majority and minority, respectively, and contribute to MM of 0.6∼0.3 μ B , does not depend as much on the cell sizes because their wavefunctions are widely extended, decaying with the distance r to the vacancy as ∼ 1/r 27 . This feature can be understood because these states are induced by the unpaired p z orbitals, involving not only two atoms but also additional atoms in the majority sublattice of the unit cell. This is a very important feature that determines the ferromagnetism in graphene with vacancies via a never before reported mechanism, see the next subsection for details. From Table As mentioned above, when the origin of the magnetism in proton-irradiated graphene was explained by the conventional magnetic theory, it was debated or resulted in conflicts. The current magnetic models, such as the indirect exchange model, the superexchange model, the double exchange model and the RKKY model, have the same scalar product in the exchange energy, S i • S j ; the difference lies only in the manner of coupling. In this aspect, these models are all based on Heisenberg's theory originated from the exchange integrals for an H 2 molecule 10 . The magnetic mechanism for magnetic materials such as iron and nickel metals is governed by the conventional magnetic theory. If the conventional magnetic theory is used to explain the magnetism in graphene with vacancies, contradictions and difficulties lie at least in two aspects. 1) How can sp electrons (principle quantum number n < 3) be spin-polarized? 2) How can such a weak magnetization (10 -3 ∼ 10 -4 orders of magnitude smaller than a conventional magnet) have such a high critical temperature? In other words, how is such a long-range (with a distance between vacancies of up to 20 Å) coupling strong enough to trigger ferromagnetic ordering above room temperature Concerning the difficulty in explaining sp electron spin-polarization in proton-irradiated graphene, we have shown that the vacancy-induced states such as antibonding and nonbonding states can appear near the Fermi level. If these states are partially filled, according to the antisymmetric principle of electron exchange the sp electrons could be spin-polarized. Obviously, unlike an isolated atom governed by Hund's rule, the sp-electron spin polarization in proton-irradiated graphene originates from the antisymmetric spatial wavefunctions involving three atoms surrounding the vacancy for sp 2 * and all the atoms of the majority sublattice for p * z . The induced MM of the atoms are not individually localized but are distributing as a whole moment on all the involved atoms. If the entire magnetic moment is projected on the atoms, the projected moments appear to be distributed on the involved atoms. To distinguish these from localized MM, we refer to these moments as fractional magnetic moments. The fractional MM on the majority sublattice atoms, whose p z orbitals are composed in an antisymmetric manner, are inseparably combined into the entire magnetic moment, because they belong to one electronic state, the p * z state. This is a distinctly different mechanism from any conventional mechanism. We used the word combine in the last sentence to emphasize that there is no coupling interaction between the fractional magnetic moments, rather the intrinsic parts belong to the entire magnetic moment. These fractional MM, as a whole moment induced by partially filled antibonding and nonbonding states, should be parallel according to the exchange antisymmetric principle for electrons. Concerning the difficulty in explaining the ferromagnetic ordering with such a high critical temperature in proton-irradiated graphene, we have stressed in Subsection III A that we did not perform calculations for the exchange energy based on the conventional magnetic theory for two reasons. 1) Because the vacancy concentration in proton-irradiated graphene, for which ferromagnetism was observed, corresponds to a distance between vacancies as large as 15∼20 Å; a valid simulation would be computationally demanding. 2) Because such a longrange (15∼20 Å) coupling itself is beyond any conventional magnetic models, it is not possible to obtain a significant conclusion from calculations based on the conventional magnetic theory. In Subsection III B we demonstrated that the nonbond-ing state, p * z , is not induced by an interaction between the atoms in the majority sublattice but by an imbalance between the p z orbitals of two sublattices due to the removal of one atom in the minority sublattice. We have shown via the TB model that, considering only the interaction between the first nearest neighbors (1NN), p * z consists of the p z -orbitals of only the atoms in the majority sublattice. Even when considering the interaction of the second nearest neighbors (2NN), the origin of the unpaired p z -orbitals constrains the orbital components on the atoms of the minority sublattice as little as possible because any extra orbital components of p * z on the minority sublattice would cause an extra imbalance between the two sublattices. Furthermore, as a point-defect state of a two-dimensional lattice resonating with energy of a perfect crystal, its wavefunction decays from the vacancy as ∼ 1/r, keeping the orbital components on the minority sublattice as little as possible within a region of the decay length. According to these characteristics, we conclude that p * z plays a key role not only in spinpolarization but also in magnetic ordering, based on the following analysis. Removing one atom from the minority sublattice causes one p * z state and leaves one unpaired p z electron in the majority sublattice. Appearing near the Fermi level, the p * z state will be filled by one remaining electron in spin polarization, leading to fractional MM distributed on the majority sublattice atoms. Removing two infinitely separated atoms in the minority sublattice could create two independent p * z states and two free electrons. Imaging that the two vacancies are moved closer and closer until the two regions of each p * z within the decay length overlap, the two independent p * z states are therefore coherent. Within the overlap region, this favors keeping the wavefunction components as little as possible on the atoms of the minority sublattice because the p * z states themselves do not originate from an interaction, but from an imbalance between the p z -orbitals of the two sublattices, corresponding to a recombination of the unpaired p z -orbitals of the majority sublattice atoms. The unpaired nature again constrains the sequence antisymmetric wavefunction extending from the overlap region to all the involved regions, leading to the two p * z being coherent if they are within the decay length. As mentioned above, in addition to the p * z in graphene with a vacancy, the antibonding state, sp 2 * , which is short ranged, induces fractional magnetic moments on the three atoms surrounding the vacancy. Here p * z can be seen as acting as an effective magnetic field to polarize the spin of the electrons filling on the sp 2 * state because both p * z and sp 2 * originate all from the same vacancy. The above analysis, in two respects (spin-polarization and magnetic ordering), indicates a never before reported mechanism that is different from the conventional mechanism. Different models for magnetic ordering, such as the direct exchange model, the indirect exchange model, the superexchange model, the double exchange model and the RKKY model can be all traced to the same mech-anism with different coupling manners. However, there are no localized MM in this new unusual magnetic mechanism, instead, there are fractional MM of the entire moment that are always aligned parallel due to the antisymmetric wavefunctions. Note that the coherent origin of p * z is not an interaction between vacancies but the imbalance between the p z orbitals of the two sublattices; as in the origin of an isolated p * z state, recombining the unpaired p z -orbitals caused by more vacancies keeps the wavefunction of p * z as little as possible in the minority sublattice. The temperature plays a role in the magnetic ordering for this unusual mechanism: while it does not act as a factor to decouple the MM, but it does destroy the nonbonding state itself or does change the electron filling situation, that is, the involved state is shifted from being partially to fully filled or from being partially filled to completely empty. This is why such a weak magnetization can be bewilderingly observed at room temperature in proton-irradiated graphene. In this way, we can also explain the existence of a small window for vacancy concentration. A previous study concluded that, if vacancy concentration is too large, localized sp-electrons become delocalized and therefore destroy the FM ordering; therefore, there is a small window of vacancy concentration, up to which no ferromagnetism can be observed 8 . We have stressed that no really localized electrons exist in band calculations based on SEA. According to the above analysis, we propose an alternative possibility that large vacancy concentrations mean that more electrons are released and more p * z states are formed. The p * z states, saying two per unit cell, can make contact with each other to form two combined states with some energy splitting. (if considering also 2NN interaction in TB model). If the energy splitting of the two combined states is larger than the spin splitting, the two electrons released by two vacancies will fully fill the lower combined state without spin polarization, therefore destroying the ferromagnetism. Based on first principle calculations, we traced for the first time the magnetism in nominally nonmagnetic materials to the antisymmetric orbital combination of the involved electronic states and proposed a never before reported magnetic mechanism distinctly different from the conventional theory. We emphasize that in these two respects, our conclusions are different from the previous investigations. We investigated the origin of magnetism in graphene with vacancies. It was shown that MM existed in all the investigated cases (for 2 × 2 ∼ 8×8), varying between 1.0 μ B and 1.6 μ B and reaching a stable value of 1.3 μ B in the 7×7-sized cell. The compelling evidence shows that the MM in materials with only sp electrons can be traced to the antisymmetric manner of the wavefunctions of the involved electronic states, the sp 2 * -antibonding and p * z -nonbonding states which appear near the Fermi level. This is a conclusion distinctly different from the previous investigations as pointed out in section Introduction. Removing one atom from graphene creates a vacancy, leaving three dangling bonds on three atoms pointing toward the vacancy and breaking the balance between the p z orbitals of the two sublattices. Consequently, the three sp 2 dangling bonds interact with each other to hybridize one bonding state and two antibonding states without JTD (for 2×2 and 3×3) or with JTD (for 4×4 ∼ 8×8); in addition, the unpaired p z orbital on the majority sublattice atoms forms one nonbonding state. Because the spatial wavefunctions of both the sp 2 * -antibonding and p * z -nonbonding states are antisymmetric, their spin wavefunctions should be symmetric according to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle. Appearing near the Fermi level, sp 2 * and p * z will be partially filled in spin polarization. This is the origin of sp-electron spin-polarization in proton-irradiated graphene. We emphasize that, unlike the conventional magnetic models, the p * z induced MM are fractional MM of a whole moment distributed not on one atom but on all the involved atoms. The nonbonding state stems not from an interaction between atoms but from an imbalance between the p z orbitals of the two sublattices due to removing one atom from the minority sublattice. Therefore, in addition to contributing fractional MM, the nonbonding state plays a critical role in magnetic ordering. If the vacancy concentration is large enough to cause the vacancy-affected regions to overlap each other, the requirement of as little orbital components as possible on the minority sublattice in the overlap regions makes the vacancy-induced p * z states coherent because more vacancies mean more unpaired p z -orbitals, which require recombination. The coherent process in the overlap region therefore constrains the antisymmetric wavefunction covering all the vacancy-affected regions, consequently causing ferromagnetism according to the electron exchange antisymmetric principle. Therefore, we can understand how, in proton-irradiated graphene, such far-flung spins can be so strongly aligned and cannot be destroyed even by a high temperature (> 300 K). Obviously, the connecting thread is a mechanism that is different from any previously published models for magnetic ordering. This work was supported by NFSC (No.61274097) and NBRPC (No. 2015CB921401).