The nonadiabatic geometric quantum computation is promising as it is robust against certain types of local noises. However, its experimental implementation is challenging due to the need of complex control on multi-level and/or multiple quantum systems. Here, we propose to implement it on a two-dimensional square superconducting qubit lattice. In the construction of our geometric quantum gates, we only use the simplest and experimentally accessible control over the qubit states of the involved quantum systems, without introducing any auxiliary state. Specifically, our scheme is achieved by parametrically tunable all-resonant interaction, which leads to high-fidelity quantum gates. Meanwhile, this simple implementation can be conveniently generalized to a composite scenario, which can further suppress the systematic error during the gate operations. In addition, universal nonadiabatic geometric quantum gates in decoherence-free subspace can also be realized based on the tunable coupling between only two transmon qubits, without consulting to multiple qubits and only using two physical qubits to encode a logical qubit. Therefore, our proposal provides a promising way of high-fidelity geometric manipulation for robust solid-state quantum computation. The superiority of quantum computation is generally believed to be mainly reflected by the manipulation of the superposition of quantum states, which can solve some certain problems that are difficult to process by classical computation Superconducting quantum circuits To implement high-fidelity quantum gates, geometric quantum computation (GQC) schemes In addition, when a qubit interacts with its environment, qubit dephasing noise will be produced, which is one of the major sources of qubit decoherence. However, for many qubit system, this type of noise may behave collectively Here, we propose to implement a nonadiabatic GQC scheme on the 2D square qubit lattice consisting of capacitively coupled superconducting transmon qubits where Ω(t) and φ are the driving strength and phase of the microwave field, respectively. To get a geometric evolution, we divide the entire evolution time T into three parts, at the intermediate time T 1 , T 2 with pulse area and relative phase φ satisfying At the final time T, the evolution operator can be expressed as where n = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ), the parameters θ, φ and γ can be tuned by external microwave field control, and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are the Pauli operators for the computational subspace {|0 , |1 }. Then, we demonstrate that U 1 (T) is a geometric gate of n • σ, a pair of dressed states, as our evolution states inducing the geometric gate. In this dressed-state representation, the evolution operator can be rewritten as Clearly, both of the orthogonal states |ψ + and |ψ -satisfy the cyclic evolution condition, i.e., and the parallel-transport condition, i.e., Therefore, after undergoing a single orange-slice-shaped cyclic evolution path, as shown in Fig. Consider the intrinsic weak anharmonicity α of the transmon qubit, the microwave driving will also couple the high energy-level in a dispersive way, as shown in Fig. , the NOT and Hadamard gates should result in an ideal final state To fully evaluate the performance of the implemented gates, we define the gate fidelity as Furthermore, our geometric implementation of a singlequbit gate has the same level of gate fidelities as that of the dynamical method, the best performance of which is reported in Refs. In this way, we obtain a very high state fidelity F N = 99.93% with Ω 0 = 2π × 40 MHz and F H = 99.89% with Ω 0 = 2π × 30 MHz for the NOT and Hadamard geometric gates, as shown in Fig. To show the noise-resilient feature of our geometric gates, we take the error caused by the qubit frequency drift as an example to compare the performance of our geometric gates with that of the corresponding dynamic gates. In our simulation, we set the operation time of both the dynamic and geometric gates to be the same. Taking the third level into account, the whole Hamiltonian consists of Eq. (A1) plus an additional error term (δ|1 1| + 2δ|2 2|) due to the qubitfrequency drift with δ being the drift quantity. From the whole Hamiltonian, the imperfect dynamic NOT and Hadamard gates can be constructed by taking the pulse area satisfying π and 3π 2 , respectively, where during the process of constructing the Hadamard gate, the relative phase needs to be reduced by π 2 at the moment when the pulse area reaches π. In Fig. Next, we use the demonstrated composite-pulse scheme to improve the ability of our geometric gates in suppressing systematic error, which can further enhance the robustness of our geometric gates (the analytical calculation is present in Appendix B). Here, the systematic error we consider is in the form of (1 + )Ω(t) with being the error fraction, i.e., the deviation of driving strength, which causes the destruction of the exact π pulse condition so that the cyclic evolution is no longer satisfied. We take the single-qubit gate U 1 (T) in Eq. ( The nontrivial two-qubit gates can be implemented on two capacitively coupled transmon qubits, e.g., the two denoting as T A and T B , the details are shown in Fig. Usually, the qubit-frequency difference of adjacent transmon qubits and their coupling strength are fixed and not adjustable. To obtain tunable coupling between them [14-17], we add an ac driving on the transmon qubit T B , experimentally induced by biasing the qubit by an ac magnetic flux, which results in periodically modulating this qubit's transition frequency in the form of Moving into the interaction picture, the transformed Hamiltonian reads + √ 2|20 11|e i(∆1-α A )t e iβ1 cos(ν1t+φ) + H.c. , where We can see that the resonant interaction can be induced from the above Hamiltonian in both the single-or two-excitation subspaces by a different choice of the driving frequency ν 1 ; the corresponding energy level diagram is shown in Fig. In recent experiments where n 1 = ±1, ±2, . . ., and two kinds of two-qubit controlphase gates in the two-excitation subspaces {|11 , |02 } and {|20 , |11 } by meeting the condition of respectively, where n 2 , n 3 = ±1, ±2, . . .. The experimental results indicate that the gate infidelities are 6% and 9% for the two-qubit for iSWAP and Control-phase gates, respectively. These gate infidelities mainly come from the influence of the third level of the transmons, due to the limited qubit anharmonicities. In the next subsection and in the next section dealing with DFS encoding, we show that the improvement of gate fidelities for the iSWAP and control-phase gates can be achieved through the optimization of qubit parameters. In particular, we can use this parametrically tunable coupling to complete the construction of high-fidelity two-qubit iSWAP and control-phase gates in a geometric way. We consider the case of the parametric driving compensating the energy-splitting difference between the transmon qubits T A and T B , i.e., meeting the condition ∆ 1 = ν 1 as given in Eq. ( with J m (β 1 ) being Bessel functions of the first kind, and applying the rotating-wave approximation by neglecting the higher-order oscillating terms, we get an effectively resonant interaction Hamiltonian in the single-excitation subspace as where g AB = J 1 (β 1 )g AB . In the same way as that of the single-qubit-gate case, we divide the entire evolution time τ into three parts to achieve geometric evolution, at intermediate time τ 1 , τ 2 with pulse area, and relative phase φ, satisfying At the final time τ , the evolution operator can be expressed as in the two-qubit subspace {|00 , |01 , |10 , |11 }. Therefore, the two-qubit geometric gates can be achieved. In the case of θ = π/2, φ = 0, and ξ = π/2, the induced two-qubit geometric gate is an iSWAP gate which is a nontrivial two-qubit entangling gate for universal GQC, since it can transform the product state after the gate operation. To fully evaluate the performance of the implemented two-qubit gate, for the general initial state we define the two-qubit gate fidelity as In Fig. In addition, to further show the robust feature of the geometric iSWAP gate, we take the error caused by the qubitfrequency drift as an example to analyze its influence for the geometric and dynamic iSWAP gate performance. When the qubit-frequency drifts of the two qubits do not synchronous, this error turns ∆ 1 of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The composite-pulse scheme can also be applied to our two-qubit geometric gates, where the systematic error can be suppressed. Here we define the form of systematic error as (1 + η)g AB with η being the error fraction, which denotes the deviation of the qubit-qubit coupling strength. We take the two-qubit gate U 2 (τ ) in Eq. ( In the following, we take the iSWAP two-qubit gate as an example and select the geometric gate U S 2 (τ ), the geometric composite gates U S 2 (2τ ), U S 2 (3τ ) and the dynamic gate U d S as our comparison objects under the above optimal parameters. As shown in Fig. In order to suppress collective dephasing noise where |mn = |m A ⊗ |n C . Firstly, we turn to the implementation of universal singlelogical qubit geometric gates by parametrically tunable coupling between two capacitively coupled transmon qubits T A and T C , which can be achieved by adding a parametric driving on the transmon qubit T C so that its frequency oscillation as ω C (t) = ω C + ε 2 sin(ν 2 t + φ L ). Here we can take them as a unit to encode our logic qubit. The effective coupling Hamiltonian, which is similar to Eq. ( where As our DFS encoding is within the single-excitation subspace, the encoded quantum information does not leak to other subspaces. To achieve geometric evolution, we divide the entire evolution time T into three parts, at intermediate time T 1 and T 2 , with pulse area and relative phase φ L satisfying At the final time T , the evolution operator reads in the two-dimensional DFS S 1 = {|0 L , |1 L }, from which universal nonadiabatic single-qubit geometric gates in DFS can be achieved. The geometric nature of this gate can be proved similar to that of the single-qubit case in Eq. (3). To further analyze the performance of the single-logical qubit gates, here we choose the NOT and Hadamard gates as two typical examples, which correspond to the same φ L = 0 and γ L = π/2, with different θ L , θ N L = π/2, and θ H L = π/4 for the NOT and Hadamard gates, respectively. Here, the anharmonicities of the transmon qubits T A and T C are α A = 2π × 220 MHz and α C = 2π × 245 MHz. Meanwhile, we set the parametric driving frequency equal to the frequency difference of the two transmon qubits T A and T C , i.e., ν 2 = ∆ 2 = ω A -ω C = 2π × 165 MHz, so that the effectively resonant interaction is induced in the single-excitation subspace. Set the decoherence rates of all the physical qubits as κ = 2π × 4 KHz, for β 2 = ε 2 /ν 2 ≈ 2.2 and the qubit-qubit coupling strength g AC = 2π × 20 MHz, the gate fidelities of the NOT and Hadamard gates can be as high as F L N = 99.81% and F L H = 99.87%, as shown in Fig. We next proceed to the construction of the two-logical qubit control-phase geometric gates. As shown in Fig. where For the construction of two-logical qubit geometric gates, we only need the parametrically tunable coupling between two physical qubits, i.e., one from each logical qubit, namely T C and T D , by adding an ac driving on the qubit T C so that its frequency oscillation ω C (t) = ω C + ε 3 sin(ν 3 t + φ L ) can be obtained. The above two-logical qubits are arranged in the horizontal direction in the 2D lattice of Fig. where The resonant situation in the two-excitation subspace of {|11 CD , |02 CD } can be achieved by setting ν 3 = α D -∆ 3 . Then, we apply the rotating-wave approximation by neglecting the higher-order oscillating terms, we can obtain an effectively resonant interacting Hamiltonian as where g CD = √ 2J 1 (β 3 )g CD , and |a L = |0002 , which is regarded as an auxiliary state here. In order to achieve the construction of the two-logical qubit control-phase gates, we divide the total evolution time τ into two equal parts. For the first stage t ∈ [0, τ /2], the relative phase φ L = π in the Hamiltonian H L2 . At the moment τ /2, we change the relative phase to φ L = ξ L . For the second stage t ∈ [τ /2, τ ], the relative phase remains at φ L = ξ L . The whole evolution of logical states forms an orange-slice-shaped evolution path. After undergoing this cyclic evolution path, the logical state |11 L can obtain a purely geometric phase -ξ L as the parallel-transport condition is satisfied, i.e., The evolution operator U L2 (t) at the final time τ is in the DFS S 2 . Thus, the two-logical qubit control-phase geometric gates can be achieved. To further evaluate the performance of these gates, we take U CP = diag{1, 1, 1, e -iπ/2 } as a typical example by taking ξ L = π/2. Here we set the parameters of the qubit T It is worth emphasizing that the compositepulse scheme in the previous section can also be applied to this DFS-encoding scheme of GQC. In summary, we propose to implement nonadiabatic GQC on the 2D square superconducting qubit lattice consisting of capacitively coupled transmon qubits, by using parametrically tunable coupling between two qubits. During the geometric gate operations, we achieve independent manipulation of the qubit states, without introducing any auxiliary state. Moreover, our scheme can be achieved by effectively tunable allresonant interaction, thus leading to high-fidelity and more robust geometric quantum-composite gates. In addition, nonadiabatic GQC in DFS, based on parametrically tunable resonant coupling between two transmon qubits, can also be implemented, without consulting multiqubit interactions. Moreover, in our scheme, we only use two physical qubits to construct the DFS, which possesses minimal qubit resource requirement. Therefore, our scheme provides a promising way to achieve high-fidelity GQC. where ρ 1 is the density matrix of the transmon, L (A) = 2Aρ 1 A † -A † Aρ 1 -ρ 1 A † A is the Lindblad operator for operator A, and κ j -, κ j z are the relaxation and dephasing rates of the transmon, respectively. In our simulation, we choose the parameters from the state-of-the-art experiments in Refs. In Fig. For large scale fault-tolerant quantum computation, highfidelity quantum gates are preferred. Thus we want to outpace the above maximum fidelity in the presence of the leakage error, i.e., achieving independent manipulation of the qubit states and removing the influence of the third level. For this purpose, we use the recent theoretical exploration of derivative removal via adiabatic gate (DRAG) As shown in Fig. Here, we present the analytical calculation to show the influence of systematic error on the gate fidelity and the advantage of the composite-pulse scheme in suppressing systematic error. In the presence of the systematic error, the Hamiltonian H 1 (t) for single-qubit gates in Eq. (1) turns to where Ω (t) = (1 + )Ω(t) = μΩ(t) with being the error fraction, satisfying | | 1. After the geometric operation, the evolution operator under the influence of systematic error is calculated to be Next, we sequentially apply the decomposition and then the Taylor expansion formula of the trigonometric functions to Eq. (B2), up to 2 , which are the main deviations here. According to the form of the elementary gate in the presence of systematic error, the corresponding composite gates are in the form of U 1 (2T) = U 1 (T)U 1 (T) and U 1 (3T) = U 1 (T)U 1 (T)U 1 (T). To further compare the sensitivity of elementary gate and composite gates to systematic error, we calculate the fidelity of these gates by using the formula where U and U represent the desired gate and the gate affected by the systematic error, respectively. In order to make the compared gate be the same, for the gate U 1 (T) and the composite gates U 1 (2T), U 1 (3T), we set the parameter γ to be π/2, π/4, π/6, respectively. Through analytical calculations from Eq. (B3), we can get Comparing the above analytical results, we obtain Therefore, the composite-pulse scheme can strengthen the robustness of geometric gate against the systematic error. A similar discussion is also valid for the case of two-qubit geometric composite gates. (T) = e inγ |ψ + ψ + | + e -inγ |ψ -ψ -|,(8) can be achieved.In order to reflect the advantage of the composite-pulses scheme, we first consider only the influence of the systematic error. Here, taking the NOT gate as an example and setting the parameters of the qubit as α = 2π × 220 MHz, Ω 0 = 2π × 40 MHz. We select the geometric gate U N 1 (T), the geometric composite gates U N 1 (2T), U N 1 (3T) and the dynamic gate U d N , which can be obtained by simple Rabi oscillation, as our comparison objects. In Fig.4(a), we plot the gate fidelities as a function of the systematic error, one can clearly find that the geometric composite gates U N 1 (2T) and U N 1 (3T) have better performance than the geometric gate U N 1 (T) and the dynamic gate U d N under the systematic error. In addition, we note that the geometric composite gates will inevitably require a longer operation time, and thus we need to comprehensively analyze the influence of both the decoherence and the systematic error, after neglecting the higher-order oscillating terms (corrected by DRAG). As shown in Fig.4(b) and (c), under decoherence, both the geometric and dynamical gates share similar performance in terms of the systematic error. However, we find that the geometric composite gates can surpass the dynamical gate, as shown in Fig.4(d) and (e). Meanwhile, considering the competition of the systematic and decoherence errors, U N 1 (2T) is the best choice in our case.III. NONTRIVIAL TWO-QUBIT GEOMETRIC GATESIn this section, we consider the construction of the nontrivial two-qubit geometric gates. Therefore, combining the implemented arbitrary single-qubit gates, nonadiabatic GQC can be realized on the 2D square superconducting qubit lattice, where all the adjacent transmon qubits are capacitively coupled. Our two-qubit gates can be implemented in any two adjacent transmon qubits. In addition, similar to the singlequbit-gate case, in order to consider the effect of the intrinsic weak anharmonicity of the transmon qubits, we need to take the third energy level that is beyond the qubit states into account, as main leakages out of the qubit basis come from this level during the construction of two-qubit gates.A. Parametrically tunable coupling