Combining classical electrodynamics and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we develop a general and rigorous theoretical framework that describes the energetics of metal surfaces under high electric fields. We show that the behavior of a surface atom in the presence of an electric field can be described by the polarization characteristics of the permanent and field-induced charges in its vicinity. We use DFT calculations for the case of a W adatom on a W{110} surface to confirm the predictions of our theory and quantify its system-specific parameters. Our quantitative predictions for the diffusion of W-on-W{110} under field are in good agreement with experimental measurements. This work is a crucial step towards developing atomistic computational models of such systems for long-term simulations. The interaction of metal surfaces with an applied electric field is well described in the continuum-limit by classical electrodynamics There are many indications in the literature that metal surfaces behave differently under the influence of a high electric field The behavior of adatoms on metal surfaces in the presence of an electric field has attracted interest of both theoretical and experimental studies since the 1950s In this letter, we present an ab initio theory, that rigorously describes the atomistic behavior of a metal surface under high electric field, in terms of the well-defined polarization characteristics of the entire surface-adatom system. Our theory establishes a general approach for calculating the electric field effects on the activation energy of any atomic transition on a metal surface under both uniform and non-uniform electric fields, utilizing modern density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We validate our approach by calculating the activation energies of migration and thermal evaporation for the particular case of a W adatom on a W{110} surface and subsequently successfully comparing our theoretical predictions to both direct DFT calculations and experimental data available in the literature. In section II, we develop the theoretical concepts that describe the activation energy of various atomic transitions in terms of the system polarization characteristics. Then in section III we describe the methodology for our DFT calculations for the W{110} system, the results of which are presented in section IV, validating our theory versus direct DFT calculations. Finally, in section V, we compare our results with experiment and discuss the limits of our theory, before concluding in section II. THEORY An applied electric field causes charge redistribution on metal surfaces by shifting the electron densities with respect to the position of positive surface nuclei either out from the surface or into the bulk, depending on the direction of the field. Similarly, the presence or the absence of an atom, causes charge redistribution in its vicinity as well. Fig. The interaction of a charge distributed as ρ( r) with a uniform applied electric field F = ẑF changes the value of the total energy of the system. This change can be calculated by analyzing the behavior of the corresponding system dipole moment P = (P x , P y , P z ) = ρ rdV . An infinitesimal increment of the uniform field δ F , applied to a system with a dipole moment P induces an infinitesimal change of the total energy (see sec. (4.2) in ref. where E(0) is the total energy of the system in the absence of an external field. For small fields, the relation P z (F ) can be represented as a Taylor expansion where M is the permanent dipole moment and A the polarizability of the system. Using eq. ( See sec. (II D) for a detailed analysis of the approximation (2) and the physical meaning of M and A for the slab system discussed below. Equation Focusing on the migration and evaporation of a surface atom, we consider a rectangular metal slab under a uniform applied field, with its surfaces normal to the z axis, such as the one illustrated in fig. where E m (0) is the barrier without field, M sl ≡ M s -M l and A sl ≡ A s -A l . In previous works The binding energy between an atom and the surface E b can be evaluated in a similar manner as eq. ( where the subscript r denotes the reference system (substrate surface in the absence of the moving atom), a denotes the isolated neutral atom and we have assumed M a = 0 due to the symmetry of the free atom. Note that E b is not the activation energy for field evaporation (ion emission under extremely high fields), but thermal evaporation of a neutral atom under a nonionizing field. It is therefore not to be confused with the removal work Λ, i.e. the work needed to remove an atom from the surface under field to a remote field-free space. Although Λ is not the activation energy for any real physical process, it is a theoretical concept of significant importance in the field evaporation theory (FET) Λ coincides with E b for F = 0, but its dependence on the field F is different, due to the nature of the final state (atom under field for E b ). Similarly to the case of E b , in the final state the two separated systems do not interact and the total energy can be written as the sum of the subsystems E a (0) + E r (F ). Thus the removal work Λ = E a (0) + E r (F ) -E l (F ) can be expressed as We note that a quadratic (on F ) expression for Λ(F )-Λ(0) was proposed in Let us now consider the migration barrier in the presence of a small electric field gradient γ ≡ dF/dx along the migration direction x. Such a gradient may appear due to surface features that locally enhance the applied field. In this case, our fundamental equation ( To this end, we shall write the total energy of the system E( r i ), when the migrating atom lies at a surface point r i = (x i , y i , z i ), as where ∆E( r i ) is the energy added to the system due to the introduction of the atom under study at r i . E r , i.e. the reference system energy in the absence of the atom, is independent of the position r, therefore does not enter the expressions for the migration barrier, i.e. ∆E( r i ) depends on interatomic interactions and interactions of charges with the external electric field that are localized around r i . In other words, only the values of F (x) in the vicinity of x i affect it. As one can see in fig. Here i stands for s, l or r. By combining eq. ( The first three terms of expression We shall now return to the slab model to discuss the physical meaning of its polarization characteristics and the approximations underlying its adoption. The rectangular metal slab system introduced in section II B is the standard system used for DFT calculations on metal surfaces First, the slab has to be sufficiently thick to obtain bulk properties in its middle (i.e. > 10 -20 Å); this ensures a sufficiently good representation of the effectively infinitely deep bulk below the surface. Second, the roughness of the surface should be much smaller than the lateral width of the slab and the thickness of the vacuum region. Third, the radius of curvature of the real surface must be much larger than the slab thickness (i.e. > 100 Å). The last two conditions ensure that the surface can be considered quasi-flat. When the metal slab is introduced to the influence of a constant external electric field F = F ẑ, the free charge of the metal shall redistribute in order to nullify the electric field in its interior. Two opposite charge layers will be induced on the surfaces (see e.g. fig. It can be shown (see appendix A), that the polarizability of this system can be approximated as where S is the lateral area of the slab, 0 the dielectric constant and ∆z the distance between the centers of mass of the two charge layers. In other words, the system polarizability is proportional to the effective field-free volume inside the slab. The above expression can be used to obtain the continuum-limit Maxwell stress. By substituting to eq. ( From eq. ( The physical meaning of A sl , A sr and A lr emerges from the above analysis. They are proportional to the increase of the effective field-free volume of the metallic system due to a change on the surface. For a system with a given lateral area S, such as the one we simulated with DFT, differences in A are proportional to the corresponding shift of the charge layer position. Finally, we note that when approximating A with 0 S∆z, we assume that ∆z does not vary significantly with the applied field F . The latter is not in general true, since the system always responds to the application of a field and the corresponding Maxwell stress. This response is always towards the minimization of the total energy, i.e. the increase of A and ∆z. Therefore, in a relaxed system, ∆z varies slightly with F , meaning that A is actually proportional to the zero-order term of a Taylor expansion of ∆z(F ). Higher order terms would contribute to the O(F 2 ) terms in eq. ( The unknown M and A parameters in eqs. ( Here we calculated all the parameters for the example case of a single W adatom on a flat W{110} surface. For this purpose we ran DFT simulations for four different system configurations: the flat {110} surface (r), the surface with an adatom positioned at the saddle (bridge) point (s), with the adatom at the lattice (hollow) point (l) and an isolated W atom in vacuum (a). Systems (l, s, r) are illustrated in fig. The electric field effect on the potential is implemented in VASP according to a scheme proposed by Neugebauer et al. in A Gamma-centered k-grid was used in all the calculations: a 7 × 7 × 1 grid for the systems with adatom and a 28 × 28 × 1 k-grid for the 2 × 2 × 7 flat slab. The cut-off energy of the plane wave basis was set to 600 eV. The above values were obtained after performing convergence tests, i.e. increasing the k-grid density and the cut-off energy until the total energy of the system converged. Our criterion for the convergence tests was 1 meV, therefore we will consider this value as our error margin for the ground-state energy calculations. This error margin is used to obtain the error bars of all direct DFT data plotted in the figures of sec. IV. Fig. This small deviation is attributed to the numerical error in the evaluation of P via integration of the electron density. This lack of numerical precision is the very reason we chose the E -F curves instead of the P -F ones. The calculation of P from the DFT electron density has much larger numerical error than the corresponding calculations of energy values for a given computational effort In fig. In order to validate these formulae, we also calculated these values directly from E s , E l , E r , and E a as obtained by DFT. In the inset of fig. On the anode side (F > 0), all three quantities increase for small fields, because both linear terms -M sl and M lr are positive. E m and E b reach a maximum around 10 GV/m where the negative quadratic terms start dominating and the inverse trend appears. On the other hand, both quantities are monotonously decreasing on the cathode side (F < 0). Therefore, any applied field would speed up the diffusion and promote evaporation on the cathode. On the contrary, both diffusion and evaporation would slow down for an anode field up to a certain turning point. The behavior of Λ coincides with E b in the low field regime due to their common linear term. Nevertheless, for higher fields Λ exhibits an upwards curvature, due to the positive quadratic term which includes the work required to remove the atom from the influence of the field. Considering the diffusion under a field gradient, which is described by equation In fig 5, similarly as in fig FIG. The trends shown in fig. Note that the M and A coefficients of these terms might differ significantly for different migration processes and materials. Hence, our results for the simple W-on-W{110} are not enough to draw general conclusions on the diffusion on more complex surfaces. In order to do that, M and A should be calculated for additional atomic migration processes. We leave this out of the scope of this work, which focuses on the theoretical framework upon which such calculations may be based. We chose to perform DFT calculations for the W{110} system because experimental data of the diffusion on this specific system are available for comparison. Tsong and Kellogg If the barrier is considered to depend linearly on the field gradient as in eq. ( where x b is the mean displacement of the adatom when it performs a biased diffusion under a non-uniform field with gradient γ, x 2 is the mean square displacement of the adatom when the latter diffuses without any applied field, l is the atomic jump length, k is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. Now in ref. From our extracted values we obtain M sr +A sr F = 0.88± 0.03 e Å. This result is in a surprisingly good agreement with the experimental value, with a small deviation of about 20%. This small deviation can be attributed to the experimental error of the involved measurements. In table I of ref. The range of fields used for the theoretical curves in fig. On the other hand, high positive fields also impose strict limitations due to the fundamental definitions of the migration barrier and the binding energy we use here. The definition of the binding energy as E b = E r +E a -E l assumes that if one moves the adatom away from the surface under field, the total energy of the system will converge to E r + E a as the distance increases. However, at the fields approaching the field evaporation regime (30-60 GV/m for W) To investigate the field range where this behavior is expected to appear for W, we ran DFT simulations for an isolated W atom under high fields. Already at F = 10 GV/m the system energy deviates significantly from the parabolic behavior shown in fig. The migration barrier, on the other hand, becomes rather meaningless when the activation energy for the field evaporation becomes comparably small or even smaller. This is because the atoms will see a potential "slide" towards the vacuum before they reach the new site. The evaporation activation energy has been measured to be 0.9 eV for a field of 47 GV/m Finally, the limited range of the electric fields (|F | less than 3-4 GV/m in our calculations) that can be calculated by the current DFT technique To conclude, this work provides a rigorous theoretical basis for understanding the atomistic behavior of metal surfaces under high electric fields and can be used to develop atomistic computational models for the long-term evolution of metal surfaces in this condition. We have showed that the behavior of a surface atom can be described with a few parameters in terms of the total dipole moment of both the permanent and field-induced charges in its vicinity. Our theory is in excellent agreement with DFT calculations and when we combine the two, we obtain results on the behavior of W adatoms on W{110} surfaces that are in very good agreement with experiments. According to the brownian motion theory, when jumps in all directions are equally probable with an activation energy E m , the mean displacement after a time τ is x = 0 and the mean square displacement is where ν is the attempt frequency, l is the length of the jump and kT is the temperature multiplied by the Boltzmann constant. On the other hand, if the activation energy is E m +δE m on the left side and E m -δE m on the right, then the mean displacement of the biased diffusion is The ratio between them is then If the bias is due to an applied field that has a gradient in a certain direction, as we assumed in our theory, we can substitute δE m by the function of the field and the field gradient given in eq. ( 