Colouration by surface nanostructuring has attracted a great deal of attention by the virtue of making use of environment-friendly recyclable materials and generating non-bleaching colours 1-8 . Recently, it was found possible to delegate the task of colour printing to laser postprocessing that modifies carefully designed and fabricated nanostructures 9,10 . Here we take the next crucial step in the development of structural colour printing by dispensing with preformed nanostructures and using instead near-percolation metal films atop dielectricmetal sandwiches, i.e., near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays. Scanning rapidly (~ 20 μm/s) across 4-nm-thin island-like gold films supported by 30-nm-thin silica layers atop 100nm-thick gold layers with a strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser beam, while adjusting the average laser power from 1 to 10 mW, we produce bright colours varying from green to red by laser-heating-induced merging and reshaping of gold islands. Selection of strongly heated islands and their reshaping, both originating from the excitation of plasmonic resonances, are strongly influenced by the polarization direction of laser illumination, so that the colours produced are well pronounced only when viewed with the same polarization. Conversely, the laser colour writing with circular polarizations results in bright polarization-independent colour images. The fabrication procedure for near-percolation reflector arrays is exceedingly simple and scalable to mass production, while the laser-induced modification occurs inherently with the subwavelength resolution. This unique combination of remarkable features makes the approach developed for laser colour writing readily amenable for practical implementation and use in diverse applications ranging from nanoscale patterning for security marking to large-scale colour printing for decoration. others, and is thus intimately dependent on material and geometric choices as well as spatial and temporal properties of the laser. The thermally induced NP merging and reshaping can, in general, be viewed as a part of dewetting that describes the rupture of a thin (melted) film on the substrate and the formation of droplets. Thermally induced dewetting of a top metal film (as a whole) in metal-insulator-metal structures has been found suitable for fabrication of plasmonic broadband visible absorbers The NPPRA-based configuration investigated in detail in this work comprises 4-nm-thin (on average) gold films evaporated on 30-nm-thick silica (SiO2) layers atop optically thick (100 nm) gold films supported by silicon substrates (Fig. Notably, the colours are uniform even when viewed through diffraction-limited optics, indicating that the density of reshaped NPs is sufficiently high to average out local variations in the optical response on scales comparable to the diffraction limit as observed in a colour print of the University of Southern Denmark (SDU) logo (Fig. Local laser-heating-induced NP reshaping in NPPRAs and ensuing surface colouration introduced in our work is expected to feature subwavelength resolution because of very high densities of NPs (>> 100 μm -2 ) typical for near-percolation metal films. Similar to the colour laser printing on preformed nanostructures In the course of our investigations, we have used for colour printing different NPPRA configurations, i.e., having thicknesses of both spacer SiO2 layers and thin island-like gold films, and found the effect of polarization-selective laser colour printing to be remarkably robust (see Supplementary Section 6). The practical applicability of colour printing schemes hinges on the robustness of the printed colours under often chemically and mechanically corrosive influences of the environment. While colours in the simple configuration with a laser-reshaped gold top layer can simply be wiped off with a light touch, the presented approach suggests various schemes of protection with a dielectric overlay due to the inherent stability of GSP resonators with respect to surfactants Laser-heating induced morphological changes in near-percolation metal films have recently been considered using two-photon luminescence (TPL) imaging Further understanding of underlying physical mechanisms involved in the proposed approach for colour printing requires constructing an adequate physical system amenable to modelling of its optical properties. To this end, we have verified the correlation between the surface morphology reconstructed using the SEM images and the optical reflectance spectra calculated using three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations The polarization selectivity discussed at length in the previous sections becomes detrimental when targeting conventional colour printing with prints to be viewed with ambient (unpolarized) light. In order to produce polarization-independent colour images we employed circularly polarized light for laser colour printing. We found that the corresponding colour prints look identical for all polarizations as well as for unpolarised light (see Supplementary Section 5) and even exhibit a bit brighter and more intense colours than those observed with the co-polarized writing and viewing, although the difference being admittedly small (cf. Fig 2b and Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated the usage of near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays for laser printing of structured colours. Scanning rapidly (~ 20 μm/s) across 4-nm-thin island-like gold films supported by 30-nm-thin silica layers atop 100-nm-thick gold layers with a strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser beam, while adjusting the average laser power from 1 to 10 mW, we have produced bright colours varying from green to red by laser-heating-induced merging and reshaping of gold islands. Both polarization sensitive and independent colour writing were demonstrated using linearly and circularly polarized light, respectively. In the case of linearly polarized writing, the difference between cross-polarized images is substantial, suggesting important perspectives for polarization multiplexing. The fabrication procedure for near-percolation reflector arrays is exceedingly simple requiring only three consecutive material depositions (to produce an optically thick metal back-reflector, a thin dielectric spacer and a very thin semi-continuous metal film) and thereby truly scalable to mass production. At the same time, the laser-induced modification occurs inherently with the subwavelength resolution, while the fabricated colour prints can be protected with a transparent dielectric overlay for ambient use without destroying its colouring. Moreover, we have also demonstrated the possibility for laser colour printing on polymer-protected nearpercolation plasmonic reflector arrays, a procedure that allows one to separate the process of pristine sample fabrication and that of laser colour printing. The unique combination of aforementioned remarkable features makes the approach developed for laser colour writing readily amenable for practical implementation and use in diverse applications ranging from nanoscale patterning for security marking to large-scale colour printing for decoration. Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper as supplementary information. The printing of coloured images with power modulation for individual pixels is based on the setup used for TPL microscopy, with an additional electronically controllable optical attenuator after which the light enters the microscope through a semi-transparent mirror, which is used to collect the fundamental harmonic (FH) reflection when doing two-photon luminescence measurements. A dichroic mirror (DCM) then direct the laser beam into a long working distance objective (LW-obj.) which focusses the beam onto the sample placed on a computer-controlled scanning stage. Three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations shown in Figure To better reveal the physical origin of the spectral characteristics and associated colours of the system, we simulated four different scenarios and compare their optical responses (Figure Here, the reshaped area showing red colour (Figure Absorption is the only channel attenuating the reflected power and thus can well account for the features on both measured and simulated reflection spectra. Bearing this in mind, we first calculate the optical response of the percolated gold film on SiO 2 (Figure To further separate the two mechanisms involving the bottom gold layer, we apply a silver bottom layer instead (Figure For a sufficiently advanced dewetting process, i.e. for colours written at high powers, the percolated film reconfigures into a film of discrete particles that can with good accuracy be described by arrays of large (relative to pristine-film features) polarisable ellipsoids using a modified long wavelength approximation (MLWA) where ω = ck 0 is the angular frequency of the incident light, α eff is the effective polarizability tensor (calculated using MLWA), Λ is the (artificial) array period, ẑ is the normal to the surface, and E 1 is the electric field vector. Light is incident on the array of particles normal to the surface of the homogenized film. Matching fields at the two interfaces results in the following expression for the reflection coefficient of the three-layer system: where Z i is the wave impedance and eff vv α are diagonal elements of the effective polarisability tensor with ν = x, y, z (Figure Strongly polarization-selective colour-writing can be achieved using linearly polarized light, and yields colours with strong polarization anisotropy for all colours, with bright saturated colours resulting from viewing under co-polarized illumination -including bright and dark greens, grey as well as bright and dark reds -and only weakly saturated areas appearing in the cross-polarization. It is possible to achieve even brightly saturated red in co-polarized illumination while maintaining very low colour saturation for the cross-polarized illumination. This fact is particularly noteworthy since the thermal diffusion by necessity introduces the onset of polarization cross-talk at some power threshold, while Figure With the aim of achieving images that are invariant under any, linear or circular, polarization stateand for unpolarized and even partially polarized viewing -we modify our experimental setup with an additional quarter-wave plate and polarizer, enabling the exposure with a circularly polarized beam. This makes the resulting image fully invariant under both linear and circular polarizations (Figure In the course of our studies, we have tried different thicknesses of both spacer SiO 2 layers and thin island-like gold films that were also deposited under different conditions and using different evaporation chambers and deposition techniques. Without going into detail of all these exploratory experiments, we would like to emphasize that the effect of polarization-selective laser colour printing was seen to be remarkably robust, as it has been found with all investigated configurations, albeit with somewhat different colour palettes and colour vividness (as illustrated in Figure The practical applicability of colour printing schemes hinges on the robustness of the printed colours under the often chemically and mechanically corrosive influence of the environment. While colours in the simple configuration with a percolated top layer can simply be wiped off with a light touch, the technique nevertheless lends itself to various schemes of protection via a dielectric overlay, which, intriguingly, can be applied in either pre-or post-processing of the substrate. With the aim of showing that both colours and polarization sensitivity of the exposure are preserved when applying a PMMA protection layer in post-processing, we cover the sample from Figure While the application of dielectric layers in post-processing is feasible for some applications, such as colouration of consumer products, the technique is entirely impractical for in-situ printing applications, where the printable substrate should be protected both prior, under and after printing. This creates the need to encapsulate the (close to) percolated gold layer at the fabrication stage. We demonstrate that a sample can indeed be covered with a protective layer of silicon dioxide prior to the laser writing -again with no loss of saturation or polarization selectivity (Figure We have also investigated the correlation between colour printing as observed with optical brightfield microscopy and two-photon luminescence (TPL) imaging by exposing two (5×5 μm 2 ) square areas with different powers of incident light being x-and, slightly above, y-polarized, resulting in 4 coloured areas located close to each other (Figure 