We theoretically propose a phase-coherent thermal circulator based on ballistic multiterminal Josephson junctions. The breaking of time-reversal symmetry by either a magnetic flux or a superconducting phase bias allows heat to flow preferentially in one direction from one terminal to the next while heat flow in the opposite direction is suppressed. We find that our device can achieve a high circulation efficiency over a wide range of parameters and that its performance is robust with respect to the presence of disorder. We provide estimates for the expected heat currents for realistic samples. The miniaturization of electronics has led to ever more powerful computers but also to an increased production of heat in computer chips. One possible way to deal with such waste heat is to recover it via thermoelectric energy harvesting An ideal playground to investigate phase-coherent electronic heat flows is mesoscopic superconducting circuits Still missing, however, is a phase-coherent heat circulator, which is a multiterminal device that allows heat to flow, say, clockwise from one terminal to the next but blocks thermal transport in the counterclockwise direction. This is analogous to a microwave or radio-frequency circulator in electronics We consider a three-terminal ballistic Josephson junction In order to obtain the scattering matrix of the whole system at an arbitrary energy ω > |∆ i |, we make use of the reflection and transmission coefficients for Andreev reflection given by 3 × 3 matrices at the normalsuperconductor interfaces within the Andreev approximation as where the coherence factors are given by Here, one of the superconducting phases can be put equal to zero without loss of generality, i.e., φ 0 ≡ 0, while the remaining two phases φ 1 and φ 2 can have arbitrary values. We have furthermore assumed an equal gap amplitude |∆ i | = ∆ to elucidate our discussion more clearly. We then define the matrices to obtain the total scattering matrix of the junction as where the scattering region is described by the matrix From the total scattering matrix in Eq. ( Due to current conservation, the scattering matrix is unitary, i.e., š † š = šš † = 1, and the transmission function satisfies the sum rule i T ij = j T ij = 2, where the factor 2 comes from the sum over the electron and hole subspace. Finally, the thermal conductance matrix is given by its elements (i, j = 0, 1, 2) where ζ -1 (ω) = 4k B T 2 cosh 2 (ω/2k B T ). Note that κ ij describes the thermal conductance from terminal j to i. Onsager reciprocity dictates that κ ij (φ 0 , φ 1 , φ 2 , α) = κ ji (-φ 0 , -φ 1 , -φ 2 , -α) In order to quantify the circulator efficiency, we introduce a figure of merit defined by The first term in the numerator, κ 02 κ 21 κ 10 , describes the heat circulation in a counterclockwise sense, i.e., 0 → 1 → 2 → 0, whereas the second term, κ 01 κ 12 κ 20 , quantifies the clockwise rotation 0 → 2 → 1 → 0. If there is no rectification in thermal conductances, i.e., κ ij = κ ji for all i, j, we have R = 0, as the numerator in Eq. ( When the coupling strength t gets larger, the efficiency grows more rapidly as α increases and the maximum approaches closer to the ideal case |R| ∼ 1, as shown in Fig. In Fig. Thus far we have considered a perfectly symmetric junction with equal on-site energies ε i = ε and hopping matrix elements t ij = t. Relaxing this condition to the asymmetric case with arbitrary ε i and t ij is straightforward Figure In summary, we propose a phase-coherent thermal circulator based on ballistic multiterminal Josephson junctions. Its operation relies on the breaking of time-reversal symmetry by a magnetic flux or a superconducting phase bias. We demonstrate that the device achieves a high circulation efficiency over a wide range of parameters. Furthermore, its operation is robust with respect to the presence of disorder.