The dielectric and magnetic polarizations of quantum paraelectrics and paramagnetic materials have in many cases been found to initially increase with increasing thermal disorder and hence exhibit peaks as a function of temperature. A quantitative description of these examples of 'orderby-disorder' phenomenona has remained elusive in nearly ferromagnetic metals and in dielectrics on the border of displacive ferroelectric transitions. Here we present an experimental study of the evolution of the dielectric susceptibility peak as a function of pressure in the nearly ferroelectric material, strontium titanate, which reveals that the peak position collapses towards absolute zero as the ferroelectric quantum critical point is approached. We show that this behaviour can be described in detail without the use of adjustable parameters in terms of the Larkin-Khmelnitskii-Shneerson-Rechester (LKSR) theory, first introduced nearly 50 years ago, of the hybridization of polar and acoustic modes in quantum paraelectrics, in contrast to alternative models that have been proposed. Our study allows us to construct for the first time a detailed temperature-pressure phase diagram of a material on the border of a ferroelectric quantum critical point comprising ferroelectric, quantum critical paraelectric and hybridized polar-acoustic regimes. Furthermore, at the lowest temperatures, below the susceptibility maximum, we observe a new regime characterized by a linear temperature dependence of the inverse susceptibility that differs sharply from the quartic temperature dependence predicted by the LKSR theory. We find that this non-LKSR low temperature regime cannot be accounted for in terms of any detailed model reported in the literature, and its interpretation poses a new empirical and conceptual challenge. The study of quantum phase transitions and quantum critical systems has led to the discovery of novel phases of matter and the introduction of novel conceptual frameworks for the description of emergent phenomena Another example involves a transition from a displacive ferroelectric state to an unpolarized or quantum paraelectric state in polar materials such as the perovskite oxides The identification of the nature of the quantum paraelectric states in such materials has been a key objective of the present study. This is a part of a more general goal to characterize and understand the temperaturequantum tuning parameter phase diagram of quantum critical ferroelectrics. The absence of free charge carriers (in undoped samples) was expected to lead to a simpler phase diagram than that observed near to quantum critical points in metals, in which quantum critical phenomena are in many interesting cases masked by the emergence of intervening phases. These include unconventional superconductivity and exotic textured phases, which are of great interest but stand in the way of understanding quantum critical behaviours in their simplest forms over wide ranges down to very low temperatures. To characterize the temperature-quantum tuning parameter phase diagram in close detail and obtain a deeper understanding of the quantum paraelectric state we have carried out measurements of the dielectric response over a wide range in temperature and pressure with high precision. In particular, the identification of the low temperature behaviour of the relative dielectric constant, ε r , or dielectric susceptibility, χ = ε r -1, has benefited from measurements of relative changes of χ as small as a few parts per billion. We first mention briefly the results of some relevant previous studies of our chosen material and then present and discuss our new findings. SrTiO 3 is a well-studied incipient displacive ferroelectric These and related studies, including those on superconductivity in doped SrTiO 3 Fig. ing over to a quadratic power law dependence at lower temperatures attributed to quantum critical fluctuations. The low temperature dielectric susceptibility reaches a maximum at approximately 2 K with a value of around 20,000 before falling at even lower temperatures. Observed as a minimum in the inverse susceptibility, this effect is resolved here in much clearer detail than in earlier studies The variation of χ -1 (T ) above a scale T QC > T * , which vanishes along with T * at p c , is found to be quadratic, T 2 , up to another scale T CL , and is linear in the classical regime above T CL (SI Appendix and Fig. The main features of this phase diagram are consistent with the predictions of a 3-D self-consistent Gaussian mean field model, also known as the self-consistent phonon model (see e.g. However, the self-consistent phonon model in its simplest form fails to account for the low temperature be- haviour presented here for T < T * , which suggests that the quantum paraelectric state at low T is very different from the traditionally accepted gapped state with activated behaviour, e.g. as described by the Barrett theory We discuss first the role of the coupling of the electric polarization with the non-polar lattice vibrations or acoustic phonons not included in the above self-consistent phonon model. As shown previously The LKSR model also predicts that the depth ∆χ -1 (T * ) of the minimum should scale as χ -1 (0), which is partly supported from a comparison of the main plot and lower inset of Fig. This dramatic departure from the prediction of the LKSR model leads us to consider alternative explanations for the susceptibility minimum. One such alternative explanation involves the combined effects of longrange dipolar interactions between elementary dipoles and the short range coupling of the polarization modes However, on closer examination we find that this negative T -linear form only applies to a material such as SrTiO 3 at relatively high temperatures, indeed at scales above that of the longitudinal polar optical frequencies, which are far above the observed T * in our experiments. In the temperature range below of the order of 10 K the dipole-dipole interaction model predicts an exponentially weak rather than a (-T ) temperature dependence of χ -1 (T ), which is in sharp disagreement with observation. For this and other reasons the dipole-dipole interaction model appears to be untenable at least for the case of SrTiO 3 and does not explain the pressure dependence of T * and of the depth of the minimum. It is also unlikely to operate in other materials where the minimum has been observed, such as TSCC, which have ultra-weak, nearly neutral, dipoles We now speculate on one possible origin of the proposed quasi-static modes. The LKSR model discussed thus far takes into account only the coupling of the polarization to the lattice density or to the volume strain. It has been shown that the coupling to non-uniform strain can in principle give rise to long-range strain-mediated interactions between the polarization modes (i.e., longrange mode-mode coupling). These long-range interactions are capable of producing micro-domain structures in the polarization field under certain conditions We therefore conclude that the susceptibility minimum in SrTiO 3 can be understood largely in terms of the LKSR model. An alternative explanation for the susceptibility minimum in terms of the anharmonic effects of the long-range dipole-dipole interaction is found to be untenable at least for the case of SrTiO 3 . Thus, we may describe the quantum paraelectric state below T * as a state in which the polarization field and the non-polar lattice field are strongly hybridized, with the emergence at still lower temperatures of a previously unknown regime characterized by a linear temperature dependence of the inverse susceptibility. This is in sharp contrast to the con- ventional picture in which a ferroelectric quantum phase transition separates a ferroelectric state from an unhybridized paraelectric state characterized by an activated form of the temperature dependence of the inverse susceptibility. We have presented new experimental findings and, in the traditional way, compared these findings with existing theoretical models. Our analysis does not allow us to claim that the LKSR model has been 'proved' even for the description of the origin of the inverse suceptibility mimimum, only that it is more realistic than other proposals. Finally we note that a minimum of the inverse of the order parameter susceptibility is also observed in metals on the border of ferromagnetic quantum critical points. It is possible that at least in some cases the origin of this minimum can also be attributed to the coupling of the fluctuations of the order parameter field and lattice strain or to effects of magnetostriction in place of the effects of electrostriction in the ferroelectric systems. High precision capacitance measurements were carried out on single crystal samples of SrTiO 3 from Crystal GmbH with gold electrodes vacuum evaporated onto the surfaces in a parallel-plate capacitor geometry. Measurements under hydrostatic pressure conditions were made possible by the development, in collaboration with Cam-Cool Research Ltd, of a piston-cylinder clamp cell with miniature shielded coaxial cables running into the sample region and electrically isolated from the cell body. This eliminates stray capacitances from the wiring and allows pF capacitance signals to be measured with stabilities of up to 10 -18 F, a few parts in a billion. The shield conductors of the coaxial cables were joined together at the sample position and at the measurement instrument in the standard 2-point capacitance setup. The pressure transmitting medium was Daphne Oil 7373 and pressure values, determined from the superconducting transition temperature of a tin manometer, were estimated with an accuracy of 0.5 kbar. An Andeen-Hagerling 2550A capacitance bridge was used, with an excitation amplitude voltage of 0.1 V at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz applied to the sample. The sample thickness, corresponding to capacitor plate separation, was 0.5 mm. Measurements were taken on a modified 1 K Dipper cryostat from ICE Oxford, allowing continuous stable temperature control down to 1.2 K. Typical heating or cooling rates were held at 0.01 K per minute to allow the large thermal mass of the pressure cell to thermally equilibrate; temperature errors are of the order 10 mK at low temperature. Typical results of our measurements are shown in Figure In this section we outline a collection of technical details and descriptions around values and results reported in the main text. The uncertainty on the value of the extrapolated critical pressure, -0.7(1) kbar, was determined from the linear fits employed, considering error bars from the dominant error in the data points. By far the largest uncertainty on each point is the pressure value -capacitance and temperature uncertainties were negligible. Changing the number of data points used had no effect on the value, within error, the data show a good linear trend. Additionally, the zero-temperature extrapolated inverse susceptibility values were found to be robust to the method chosen to establish them. At low temperature the data are almost flat; taking the values at 2 K and extrapolating to 0 K via various methods yielded very similar results. For the values reported in this work, a 2nd order polynomial was fitted to the data at very low temperature (below features of the minimum where possible), matching and preserving the shape of the data well over this limited range, and used to extrapolate to zero. For the case of the reported characteristic temperatures shown on the phase diagram, such as T QC and T CL , we stress that these are not phase transitions with welldefined temperatures, but crossovers from one regime to another where different effects are dominating the physics -no absolute temperature can be defined, we can merely be internally consistent and study their evolution. As the absolute values are arbitrary, we chose cutoffs and conditions such that fits in each region (so approaching the cutoff temperature from below and above) yield the same result at all pressure values, and to match with temperature values found from power-law analyses in Rowley et. al. (2010) In Figure In Figure The calculations of the dielectric susceptibility, χ (T ) = ε r (T ) -1, were carried out in terms of the selfconsistent phonon model for a simple displacive ferroelectric in three dimensions, see Refs where the wavevectors q, κ(T ) and κ(0) = κ(T = 0) are in units of the relevant Debye wavevector Λ, T and are ω are in units of the relevant Debye temperature θ and ω n = 2πnT , where n is an integer. The cut-offs in wavevector and frequency are taken to be unity in these units (i.e., 0 < q < 1 and -1 < ω < 1). The dimensionless correlation wavevector κ(T ) and the dimensionless coupling parameter ζ are given, in terms of the model parameters defined in the next section and in Ref and where χ (0) = χ(T = 0), ∆ and υ define the "T = 0" spectrum of the critical transverse optical modes and b is the coefficient of the anharmonic term in the equation of state assumed to have the analytic form ε 0 E = P/χ(T )+ bP 3 , where E is the electric field that stabilizes the polarization P . Thus κ 2 (T ) is a dimensionless measure of the inverse dielectric susceptibility. We also note that the square of the gap of the spectrum of critical transverse optical modes is expected to be proportional to the inverse susceptibility, so that ∆ 2 (T ) = χ -1 (T )∆ 2 /χ -1 (0), where ∆ = ∆(0). The coupling between the critical transverse optic mode and the acoustic mode, or more precisely the volume strain, leads to a further correction to κ 2 (T ) of the form where η is the ratio of the velocity of critical transverse optical modes to the velocity of the acoustic mode and λ is a dimensionless electrostrictive coupling constant. We have estimated the latter via the strain dependence of the energy gap of the order parameter mode where ζ is the dimensionless parameter defined in Eq. 3, K is the bulk modulus and p c is the critical pressure (negative for SrTiO 3 ) where the T = 0 K correlation wavevector is expected to vanish. We note that the electrostrictive effect is also expected to make a negative contribution to the mode-coupling parameter, b, and lead potentially to a first order transition. Numerical estimates suggest, however, that the transition should remain second order under our experimental conditions in agreement with measurements down to 0.3 K in SrTiO 3 The prediction of the above model (defined by Equations 1-5) for the temperature dependence of the susceptibility at a series of applied hydrostatic pressures for model parameters relevant to SrTiO 3 (next section) is shown in Figure In an effort to understand this unexpected behaviour, we have also considered the possible roles of the longrange dipole-dipole interaction and of quasi-static inhomogeneities of the lattice or micro domains predicted to arise from anisotropic couplings (including wavevector dependence) of the strain and electric polarization fields. The main effect of the dipolar interaction is to modify a degeneracy factor defining the dimensionless selfinteraction coupling parameter already included in the expression for ζ given in Equation (3). Additional predicted consequences of the dipolar interaction are found not to be relevant to SrTiO 3 at low temperatures as dis-cussed in the main body of the paper. Finally we consider more closely the temperature dependence of the electrostrictive correction. Via contour integration Equation ( i.e., δκ 2 (T ) is expected to fall as the fourth power of T or as the thermal energy of the acoustic modes in three dimensions. Equation The starting self-consistent phonon model for a displacive ferroelectric is defined mainly in terms of four temperature independent parameters, which we take to be χ -1 (0) , b, ∆, and v. The parameters χ -1 (0) and b were obtained from the intercept and slope, respectively, of plots of ε 0 E/P vs P 2 at 0.3 K We note that the square of the gap is expected to be proportional to the inverse susceptibility, so that ∆ 2 (T ) = χ -1 (T )∆ 2 /χ -1 (0), where ∆ = ∆(0), and that v reduces to the speed of sound of the critical transverse optical modes when the gap vanishes. The relatively small value of ∆ implies that SrTiO 3 is close to a displacive ferroelectric quantum critical point at ambient pressure. For a Debye wavevector Λ set equal to π divided by the lattice constant (0.39 nm), the dimensionless self-interaction coupling constant ζ defined in Equation ( 