An assumption in micromechanical analysis of polymers is that the constitutive polymeric media is non-porous. Non-porosity of media, however, is merely a simplifying assumption. In this paper, we neglect this assumption and studied polymer networks with a different porosity volume fraction. A random morphology description function is used to model the porosity of the network and nonlinear finite element analyses are conducted to perform structural analysis of porous polymer networks. The results show that the porosity effect is significant in mechanical behavior of polymer networks and may increase the maximum Von-Mises stress drastically. Since the discovery of zeolites and their successful industrial applications, the porous materials have become one of the most exciting frontiers in modern science such as chemistry and physics. From physical point of view, porosity plays significant role in modifying properties of the materials and has variety of applications including medical devices and tissue engineering The random morphology description function (RMDF) is implemented to build random microstructure models with different porosity values. Where N is number of random function, C i and y i are random coefficient and random coordinates respectively. This equation is a summation of two-dimensional Gaussian functions to create realistic random function where D 1 and C 1 D1 are material constants, is the first invariant of the isochoric part of the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor. Table In this section, the mechanical behavior of homogenized polymer networks is presented for heterogeneous random porous polymer networks. Von-Mises stresses and total deformations of the models are illustrated in Figure In comparison with non-porous media, by increasing the porosity of the media, the higher volume fraction of the porous media will face the same or lesser amount of the Von-Mises stress in the non-porous media-i.e. lesser volume fraction of the porous media will withstand higher values of stresses-It can be observed from the stress contours that the certain regions, e.g. between the holes, will face extremely higher values of stresses due to the geometry of porous media and these regions are more prone to failure. In attempt to correlate the mechanical behavior of porous polymer network and porosity fraction, a finite element framework is established. Randomly and heterogeneously are main assumptions of this framework. We have shown that structural analysis using FE method of porous media is crucial to investigate. In this manner, finite element method has been successfully used to develop mechanical properties of the heterogeneous random porous polymer network. Initial simulations have shown that increasing the porosity will increase the maximum Von-Mises stress concurrently. This study shows that in presence of porous polymer networks, performing structural analysis to predict the stress field and failure is inevitable. While there are many ongoing studies in the field of nanoparticles There are remarks regarding capability and validity of proposed framework which must be mentioned. First, the polymer network is assumed to be polydisperse and chains length distribution follows simple exponential distribution 