Interplay of Fermi surface topology and electron correlation is the quintessential ingredient underlying spontaneous symmetry breaking in itinerant electronic systems. In one-dimensional (1D) systems at half-filling, the inherent Fermi surface nesting makes the translationally invariant metallic state unstable, which is known as Peierls instability. Extending the scope of Peierls instability to two (2D) or three dimensions (3D), however, is not straightforward, since the Fermi surface in higher dimensions is generally not nested. In this work, we show that a perfectly nested Fermi surface can be realized in a class of 2D perovskite oxides, giving rise to 2D Peierls instability. Here the central role is played by the zone boundary Dirac line node (DLN) protected by two orthogonal glide mirrors induced by the rotation of oxygen octahedra. Especially, at a critical angle of the octahedron rotation, the zone-boundary DLN flattens, leading to logarithmically diverging susceptibility. We propose the 2D Peierls instability driven by dispersionless DLN as a principle mechanism for spontaneous symmetry breaking in various layered perovskite oxides including the antiferromagnetism of Sr 2 IrO 4 . As a clear signature of the 2D Peierls instability, we predict that the magnetic domain wall in Sr 2 IrO 4 hosts localized soliton modes. Peierls instability is a ubiquitous mechanism originally suggested in a one-dimensional (1D) lattice at half-filling that leads to the spontaneous dimerization. 1 Due to the inherent nesting of the 1D Fermi surface topology, the translationally invariant metallic state becomes unstable even in the presence of an infinitesimally weak interaction, manifested by the logarithmic divergence in its static susceptibility at the momentum q = 2k F where k F indicates the Fermi momentum (Fig. As an attempt to realize a 2D Peierls system, the laterally stacked 1D Peierls system can be constructed. For a 1D Peierls building block, let us consider a well-known polyacetylene chain at its critical point preserving the translation symmetry. In this system, Fermi surface nesting occurs in the form of a 1D Dirac point at the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary (Fig. By considering 1D polyacetylene chains at the critical point as being embedded in 2D, the 1D Dirac point can be extended to a flat Dirac line node (DLN) spanning the 2D BZ boundary. Therefore, the 2D extension of the Peierls instability is clued by the presence of dispersionless zone-boundary DLN at the critical point. In general, however, it is not easy to protect a line degeneracy in 2D systems, especially when both time-reversal T and inversion P symmetries exist together with spin-orbit coupling. In fact, even the zone boundary 1D Dirac point in a polyacetylene chain at its critical point is not a symmetry protected degeneracy but merely resulting from the unit cell doubling. All those difficulties are remediable in the presence of nonsymmorphic crystalline symmetries such as glide mirrors or screw rotations, which is known to protect band degeneracies at the BZ boundary in general. Here we show that such an intriguing idea can be realized in a wide class of layered perovskite oxides. The central role is played by the in-plane rotation of oxygen octahedra, which is a common lattice distortion among layered 2D perovskite oxides. It doubles the size of the unit cell and, at the same time, generates two orthogonal glide mirrors, leading to the DLN at the BZ boundary. Interestingly, the bandwidth of the nodal line dispersion can be controlled by changing the in-plane rotation angle θ of oxygen octahedra. When θ reaches a certain critical value θ c , the DLN on the BZ boundary becomes completely dispersionless, manifesting 2D Peierls instability with the logarithmically diverging susceptibility. We propose that the instability induced by the dispersionless zone boundary DLN is the principle mechanism for the canted antiferromagnetic ground state of Sr 2 IrO 4 . Given the magnetic ground state as a consequence of 2D Peierls instability, a magnetic domain wall (DW) of Sr 2 IrO 4 is shown to host 1D localized soliton modes along the DW boundary. Since the origin of such a flat DLN is solely coming from the crystalline symmetry, we believe that the 2D Peierls instability can occur ubiquitously in various layered perovskite oxides sharing the same crystalline symmetry. Lattice distortion induced nonsymmorphic symmetry. Layered perovskite oxides with the chemical formula A 2 BO 4 , as shown in Fig. There are several materials exhibiting rotation distortion. ordering is developed. 7 (See Fig. with θ ∼ 9 • . Such an in-plane rotation distortion changes the space group symmetry of the lattice from the symmorphic group I4/mmm (no. 139) to the nonsymmorphic group I4 1 /acd (no. 142) 10 exhibiting two orthogonal glide mirrors (Fig. Explicitly, the two glide mirrors G X,Y ≡ {M X,Y | 1 2 1 2 } are the combination of an ordinary mirror M X,Y which inverts the sign of the X-or Y -coordinate and a partial translation ( 1 2 , 1 2 ) along the diagonal direction (See Fig. The two glide mirrors induced by the rotation distortion of oxygen octahedra can generate the four-fold degenerate DLN on the full BZ boundary due to the following reason. The point group symmetry of the system is generated by inversion P , and two glide mirrors G X and G Y , which transform the spatial coordinate as 2 )} where C 2Y ≡ M Y P is an ordinary two-fold rotation about the Y -axis. Let us note that S Y contains a halftranslation along the X-direction perpendicular to its rotation axis. This indicates that the rotation axis of S Y is not located at the inversion center, that is, S Y is an off-centered two-fold rotation symmetry. which, combined with Eq. ( To demonstrate the presence of the DLN spanning the BZ boundary and how to control its bandwidth, we study a tight-binding Hamiltonian relevant to Sr 2 IrO 4 . Sr 2 IrO 4 is a representative system in which the interplay of strong spin-orbit coupling and electron correlation can give rise to novel spin-orbit entangled ground states. The unit cell of Sr 2 IrO 4 is composed of four layers of iridium oxide planes. For convenience, however, we first focus on the property of a single iridium oxide layer, and then include the influence of weak inter-layer coupling. By introducing ] as a basis, the lattice Hamiltonian for a single layer with a rotation distortion of an oxygen octahedron by an angle θ (see Fig. where Here we choose the unit translation vectors x and ŷ of the undistorted lattice as a unit of real space coordinates for convenience. The explicit form of the hopping integral t 1,1d,2,3 (θ) is shown in Methods. The Pauli matrices τ 0,x,y,z (σ 0,x,y,z ) denote the A and B sublattice (the J eff = 1/2 pseudo-spin) degrees of freedom. The diagonal term indicates the second (third) nearest neighbor hopping processes between the same sublattices with the same effective angular momenta. The θ dependence of the hopping integrals is derived from the Slater-Koster approximation. where α=p,n = 1, 2, ..., 2N is the labeling for a diagonal line with positive (α = p) or negative (α = n) slope, while a diagonal line with odd (even) α is composed of sites belonging to the A(B)-sublattice. r = (r x , r y ) indicates the coordinate of a lattice site, and σ = ± denotes the effective angular momentum J eff,z = ±1/2. Basically, |Ψ α α,σ represents a line of states whose local wave function amplitude changes the sign alternatively along the line. Illustrations of such diagonal line states with positive and negative slopes are shown in Fig. A strictly localized wave function can be an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian only when the sum of hopping amplitudes onto sites outside the support of the wave function vanishes. where r, r denotes a pair of nearest-neighbor sites belonging to different sublattices located at r and r , respectively. In momentum space, Ĥ1 gives rise to the terms ε 1/1d (k, θ) = 2t 1/1d (θ)[cos(k x ) + cos(k y )] in Eq. (4). By applying Ĥ1 to |Ψ α α,σ , one can easily find that Ĥ1 |Ψ α α,σ = 0. Namely, due to the alternating sign of the wave function along the line, the hopping amplitudes to neighboring sites are canceled (see Fig. As shown in Methods, it is straightforward that |Ψ p A,σ (φ) is a plane wave state with momentum k satisfying k x + k y = π. Likewise, one can check that |Ψ p B,σ (φ) is another plane wave state with the same momentum. Taking the pseudo-spin σ into account, we have found four linearly independent degenerate eigenstates which are dispersionless along the BZ boundary satisfying k x +k y = π. By repeating similar procedures, one can also show that {|Ψ n A/B,σ (φ)} form four-fold degenerate eigenstates which are dispersionless along another BZ boundary satisfying k xk y = π. When the hopping processes between the second and third nearest-neighbor sites are included, the diagonal line states become dispersive. Thus dispersionless DLN can be spanned by the diagonal line states only under a certain limited condition, which, in the present problem, corresponds to the case when the rotation angle of an oxygen octahedron reaches the critical value θ c ∼ 16 • . The Hamiltonian describing the hopping amplitudes between the second (t 2 ) and the third (t 3 ) nearest-neighbor sites is given by which, in momentum space, gives rise to ε 2 (k, θ) and ε 3 (k, θ) in Eq. ( to |Ψ α α,σ , we obtain Thus, for |Ψ α α,σ to be the eigenstate of Ĥ23 , the condition t 2 = 2t 3 should be satisfied. In fact, this is an identical condition to obtain θ c at which the dispersionless DLN appears on the BZ boundary. When further neighbor hopping processes are included additionally, diagonal line states may not be localized eigenstates anymore, but the suitable linear combination of them can recover compact localized states spanning a flat zone boundary DLN. Therefore a zone boundary DLN is generally expected to exist as along as the symmetry of the system is maintained and there are enough number of control parameters such as the rotation angle of oxygen octahedra. It is worthwhile to note that a pair of neighboring diagonal line states can construct the degenerate eigenstates of a zigzag-shaped chain shown in Fig. Here we discuss the physical consequence induced by the dispersionless DLN on the BZ boundary. Let us note that in a polyacetylene chain with zigzag-type deformation at its critical point, the static susceptibility diverges logarithmically at the momentum q = 0 (modulo a reciprocal lattice vector) signaling a sublattice symmetry breaking. Although the nature of the resulting ground state depends on the effective interaction, the sublattice symmetry breaking always accompanies the breaking of the glide mirror that otherwise protects the Dirac point, leading to a gapped phase with lower energy. A similar idea can be applied to a 2D Peierls system driven by a flat zone boundary DLN. Due to the perfect Fermi surface nesting from the dispersionless DLN, the uniform static susceptibility with the momentum q = 0 (modulo a reciprocal lattice vector) diverges logarithmically. An order parameter breaking the glide mirror symmetry can lift the degeneracy of DLN leading to a gapped insulator with lower energy. In the case of Sr 2 IrO 4 , its ground state is known to be a Neel-type AFM with in-plane spin canting (in-plane canted AFM). In the following, we examine the magnetic instability of this system focusing on the role of the zone boundary DLN whose bandwidth can be controlled by varying the rotation angle θ of oxygen octahedra. Previous theoretical studies have shown that the lattice model for a monolayer composed of J eff = 1/2 states cannot capture the spin anisotropy of the system. 7,22 Thus, to obtain the in-plane canted AFM ground state numerically, we consider the 3D structure with the unit cell comprised of four layers. Let us note that, as long as the glide symmetries are preserved, the almost flat DLN can still appear even in the presence of inter-layer coupling, which merely renormalizes the critical angle at which the zone boundary DLN becomes dispersionless. We determine the magnetic ground state derived from the DLN and the relevant phase diagram by studying both the RPA-type spin susceptibility and the self-consistent mean field theory. The general form of the spin susceptibility is given by χ ij αα ,ll (q) = -β 0 dτ S i αl (q, τ )S j α l (-q, 0) where the spin operator is defined as Here α, α and l, l indicate the sublattice and layer indices, respectively. To distinguish the two candidate ground states, the in-plane canted AFM and the c-axis collinear AFM, we have computed the spin susceptibility χ +- AFM (q) and χ zz AFM (q) at the momentum q considering the staggered spin operator S i = S i A -S i B in the unit cell. As shown in Fig. Additionally, to confirm the magnetic ordering pattern suggested by the spin susceptibility, we have performed a self-consistent mean field calculation of a Hubbard-type model Hamiltonian with on-site repulsion : H = H t + H U where H t is a 16 × 16 tight-binding Hamiltonian including the sublattice, J eff = 1/2 pseudo-spins, and the layer degrees of freedom. The mean-field decoupling of the Hubbard interaction is implemented as We determine the magnetic ordering pattern by computing the order parameter x , m B y , m B z ) for sublattice B in the bottom layer self-consistently. Adopting the "up-down-down-up" type interlayer spin ordering pattern confirmed in previous studies, 7,25 the order parameters in the other three layers are chosen accordingly. The resulting phase diagram is demonstrated in Fig. Let us note that in Ba 2 IrO 4 where Sr is replaced by Ba, the ground state is an AFM insulator although there is no rotation distortion (θ = 0). In this case, since the space group of the system without rotational distortion is symmorphic, one may expect that our theory based on the zone boundary Dirac line node cannot be applied. However, let us stress that this is not the case. If we plot the band structure by using the same doubled unit cell, one can still observe the zone boundary Dirac line node, and the magnetic instability of the system can still be described by using the same theoretical framework. The physical property of the system is independent of the unit cell choice. The existence of the zone boundary DLN in Ba 2 IrO 4 is confirmed by the tight-binding approach (see Fig. In particular, one can also observe the flattening of the DLN as θ is increased artificially, although the real system with θ = 0 can develop AFM state due to the relatively strong U . This clearly shows that the Dirac line node based AFM mechanism is still valid in Ba 2 IrO 4 system as well. The emergence of zero dimensional (0D) soliton modes localized at a domain wall (DW) is a hallmark of 1D Peierls systems, which is normally described by the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model. To confirm the robustness of the in-gap states independent of the detailed structure The bandwidth control by varying the rotational angle of octahedron is important to examine the nesting induced instability in layered perovskite oxide systems. Here we explain how the hopping integrals in the tight-binding Hamiltonian in Eq. ( , where s refers to the spin. It is based on the idea that the hopping integrals can be decomposed into several hopping elements such as V ddπ , V ddδ , V ddσ in the d-orbitals basis and can be parameterized with respect to the relative displacement between two orbitals. The relative displacement is then adjusted by the amount of the angle for rotational distortion θ. (See also Slater-Koster parameter method in Supplementary Information). Accordingly, the explicit form of hopping integrals in (4) are The rotational angle dependence ∼ cos 4θ results from the intra-orbital hybridization between d xy -orbitals. The rotational angle dependence ∼ cos 2θ in t 1 describes the intra-orbital hybridization within d yz -orbitals or d zx -orbitals whereas the rotational angle dependence ∼ sin 2θ in t 1d describes the inter-orbital hybridization between d yz -orbitals and d zx -orbitals. The hopping elements between nearest neighbor sites are chosen as (V ddπ , V ddδ , V ddσ ) = (1, -0.25, -1.5) and those for the next nearest neighbor sites are (V ddπn , V ddδn , V ddσn ) = l×(V ddπ , V ddδ , V ddσ ) with l = 0.07. The factor l reflects the reduction of hopping integral with respect to the distance. Naively, the reduction factor has to be chosen as l = (1/2) 5 ≈ 0.0312, but considering the results from ab initio calculations, 7 we have used l = 0.07. Our electronic structure calculations were based on density-functional theory within the local density approximation (LDA) as implemented in Elk code. The divergent susceptibility due to dispersionless DLN indicates that the metallic state has an instability to a gapped phase which breaks the crystal symmetry leading to AFM state. The specific ordering pattern suggested by the susceptibility calculation is the abplane canted AFM rather than c-axis collinear AFM as shown in Fig. In the regime for the ab-plane canted AFM phase, due to the spin anisotropy originating from interlayer-coupling, the arbitrary initial value including the c-axis AFM converges into the ab-plane canted AFM as a final solution. We also have confirmed that the total energy of the ab-plane canted AFM is lower than that of the c-axis AFM. The critical interaction U c from self-consistent calculation agrees well with that from RPA-corrected susceptibility calculations. Convergence to ordered phase is tricky near critical rotational angle θ c within our mean-field calculation scheme. More sophisticated numerical calculation may be needed to elaborate the results near the critical rotational angle. However, the overall tendency of the critical interaction U c as a function of the rotational angle θ is consistent with each other as shown in Fig. We have introduced the diagonal line states in Eq. ( From the localized diagonal line states in Eq. ( where r = (r x , r x + 2m -1) (r = (r x , -r x + 2m -1)) for α = p (α = n) with r x = 1, 2, ..., 2N . For a diagonal line with positive slope, we obtain which, in the thermodynamic limit, becomes In this way, we obtain the Bloch state |Ψ p A,σ (φ) which is defined along BZ boundary satisfying k x +k y = π. The same property holds for |Ψ α τ,σ (φ) by changing sublattice τ , pseudo-spin σ and slope α indices with the wave number φ defined along the BZ boundary satisfying when it comes to positive (negative) slope. Finally, the explicit form of the critical rotational angle from the condition t 2 = 2t 3 is given by shown in (a). The orange, red, blue lines show the dispersion of the in-gap states when the local magnetic moment at the DW, m DW , is 0.6, 0.1, 0, respectively. (d) The bulk gap (∆ bulk ) v.s. the gap between in-gap states (∆ in-gap ) as a function of the magnitude of m DW . (e) A DW configuration and the relevant energy spectrum when the net magnetic moment in each domain is parallel to the DW. (f, g) A DW configuration and the relevant energy spectrum when the DW is parallel to the x axis and the net magnetic moment is perpendicular to the DW (f) and parallel to the DW (g), respectively. First, let us compare G x eigenvalues of |n x,± (k y ) and P T |n x,± (k y ) . From Eq. (S7), we find thus a Kramers pair |n x,± (k y ) and P T |n x,± (k y ) have the same G x eigenvalues. Now we compare G x eigenvalues of |n x,± (k y ) and S y |n x,± (k y ) From the anti-commuation relation between S y and G x , it is obvious that thus |n x,± (k y ) and S y |n x,± (k y ) have different G x eigenvalues. Since the system is invariant under P T , S y , G x on the k x = π line, the four states |n x,± (k y ) and P T |n x,± (k y ) and S y |n x,± (k y ) and P T S y |n x,± (k y ) with G x eigenvalues n x,± (k y ), n x,± (k y ), n x,∓ (k y ), n x,∓ (k y ), respectively, are all degenerate with the same energy, thus there should be a Dirac line node with four-fold degeneracy on the k x = π line. One can perform similar analysis on the k y = π line, and thus the DLN spanning the full BZ boundary can be understoond. We use Slater-Koster parameters within same sublattice τ as follows: This Slater-Koster parameters depend on the rotation angle θ and relative displacement angle φ between two adjacent orbitals where d λ,0 -orbital locates at the origin and d λ,i -orbital at r i = (x i , y i ). Thus φ is defined by Similarly, we have the Slater-Koster parameters between different sublattices τ and τ which are given by The collective rotation allows the hopping between different orbitals of d yz and d zx as follows: that of Sr 2 IrO 4 is that the J eff = 3/2 states as well as the J eff = 1/2 states largely contribute to the Fermi surface due to the weak spin orbit coupling. Because of this, even if the zone boundary DLN becomes flat, its location is away from the Fermi level, which weakens the magnetic instability driven by DLN. This is also consistent with the fact that U c for Sr 2 RhO 4 is bigger than that for Sr 2 IrO 4 . On the other hand, in the case of Ba 2 IrO 4 , the system has an AFM ground state although there is no rotation distortion. In this case, one may expect that our theory based on the zone boundary DLN cannot be applied since the space group of the system remains symmorphic. However, even in this case, one can still use √ 2 × √ 2-type doubled unit cell to describe the magnetic instability since the property of the system is independent of the unit cell choice. In fact, according to the DFT+SOC calculations, the zone boundary Dirac line node is still present if the band structure is plotted by using the doubled unit cell as shown in Fig. The Hamiltonian with interlayer hopping reads where Here, τ i and σ i with i = 0, x, y, z indicate the Pauli matrices acting on the sublattice spaces and J ef f = 1/2 spaces, respectively. To fully express Eq. (S14) with Pauli matrices, ρ i and η i is introduced without any physical meaning: With this, we can write down Eq. (S14) as a compact form (S17) We are now in position to construct the Green's function and take the trace of matrix for spin susceptibility. The general form of susceptibility depends on the sublattice, spin, and layer indices: where α, α and l, l indicate the sublattice and layer indices, respectively. The relevant physical susceptibility can be expressed as With antiferromagnetic interlayer coupling fixed to in a manner of the up-up-down-down spin configuration, we focus on spin susceptibility in 2D. In that sense, the four susceptibility of χ zz AFM , χ zz FM , χ +- AFM , χ +- FM are taken into account. Further evaluation of Eq. (S19) reads where we have with The replacement k → k+q and iω n → iω n +iν n in Eq. ( After Matsubara summation, we arrive at The replacement of n in ∆ n k,q with n = 1, 2, 3, 4 and the proper choice of constant factors of 4 or 8 can give us all kinds of physical spin susceptibility defined in Eq. (S19). reads where we reach the last line when the spin index summations are applied. Next, we should evaluate the ∂ ∂τ C † k,α,σ (τ ). The Hamiltonian is given by with b the sublattice index. There is no inter-sublattice mixing term in Hubbard interaction due to the nature of on-site interaction. We obtain The third and fourth commutators givesn k,α 1 ,↑ and n k+q,α 1 ,↓ contributions. The resultant Dyson's equation is thus In this section, we analyze the in-gap states localized in antiferromagnetic domain wall of Sr 2 IrO 4 system. The tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonian of a single-layer strontium iridate is given by where Or, rewriting the above equation in matrix form, we have For the sake of convenience in later calculations, we choose a new set of coordinates (K X , K Y ) = 1 √ 2 (k x + k y , k yk x ). Then the Hamiltonian reads (S54) The 4t 3 σ 0 τ 0 term does nothing but just give a constant shift to the band structure, so we neglect it from now on. Then, up to the first order of δK i 's, the effective Hamiltonian is written as This time, H u/l,Bloch no more anti-commutes with τ z , so the zero modes do not exsist. -1 -0. 