We introduce the concept of multichannel Floquet Perfect Absorbers (FPAs) which are periodically modulated lossy interferometric traps that completely absorb incident monochromatic waves. The proposed FPA protocols utilize a Floquet engineering approach which inflicts a variety of emerging phenomena and features: reconfigurability of perfect absorption (PA) for a broad range of frequencies of the incident wave; PA for infinitesimal local losses, and PA via critical coupling with high-Q modes by inducing back-reflection dynamical mirrors. Introduction -The quest of new methods and technologies that can lead to a perfect absorption (PA) of an incident waveform is an interdisciplinary research theme in classical wave physics. It spans a range of frequencies from optics A desirable feature for many of the above applications is an "on-the-fly" reconfigurability of the structure i.e. the possibility to absorb on demand an incoming monochromatic wave at a specific frequency, without altering the fabrication characteristics of the structure itself. Another requirement, either due to cost or design considerations, is to incorporate minimal losses inside the structures while at the same time achieve a perfect absorption. This second requirement has been recently addressed, in the frame of multi-channel systems, by the so-called Coherent Perfect Absorber (CPA) scheme. This is an interferometric protocol employing two counterpropagating waves which destructively interfere outside a weakly lossy cavity (the target)-in analogous manner to time-reversed laser -to achieve coherent perfect absorption In this paper we introduce PA in a completely different framework associated with Floquet time-modulated cavities. Using a Floquet scattering formalism we show that the proposed Floquet Perfect Absorber (FPA) protocols are "on-the-fly" reconfigurable and can PA any specified frequency of the incoming waves by altering the external driving characteristics -a feature that is absent from any static PA scheme whose properties are fixed during the fabrication process. Importantly, we show that the implementation of Floquet engineering methods provide powerful means for the implementation of PA protocols with unconventional characteristics. For example, we demonstrate perfect absorption via coherent multi-channel illumination for infinitesimal local losses -a phenomenon which we refer to as Floquet-enhanced perfect absorption -occurring at appropriate values of the frequency/ amplitude of the periodic driving scheme. Finally, we show that our scheme can be flexible and interpolate between coherent FPA and PA via critical coupling associated with single-channel illumination. In contrast to conventional wisdom, we demonstrate that the latter scenario can occur even in the absence of physical back-reflecting mirrors. The latter is induced dynamically via Floquet engineering. Floquet Scattering Formalism -We consider a cavity, or a network of N s coupled single-mode cavities. Hereafter we refer to the cavities as "sites" with the corresponding resonant mode attached to each site. The mode frequencies, and generally the couplings, are periodically modulated by an electric field which is periodic in time with period T = 2π/ω. For some physical set-ups see Fig. Above H 0 (t) is a N s ×N s Hermitian matrix, γ μ quantifies the loss in the μ-th cavity and {|e μ } is the basis of the mode space where H 0 (t) is represented. We turn the system of Eq. ( We shall assume, for demonstration purposes, that the leads feature an one-dimensional tight-binding dispersion E = -2 cos k (in units of coupling) and that the loss strength of the lossy resonator(s) are γ μ = γ. When an incident wave with frequency E 0 = E(k 0 ) ∈ [-ω/2, ω/2] is engaged with the periodically-modulated target, it is scattered to an infinite number of outgoing channels (including evanescent ones) supporting frequencies E n = E 0 + nω = -2 cos k n (n is an integer). The evanescent channels in the leads with E n / ∈ (-2, 2) , Imk n > 0 do not carry flux. We, therefore, consider the scattering matrix S which connects only the N p incoming with the outgoing propagating channels E n ∈ (-2, 2) , k n ∈ (0, π) at each of the α = L, R leads. Following Ref. where I 2Np is the 2N p × 2N p identity matrix. The quasi-energy operator H Q is defined in the Floquet-Hilbert space and has elements ( T ́T 0 dtH ss (t) exp (ınωt) and n, n are integers while s labels the sites (resonators) of the system. W is the coupling matrix that describes the coupling between the propagating-channels (at the leads) and the system. Its matrix elements are (W ) n P α,n s = √ v n P c α δ n P n δ α↔s where v n P ≡ ∂E/∂k| kn P = 2 sin k n P and the sub-index n P labels only the propagating channels. The matrix (W c ) nα,n s = c α δ nn δ α↔s and c α describes the bare coupling between the lead α and the Floquet system where we define δ α↔s = 1 when lead α is coupled with the site s directly or δ α↔s = 0 otherwise. Finally the matrix K takes the form (K) nα,n α = δ nn δ αα exp (ık n ). Necessary Conditions for Floquet Perfect Absorption -The scattering matrix S(E 0 , γ, ω), Eq. ( which resembles a generalized eigenvalue problem associated with an effective non-Hermitian Hamiltonian In the small coupling limit c α → 0, a first-order perturbation approach allows us to evaluate theoretically (E F P A , γ F P A ) from Eq. (3) where ψ (0) ns = e ns ψ (0) , |e ns is the unit vector in the Floquet-Hilbert space with the entry being (|e nμ ) n s = δ nn δ μs and E (0) , ψ (0) is an eigenpair of the Hermitian matrix The index μ indicates the lossy resonators, n E indicates the evanescent channels and n P the propagating channels. Finally s α labels the resonators which are coupled with the lead α directly, and k Coherent FPA scheme-Equation (3), and its perturbative variant Eq. ( As a useful illustration, we solve the FPA problem explicitly in the case of one driven lossy resonator, i.e., H 0 (t) = h (t) , h (t) ∈ R, see Fig. where u (t) = exp -ı ́t 0 dt h (t ) + ıE (0) t u (0) is the Floquet state of the time-periodic Hamiltonian h (t) with the initial condition being u (0). In order to make further progress, we now consider a specific example where h (t) = β cos ωt. Using Eq. ( From Eq. ( More complicated systems can be also used for the implementation of the coherent FPA scheme. Take for example a network of coupled resonators or oscillators like the one shown schematically in Fig. a consequence of causality. When, however, γ = 0 these eigenvalues can, in principle, situated in both positive and negative half-planes of the complex frequency plane. The ones that have crossed the real axis at frequency E FPA are relevant to our study, since for the corresponding loss-strength and/or driving frequency γ FPA , ω FPA (and driving amplitude β) an incident traveling waveform can be perfectly absorbed. In Fig. An important element of our Floquet perfect absorption protocol is the possibility to induce PA at different incident frequencies E 0 = E FPA without changing the fabrication characteristics of the cavity. Numerical evaluation of the secular Eq. ( Let us finally comment on an alternative formulation that allows us to evaluate the coherent FPA values (E FPA , γ FPA ) together with the corresponding incident waveform |I F P A . This approach involves the notion of the absorption matrix A(E, γ, ω) ≡ I 2Np -S † S = A † . The eigenvalues α(E, γ, ω) of the absorption operator indicate the amount of absorption that a coherent incident waveform, with channel amplitudes dictated by the components of the associated eigenvector, will experience once it encounter the modulated target. Obviously the eigenvalues of the absorption operator are 0 ≤ α ≤ 1; when α(E, γ) = 0 the incident waveform is not absorbed, while α(E = E FPA , γ = γ FPA ) = 1 indicates complete absorption. Using Eq. ( In the weak-coupling limit and and thus |I F P A ∝W ψ (0) . Therefore, the study of coherent FPA in the weak-coupling limit boils down to the eigenvalue problem of the operator H Q (γ = 0). FPA based on Dynamical Mirrors and Critical Coupling -The implementation of PA protocols that do not need a coherent multi-sided illumination or a backreflection mirror, is highly attractive for many applications and could open up many engineering possibilities. One way to achieve this goal is by utilizing the presence of accidental degeneracies of critically coupled modes with opposite symmetries The basic idea can be demonstrated using the simple system of Fig. Using Eq. ( . These FPA points have a simple physical interpretation: In the limit of small losses γ FPA , the on-site potential L ∼ (1/ √ γ) at the left site has to take large values. At the same time the Floquet driving creates a dynamical wall that forbids the incident wave to escape from the right lead. In other words, the scattering system turns to a high-Q cavity. When the incoming wave is at resonant with the modes of the cavity (i.e. perfect impedance matching) then it can be trapped for large times and eventually absorbed completely -even if the absorption strength γ is infinitesimally small. The above scenario is nothing else than the so-called impedance matching condition, which, once expressed in terms of losses, indeed states that radiative and material losses must be equal Conclusions -We have introduced a class of perfect absorbers that rely on Floquet engineering schemes. These Floquet Perfect Absorbers (FPA's) are easily reconfigurable, and can host a variety of new phenomena, including PA in the presence of infinitesimal local losses, and unidirectional reconfigurable PA's that operate without the use of physical mirrors. The latter are now substituted by dynamical (reconfigurable) mirrors realized using appropriate Floquet drivings schemes. Floquet PA's and other Floquet photonic systems is an emerging field which currently is in it's infancy. Among the promising future directions is the implementation of our FPA's proposal in existing Floquet platforms (see for example Network system associated with Figure In order to study the FPA phenomena discussed in the main text, we have coupled this system with one-dimensional leads of coupled resonators. The left lead is coupled directly with the first site (resonator) while the right lead is directly coupled to the fourth site (resonator). Both (bare) couplings c are assumed to be equal. The loss, with loss-strength γ, has been included in the third resonator. The data shown in the main panel of Fig. The data associated with the right inset of Fig. Network system associated with Figure 