Based on high throughput density functional theory calculations, we performed systematic screening for spin-gapless semiconductors (SGSs) in quaternary Heusler alloys XX YZ (X, X , and Y are transition metal elements without Tc, and Z is one of B, Al, Ga, In, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb, P, As, Sb, and Bi). Following the empirical rule, we focused on compounds with 21, 26, or 28 valence electrons, resulting in 12, 000 possible chemical compositions. After systematically evaluating the thermodynamic, mechanical, and dynamical stabilities, we successfully identified 70 stable SGSs, confirmed by explicit electronic structure calculations with proper magnetic ground states. It is demonstrated that all four types of SGSs can be realized, defined based on the spin characters of the bands around the Fermi energy, and the type-II SGSs show promising transport properties for spintronic applications. The effect of spin-orbit coupling is investigated, resulting in large anisotropic magnetoresistance and anomalous Nernst effects. In recent years, spin-gapless semiconductors (SGSs) have drawn intensive attention to the spintronics community. Basically, SGSs are half metals with the majority spin channel being semimetallic, i.e., the gap is zero, while there is a finite band gap in the minority spin channel. Based on how the spin characters of bands touching the Fermi level, there are four types of SGSs as sketched in Fig. Based on first principles calculations, it was originally proposed that Co-doped PbPdO 2 can host the SGS state. On the other hand, high throughput (HTP) screening based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations has been proven to be an efficient way to search for materials with desired properties. We considered quaternary Heusler compounds with a general chemical formula XX YZ, where X, X , and Y are the transition metal elements except for the radioactive Tc, and Z is one of the main group elements among B, Al, Ga, In, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb, P, As, Sb, and Bi. For convenience, the ternary and binary (DO 3 -type) Heusler systems are considered as quaternary Heusler by allowing X, X , or Y to be the same element. As shown in Fig. ), and 4d( 3 4 , 3 4 , 3 4 ). The HTP screening has been carried out in an automated way following the work flow shown in Fig. After obtaining the magnetic ground state together with the optimized crystalline structures, the formation energy ( H) is evaluated to verify the thermodynamic stability, i.e., the stability with respect to decomposing into constituting elements. For a general quaternary Heusler XX YZ, the formation energy is expressed as where E X , E X' , E Y and E Z are the energies of elements X, X , Y, and Z in their bulk forms, while E XX Y Z is the ground state energy of XX YZ. The electronic structure together with the magnetic moments of the compounds with negative formation energies are calculated with a denser k-mesh of 21 × 21 × 21 using the full-potential local-orbital minimum-basis band structure scheme (FPLO). For the candidate SGSs, we further checked the mechanical and dynamical stability. The mechanical stability describes the stability of the crystal against deformations or distortions in terms of strain, which can be obtained based on the elastic constants (C ij ). Basically, the elastic constants are associated with the second-order change of the internal energy for a crystal under an arbitrary deformation of strain as where E is the internal energy, V 0 is the equilibrium volume of the crystal, and ε i or ε j denote applied strains. For a cubic crystal system (such as Heusler compounds in this work), the elastic constant matrix has only three independent elements as Correspondingly, the Born stability conditions which are related the bulk, tetragonal, and shear moduli, respectively. On the other hand, the dynamical stability describes the change of the total energy with respect to the internal degrees of freedom, i.e., the atomic displacements. In the harmonic approximation, the total energy of a crystal can be expressed as in terms of displacements D Rσ where R is the position, σ is the Cartesian index, and Φ σσ RR is the interatomic force constant matrix. The dynamical stability is determined by the dynamical matrix D(q), which can be obtained from Fourier transformation of Φ(R) as following where q is the wave vector of phonon. Dynamical stability indicates that D(q) is positive-definite, meaning all the phonons have real and positive frequencies ω(q). The phonon dispersion calculations are carried out using the Phonopy 36 package with force constants obtained from VASP. Finally, the transport properties are studied for a few representative SGS candidates, including the anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) and the longitudinal conductivity. The AHC is calculated by integrating the Berry curvature (Ω(k)) over the whole Brillouin zone (BZ) as BZ Ω(k)d 3 k, with the Berry curvature given by where ψ αk is the spinor Bloch wave function corresponding to the eigenenergy αk , and ν i is the i-th Cartesian component of the velocity operator. In our calculations, in order to achieve numerical convergence, the AHC is obtained using the Wannier interpolation technique based on the Maximally Localised Wannier Functions (ML-WFs). where f 0 and f are the equilibrium and nonequilibrium distribution functions, respectively. The conductivity is expressed by where α and β are the Cartesian indices, V and μ indicate the unit cell volume and the chemical potential, respectively. The transport distribution function σαβ ( ) can be evaluated by where k, i, and N are the wave vector, band index, and the number of the sampled k points. For bonding analysis, the crystal orbital Hamilton population (COHP) was evaluated using the LOBSTER code. To validate the stability criteria implemented in the HTE, we collected all the previously reported Heusler SGSs, and compared with our DFT results (TABLE Mechanical Dynamical ( Å) (μB) (eV/at.) stability stability NV = 21 Ti2CoSi 6.081 3.00 -0.3718 0 have been experimentally synthesized, such as CoFeCrAl, CoFeCrGa, CoFeMnSi, and Mn 2 CoAl, we observed that they fulfill all three stability criteria based on our calculations. This confirms the reliability of our theoretical framework to do HTP screening for novel SGSs. Having confirmed the SGSs reported in the literature, HTP calculations are done following the work flow (Fig. In the following, we will focus on the 70 cases which fulfill all the three stability criteria (TABLE According to TABLE II, most newly predicted SGSs are quaternary Heusler compounds. We have only found three new ternary SGSs (e.g., Co 2 NbX (X = Al, Ga, and In), but they are either dynamically or mechanically unstable. As shown in TABLE I, there are six ternary Heusler (e.g., Ti 2 CoSi, Mn 2 CoAl, Mn 2 CuAl, Cr 2 ZnX (X=Si, Ge, and Sn)) proposed to be SGSs. It is mentioned above that the Cr 2 ZnX (X=Si, Ge, and Sn) would be more stable in the full Heusler structure, in contrast to previous calculations. Essentially, SGSs are half metals thus the total magnetic moments are expected to be integers, and they should obey the Slater-Pauling rule. Such behaviors of the magnetization for Heusler compounds can be understood based on the atomic models, as demonstrated in previous studies. The t 2g -e g picture is valid for compounds with one magnetic ion. For instance, as shown by the density of states for PtVYAl (Fig. The crystal field splittings changes greatly for systems with two or more magnetic atoms. It is well known that for full Heusler with chemical formula X 2 YZ, the site symmetry for both Y and Z are m 3m (O h ), while that for X is 43m (T d ). The d-shell will split into t 2g and e g subshells in both O h and T d crystallographic symmetries, where the difference is that the t 2g is lower (higher) in energy for the O h (T d ) case, respectively. The similar picture can also be applied to the N V =26 cases with two magnetic ions, where the total magnetic moments of 2.0 μ B can be attributed to 1.0 μ B atomic moments from two atoms. Here we take CoFeTaGe (cf. Fig. For all four types of SGSs, the electronic structures for one representative case in each class are shown in Fig. Such specific electronic structures for four types of SGSs can be reflected in the transport properties in terms of the AHC and longitudinal conductivity, shown as well in Fig. The right panels of Fig. It is observed that SOC can induce significant changes in the electronic structure of SGSs, since the band gaps of SGSs are on average of small magnitude (cf. Section S4 in Supplemental Materials). For instance, for IrVScSn, the indirect band gap is about 58.4 meV without SOC (Fig. As the SGSs are magnetic, the combination of magnetic ordering with SOC lowers the symmetry of the systems, leading to magnetization direction dependent physical properties. Fig. ) ) where σ(φ) (ρ(φ)) is the longitudinal conductivity (resistivity) with the azimuthal angle φ for the magnetization direction in the (001) plane. This results in an AMR ratio as large as 33%. On the other hand, the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy between such two cases with azimuthal angle φ=0 and π 4 is only about 10 -6 eV per formula unit, due to the underlying cubic symmetry. Therefore, we suspect that such materials with large AMR ratio and easily tunable magnetization directions can be applied for future spintronic applications. As shown in Fig. To summarize, we have carried out a systematic highthroughput screening for spin-gapless semiconductors (SGSs) in quaternary Heusler compounds with 21, 26, and 28 valence electrons. After validating our calculations with the previously reported cases, we predicted 80 new stable (based on the formation energy) compounds as promising candidates of spin-gapless semiconductors, where 70 cases are stable based on further evaluation of the mechanical and dynamical stabilities. The magnetization of SGSs obeys the Slater-Pauling rule, which can be interpreted based on a new scheme of crystal field splitting of the D 4h type. Interestingly, all four types of SGSs have been identified among our candidate systems, where both the longitudinal conductivity and transversal anomalous Hall conductivity are calculated. We find the type-II SGSs are particularly interesting for spintronic applications as the spin polarization of the longitudinal conductivity is very sensitive to the chemical potential, while the anomalous hall conductivity changes its sign across the Fermi level, leading to possible significant anomalous Nernst effect. This is also true for the SGS candidate NiCrMnAl with direct touching. Additionally, it is also demonstrated that spin orbit coupling can have significant effect on the electronic structure of SGSs with heavy elements, where the band gap can be tuned by the magnetization direction, resulting in large anisotropic magnetoresistance in cubic crystals. Therefore, we suspect that SGSs are promising materials for future spintronic applications, awaiting further experimental and theoretical explorations. The detailed data is shown in the following table, including lattice constants, total and partial magnetic moments, formation energies, elastic constants, mechanical and dynamical stabilities, magnetic orders, and SGS types. a opt , H are lattice constant and formation energy. For mechanical and dynamical stabilities, 1 and 0 are stable and unstable. In magnetic order, FM and FIM are ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic. In SGS type, 'SOC-' means spin-orbit coupling (SOC) has significant influence on such SGS. We have discussed the magnetism of Heusler SGSs in the main text. For the understanding of exchange and crystal field splitting, we have shown the representative total and partial density of sates (DOS) of the considered 1 and 2 main magnetic compounds with N V =21 or 26. In case of N V =21, PtVYAl and FeVNbAl are the representatives of 1 and 2 main magnetic ions Heusler SGS. In case of N V =26, IrFeTiSb and CoFeTaGe are the representatives of 1 and 2 main magnetic ions Heusler SGS. Figure In order to understand the spin splitting clearly for the two magnetic ion SGS clearly, we show the local density of states (LDOS) of the magnetic ions for FeVNbAl and CoFeTaGe in the following. 