Ramp-type junctions of Au -Bi 2 Se 3 -NbN were prepared on top of a bottom gate comprised of a SrTiO 3 gate-insulator film on NbN gate-electrode layer on (100) SrTiO 3 wafer. Two wafers with gate-insulator thickness of 120 and 240 nm were studied, with the former showing higher gate leakage currents Ig at high gate voltages Vg, leading to heating effects and shifting of the junctions conductance spectra versus the voltage bias. At Vg=0 V, the conductance spectra of the low resistance junctions showed zero bias conductance peaks inside a tunneling gap with typical conductance drops when the critical current Ic was reached, while the high resistance ones exhibited tunneling conductance only. For Vg>-0.2 V (E -2 MV/cm) of the wafer with 120 nm thick gateinsulator linear Ig vs Vg was found, while for Vg<-0.2 V, Ig saturation was observed, leading to quadratic and linear heating effects at positive and negative high Vg values, respectively. This led to asymmetric conductance spectra shifts versus Vg which followed almost exactly the Ig vs Vg behavior. In the wafer with twice the gate-insulator thickness (240 nm), heating effects were strongly suppressed, and symmetric small peak shifts appeared only under the highest Vg values of Vg=±2 V (E ± 10 MV/cm). Under Vg=2 V, a 5% lower conductance was observed as compared to Vg=-2 V, indicating a small Fermi energy shift in our junctions under ±10 MV/cm fields. Junctions of a normal metal (N) and a superconductor (S) with a topological insulator (TI) sandwiched in between may exhibit topological superconductivity (TOS). This can be a result of inducing superconductivity in the TI by means of the proximity effect with a conventional s-wave superconductor. TOS in the junctions in turn, can have zero energy modes of Majorana bound states (MBS), which exhibit Non-Abelian statistics and therefore might find use in future fault-tolerant quantum computers The NbN, STO and Bi 2 Se 3 thin films were prepared by laser ablation deposition from a metallic Nb target or polycrystalline STO and Bi 2 Se 3 targets. While the NbN and STO films were deposited at 600 0 C heater block temperature under either 40 mTorr of N 2 gas flow or vacuum, respectively, the Bi 2 Se 3 film were deposited at 300 0 C heater block temperature under vacuum. The corresponding wafer surface-temperatures during deposition were about 500 and 250 0 C, respectively. High laser fluence on the target was used for the deposition of NbN and STO (∼ 10 J/cm 2 ), while a much lower fluence was needed for the deposition of the Bi 2 Se 3 film (∼ 1 J/cm 2 ). Single layer films were deposited on (100) STO wafers of 10 × 10 mm 2 area. X-ray diffraction measurements of these films showed that all grew with preferential crystallographic orientation. The NbN and STO layers, mostly in the cubic phase with a-axis orientation with a=0.433 nm for NbN and a=0.390 nm for STO, while the Bi 2 Se 3 film had the typical hexagonal structure with c-axis orientation normal to the wafer and c=2.88 nm. Metallic gold films were prepared also by laser ablation deposition under vacuum at ∼ 10 J/cm 2 A schematic cross-section of the fully photo-lithographically patterned gate and ramptype junctions is shown in Fig. and 20 additional contact pads on the other half of the wafer. An Atomic force microscope image of a typical junction is shown in Fig. We start with the results obtained on the RJG-5 wafer which had an STO gate-insulator thickness of 120 nm and 20 nm thick Bi 2 Se 3 barrier. Fig. Before discussing the effects induced by applying different gate voltages as in Fig. We now go back to discuss the gate voltage effects observed in Fig. To avoid this unwanted spurious behavior of the junctions due to the leaky gate, we prepared another wafer RJG-6 with a thicker gate insulating STO layer of 240 nm thickness and 46 nm thick Bi 2 Se 3 barrier. Resistance vs temperature results under ZFC and 0Vg are depicted in the main panel of Fig. FIG. Since heating effects by the gate-leakage currents Ig were found for junctions on the RJG-5 wafer as seen in Figs. Next the conductance spectra of the junction on the RJG-6 wafer under different gate voltages Vg are presented and discussed. The resulting spectra are depicted in Fig. temperature range is given in this figure as indicated. One can see that no heating occurs up to 0.1Vg as T remains 2.1 K, but a small heating occurs 0.5Vg to 2.6-3.1 K, which increases at ±1Vg to 4.1-4.8 K. Nevertheless, unlike in Fig. Finally, we note that in Ref. On-wafer gating of ramp-type junctions of Au-Bi 2 Se 3 -NbN with superconducting NbN gate-electrode and SrTiO 3 gate-insulator is demonstrated. Heating effects and conductance spectra shifts due to gate-leakage currents are stronger with a thinner gate-insulator layer than with a thicker one. A small Fermi level tuning of 5% is observed in the Bi 2 Se 3 barrier layer of the ramp-junctions under ±10-25 MV/cm gate field for ∼ 100 -300.