Motivated by recent results on small and hollow magnetic monopoles and on core and shell bimagnetic nanoparticles, we propose the construction of bimagnetic monopoles, which are structures that accommodate a magnetic monopole inside another magnetic monopole. In 1974, two independent pioneer studies by 't Hooft The study of magnetic monopoles of the type described above is hard, because it requires the presence of several degrees of freedom, controlled by the gauge and scalar fields that interact under a local and non Abelian symmetry in three spatial dimensions; see, e.g., Other studies on magnetic monopoles have been motivated by the addition of internal structure to the magnetic configuration. An interesting way to do this is with the enhancement of the symmetry, as in the investigation implemented before in The bimagnetic structure is of current interest in high energy physics and may find applications in other areas of nonlinear science, in particular in condensed matter. Evidently, it gains further importance if one reminds the presence of magnetic monopoles in a class of exotic magnetic materials, which are known collectively as spin ice The magnetic structures that we construct here are spatial configurations that engender spherical symmetry, and this is not present in the structures that appeared before in Refs. The enhancement of symmetries to study the entrapment of topological structures can be implemented in many different contexts, in particular in the simpler case involving discrete and/or Abelian gauge symmetries. Investigations focusing on this issue appeared before, for instance, in To comply with the construction of bimagnetic monopoles, in Sec. II we start describing the system and developing the BPS procedure on general grounds. We then investigate specific examples in Sec. III, considering the entrapment of a standard monopole inside a hollow monopole and also, describing the case where a small monopole can be nested inside a hollow monopole. In order to approach the practical realization of the results of the current work, we also constructed a hollow monopole inside another hollow monopole. Since the hollow monopole has an empty core, we are then dealing with a shell on top of another shell, with an empty core. In this way, we are still keeping spherical symmetry, but now, concerning the practical realization of the corresponding composite structure, we are circumventing the presence of singularity at the center of the solution, approaching a more feasible possibility. We end the work in Sec. IV, with the inclusion of comments and perspectives of future works. The model is defined in (3, 1) spacetime dimensions and we consider the Lagrangian density It engenders SU (2) × SU (2) symmetry. Here, φ a represents a triplet of real scalar fields that is coupled to the gauge field A a μ under the SU (2) symmetry. The other SU (2) symmetry describes the fields χ a and A a μ . The covariant derivatives are denoted by , and the field strength tensors are In our model, P (|χ|) and P(|χ|) represents the magnetic permeabilities, and the functions M (|χ|) and M(|χ|) control the kinetic terms of the scalar fields, and we suppose they are all nonnegative functions of |χ|. Also, g and q are the coupling constants, the indices a, b, c = 1, 2, 3 are used to represent the SU (2) symmetries and the greek letters μ, ν = 0, 1, 2, 3 stand for the spacetime indices. We use the Minkowski metric, η μν = diag(-, +, +, +), with natural units, = c = 1. The field equations associated to the Lagrangian density in Eq. ( in which we have To investigate the presence of monopoles, we take static configurations with A 0 = A 0 = 0, which yields to null electric fields, and the hedgehog ansatz with the boundary conditions where v and w are positive real numbers. As usual, the boundary conditions for H, K, H, and K at the origin have to be used to leave no room for singular behavior for the corresponding fields. In this case, the presence of spherical symmetry changes the equations of motion (2) to where the prime stands for the derivative with respect to radial coordinate r. The above equations are second order differential equations that couple to each other via the several functions involved in the problem, so they are hard to solve. For this reason, it is convenient to use the BPS procedure to find the first order differential equations that solve the equations of motion. To do so, we write the energy density of the static field configurations in the form The idea is to proceed as in We follow the suggestion introduced in Ref. If the solutions satisfy the first order equations and the energy is minimized to E = E B , given by Eq. ( One can note that the first order equations ( where ρ c and ρ s represent the energy densities of the core and shell components of the bimagnetic structure. They have the forms and It is worth highlighting here that the BPS procedure leads to a fixed energy for each component, given by Eq. ( The next step is to use the above results to illustrate the general procedure with some examples. In order to prepare the model for numerical investigation, we first rescale some quantities as follows This leads us to work with dimensionless fields and radial coordinate. We also take g = v = 1 and consider the upper signs in the first order equations ( FIG. In the right panel we display the energy density As the first example, let us consider the core structure to be in the standard form, as proposed by 't Hooft and Polyakov They admit the analytical solutions [3] where we have considered q = w = 1, for simplicity. The energy density of the core monopole is obtained from Eq. ( (17) In Fig. To find the shell structure, we take the magnetic permeability in the form with α real and positive. In this case, the first order equations ( Unfortunately, we have been unable to find analytical solutions for the above equations. However, before using numerical procedures, we can evaluate their behavior near the origin by taking H(r) = H o (r) and K(r) = 1 -K o (r). In this case, the most important contribution to H o and K o are: and K o ∝ r ( √ α 2 +2α+9+α+1)/2 . A similar procedure can be done for the asymptotic behavior. By considering H(r) = 1-H asy (r) and K(r) = K asy , we get H asy ∝ r -1 and K asy (r) ∝ e -r . The energy density of the shell structure is given by Eq. ( By using the behavior of the solutions around the origin, one can show that ρ s (r ≈ 0) ≈ r √ α 2 +2α+9-3 . Therefore, the parameter α controls the way the energy density of the shell configuration behaves at its core, so we use it to appropriately describe the solution. We use numerical methods and depict, in Fig. In order to highlight the result, in Fig. FIG. The second example is implemented by considering the core monopole to be the small monopole introduced in Ref. These equations admit the solutions and where Ei(a, z) denotes the exponential integral function. The energy density In Fig. FIG. The solid lines represent the case α = 2 and the dashed ones stand for α = 3. To investigate the effect of the small monopole in the other structure, we take the same magnetic permeability shown in Eq. r 2 e -α(e 2r -1) ) As in the previous case, we have been unable to find analytical solutions for the above equations. However, it is possible to estimate their behavior around the origin by considering In this case, the leading behavior indicates that +4α+9+2α+1)/2 . A similar procedure can be done for the asymptotic behavior. By considering H(r) = 1-H asy (r) and K(r) = K asy , we get H asy ∝ r -1 and K asy (r) ∝ r α e -r . The energy density can be calculated from Eq. ( One can use the behavior of the solutions around the origin to identify the behavior ρ s (r ≈ 0) ≈ r √ 4α 2 +4α+9-3 . This shows that the parameter α plays the same role as in the previous example. Moreover, in Fig. We now turn attention to the construction of a magnetic monopole where a magnetic shell is located on top of another magnetic shell, leaving its core empty. We think that this possibility may be ease to be realized experimentally, since the empty core contributes to circumvent the presence of singularity at the center of the structure that can be constructed with the use of technics similar to that already used to engineer bimagnetic nanoparticles. We investigate the possibility of constructing a magnetic structure with a shell on top of another shell starting with the choice This, for q = w = 1, leads us with the first equations Unfortunately, we have not been able to find their explicit solutions. An investigation for small and large values of r is also possible, but we omit it here since it follows as in the previous cases. Instead, we implement a numerical simulation and plot the solutions H(r) and K(r) in Fig. We then use the solutions of the first order equations ( to get Since H(r) is numerical, the solutions of the above equations can only be obtained numerically. The energy density of the outer shell monopole is then obtained from Eq. ( We have described a procedure to obtain bimagnetic structures in a non Abelian model similar to the standard model and nanogranular materials available experimentally; see, e.g., Refs. These bimagnetic structures are of current interest and can be used in several contexts, in particular in the case of models beyond the Standard Model, where the leftright symmetry play a role. The left-right symmetry may appear in models of Grand Unified Theories, for example, in the case of the SO(10) model, that can undergo the breaking SO(10) → SU (3)×SU ( The composed structures can also be used in applications in systems with two distinct condensed phases, and in other circumstances. Some specific possibilities are now being examined, one concerning the addition of fermions to study the existence of fermionic zero modes attached to the bimagnetic structure (see, e.g., 