Triplet pairing in Sr2RuO4 was initially suggested based on the hypothesis of strong ferromagnetic spin fluctuations. Using polarized inelastic neutron scattering, we accurately determine the full spectrum of spin fluctuations in Sr2RuO4. Besides the well-studied incommensurate magnetic fluctuations we do find a sizeable quasiferromagnetic signal, quantitatively consistent with all macroscopic and microscopic probes. We use this result to address the possibility of magnetically-driven triplet superconductivity in Sr2RuO4. We conclude that, even though the quasiferromagnetic signal is stronger and sharper than previously anticipated, spin fluctuations alone are not enough to generate a triplet state strengthening the need for additional interactions or an alternative pairing scenario. Superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 The Fermi surface of Sr 2 RuO 4 is known to tiny details Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) experiments detect strong IC spin fluctuations at q IC =(±0.3,±0.3,q l ) To this end, we have used polarized INS to search for the missing FM fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 . The magnetic response consists of two components: a broad maximum around q = 0, which we will call qFM, and an IC, and much stronger, AFM component. We entered this full magnetic susceptibility into the BCS equations describing spin-fluctuation-induced superconducting pairing. Because neutron polarization analysis suffers from a reduced intensity, we used a large sample of ten aligned crystals grown at Kyoto University Even with our large sample it was impossible to quantitatively analyze the qFM response by unpolarized INS, because it is too little structured in q space impeding a background (BG) determination, see supplemental material Polarized INS results displaying the sum of the two magnetic components (in-plane plus out-of-plane) are shown in Fig. The quantitative model fitted to the data consists of two parts: the IC peaks centered at Q IC and the broad and weakly q-dependent qFM part at the zone center. We write χ (q, E) = χ IC (q, E) + χ FM (q, E), where is the single-relaxor formula with both (Γ q ) -1 and χ (q, 0) decaying with the same correlation length ξ IC . Here ∆q = |q -q IC |, and is measured in the reciprocal lattice units, (r.l.u. ), equal to 2π/a. Equation (1) describes a typical magnetic response near an AFM instability [52]. The qFM term was described by a broad Gaussian, and its energy dependence in the single-relaxor form with the constant parameter Γ FM : and q is the distance to the nearest 2D Bragg point. The parameters resulting from a global fit to the whole data set are given in Table The corresponding real part of the susceptibility at zero energy χ (q, E = 0), the amplitudes of the spectra at fiexd q, is displayed in Fig. The qFM response does not correspond to the paramagnon scattering expected close to a FM transition , where ∆(k) characterizes the superconducting order parameter (SOP). V (k, k ) is, for the singlet and triplet pairings where I(q) is defined as I(q) = χ 0 (q) -1 -χ(q) -1 , and χ 0 (q) is the noninteracting (Lindhardt) susceptibility. Note that only the amplitude of the single-relaxor spectra, χ (q, 0), enters the interaction matrices. We use the tight binding Hamiltonian of Ref. . The matrices V s,t (k, k ) are diagonalized by discretizing the Fermi surface into 1301 vectors k. The largest eigenvalue defines the the most stable superconducting state, and the corresponding eigenvector the symmetry and the structure of the SOP. The interaction parameter I(q) is crucial. Based on their calculations for SrRuO 3 , Mazin and Singh To elucidate the role of the IC and qFM spin fluctuations, we have diagonalized the matrices described by equation (3) using the two contributions separately, and using the total χ = χ (q, 0). The results are shown in Table We have also estimated a potential effect of matrix elements in Eq. ( In conclusion, we have identified the long-sought qFM fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO 4 , and, by comparing with the phonon scattering, quantitatively determined their amplitude. Combining this qFM signal and the nestingdriven IC response we have constructed the total magnetic susceptibility χ (q, E) at all q, which is consistent with the macroscopic susceptibility, with the specific heat coefficient in the normal state and with the 1/T 1 T NMR results. Even though the experimentally determined qFM response is stronger and sharper than thought before, the IC component still dominates the spin-fluctuation spectrum in Sr 2 RuO 4 , so that the total susceptibility favors a singlet order parameter for a spin-fluctuation mediated pairing. Thus, if the superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 is triplet, interactions beyond simple spin-fluctuation exchange would be required for the pairing mechanism. contains an essential part that depends only on the scattering angle. By analyzing many Q scans, a BG function depending on the scattering angle could be fitted. The variation of the BG also reflects the variation of the nSF count rates indicating that this part of the BG arises from the finite flipping efficiency. Although in the analysis of the magnetic signals, the size of the magnetic scattering has almost exclusively been obtained from the PA, these considerations show that the BG is well understood and properly mastered. [53] The overestimation of χ (0, 0) seems to arise from the IC Lorentzian tails. The data can be equally well described assuming a Gaussian decay also for the IC amplitude, with the parameters χ IC = 214 μB/eV 2 , W =0.12 r.l.u. and a constant ΓIC=11 meV. With this description there is no contribution of IC parts to q=0, but the results for the BCS eigenvalue calculation are nearly unchanged. In particular the singlet is still favoured with an eigenvalue (in units of Table [54] A. Zheludev, reslib 3.4c, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, 2006.