We present a strong coupling dynamical theory of the superconducting transition in a metal near a QCP towards Q = 0 nematic order. We use a fermion-boson model, in which we treat the ratio of effective boson-fermion coupling and the Fermi energy as a small parameter λ. We solve, both analytically and numerically, the linearized Eliashberg equation. Our solution takes into account both strong fluctuations at small momentum transfers ∼ λkF and weaker fluctuations at large momentum transfers. The strong fluctuations determine Tc, which is of order λ 2 EF for both s-and d-wave pairing. The weaker fluctuations determine the angular structure of the superconducting order parameter F (θ k ) along the Fermi surface, separating between hot and lukewarm regions. In the hot regions F (θ k ) is largest and approximately constant. Beyond the hot region, whose width is θ h ∼ λ 1/3 , F (θ k ) drops by a factor λ 4/3 . The s-and d-wave states are not degenerate but the relative difference (T s c -T d c )/T s c ∼ λ 2 is small. Introduction Superconductivity (SC) mediated by fluctuations arising from proximity to an electronic quantum-critical point (QCP) has attracted tremendous interest in the "high T c " era. Much of the motivation comes from the known proximity of the Cu-and Febased superconductors to antiferromagnetism A subset of theories of SC in a quantum-critical regime are those dealing with transitions at vanishing momentum transfer Q = 0 Our work unifies the strong coupling and weak coupling approaches. We analyze the pairing near a Q = 0 nematic QCP including both the angular dependence of the nematic form-factor along the FS and the dynamics of the pairing interaction and associated self-energy Σ(θ, ω m ). We obtain T c in different pairing channels and the angular variation of the pairing gap by solving the linearized Eliashberg gap equation right at a QCP, where ξ -1 = 0. We argue that the gap variation along the FS and the difference between the couplings in s-wave and d-wave channels are governed by a single dimensionless parameter λ, which is the ratio of the effective bosonfermion coupling and the Fermi energy, which we assume to be of order bandwidth. At a metallic QCP, interaction is assumed to be smaller than the bandwidth, and we treat λ as a small parameter. We show that T c remains finite at a QCP, and s-wave and d-wave channels remain non-degenerate. The difference between the two comes from the dynamical part of the pairing interaction. The T c for s-wave pairing is higher, and the difference 1 -T d c /T s c ∝ λ 2 . We show that the angular dependence of the form-factor causes a sharp angular variation of the pairing gap along the FS in both s-and d-channels as a function of distance θ along the FS from where the form factor is maximal (i.e., from θ = nπ/2). The pairing gap is the largest in "hot" regions with a width of order θ h ∼ λ 1/3 . This scale is parametrically larger than the typical momentum transfer by the interaction, O(λ), but smaller than typical scale of variation of the form-factor, which is θ = O(1). Between the two scales the gap behaves as (θ h /θ) 4 . This behavior holds for both s-wave and d-wave pairing gaps, and the difference between the two develops at θ = O(1). The Model. We base our study on the standard boson-fermion coupling model in which f (k) represents the d-wave form-factor and φ(q) is a bosonic field with static propagator χ(q) = χ 0 /(q 2 + ξ -2 ). At a QCP, ξ -2 = 0. The effective bosonfermion interaction is ḡ = g 2 χ 0 and the dimensionless coupling λ ∼ ḡ/E F . In our problem, the relevant degrees of freedom are near the FS, so we approximate f (k) by an angular function f (θ k ) = cos 2θ k . We use as an input the result of earlier studies where γ = ḡm/π and ḡ = χ 0 g 2 is the effective coupling. For fermions at the FS, the momentum transfer is q = 2k F sin θ q /2, and the susceptibility becomes the function of only θ q and Ω. The fermionic self-energy near the FS is where The Eliashberg equation. In order to obtain the linearized Eliashberg equation for the anomalous pair function F (θ k , ω n ) we consider the ladder series of diagrams for infinitesimally small F (θ k , ω n ) with g 2 χ(q, θ q , Ω m ) as the interaction and use full fermionic propagators with the self-energy Σ(θ k , ω m ). The Eliashberg equation is obtained by approximating the pairing interaction by that for fermions right on the FS (i.e., approximating χ(q, θ q , Ω m ) by χ(θ q , Ω m ) and integrating out the momentum transverse to the FS in the fermionic propagators. This is justified because typical bosonic momenta q ∼ ω 1/3 are parametrically larger than typical fermionic momenta |k - Integrating over the momentum transverse to the FS we obtain where we defined explicitly Notice that this is a 2D integral equation in both frequency and the angle along the FS. We removed the thermal contribution ω n = ω m , as it does not affect T c for spin-singlet pairing Eq. ( T c and the angular variation of F (θ k , ω m ). We first obtain T c . The frequency sum over ω m in ( where (7) Eq. ( This is consistent We next look at a lukewarm region and examine whether the interaction within this region can give rise to a comparable T c . For definiteness let's focus on θ k near π/4. In lukewarm regions we need to differentiate between s-wave and d-wave (even and odd) solutions with is not singular and weak. In this situation, one can neglect both the Landau damping and the fermionic self-energy. Then F s (π/4, ω n ) does not depend on ω n , i.e., the pairing is described by BCS theory, with an onset temperature T luke s ∝ e -1/λs , where λ s = O(λ). The temperature T luke s is indeed much smaller than T c in Eq. ( We now determine the angular variation of the gap in the hot regions. For definiteness consider the segment 0 ≤ 0 ≤ π/4. We label a characteristic θ at which F (θ k , ω n ) varies as θ h . At a first glance, θ h should be of order one because f (θ) varies at θ = O(1). However, we show that θ h is actually parametrically smaller and is of order λ 1/3 . To see this, we assume that θ h 1 and then verify it. Because typical ω m and ω n in the Eliashberg equation are of order T c , i.e., ω n ∼ T c and γ|ω m -ω n |/k 3 F v F ∼ λ 3 , we can reduce the 2D integral equation ( (9) If we approximate f 2 (θ k + θ q /2) by 1 and F (θ k ) and F (θ k + θ q ) by F (0), we see that Eq. ( . The other comes from the coupling to hot region, where F (θ k + θ q ) ≈ F (0). Typical θ q for this second contribution are θ q ∼ -θ k , i.e., they are parametrically larger than λ. This second contribution is then of order λF (0)θ h /θ 2 k . Substituting the sum of the two contributions into the r.h.s. of ( By construction, F (θ k ) is supposed to vary at θ k ∼ θ h . This yields λθ h ∼ θ 4 h , i.e., This scale is in between the "width" of the interaction λ and θ = O(1), at which f (θ) evolves. We see from F (0). The behavior of F (θ k ) in this region is different for s-wave and d-wave pairing (see below). In Fig. To obtain the global structure of the gap function and determine the splitting of onset temperatures T s c , T d c for swave vs d-wave pairing, we need to take into account variations of the gap function over large regions of the FS, |θ q | ∼ π/2. Naively, we expect s-and d-wave splitting to be determined by whether the nematic attraction prefers a nodal d-wave structure or non-nodal s-wave structure. However, it turns out that the condensation energy from d-wave nodes is of order λ 11/3 , and is much smaller than the actual s -d energy difference which is of order λ 2 . Instead, the splitting originates from the difference in the interactions between hot regions. To show this, we again reduce the 2D integral equation ( (12) One can verify that larger eigenvalue corresponds to larger T c . Our goal is to find η s -η d . The leading contribution to the r.h.s. of ( in the region θ q ∼ ±π/2). Accordingly, the splitting between s-wave and d-wave couplings is The eigenvalue splitting gives rise to the splitting between T s c and ). One can verify that the higher eigenvalue is η s , as one expects considering that the interaction is purely attractive. We also verified Eq. ( Summary. In this communication we studied strong coupling theory of SC in a metal near a QCP towards q = 0 nematic order. We used fermion-boson model, and treated the ratio of effective boson-fermion coupling and the Fermi energy as a small parameter λ. We solved the linearized Eliashberg equation and verified that T c is finite at a QCP and is of order λ 2 E F for both s-wave and d-wave pairing. The two are not degenerate and T s c is larger than T d c , but the difference T s c -T d c ∼ λ 4 E F is much smaller than each of these temperatures. We also analyzed angular variation of the superconducting order parameter F (θ k ) along the FS. We showed that F (θ k ) is the largest in hot regions on the FS, whose width θ h ∼ λ 1/3 . Within a hot region (at θ k < θ h ), the order parameter is approximately a constant. Outside, it drops as (θ h /θ k ) 4 and becomes smaller by a factor λ 4/3 . This behavior holds for both s-wave and d-wave order parameters. The two become different only at θ k = O(1). We end with a word of caution. In this work we considered F (θ k ) which monotonically decreases between hot and lukewarm regions and does not change sign along the arc 0 < θ k < π/4. There exist other s-wave and d-wave solutions of Eq. ( Our supplemenary material has two parts. The first part gives a more detailed derivation of our results on angular variation of the gap function F (θ k ) in both hot and lukewarm regions, and on the resulting splitting of critical temperatures T s,d c between s-wave d-wave modes, Eq. ( Angular variation of F (θ k ) In the main part of the paper, we noted that the critical temperature is, to first approximation, determined by the local, frequency dependent, gap equation Eq. ( To determine the width of the hot region gap we assume that F = F (θ k /θ h ) is a function of a single scaling parameter θ h , and analyze it for 1 θ k θ h . The r.h.s. of Eq. ( where The first term is the local contribution from θ q ∼ λ, and the second term is the induced gap from the nearby hot region at θ q ∼ -θ k . It is easy to see that for we obtain a dimensionless equation (for x 1), with a solution, where a is a constant of order one. Our results are equivalent to Eqs. ( In order to obtain the transition temperatures for s-wave and d-wave gaps, we again reduce Eq. ( We assume and then verify that (T s c -T d c ) T c , and expand the η's near T s c , T d c , to obtain, where T c is the solution, Eq. ( In order to evaluate η s,d we again account for the two contributions from the r.h.s. of Eq. ( where in the integration we shifted θ q → θ q ± π/2. In the second line, one θ h in the last term on the right comes from width of the hot region, and another θ 2 h comes from expanding the form-factor, f 2 (π/4 + θ q /2) ≈ θ 2 q /4. a is a constant of order one. Eq. ( 2 dθ q π dθ q π F (θ q + θ q )|2 sin θ q /2| |2 sin θ q /2| 3 + λ 3 f 2 θ q + θ q 2 |2 sin θ q /2| |2 sin θ q /2| 3 + λ 3 f 2 θ q 2 ≈ F (0)(1 Here b ± are constants of order one. The final term comes from one of two contributions: (a) θ q ∼ 0 but 0 |θ q | π/2, or vice versa. This is a contribution from the lukewarm region. (b) 0 |θ q |, |θ q | π/2, but |θ q + θ q | ∼ 0, π/2. This is a contribution from the hot regions. Regardless of origin, the final contribution is clearly smaller than the second term, and so, going back to Eq. ( We performed numerical analysis of the two gap equations we studied in the main text: both the full 2D Eliashberg equation, Eq. ( We solved the local gap equation by numerically finding the largest eigenvalue of the operator on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( We solved the full 2D Eliashberg gap equation for a variety of of system sizes in both angle discretization and Matsubara frequencies, N θ = 2 7 -2 9 , N M = 2 3 -2 6 , and a variety of couplings, λ = 0.025 -0.25. All computations were performed using the resources of the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute (MSI). We confirmed numerically the calculated scaling of the hot region width and decay, Eqs. 