In organic optoelectronics, order of conjugated molecules is required for good charge transport, but strong aggregation behavior may generate grain boundaries and trapping, opposing those benefits. Side chains on a polymer's backbone are major reason for and also tool to modify its morphological characteristics. In this report, we show on the example poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenylco-bithiophene) (F8T2) that by a combination of two types of side-chains on the backbone of equal number of carbons, one promoting crystallization, another hindering it, organization of the main chains can be controlled, without changing its major properties. We compare the traditional F8T2 derivative with octyl substituent with two modified species, one containing solely 2ethylhexyl side-chains and another with both types randomly distributed. Thermal characteristics, photophysics and morphology are compared and effects on film formation and 2 charge transport in bulk-heterojunction blends demonstrated on photovoltaic devices utilizing F8T2s as donor and the fullerene derivative ICBA as acceptor material. Solar cells based on conjugated polymers are a promising class in photovoltaic technology, as they are solution processible, light weight and low cost, compared to commercial silicon solar cells and can be tailored to the required properties via chemical synthesis. While thermal treatment at a relatively low temperature of 70°C was suitable for formation of a desired bi-continuous morphology, any higher temperatures supported the polymer's strong tendency to form large crystalline aggregates in the blend, surrounded and thus separated by PCBM. This aforementioned morphology is detrimental for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport. Accordingly, this limits the viability of F8T2 as is. A suitable tool for influencing a polymer's characteristics is the side-chains. For conjugated polymers, these are usually non-conjugated insulating moieties with the primary function to enable solubility for solution processing. 2.1 Materials. The F8T2 derivatives P1, P2 and P3 were synthesized by Suzuki coupling between 5,5′-dibromo-2,2′-bithiophene and 9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diboronic acid bis(1,3propanediol) ester or 9,9-di(2-ethylhexyl)fluorene-2,7-diboronic acid bis(1,3-propanediol) ester, respectively, as demonstrated in Scheme 1. Scheme 1. Synthesis scheme for polymers P1 and P2 (top) and synthesis scheme for polymer P3 (bottom) All reactions were carried out under inert atmosphere using Schlenck technique. 1.35 mmol of both monomers were dissolved in 30 mL of anhydrous toluene. Then 50 μL of the phase transfer catalyst, Aliquat 336 were added followed by 6 mL of 2M aqueous NaOH. After the addition of 15.5 mg tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)-palladium, the reaction mixture were stirred at 90°C for 48 hours. To provide defined end groups the fluorene monomer (37.5 mg, 0.05 eq), and bromobenzene (20 μL, 0.1 eq) were added. After stirring for further 2 hours, the polymer was precipitated in methanol. After filtration, the crude product was dissolved in chloroform and extracted three times with water. The organic phase was dried over sodium sulfate, the solvent was removed by rotary evaporation and the product was precipitated again from chloroform and methanol. Slow molecular weight oligomers were removed by Soxhlet extraction using acetone. All three polymers exhibited good solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB), and tetrahydrofuran (THF). The number average molecular weight (Mn) and the dispersity (ĐW=Mw/Mn) of the three polymers were determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with THF as solvent. GPC was done using a Merck Hitachi L6000 pump, separation columns of Polymer Standard Service, 8 x 300 mm Anhydrous solvents CF, THF and DCB were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 2.2 Film/Device Preparation. All substrates (patterned ITO-coated glass, Spectrosil Quartz and 400 Si-wafer) were sonicated in acetone and IPA for 10 minutes, each, followed by O2plasma treatment (100 W, 10 min). The solar cell ITO substrates were coated with a 70 nm thick layer of PEDOT:PSS by spin coating in air from sonicated and filtered (0.2 μm PP filter) solution and dried at 200°C in flowing argon for 30min. Solutions of the F8T2 polymers and of F8T2:ICBA blends with 1:1 ratio (by weight) were prepared in 70°C hot DCB. The active layers were spin-coated from hot solution onto PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates for solar cells and onto Spectrosil quartz for photophysical characterization. For X-ray characterization, solution was spin-coated or drop-casted onto Si-wafers. Preparation of polymer solutions and films and also annealing (where applicable) were done in argon gas atmosphere. Photovoltaic devices were completed by the evaporation of a silver cathode (100 nm) at a vacuum of around 10 -5 mbar. After preparation the devices were encapsulated (2-component epoxy resin) prior to performing measurements in air, to prevent degradation. For UV photoelectron spectroscopy, samples were deposited via spin-coating on gold-coated (50nm) Si substrates. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) 1 H (299.87 MHz) spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance II 300 spectrometer at 120°C using 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloro( 2 H2)ethane (C2D2Cl4) as solvent and were referenced to the residual solvent peak (δ( 1 H) = 5.98 ppm). Phase transitions of the polymers as a function of temperature were recorded using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a Perkin Elmer Pyris Diamond Differential Scanning Calorimeter at heating/cooling rate of 40°C/minute. Described transitions were taken from the third heating run. UPS measurements were performed with aThermo a double-differentially pumped He gas discharge lamp emitting He I radiation (hv = 21.22 eV) with a pass energy of 2 eV. The low-energy edge of the valence band was used to determine the ionization potential (equal to HOMO) of the measured films. The band gap energy (for approximation of LUMO level energy) was acquired from the optical absorption onset. Optical absorbance spectra of solutions and films were recorded using a UV-1800 UV-VIS spectrophotometer from Shimadzu. Fluorescence decay dynamics were studied via timecorrelated single-photon counting (TCSPC) at 407 nm excitation with a diode laser (PicoQuant LDH 400), pulsed with 100 ps full-width at half-maximum at a repetition rate of 10MHz. PL was detected with a microchannel-plate photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu Photonics) coupled to TCSPC electronics (Lifespec-ps and VTC900 PC card, Edinburgh Instruments). For electroluminescence measurements from photovoltaic devices, a Keithley 236 SMU was used as current source, the emission collected with a fiber and detected with an Oriel InstaSpec IV spectrograph. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) measurements were conducted at the KMC-2 beamline at BESSY II (Berlin, Germany) using X-rays with a wavelength of 1.00 Å and an area detector (Bruker, Vantec-2000 MikroGap). 3.1 NMR. The three F8T2 derivatives have been investigated by 1 H NMR spectroscopy. The signals in the aromatic region originate exclusively from the hydrogens in the conjugated backbone of the polymer, that is the fluorene unit (around 7.7 ppm) and the two thiophene rings (around 7.3 ppm). However, P2 shows no further transitions within the entire scan range, indicating that the material is completely amorphous. This is likely due to the presence of the racemic 2-ethylhexyl side-chains, whose three-dimensional structure is known to inhibit intermolecular packing. P3 on the other hand, which contains both, straight and branched groups, again exhibits two melting peaks similar to P1, but shifted to higher temperatures TM1=303°C and TM2=347°C, but no cold crystallization. We suggest that in this material only "blocks" with straight side-chains form small ordered areas. Accordingly, the two peaks might also arise from formation/transition of a mesophase. Altogether, these results indicate that the F8T2 derivative with mixed side-chains exhibits a considerably suppressed crystallization behavior, compared to the "standard" F8T2 (P1). Variations in HOMO and LUMO energies between the three different F8T2 species in this study are assumed to be mainly affected by the difference in intermolecular coupling, rather than by the actual monomer structure, because the number of carbon atoms on the side-chains is constant. There is a blue-shift of the absorption maximum from 460 nm for P1, to 447 nm for P2, and 450 nm for P3, respectively. The emission spectrum of P1 shows four vibronic features at 506, 535, 578 and 630 nm, originating from the according S0 n S1 0 transitions. For P2 and P3 this fine structure is also present, but far less pronounced (e.g. S0 3 S1 0 is barely visible) and blue-shifted, e.g. the S0 0 S1 0 peak from 506 nm for P1 to 498 nm for P2 and P3. Another varying feature is the intensity ratio IPL 0-0 / IPL 0-1 between the vibronic transitions. Different to P2 and P3, which show the highest intensity on the S0 0 S1 0 transition (IPL 0-0 /IPL 0-1 >>1), which is typical for solution emission-spectra, P1 has a considerably increased S0 1 S1 0 emission (IPL 0-0 /IPL 0-1 ≈1), rather typical for solids. The latter indicates aggregate formation in solution, as known for "standard" F8T2, which occurs for P1 in chloroform, observable as enhanced intermolecular coupling in absorption and emission. In order to identify origin and composition of the emissions and potential exciton migration effects, the emission kinetics of films have been investigated via TCSPC. Therefore photoluminescence decay dynamics of the three F8T2 derivatives have been probed on the IPL 0-1 (550 nm), IPL 0-2 (580 nm) and IPL 0-3 (640 nm) emission (Figure Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray diffraction (GIXD) has been carried out to obtain information on the influence of the different side-chain configurations on the intermolecular order, the packing behavior and the overall arrangement. The GIXD data of P1, P2 and P3 drop-cast films are shown as reciprocal space maps in Figure On the basis of this interesting observation in the molecular arrangement of P3, being a mixture of P2's shorter lamellar distance and P1's π-π wider stacking distance, the question arises on how the side-chains of this specific polymer are oriented. To answer this question, molecular dynamic simulations on the equilibrium arrangement of the side-chains have been performed for all three polymers. Starting point is a 3D assembly of several parallel polymer backbones with given (100) and (010) distances, as experimentally determined above, and the side-chains completely oriented in-plane with the aromatic rings. During the simulation run towards equilibrium, side-chains should adopt an orientation by torsion and bending of the bonds within the side-chain and their link to the fluorene unit in the backbone, which is sterically and energetically favorable. The conformation of the polymer backbones should remain unchanged, provided that equilibrium can be reached with the given backbone distance. All simulations have been run multiple times to assure reproducibility of the results. Figure The side-chains reoriented into sterically favorable positions, which, in the present simulations, was usually rotation by ca. 45° relative to the fluorene. The octyl chains in P1 are slightly kinked out of plane. The 2-ethylhexyl chains in P2 also kink at the branching point with the two branches bending in opposite directions. In the case of P3 (with the mixed side-chains), the simulations provided a very different outcome. Every simulation using the GIXD stacking distances resulted in a twisted and bent aromatic backbone and no regularities in side-chain orientation. Only if a lamellar distance of at least 15 Å was chosen, the backbone stayed planar (not shown). From these results, together with the knowledge that this is a random and no blockco-polymer, it is assumed that the effects that indicate molecular order for P3 (intermolecular coupling in emission, stacking distance in GIXD) is caused by a few ordered domains formed by smallest neighboring sections with the same side-chain type. According behavior could be observed in simulations for P3, e.g. in Figure F8T2s' side-chains affect their functionality in a photovoltaic device, 1:1 donor/acceptor blends with ICBA were studied for variations in blend morphology and charge transport behavior. There the ICBA is assumed to diminishing the likeliness of intercalation between the polymer sidechains due to its size and therewith highlighting the polymers' properties in these structures. All blend films have been annealed at 100°C, close to Tg to allow side-chain relaxation but below any other thermal transformation. Atomic force microscopy images of these films in Figure Photovoltaic devices with according active layers reveal considerable differences between the three F8T2derivatives. The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics under illumination (simulated solar conditions, AM1.5G, 100 mW/cm 2 ) are shown in Figure Also FF and VOC are slightly reduced, compared to the P2 and P3 devices. Interestingly, the characteristics of P2 and P3 cells are almost equal, which is not expected from their considerably different photophysical behavior (see above). To estimate the pure charge transport characteristics of the three blends, charge mobility of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/F8T2:ICBA/Al devices has been extracted by modelling the dark current under forward bias using the spacecharge-limited expression for the current density: This approach provides a reasonable estimation for the mobility of the majority charge carrier species within the blend. Because of the much higher energy barrier for electron injection into the ICBA LUMO from the Al electrode, as compared to hole injection into the F8T2 HOMO from PEDOT:PSS, these devices are regarded as hole-dominated under forward bias. Therefore, the fitted mobilities reflect hole mobilities in the F8T2:ICBA blends. Additionally, ICBA is known to be a comparably bad charge transport material, hence the measured values majorly reflect the transport behavior in the polymers. The space-charge limited current characteristics and the respective fits are displayed in Figure Overall, these values differ considerably. The highest zero-field hole-mobility in blends of the three F8T2 derivatives is shown by P3 with a value of 1.5x10 -10 m 2 /(Vs), which is followed by P2 with a mobility lower by two orders of magnitude of 7.6x10 -12 m 2 /(Vs) and finally, again one order of magnitude lower, we find the P1 blend with a mobility of only 2.1x10 -13 m 2 /(Vs). This poor mobility in P1 correlates well with the reported behavior of "standard" F8T2 and has been rationalized by charge trapping in ordered aggregates. To summarize, the disadvantageously strong aggregation behavior of the conjugated polyfluorene F8T2 can be controlled by substituting a combination of crystallization-promoting octyl-and crystallization-suppressing 2-ethylhexyl side-chains. A comparison between F8T2 with straight, branched, and mixed side-chains of an equal number of carbon atoms unveiled the semiconductor's major character to be maintained upon this chemical modifications and merely properties sensitive to structural arrangement were significantly altered, both in pure films and in blends with ICBA. F8T2 with straight side-chains showed a strong tendency towards aggregation, however with random orientation of crystalline regions causing disturbed interconnectivity, which results in bad charge transport and slow inefficient interfacial charge transfer, leading to the observed poor mobility and device characteristics. By replacing these very side-chains by branched groups, the polymer is hindered in adopting crystalline order, however, this prevented aggregation, in turn allows more freedom in molecular organization during solution deposition. Consequently, this leads to amorphous films, exhibiting a subtle preference in chain orientation. Inhibiting the aggregation clearly shows beneficial effects on charge transport in blends, which is reflected in a slight increase in mobility and device performance in sample solar cells, due to better interface formation, despite the fact that exciton dissociation efficiency in the material was actually lowered. The polymer with both types of side-chains attached to the backbone showed, in many aspects, intermediate properties between the two other species. Most importantly, the aggregation behavior was largely suppressed, but the films still showed signs of intermolecular coupling and, in consequence, considerably increased the charge mobility in blends, leading to the best device performance among the three materials employed. The efficiency of charge transport in these material systems cannot be underestimated. The present example shows that benefits for charge transport can significantly overcompensate losses in intermolecular coupling by reduced order. On the basis of the present study, applying a combination of crystallization-suppressing and -promoting side-chains emerges as a valuable tool for adjusting morphology of polymer films to the requirements of applications in organic electronics. Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi Photoelectron Spectrometer under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV), using L , where μ0 is the zero-field mobility, γ the field activation parameter, JSCL the current density, ε the permittivity, Vint the internal voltage, and L the film thickness.