In this work, self-mixing interferometry (SMI) is implemented inline to a laser microdrilling system to monitor the machining process by probing the ablation-induced plume. An analytical model based on the Sedov-Taylor blast wave equation is developed for the expansion of the process plume under multiple-pulse laser percussion drilling conditions. Signals were acquired during laser microdrilling of blind holes on stainless steel, copper alloy, pure titanium, and titanium nitride ceramic coating. The maximum optical path difference was measured from the signals to estimate the refractive index changes. An amplitude coefficient was derived by fitting the analytical model to the measured optical path differences. The morphology of the drilled holes was investigated in terms of maximum hole depth and dross height. The results indicate that the SMI signal rises when the ablation process is dominated by vaporization, changing the refractive index of the processing zone significantly. Such ablation conditions correspond to limited formation of dross. The results imply that SMI can be used as a nonintrusive tool in laser micromachining applications for monitoring the process quality in an indirect way. High-power lasers are widely used for machining materials when quality and fast manufacturing processes are required, allowing micrometric precision in many applications such as cutting, welding, hole drilling, and surface texturing The ablation plume carries information about the ablation rate and efficiency, and its observation can be exploited to monitor the machining process, although the interpretation of its dynamics is not trivial Several optical techniques, including photography, interferometry, holography, or absorption imaging, represent convenient approaches for the observation of the fast-evolving phenomena of ablation plume expansion, allowing non-contact measurements with high temporal and spatial resolutions In the current paper SMI is proposed as a method for probing the formation and evolution of the plume during multipulse laser ablation, with the aim of monitoring the microdrilling process. A simplified model is presented for describing the optical path difference sensed by a probe laser beam in terms of vapor density and refractive index variations within the expanding plume, linking it to the number of drilling pulses. A self-mixing interferometer based on a diode laser is integrated coaxially with the nanosecond pulsed laser of a microdrilling setup. A digital algorithm for the interferometric signal analysis is developed to demonstrate the possibility of automatic inline monitoring. The experimental results and the morphological analysis of the blind holes obtained for different materials and pulse numbers suggest that the interferometer probes the effective amount of ablated material in the plume. Such a configuration might be used for keeping track of the ablation quality related to the material vaporization rate, in concurrence with the melt-solidification phenomena typical of the thermal interaction given by nanosecond laser pulses. The measurement principle of a laser interferometer is based on the detection of constructive and destructive interference fringes, obtained by overlapping two or more coherent beams passing through different optical paths. In the classical Michelson interferometer a laser beam is split into two parts, passing through the reference and the sample arms, and then reflected back and recombined on a detector. The self-mixing configuration simplifies such an arrangement, exploiting the optical feedback effect occurring when part of the emitted light gets reflected and interferes within the active medium of the laser source, with fringes being visible as laser intensity modulations where λ 0 is the wavelength of the laser beam The interferometer measures an optical path variation, calculated as the difference between the initial and unperturbed optical path length p i , and the optical path p f (t) in the presence of an ablation plume after a laser pulse and Here n 0 and n 1 (t) are the effective refractive indices of the surrounding gas and of the plume respectively, d 0 is the constant distance between the interferometer diode facet and the target plane, i.e., the external cavity length, and r(t) is the extension of the plume region crossed by the probe beam. The time dependence of n 1 (t) and r(t) is referred to the start of the ablation process, happening at t = 0. Therefore the optical path difference δp(t) is Since the SMI signal is going to be studied on the millisecond timescale, it can expected that the typical size of the plume is greater than a few millimeters • the plume vapor is distributed within the volume delimited by the expanding shock wavefront; • the vapor density in the plume volume is dilute and uniform. For a spherical expansion, the radius r(t) of the shock wavefront predicted by the blast theory where ξ 0 is an adimensional constant close to one, ρ 0 is the density of the unperturbed ambient gas, and E 0 is the shock wave energy, which is typically a fraction of the laser pulse energy where M 1 is the material mass that gets vaporized and ejected from the target by a single laser pulse, while m 1 depends on M 1 and on its geometrical distribution in the plume. The angular distribution of the plume is typically concentrated within an angle 2θ p along the ablation direction, depending on several factors, such as material type, pulse duration, and ambient gas pressure with θ p the cone half angle of the plume distribution relative to the normal of the target surface. The latter can be estimated from literature as ranging from an almost hemispherical distribution, with θ p ∼ 90°and m 1 = 3 2π M 1 , to strongly elongated plume jets, with θ p ∼ 10° where K is the Gladstone-Dale constant If the refractive index of the background gas can be approximated as n 0 1, taking the expression of Eq. ( as a quantity that summarizes the characteristics of the ablation induced by a single laser pulse. The examined microdrilling process consists of a series of N p consecutive laser pulses, each one of duration τ p and with a pulse repetition rate f p = t -1 p . The total process time depends on the number of pulses N p , and is equal to T p = N p t p . A preliminary characterization of the laser source used for the following experimental investigation highlighted that the laser pulses are less energetic in the first part of the emission, with a not negligible transition interval to the condition of steady emission For the ablation conditions considered in the current work the laser emission parameters are such that T p t p τ p . Moreover, other experimental studies showed that the dynamics of the ejected plume is turbulent during multipulse ablation, suggesting that the ablated vapor gets mixed by the successive pulses and that the total amount of ablated material within the plume increments gradually during the process • the ablation process is approximated as a continuous succession of infinitesimally short and instantaneous pulses; • the vapor ejected after each single pulse accumulates within the plume volume generated by the previous pulses and delimited by r(t). Under the previous assumptions, the overall optical path difference ∆p probed by the interferometer after N p pulses can be seen as the linear superimposition of small contributions, each one defined by δp(t) of Eq. ( This expression can be rewritten as a function of the number of pulses as where the amplitude is described by the characteristic length η, defined as This quantity is essentially determined by the laser parameters, and by the physical properties of the target material and of the plume vapors. Writing Eq. ( Conversely to the single-pulse case, where the optical path δp(t) decays in time as calculated in Eq. ( The experimental setup is sketched in Fig. The self-mixing interferometer is based on a GaAlAs multi-quantum well laser diode with builtin monitor photodiode (H HL7851G), emitting 15 mW at λ 0 = 785 nm and collimated with a 10 mm lens. The diode is placed at distance d 0 = 410 mm from the target specimen. The choice of the diode wavelength is convenient since the plasma emission in the spectral interval around λ 0 is typically weak The wavelength of the probe beam is transmitted by the dichroic mirror, allowing it to be superimposed on the process beam. The two beams are then focalized on the target surface by means of an achromatic doublet lens (T AC254-100-A-ML) with focal length f l = 100 mm. In the focus, the calculated process beam diameter is 22 μm, while the expected fast and slow axes of the elliptical interferometer beam are 41 μm and 24 μm respectively. Experiments were carried out in ambient atmosphere without the use of assist gas. Previous investigations showed that, in the absence of any gas flow blowing the plume from the side, in the considered conditions the SMI beam interacts mainly with the plume rather than measuring the displacement of the ablation front The fraction of the probe light that gets scattered or reflected back to the laser cavity is the origin of the self-mixing phenomenon, introducing a modulation in the laser field intensity and frequency Spectroscopy is used to characterize the process optical emission, providing evidence to the eventual formation of plasma. The optical radiation emitted during the ablation process in the spectral range between 300 nm and 500 nm is acquired with a fiber optic spectroscope (A A S -2048), having a FWHM resolution of 0.8 nm and an integration time set to 2 ms. A shortpass optical filter with 500 nm cutoff (E 47-287) suppresses the process laser radiation, and the acquired spectra are corrected according to the filter transmission curve. The morphology of the microdrilled blind holes is analyzed by means of a three-dimensional (3D) focus variation microscope (A I F ). The 3D surface profiles are acquired at 50× magnification, with vertical and lateral resolutions equal to 50 nm and 1.5 μm respectively. The maximum hole depth h hole and dross height h dross are measured for each sample relatively to the average surface plane, as in the example reported in Fig. Table The SMI voltage signal v 0 (t) can contain a variable number of interference fringes, observed as sawtooth-like modulations since the interferometer is operated in the moderate feedback regime. The derivative sign at the signal discontinuity allows the sign of the optical path variation sign, which is origin of the fringe, to be distinguished. To extract the optical path difference ∆p(t) and its maximum value ∆p max from a high number of experimental runs, the signal is analyzed with a digital algorithm written in P , similar to other fringe unwrapping procedures 2. The discontinuities in the voltage signal v 0 (t) are identified by means of a peak search algorithm applied to the time derivative dv 0 /dt, based on local maxima detection. 3. The SMI feedback parameter C may change in time during the ablation process due to the mutable optical conditions, such as variations in reflectivity or absorption from the probed system. Therefore v 0 (t) needs to be opportunely normalized and translated to a signal v 1 (t) expressed in fringe number. The signal intervals delimited by two consecutive fringes are normalized to 1, while the remaining intervals are normalized to the height of nearest fringe discontinuity; if no fringe is present in v 0 (t), the whole series is normalized to the average scaling factor of the respective data set. 4. The unwrapping procedure reconstructs a normalized and continuous signal v 2 (t) by subtracting the cumulative offset introduced by the fringe discontinuities. 5. The unwrapped signal v 2 (t) is converted to optical path difference by knowing that each interference fringe corresponds to a path variation equal to half laser wavelength, i.e., ∆p(t) = v 2 (t) λ 0 2 . 6. The maximum value of the optical path ∆p max is extracted from each series. An example of analyzed signal is reported in Fig. • the unwrapped signal does not return close to its initial value within a few milliseconds, suggesting a probable failure in the signal acquisition or fringe detection; • signal saturation with strong voltage jumps are observed, probable signature of laser mode hopping when the diode enters the strong feedback regime; The ablation process starts at t = ms. The considered material is copper, with N p = 150 drilling pulses. • more than a reasonable maximum fringe number is found or the signal-to-noise ratio for ∆p max is too low, as it happens in noisy signals. It must be noted that some signals exhibit a cusp-like behavior in the correspondence of fringe discontinuities. This can be an effect of the AC coupling of the photodiode circuit, and it does not have any physical meaning from the interferometric point of view. The measurements confirmed that the SMI beam interacts with the process plume rather than measuring the drilling depth. In fact, for a typical sequence, the measured optical path difference ∆p(t) is positive, growing abruptly with the beginning of the microdrilling process on the micrometer scale. For a monotonic signal, such as expected from the model of Eq. ( The maximum of the optical path difference ∆p max is measured in the different experimental conditions, with 20 repetitions for each combination of material and pulse number. About the 32% of the experimental runs are excluded by the signal analysis algorithm, being identified as invalid according to the criteria described before. The average trend of ∆p max as a function of N p is reported in Fig. The visible emission spectra acquired during the microdrilling process have been grouped and averaged by material and pulse number. The results are reported in Fig. As a side effect of the ablation process, a fraction of the melt material can solidify around the drilled hole, forming dross and reducing the machining quality, as it can be seen from the illustrations reported in Fig. From a qualitative point of view, the model expressed in Eq. ( The analysis of the experimental results for ∆p max , presented in Fig. The differences between materials might be explained in terms of plasma amount and electron number density within the plume A possible qualitative explanation for the behavior of η might come from the morphological analysis of the drilled holes. In fact, as it can be observed from Figures This work reported the use of SMI in an inline configuration during laser microdrilling of different metallic and ceramic materials. An analytical model has been developed based on Sedov-Taylor blast wave theory, in order to estimate the characteristic differences between the plume expansion as a function of the pulse number for different processed materials. The main conclusions of the work are summarized as follows: • The SMI beam effectively interacts with the ablation plume, where the signal rise is associated to the change of the refractive index and the expansion of the plume together. • An unwrapping algorithm has been employed, able to resolve the optical path difference below the half-wavelength limit. The behavior of the time-dependent optical path difference could be reconstructed. • The optical path difference depends on the material type as well as on the number of pulses. The unwrapped signals showed a saturating trend toward the end of the process. • Optical emission spectra revealed that the plasma characteristics can contribute to the signal intensity, even if the material expulsion mechanism and quantity are expected to be more relevant. • The maximum optical path difference values were used to estimate the SMI amplitude coefficient. Higher values of this parameter indicate a larger plume extent and a higher refractive index change. The amplitude coefficient of TiN was found to be significantly different compared to the processed metals. • The optical path difference depends highly on the material removal mechanism. A direct transition from solid to vapor phase generates a higher optical path difference. Such process is desirable for improved quality, while the melt phase generation can improve the material removal capacity due to melt expulsion. The results show that SMI can be used to carry out analytical measurements, as well as providing a signal for the process quality monitoring. However, at this level system training is required, where the acceptable signal levels should be determined a priori. The applications can be possibly extended to the measurement of particle flows and contaminants in gases, requiring less stringent temporal and spatial resolution requirements.