We numerically investigate some properties of unbalanced Stückelberg holographic superconductors, by considering backreaction effects of fields on the background geometry. More precisely, we study the impacts of the chemical potential mismatch and Stückelberg mechanism on the condensation and conductivity types (electrical, spin, mixed, thermo-electric, thermo-spin and thermal conductivity). Our results show that the Stückelberg's model parameters C α and α not only have significant impacts on the phase transition, but also affect the conductivity pseudo-gap and the strength of conductivity fluctuations. Moreover, the effects of these parameters on a system will be gradually reduced as the imbalance grows. We also find that the influence of α on the amplitude of conductivity fluctuations depends on the magnitude of the both C α and δμ/μ in the electric and thermal conductivity cases. This results in that increasing α can damp the conductivity fluctuations of an unbalanced system in contrast to balanced ones. The gauge-gravity duality More precisely, the standard BCS theory It is also interesting to take an effective field theory approach and consider the existence of the spontaneous symmetry breaking via the Stückelberg mechanism An unbalanced model is based on an emerge of superconducting phase around a quantum critical point In the holographic context, adding a non-trivial charged field on the gravity side leads to the breaking of a U (1) A "charge" symmetry which characterizes the onset of superconductivity In this paper, we study an unbalanced Stückelberg holographic superconductor where the backreaction effects of matter on the geometry has been considered. In other words, we going to investigate the behaviors of holographic Stückelberg superconductors in Ref. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the Lagrangian for our model. We also numerically calculate condensation and phase transition for different values of δμ/μ (the ratio of the chemical potential mismatch to the chemical potential where indicates the amount of the imbalance) and F(ψ). In section 3, we briefly introduce the process of calculations for all types of the conductivity. Then, we verify their response to changes in the form of F(ψ) function and the imbalance. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 4. We consider an extension of the generalized Stückelberg model introduced in where in which F = dA and Y = dB are the two field strengths associated with the two gauge fields. The Maxwell equation makes the phase of ψ constant, so we take it to be null in order to have real ψ. In addition, this theory is invariant under the local gauge symmetry A → A + ∂Ω(x) and p → p + Ω(x) It is obvious that our model reduces to the unbalanced model in Ref. We also consider the following ansatz for the scalar and the vector fields: -3 -Furthermore, the temperature of such a black hole with the horizon at r = r h is defined as: By varying the action with respect to the metric and the fields, we arrive at the following equations of motions, ) ) χ + rψ 2 + r e χ q 2 φ 2 F(ψ) where the prime denotes derivative with respect to r and the dot denotes derivative with respect to ψ. We also take the standard choice of mass as m 2 = -2 ) where ψ 1 (ψ 2 ) can be regarded as the source of the dual condensation operator, O 1 (O 2 ). Since we need the U (1) symmetry to be broken spontaneously, we should turn one of the sources off. Therefore, we set According to the gauge/gravity duality, the leading terms of φ(r) (v(r)) are interpreted as chemical potential (chemical potential mismatch) and charge density (charge density mismatch) in the dual theory, respectively. Working in the grand-canonical ensemble, we fix the chemical potential (chemical potential mismatch) and alter the charge density (charge density mismatch). At the AdS boundary, we also should set χ = 0 and impose the asymptotic behavior where is the mass of black hole interpreted as the energy density of the dual field theory By substituting Taylor expansion of fields at horizon in (2.6) and making use of the Einstein equation (2.9), the black hole temperature can be rewritten as where subindexes h0 and h1 indicate the coefficients of the field's expansion at r = r h . Both the bulk and the boundary theory have the same time coordinate and, consequently, they have the same complex time continuation and temperature. We numerically solve the equations of motion ((2.7)-(2.11)) by integrating from the horizon out to the infinity with respect to the mentioned boundary conditions. We mostly consider the interval 0 ≤ δμ/μ ≤ 2 with a fixed chemical potential, μ = 1. Table In this subsection, we are looking for phase transition properties through study of the condensation of the scalar operator. Firstly, we plot the second order phase transition diagrams in the (T c , δμ) plane for F(ψ) = ψ 2 + C α ψ α , with α > 2 and μ = 1. From Fig. (1), we find that the critical temperature is not affected by the parameters in (2.3) since α > 2. Of course, it could be predictable since at limit ψ → 0 (near the normal phase), the dominant term in the function F(ψ) is ψ 2 . While, if we assume, for instant, F(ψ) = ψ α from Ref. We start with the special case of F(ψ) = ψ 2 +C 4 ψ 4 to identify the order of phase transitions in the interval 0 ≤ δμ/μ ≤ 4. • We numerically check that the condensations approach zero as with mean field critical exponent β = 1/2 for the second order phase transitions. Thus, β does not depend on neither δμ/μ nor C 4 . As clearly shown in Fig. The case of We are interested in investigating the effect of α (for C α < 0) on critical exponent β and searching for a non-mean field behavior. We check that the relation the relation (2.18), β is larger than the mean field critical exponent for 3 ≤ α < 4. Such behavior causes the suppression of the fluctuations and the stability of the condensation as observed in the Gross-Neveu model for massless fermions In this section, we study the conductivity properties of our model. In addition to considering mixed spin-electric linear response to the external gauge fields fluctuations, here we add the thermal effects, namely the thermo-electric and thermo-spin linear response to the temperature gradient. Therefore, one can define the conductivity matrix as follows: which encodes the whole system response. The diagonal components σ A , σ B , and κT stand for "electric", "spin", and "thermal" conductivities, respectively. Furthermore, the off-diagonal components indicate mixed effects; i.e. γ, αT , and βT indicate the "mixed", "thermo-electric", and "thermo-spin" response, respectively. The symmetry of this matrix is a result of time-reversal invariance To study the transport behavior of our system, we take a small variation of the sources and the consequent current flows. More specifically, to calculate conductivities in the boundary field theory side, we need to turn on the perturbation of the gauge fields A and B in the direction x with time dependent function e -iωt in the bulk. Afterwards, by substituting Einstein equation in the two Maxwell equations on the background, and eliminating metric fluctuations, one arrives at the two following linear differential equations: Note that the backreaction leads to coupled differential equations. This event is responsible for appearing the mixed spin-electric transport properties in a system which also impose ingoing boundary conditions at horizon. In addition, the asymptotic behavior of fields around boundary r → ∞ is x + ... , x + ... , tx + ... . Using introduced method in x =0 (3.9) x =0 . The thermo-electric and the thermo-spin conductivities are also obtained as follows: ) Finally, one can find that the non-canonical thermal conductivity is given by where we have considered pressure p = /2, like its value in We restrict ourselves to the case where the temperature takes value T = 0.3T c . As before, we assume the chemical potential equals to one (μ = 1) over this section. Note that the imaginary part of the conductivity has a pole at ω = 0, which translates in a delta function at the same point in the real part, according to the Kramers-Kroning relation. Since we are working with the fully backreacted solution, translational invariance is preserved due to the lack of dissipation in probe approximation. Because of the Ferrell-Glover-Tinkham sum rule, the area under the curves must be constant at different temperatures. Therefore, we have a depletion at small frequencies to compensate the development of the delta function at ω = 0 We first carry out analysis on the conductivities behavior in the presence of an imbalance. We are actually looking for the validity of the results achieved in Fig. In addition, imbalance disturbs the constant values of the spin and mixed conductiv- ities. Note that optical spin and mixed conductivities of a balanced system are constant values of 1 and 0, respectively. In our model, the optical spin and mixed conductivities of unbalanced systems relaxe to these values at large ω after some fluctuations. It is obvious from Fig. ( The real part of the mixed conductivity is depicted in Fig. The real part of the thermo-electric conductivity for function F(ψ) = ψ 2 + 3ψ 4 are represented in Fig. Imbalance also turns on the thermo-spin conductivity. Fig. In the case of thermal conductivity, it worth mentioning that there are no obvious differences between the pseudo-gaps width of unbalanced cases. Fig. The aim of this part of the study is to determine how C 4 affects the conductivities, for F(ψ) = ψ 2 + C 4 ψ 4 . By increasing C 4 the pseudo-gap becomes wider and the coherent For the spin conductivity, in contrast to the electric case, C 4 play a minor rule in controlling conductivity fluctuations. Fig. For the mixed conductivity, the increase of C 4 shifts fluctuations to larger frequencies. This happens because of the suppression of negative fluctuations at small ω and the amplification of positive ones at larger ω, see Fig. In the case of the thermo-electric conductivity, Fig. Fig. As one can see from Fig. By assuming the parameter C α to be fixed, we can study how conductivities behave when α varies. From Fig. In balanced systems, the part (a) of Fig. Fig. However, in Fig. We studied the unbalanced holographic superconductor model in combination with Stückelberg mechanism which gives us a highly flexible dual theory. This flexibility gives us more freedom in tuning the model parameters with experiments. We showed that while model parameter C 4 provides the change of phase transition order from second to first, the imbalance makes it harder. In other words, we need a larger C 4 for a more unbalanced system to change the order of phase transition. Such behavior also can be observed from conductivity diagrams. In most cases, conductivities behavior of highly unbalanced systems is less influenced by the Stückelberg model parameters compared with the less unbalanced ones. In other words, Stückelberg mechanism generally loses its effects as system becomes more unbalanced. Moreover, we have numerically recovered the Eq. (2.18) also for the case of unbalanced system. Additionally, we have found that imbalance can significantly divert the system's behavior with model parameters of Stückelberg mechanism. Such deviations can even reverse the behavior in some cases. We can specifically mention the behavior of electric and thermal conductivity with model parameter α. For example, electric conductivity fluctuations of the relatively less unbalanced system with δμ/μ = 0.5 are intensified as C 4 = 6 although they are damped as C 4 = 2. The same has been also observed in the case of thermal conductivity. It is interesting to investigate inhomogeneous superconductors in our model. However, we do not observe a Chandrasekhar-Clogston-like bound As a future task, we should push more towards the experimental directions and comparisons by making use of the method introduced in 