Control of local lattice perturbations near optically-active defects in semiconductors is a key step to harnessing the potential of solid-state qubits for quantum information science and nanoscale sensing. We report the development of a stroboscopic scanning X-ray diffraction microscopy approach for real-space imaging of dynamic strain used in correlation with microscopic photoluminescence measurements. We demonstrate this technique in 4H-SiC, which hosts long-lifetime room temperature vacancy spin defects. Using nano-focused X-ray photon pulses synchronized to a surface acoustic wave launcher, we achieve an effective time resolution of ∼100 ps at a 25 nm spatial resolution to map micro-radian dynamic lattice curvatures. The acoustically induced lattice distortions near an engineered scattering structure are correlated with enhanced photoluminescence responses of optically-active SiC quantum defects driven by local piezoelectric effects. These results demonstrate a unique route for directly imaging local strain in nanomechanical structures and quantifying dynamic structure-function relationships in materials under realistic operating conditions. Strain provides a fundamental route to control diverse material properties such as electrical transport Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) have been previously observed with frequency-matched synchrotron X-ray scattering, historically with diffraction micro-topography Here, we investigate acoustic strain modulation using 22 ps rms X-ray pulses separated by 11.37 ns synchronized to a SAW excitation that penetrates microns into the surface. In conventional pump-probe X-ray measurements, the synchrotron timing structure is used to synchronize an optical pump during pulsed stimulation of the sample quency match of continuous radio frequency (RF) surface acoustic wave excitation to the ring time structure, in order to virtually slow or freeze periodic lattice fluctuations generated by a transducer fabricated on the 4H silicon carbide (SiC) host material without the need for a stimulation pulse. We demonstrate the impact of this approach by correlating the dynamic lattice curvature measurement of driven lattice fluctuations with photoluminescence changes from point defects caused by acoustic driving and piezoelectric effects near an etched microscopic structure. Silicon carbide is a versatile and increasingly relevant material for quantum sensing and technological applications due to a rich variety of optically accessible de-fect spins with exceptionally long (millisecond) coherence times that are controllable up to room temperature Propagating and stationary SAWs have widespread usage in RF signal processing and electronics applications The diffraction microscopy experiment sketched in Figure 1 consists of 8 keV X-rays generated by the Advanced Photon Source focused to a 25 nm FWHM beam spot by an interlaced double Fresnel zone plate Results of the stroboscopic Scanning X-ray Diffraction Microscopy (s-SXDM) measurement are shown in Figure Acoustic waves are often scattered by interactions with fabricated objects or lattice defects. In order to assess the divacancy response to locally induced curvature and strain, we fabricate a structural defect into the center of the SiC scanning window (Fig. We directly measure the dynamic transverse curvature amplitudes near the etch pit by s-SXDM (Fig. by optical spatial resolution limits. This structure was intended primarily to create a local focusing of the oscillatory curvature which is most clearly visible as deviations from the phenomenological model in the transverse direction. Combining the nanometer-scale spatial resolution and stroboscopic feature of our X-ray imaging technique allows us to locally image both the static and actively driven lattice distortions around the etch pit. Static local strain induced by the dry etch process is relatively small and nonetheless can be directly visualized by the mean (time independent) diffraction pattern recorded at each scanning position (Fig. We demonstrated nano-focused, direct-space Bragg diffraction microscopy using the synchrotron timing structure to stroboscopically image time-varying lattice curvature. This methodology provides both higher spatial resolution than previous acoustic wave imaging methods, and more importantly allows direct measurement of independent ordinal components of lattice curvature and strain We imaged local dynamic lattice perturbations induced by a Gaussian focused SAW interacting with a fabricated structural defect in 4H-SiC and correlated these perturbations with divacancy defect optical measurements. Our nano-focused scanning hard X-ray diffraction imaging approach, based on the frequency matching of a synchrotron X-ray pulse structure to a RF transducer, can be extended to real-space imaging of crystal strain in the time domain with full control over the acoustic phase. The induced strain and dynamic lattice fluctuations observed hold important consequences for nanomechanical system engineering with local quantum defects, as indicated by the EOCC photoluminescence contrast enhancement near the structural defect. A key feature enabled by this methodology is removing ambiguity in assessing quantum structure-function relationships, through the congruent ability to image in real-space lattice fluctuations that directly relate to photoluminescence changes from optically-active point defects. Beyond semiconductors, this method is generally applicable to acoustically manipulated structures and crystallographic defects where simultaneous picosecond time, nanoscale spatial, and sub-picometer strain displacement sensitivity can be used for unique local visualization of mechanical energy transduction. The high purity semi-insulating 4H-SiC substrate from Cree Inc. had ∼500 nm AlN sputtered by OEM Group Inc. onto the wafer Si-face with low film stress. The IDT, comprising of 20 nm thick Ti and 150 nm thick Al, was fabricated on the AlN/SiC substrate. The circular pit (Fig. 