Laser metal deposition (LMD) is an additive manufacturing technique, whose performances can be influenced by several factors and parameters. Monitoring their evolution allows for a better comprehension and control of the process, hence enhancing the deposition quality. In particular, the deposition height is an important variable that, if it does not match the process growth, can bring to defects and geometrical inaccuracies in the deposited structures. The current work presents a system based on optical triangulation for the height monitoring, implemented on a LMD setup composed of a fiber laser, a deposition head, and an anthropomorphic robot. Its coaxial and non-intrusive configuration allows for flexibility in the deposition strategy and direction. A measurement laser beam is launched through the powder nozzle and hits the melt pool. A coaxial camera acquires the probe spot, whose position is converted to relative height. The device has been demonstrated for monitoring the deposition of a stainless steel cylinder. The measurements allowed to reconstruct a spatial map of the height variation, highlighting a transient in the deposition growth which can be explained in terms of a self-regulating mechanism for the layer thickness. Additive manufacturing has gained interest in many research and industrial fields, from aerospace to biomedical applications, introducing big advantages in terms of flexibility for the design and direct realization of solid objects with complex and custom geometries The LMD process depends on several parameters, including the laser power, the deposition speed, and the powder flow rate. Moreover, the deposition can be influenced by physical quantities which can vary during the process, such as the substrate temperature. In fact, if the temperature changes due to unbalance between heat accumulation and conduction, the powder melting can be eventually favored, introducing variability in the deposition growth which can lead to the formation of defects or irregularities in the deposited structure. The quality requirements in production environments and the high costs of additive manufacturing encourage the development of specific feedback systems for the adaptive control of the process parameters The distance between the nozzle and the substrate, called standoff distance (SOD), is another important parameter of the LMD process. As a matter of fact, the deposition rate is strongly influenced by the deposition height, since the latter determines the overlapping factor between the focused laser beam and the convergent powder flow Several approaches for studying the deposition growth in LMD and laser cladding can be found in literature. Firstly, the deposition height can be included in models developed from numerical simulations The deposition height can be also extracted from the 3D reconstruction of the deposited object, e.g., obtained by means correlation analysis algorithms for images taken with off-axis cameras from one or more points of view as reported by several studies A wide class of optical methods for the deposition growth monitoring is based on the triangulation principle. Its classical implementation exploits a tilted laser beam probing the target surface, with an image sensor used for detecting the probe spot position. A custom configuration of such working principle was previously demonstrated on a wire-LMD setup for the process control The method presented in the current work reinterprets and simplifies the common triangulation implementation for monitoring the deposition height during the LMD process, introducing several advantages. In fact, the proposed system represents a simple, non-intrusive, and cheap solution for monitoring inline the deposition growth, as well as a non-destructive diagnosis tool of the deposited structure The triangulation system has been operated while building a multi-layer hollow cylinder from stainless steel powder, demonstrating its robustness against the direction of the robot movements. The results highlighted a selfregulating mechanism in the layer thickness. The latter, after an initial transient, tends to an equilibrium condition, interpreted as a result of compensation between concur-rent thermal and powder defocusing effects. A 3D spatial reconstruction obtained from the measurements allowed to visualize structural defects of the deposited cylinder along the growth direction. Although the sensitivity of the proposed method might be lower if compared to some of the optical instruments utilized in the studies cited before, this is sufficient for many applications, such as the detection of sub-millimeter height mismatches or the implementation of closed-loop feedback controllers on the actual layer thickness, while flexibility in the measurement is gained due to the coaxial configuration. Finally, the examined monitoring device is composed by simple and lowcost components, which are promising factors for its usage even in industrial environments, with minimal changes to existing setups. probe spot coordinate on the camera sensor 2. System design and implementation The monitoring system has been implemented on the LMD setup illustrated in Fig. The metallic powder to be deposited is fed to the threejet powder nozzle (Fraunhofer ILT 3-JET-SO16-S) of the deposition head by a powder feeder (GTV Twin PF 2/2-MF), using nitrogen both as vector and nozzle shielding gas. The powder is ejected by three orifices configured at 120 • from each other, converging to the deposition zone and generating a powder cone. The standoff distance between the nozzle tip and the substrate is set to the reference value of 12 mm at the beginning of the process. The setup for the deposition height monitoring includes a probe laser beam and a coaxial imaging system, both housed in a custom unit attached sideways to the deposition head as illustrated in Fig. In the case that a diffusive target is present out from the deposition head, the probe beam gets scattered from the incidence point on the target surface. From a merely geometrical consideration and in the assumption of isotropic scattering, only a small fraction of the diffused light can go backward through the nozzle aperture. Such scattered light is collected by the lens L 1 of the deposition head, then it gets deflected by the dichroic mirror toward the trian-gulation unit. Half of the scattered light is transmitted and lost by the beam-splitter cube, while half is reflected to the imaging arm of the setup. A second convergent lens L 2 with focal length equal to f 2 = 125 mm is placed at the optical distance f 1 + f 2 from L 1 , in a telescope configuration whose magnification M is limited by the process lens of the existing LMD setup: The probe spot image is acquired with a CCD monochrome camera (IDS UI-6230RE-M-GL) placed at distance f 2 from the imaging lens L 2 . The camera sensor has a maximum resolution of 0.8 × 10 6 pixels, with pixel size equal to p s = 4.65 μm. The acquisition is performed on a cropped area of 340×120 pixels. The integration time is 10 ms, with the 98.4 Hz frame rate setting the measurement temporal resolution. The limit for the lateral spatial accuracy is determined by the probe spot diameter, which is measured as about 200 μm around the focal point. Several factors may disturb the measurement while depositing. First of all, the infrared light of the high-power process laser might be partially scattered back from the deposition area or from parasitic reflections, reaching the monitoring setup. Such process radiation is extinguished by a shortpass wavelength filter (Thorlabs FESH1000) with 1000 nm cutoff, placed at the interface between the triangulation unit and the deposition head. The presence of other off-focus light beams, e.g., given by backreflections of the probe light from the head optical elements, might also hide the probe signal on the target. These are suppressed by a spatial filter, obtained with a 1 mm diameter diaphragm placed in the common focus of the L 1 and L 2 lenses. Another important noise source during the process is represented by the broadband thermal emission from the melt pool, as well as the ambient light. Even if the typical thermal emission is not strong at the probe wavelength, the usage of a notch spectral filter (Thorlabs FL05532-1) with a 1 nm FWHM bandwidth around 532 nm allows to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio for the weak signals of the scattered probe light. Within the other possible disturbances, it must be considered that the probe beam overlaps and crosses the powder which flows from the nozzle. However, as showed by some preliminary tests, the scattering losses introduced by the powder are negligible. Perturbations from the processinduced plume can be also neglected since, due to the relatively low beam irradiance, the generation of plasma or plume in LMD is limited if compared to other processes such as laser cutting, welding, or ablation. Finally, the probe spot detection might partially suffer from mutable speckle patterns and variations in the target reflectivity, although the height measurement is actually related to the spot position instead of the absolute spot intensity. If the collimated probe beam is perfectly aligned with the optical axis of the deposition head, hence hitting the lens L 1 in its center, the focused beam will be coaxial to the process beam. Conversely, if the probe beam is translated by s p from the lens center, it will be deflected by an angle α p relatively to the optical axis. By neglecting the beam size and with an orthogonal incidence on the lens, the probe beam can be approximated as a single ray passing through the lens focal point. As it can be deduced from the sketch of Fig. The probe beam deflection introduced by the deposition head lens is the basis of the triangulation measurement. In fact, with α p > 0, the position of the probe spot on the horizontal target surface varies depending on the vertical height. From simple geometrical optics considerations, the coordinate y 1 of the probe spot in the target plane, defined along the deflection plane and referred to the optical axis, is proportional to the distance z 1 between the focal plane and the target itself: Taking into account the magnification M of Eq. ( During the process the target is the melt pool on the deposited structure, whose relative distance varies with time depending on the deposition growth and on the focal plane position, the latter being joined with the deposition head. It is convenient to introduce the relative height ∆z, defined as ∆z = z 1 -z 0 , where z 0 is the reference distance measured at the beginning of the deposition, i.e., when the nozzle is at the nominal SOD. A higher probe beam offset s p , hence a higher deflection angle α p , would be desirable for a better measurement sensitivity. However, the requirement of independence on the deposition direction introduces the constrain for a quasi-coaxial configuration, fulfilled when α p is sufficiently small. This means that, considering a reasonable measurement range, the probe spot must remain within the deposition region, specifically the melt pool, whose width is typically of the order of 1 mm. Therefore, with y 1 ranging as ±0.5 mm and for a ∆z range of ±10 mm, the beam offset must be s p < 10 mm. The clear aperture of deposition head interface limits s p to a maximum of about 8 mm. The 6 mm nozzle aperture is sufficiently wide and does not introduce further limitations to the probe beam passage. The acquired images of the probe spot are analyzed with a Python code, which integrates each image along the axis that is insensitive to height variations, removes the background baseline, and extracts the probe spot position by fitting the intensity profile to a one-dimensional Gaussian function. The spot center coordinate, labeled as y 2 , is measured in pixel number and interpolated on a sub-pixel scale. It must be noted that the value of y 2 is referred to the CCD sensor origin, i.e., it is equal to p s y 2 plus an offset, with p s being the pixel size. Therefore, the relation between z 1 and y 2 of Eq. ( with β 0 a constant term which depends on z 0 and on the optical alignment. The proportionality factor defines the estimated vertical sensitivity of the triangulation measurement, although the continuous fitting procedure overcomes the pixel discretization limit. The system has been calibrated by measuring y 2 as a function of known values of ∆z, i.e., controlling the position of a dummy target with a precision vertical translation stage The expected off-axis displacement s p and the deflection angle α p can be calculated from β 1 as 5.6 mm and 1.6 • respectively, considering the nominal focal lengths f 1 and f 2 . Table Beam offset s p 5.6 mm Beam deflection The deposition starts from the condition where the powder nozzle tip is positioned at the reference SOD from the substrate, as sketched in Fig. with Considering a generic multi-layer structure, it is convenient to introduce a discrete notation for the geometrical variables related to the layer number n. Therefore, while depositing with a periodic track, ∆z n can be defined as ∆z(t) at multiples of the track duration T : Analogously, in the assumption of a deterministic control of the robot coordinates, the total robot height D n is equal to the fixed height increment d multiplied by the layer number n: The physical height H n of the deposited structure after n layers is the sum of the layer thickness h j , with j ranging from 1 to n, and it can be found from Eq. ( The thickness of each deposited layer can be calculated as the difference of the deposition height between two consecutive layers: Consequently, the thickness mismatch, i.e. the error relative to the nominal height increment, is 3. Height monitoring system applied to LMD The device for the deposition height monitoring has been tested while building a single-wall hollow cylinder. The choice of such 3D geometry allowed to demonstrate the independence of the measurement working principle on the deposition direction. In fact, the transverse robot movement is, point by point, tangent to a circular path, hence all the directions are continuously probed. The deposition has been performed using the process parameters reported in Table Following Eq. ( Examples of frames acquired during the deposition are illustrated in Fig. In the case of accordance among deposition growth rate and robot path height increment, the mismatch ∆z(t) should remain equal to zero, meaning that the relative deposition height does not change from to its initial value. However, as it can be observed from Fig. The oscillations in the raw signal of Fig. The layer thickness measured during the deposition process is plotted in Fig. The second phenomenon that must be considered happens if the structure grows faster than the robot height, hence the standoff distance between nozzle tip and the workpiece decreases, reflecting into a lower efficiency of the powder-laser interaction. In fact, if the SOD becomes too low, the deposition area goes out from the optimal working field of the powder cone, with the remelting process being predominant when the powder flow and the laser beam do not overlap efficiently on the substrate. With a reduced deposition efficiency the SOD increases again, hence tending back to a better deposition condition. Such cyclical phenomenon happens all over the process, with a compensation between the deposition efficiency and the layer thickness growth. The overall result leads to a selfregulating mechanism, with an asymptotic tendency of the growth rate to an equilibrium condition, corresponding to the minimum SOD permitted by the powder nozzle configuration. The study of such kinds of mechanisms may allow for a rigorous identification of the optimal process conditions, such as the initial standoff and the programmed height increment, which can be adjusted to minimize the initial growth transient and to accelerate the convergence to the self-regulating regime in a passive way The current work presented the design and implementation of a system for monitoring the deposition height on a LMD setup. The coaxial configuration of the triangulation measurement allows for flexibility in terms of deposition strategy, overcoming some of the off-axis method limits, such as blindness along specific directions. A measurement laser beam probes the melt pool height, sharing the same optical path of the process laser beam, without the need of significant modifications to the existing setup. The device has been demonstrated for monitoring the deposition of stainless steel powder for building a multi-layer cylinder, showing its robustness even in the presence of the process emission and of the metallic powder flow. Its operation can be generalized to more complex 3D geometries and to different materials, since the height measurement is direct instead of being linked to process models. The actual thickness of the deposited layers has been calculated from the triangulation measurements. Although the system sensitivity might be improved with a higher imaging resolution, this was enough to highlight the emergence of a self-regulating mechanism in the deposition growth, which, after an initial transient, converges to the programmed height increment. Understanding such mechanism is important, since layer thickness variations can lead to shape irregularities and dimensional mismatches. The translation of the measurement into space coordinates allowed to obtain a 3D spatial map of the deposited structure, showing the formation of local defects which propagate along the growth direction. A precise synchronization of the measurement with the robot movements would allow to use the system for monitoring in real-time the deposition growth, without the need of post-process analysis. Such possibility may represent a simple, low-cost, and non-intrusive solution for controlling the process on generic coaxial LMD setups, without the need of more complex and expensive devices. The measurement error signal might be employed in feedback control systems, allowing to adapt the process parameters to the actual deposition growth and to correct the emergence of defects, hence improving quality and regularity of the deposited structures. Kuka Reis MWO-I Anthropomorphic robot ABB IRB 4600-45 Powder nozzle Fraunhofer ILT 3-JET-SO16-S Reference standoff distance 12 mm Process lens focal length f 1 = 200 mm