Iron-based superconductors can be categorized as two types of parent compounds by considering the nature of their temperature-induced phase transitions; namely, first order transitions for 122-and 11-type compounds and second-order transitions for 1111-type compounds. This work examines the structural and magnetic transitions (ST and MT) of CaFeAsH by specific heat, X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction, and electrical resistivity measurements. Heat capacity measurements revealed a second-order phase transition accompanies an apparent single peak at 96 K. However, a clear ST from the tetragonal to orthorhombic phase and a MT from the paramagnetic to antiferromagnetic phase were detected. The structural (Ts) and Néel temperatures (TN) were respectively determined to be 95(2) and 96 K by X-ray and neutron diffraction and resistivity measurements. This small temperature difference, Ts -TN, was attributed to strong magnetic coupling in the inter-layer direction owing to CaFeAsH having the shortest lattice constant c among parent 1111-type iron arsenides. Considering that a firstorder transition takes place in 11-and 122-type compounds with a short inter-layer distance, we conclude that the nature of the ST and MT in CaFeAsH is intermediate in character, between the second-order transition for 1111-type compounds and the firstorder transition for other 11-and 122-type compounds. Current interest in iron-based superconductors is focused on developing an understanding of the mechanism of superconductivity and determining the relationship between structural transitions (STs) and magnetic transitions (MTs) of the so-called parent compounds. The ST and MT transitions of 122-type compounds may be classified into three regions depending on the carrier concentration and the applied pressure; We investigated Ts and TN of the parent CaFeAsH. First, we show that CaFeAsH has only a single second-order transition at approximately 96 K, as revealed by specific heat measurements. We verify that the Ts of CaFeAsH is located between 93 and 97 K based on low-temperature X-ray diffraction measurements. The TN is determined to be 96 K by electrical resistivity measurements and observations of stripe-type AFM ordering, which is commonly observed in 122-and 1111-type compounds, as confirmed by neutron diffraction performed at 10 K. The ST and MT characteristics of CaFeAsH are discussed in terms of structural and local magnetic aspects by comparison with those features of other 1111-type and 11-, 111-and 122-type compounds. Finally, we conclude that the small temperature difference, Ts -TN, of CaFeAsH can be attributed to the strong magnetic coupling along the inter-layer direction derived from it having the shortest lattice constant c among parent 1111-type iron arsenides. CaFeAsH or CaFeAsD were prepared from CaAs, CaH2 (or CaD2), and Fe2As, CaAs + CaH2 (or CaD2) + Fe2As → CaFeAsH (or CaFeAsD) (1). CaAs and Fe2As were synthesized from their respective metals, and CaH2 (or CaD2) was obtained by heating metal Ca in a H2 (or D2) atmosphere. All the starting materials and precursors were prepared in a glove box under a purified Ar atmosphere (dew point < -90 °C and oxygen concentration < 1 ppm). A pellet of the ground starting materials was placed in a boron nitride capsule, sandwiched by two pellets of Ca(OH)2 [or Ca(OD)2] and a NaBH4 (or NaBD4) mixture acted as an excess solid hydrogen source. Specific heat measurements are a direct method of determining the phase transition temperature. To estimate the transition entropy, the lattice and electronic contributions were extracted from the data over the whole temperature range. We estimated these contributions using the function given in Eq. ( where γ is the Sommerfeld coefficient, CD and CE are the Debye and Einstein terms, respectively, and k determines the contribution of the Debye term to specific heat. The parameters CD and CE are respectively given by Eq. ( where N is the number of atoms per formula unit (N = 4 for orthorhombic CaFeAsH) and R is the molar gas constant. Generally, in order to reproduce the experimental specific heat at high temperature region, the contribution of excited optical modes have to be included as well as the acoustical modes which are expressed by the Debye model. (for LaFeAsO, there are three optical modes at 100, 180 and 290 cm-1) A scanning method is an alternative way to estimate the specific heat, especially close to the first-order phase transition. The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ for CaFeAsH was measured to determine TN of CaFeAsH (Figure Next, we discuss the effect of the interlayer distance and Bm on the Ts -TN of other iron-based superconductors, including 11-, 111-, and 122-type parent compounds. We first plotted Ts -TN versus their Bm (Figure Finally, we quantitatively compared the characteristics of the STs and MTs of CaFeAsH with those of 122-, 111-, and 11-type compounds. If we adopted the Heisenberg-type local magnetic exchange model, the temperature difference between Ts and TN of the parent compounds is directly calculated from only J1, J2, and Jz (in-plane nearest, next nearest, and out-of-plane magnetic couplings, respectively) without considering the lattice softness. 