Calcium vanadate CaV2O4 has a crystal structure of quasi-one-dimensional zigzag chains composed of orbital-active V 3+ ions and undergoes successive structural and antiferromagnetic phase transitions at Ts ∼ 140 K and TN ∼ 70 K, respectively. We perform ultrasound velocity measurements on a single crystal of CaV2O4. The temperature dependence of its shear elastic moduli exhibits huge Curie-type softening upon cooling that emerges above and below Ts depending on the elastic mode. The softening above Ts suggests the presence of either onsite Jahn-Teller-type or intersite ferro-type orbital fluctuations in the two inequivalent V 3+ zigzag chains. The softening below Ts suggests the occurrence of a dimensional spin-state crossover, from quasi-one to three, that is driven by the spin-lattice coupling along the inter-zigzag-chain orthogonal direction. The successive emergence of the orbital-and spin-driven lattice instabilities above and below Ts, respectively, is unique to the orbital-spin zigzag chain system of CaV2O4. Orbitally degenerate frustrated magnets have attracted considerable interest because they display a variety of complex ground states with unusual magnetic and orbital orders Unlike the vanadate spinels AV 2 O 4 , calcium vanadate CaV 2 O 4 crystallizes in the orthorhombic CaFe 2 O 4 -type structure (space group P nam) at room temperature, which consists of the two inequivalent V 3+ zigzag chains running along the crystal c axis [Fig. In CaV 2 O 4 , the V 3+ ions are surrounded by slightly distorted O octahedra, which share edges within the V1 and V2 zigzag chains but share corners between the V1 and V2 zigzag chains [Fig. 1(b)]. The trivalent magnetic V 3+ ion in the octahedral O environment is char-acterized by double occupancy of the triply-degenerate t 2g orbitals. In CaV 2 O 4 with the high-temperature orthorhombic crystal structure, the octahedral O environment is tetragonally compressed, and the t 2g orbitals are split into a lower nondegenerate d xy orbital and higher doubly-degenerate d yz and d zx orbitals [Fig. CaV 2 O 4 undergoes successive structural and magnetic phase transitions; a weak orthorhombic-to-monoclinic lattice distortion at a temperature T s ∼ 140 K, and an AF ordering at a lower temperature T N ∼ 70 K, T s > T N [ Below T N , CaV 2 O 4 exhibits a three-dimensional AF order with a propagation vector Q = (0, In this paper, we present ultrasound velocity measurements of the quasi-one-dimensional orbital degenerate CaV 2 O 4 , from which we determine the elastic moduli of this compound. The elastic modulus of a crystal is a thermodynamic tensor quantity, and therefore the ultrasound velocity measurements of the symmetrically independent elastic moduli in a crystal can provide symmetry-resolved thermodynamic information. In magnets, the modified sound dispersions caused by magnetoelastic coupling allow one to extract detailed information about the interplay of the lattice, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom [ Single crystals of CaV 2 O 4 with T s ∼ 140 K and T N ∼ 70 K were grown by the floating-zone method [ 6 ]. The ultrasound velocity measurements were performed using the phase-comparison technique with longitudinal and transverse sound waves at a frequency of 30 MHz. The ultrasound waves were generated and detected by LiNbO 3 transducers glued on the parallel mirror surfaces of the crystal which are respectively perpendicular to the a, b, and c orthorhombic axes. Measurements were taken to determine the symmetrically independent elastic moduli in the orthorhombic crystal, specifically, C 11 , C 22 , C 33 , C 44 , C 55 , and C 66 (see Table The temperature (T ) dependence of the compressive elastic moduli C 11 (T ), C 22 (T ), and C 33 (T ), respectively, in CaV 2 O 4 all exhibit small discontinuous changes at T s and T N [marked by arrows in Figs. In contrast to the compressive elastic moduli (Fig. 3), the shear elastic moduli of CaV 2 O 4 are found to exhibit unusual temperature variations that depend on the elastic mode. Here, it is impossible to measure C 44 (T ) below T s down to ∼125 K [Fig. In the next section, we shall discuss the origin of the elastic-mode-dependent unusual temperature variations of the shear elastic moduli. In the present study, we measured C 11 (T ) ∼ C 66 (T ) not only in the absence of a magnetic field [Figs. The present experimental results reveal that, in CaV 2 O 4 , while symmetry-conserving isotropic elastic modes of the compressive moduli C 11 (T ), C 22 (T ), and C 33 (T ) exhibit ordinal hardening upon cooling (Fig. First we address the origin of Curie-type softening in C 44 (T ) and C 55 (T ) in the orthorhombic PM phase (T > T s ) [Figs. In an orbital-degenerate system, the temperature dependence of the elastic modulus C Γ (T ) above the structural transition temperature is explained by assuming the coupling of the ultrasound to the orbital-degenerate ions through the onsite orbital-strain (quadrupole-strain) interaction, and the presence of the intersite orbital-orbital (quadrupole-quadrupole) interaction. [ with C 0 Γ the background elastic constant, T c the secondorder critical temperature for elastic softening C Γ → 0, and θ the intersite orbital-orbital interaction. The difference of the two characteristic temperatures T c -θ is the energy gain from the onsite orbital-strain interaction, which corresponds to the onsite Jahn-Teller coupling energy E JT with T c -θ = E JT . θ is positive (negative) when the interaction is ferro-distortive (antiferrodistortive). The ferro-distortive (antiferro-distortive) interaction is expected to lead to a ferro-orbital order (antiferro-orbital order) with (without) a macroscopic lattice distortion. in CaV 2 O 4 should be a Jahn-Teller-type lattice distortion, where the onsite orbital-strain interaction lifts the orbital degeneracy. Distinct from C 44 , the strain generated by ultrasound in C 55 (k c and u a) tilts the angle between the c and a axes of the orthorhombic crystal structure [Fig. We here note that, in CaV 2 O 4 , the inequivalent V1 and V2 sites each have different crystal-field z directions of the 3d orbitals, specifically, close to the crystal b axis (a axis) in the V1 (V2) sites Next we discuss the origin of Curie-type softening in C 66 (T ) in the monoclinic PM phase (T N < T < T s ) [Fig. In a spin-lattice coupled system, the temperature dependence of the elastic modulus C Γ (T ) is explained by assuming a coupling of ultrasound with the magnetic ions through the magnetoelastic coupling acting on the exchange interactions, where the exchange striction arises from an ultrasound modulation of the exchange interactions [ In Fig. account that the second-order transition at T N was suggested from the thermal expansion measurements [ 6 ], the transition at T N might be of weak first order. The positive fitted value of θ indicates the dominance of ferrodistortive intersite spin-spin interactions. In CaV 2 O 4 , the ultrasound for C 66 generates the strain within the ab plane, which is orthogonal to both the V1 and V2 zigzag chains [Fig. For the three-dimensional AF ordering in CaV 2 O 4 , the inter-zigzag-chain exchange interactions should play a crucial role via the "orthogonal-type" spin-lattice coupling. As evident in Fig. Ultrasound velocity measurements of CaV 2 O 4 have revealed the elastic-mode-dependent emergence of Curietype softening above and below T s in the temperature dependence of the shear elastic moduli C 44 (T ) and C 55 (T ) in the orthorhombic PM phase (T > T s ), and C 66 (T ) in the monoclinic PM phase (T N < T < T s ). Softening in C 44 (T ) and C 55 (T ) above T s can be attributed to the presence of onsite Jahn-Teller-type and intersite ferro-type orbital fluctuations, which arise respectively in the inequivalent V2 and V1 sites. Softening in C 66 (T ) below T s can be attributed to a dimensional spin-state crossover, from quasi-one-dimension to three-dimensions, driven by the spin-lattice coupling along the inter-zigzagchain orthogonal direction. Further experimental and theoretical studies are indispensable if the orbital-lattice order below T s and the spin-lattice order below T N in the unique orbital-spin zigzag chain system of CaV 2 O 4 are to be revealed.