We fabricate Josephson field-effect-transistors in germanium quantum wells contacted by superconducting aluminum and demonstrate supercurrents carried by holes that extend over junction lengths of several micrometers. In superconducting quantum point contacts we observe discretization of supercurrent, as well as Fabry-Perot resonances, demonstrating ballistic transport. The magnetic field dependence of the supercurrent follows a clear Fraunhofer-like pattern and Shapiro steps appear upon microwave irradiation. Multiple Andreev reflections give rise to conductance enhancement and evidence a transparent interface, confirmed by analyzing the excess current. These demonstrations of ballistic superconducting transport are promising for hybrid quantum technology in germanium. Quantum information processing in the solid-state is being pursued using superconducting and semiconducting platforms Hybrid technology in condensed matter physics has even more surprises and can host exotic excitations. In particular, a topological phase transition may occur in superconductor-semiconductor systems in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and magnetism Germanium has the potential to become an excellent material platform for the construction of these hybrid systems. It can be isotopically purified, thereby removing decoherence by nuclear spins Here, we demonstrate gate-tunable Josephson supercurrents in planar germanium quantum wells with junction lengths L up to 6 μm and find a characteristic decay length ξ * = 1.0 μm. In quantum point contacts we observe discretization of the supercurrent and conductance, demonstrating ballistic transport. From the excess current and multiple Andreev reflections we deduce an interface transparency T between the leads and germanium of 0.6 and 0.7. Furthermore, we demonstrate the DC and AC Josephson effect in planar germanium via Fraunhofer-like patterns that arise in magnetic fields and Shapiro steps resulting from microwave irradiation. Figure A two-dimensional hole gas (2DHG) is formed by applying a negative gate voltage to the top gate and a clear supercurrent becomes apparent in the IV -curve. ing the critical current and measuring the normal state resistance R N at high bias. Figure We test the Josephson nature of the supercurrent by performing phase sensitive experiments. Figure The AC Josephson effect gives rise to Shapiro steps in the presence of microwave irradiation. Clear plateaus are observed at V n = nhf /2e, see Fig. At higher bias voltage we observe changes in the conductance due to multiple Andreev reflection (MAR), see Fig. At even higher bias, we observe another resistance peak, see Fig. An important aspect for hybrid devices is whether transport can occur through individual channels. Quantum point contacts (QPCs) form an excellent playground to study the quantized nature of charge and were recently used to measure the strong g-factor anisotropy of heavy holes in strained SiGe/Ge/SiGe heterostructures The observation of a relatively low I C R N product provides room for further investigation and possible optimization. Research could focus on epitaxial interfaces, although we already find rather high transparency. It may also be that transport is in the long-junction limit, even for the shortest junctions, and in this regime I C R N is reduced. This would also explain the pure exponential length dependence of the critical current. A possible origin could be an extended interface, as speculated from the observed resistance peak at high bias, which would effectively increase the junction length. Alternatively, the coherence length could be unexpectedly short, for example due to transport carried by heavy holes with spin J = 3/2, strong spin-orbit coupling, and very anisotropic g-factors. While these speculations provide avenues for future research, the experimentally measured I C R N = 17 μV already exceeds significantly the thermal energy at base temperature and clearly demonstrates proximity superconductivity in planar germanium. The gate-tunable Josephson supercurrent ranging over micrometer length-scales provides great opportunities for hybrid superconductor-semiconductor devices. Single particle transport as demonstrated in the superconducting quantum point contact provides further scope for experiments requiring individual modes. Planar gatetunable superconducting qubits are within reach and could be coupled to nuclear spin-free spin qubits fabricated on the same platform. Topological qubits may require further development such as the observation of a hard gap, but could profit from the large g-factor of heavy holes and from the low disorder environment found in our systems. Germanium, the material that has led to the first transistor but was consequently surpassed by silicon in the information age, may thus strike back in the quantum information era.