We synthesized lanthanum hydride (LaHx) by laser heating of lanthanum in hydrogen atmosphere at pressure P = 170 GPa. The sample shows a superconducting step at 209 K and 170 GPa and temperature dependence of resistance. By releasing the pressure to 150 GPa, the superconducting transition temperature Tc increases to 215 Kthe record Tc. This finding supports a way of achieving Tc higher than the one in H3S (203 K) 1  in hydrides with sodalite-like structures, first proposed for CaH6 2 (Tc=245 K) and later for yttrium and lanthanum hydrides where higher, room temperature superconductivity is expected 3,4 . The current record of Tc=203 K has been established in H3S Recently, almost all binary hydrides have been studied The sodalite structure for calcium hydride with Tc~235 K was predicted some time ago Following our long-term efforts to find superconductivity in Ca, Y and La hydrides we finally succeeded in finding superconductivity in lanthanum hydride. We loaded a sample of La (Alfa Aesar 99.9%) in a hydrogen atmosphere in a gas loader at pressure at P0.1 GPa. DAC with anvils with 60 μm culet were used. The gasket which was made of T301 steel is separated from the electrical leads (Ta covered with Au, sputtered on the anvil) by an insulating layer of made of CaF2 mixed with epoxy. After clamping the sample in hydrogen atmosphere at pressure 2 GPa, the DAC was extracted and the pressure was further increased at room temperature to P~170 GPa. Figure At 170 GPa, we heated the sample with a YAG laser at temperatures below 1000 K. As a result, the volume of the sample was significantly increased while hydrogen deceased. Hydrogen still remained around the sample. Figure By decreasing the pressure to 150 GPa, Tc increased to the record value of 215 K. Further decreasing of the pressure to 138 GPa, decreases the Tc substantially. At the next cooling at this pressure the superconducting state step disappears (Fig. This work present the first observation of a superconductivity with a record Tc in a new class of hydrides which are predicted to have a clathrate structure literature (b) By decreasing the pressure, Tc increases, but drops at pressures below 150 GPa. Inset shows the pressure dependence of Tc. The measurements at 138 GPa show a broad superconducting transition. Over time, superconductivity at this pressure (138 GPa) disappeared (see 138 GPa cooling). Superconductivity reappeared when pressure was increased to 156 GPa. (c) Data from another channel of the van der Pauw measurements. For disordered state of the sample (measurements at 138 GPa and 156 GPa) the shape of the superconducting transition is different from the data from another channel (b, c).