This work shows experimentally how electrical energy can be harvested directly from cell membrane potential and used to power a wireless communication. The experiment is performed by exploiting the membrane potential of Xenopus oocytes taken from female frogs. Electrical potential energy of the membrane is transferred to a capacitor connected to the cell via a proper electrical circuit. Once the capacitor has reached the planned amount of energy, the circuit is disconnected from the cell and the stored energy is used to power a radio frequency communication that carries bio-sensed information to a distanced receiving circuit. Our result shows that electrical energy can be harvested directly from biological cells and used for a number of purposes, including wireless communication of sensed biological quantities to a remote receiving hub. In a popular movie from the sixties (Fantastic voyage, 20th Century Fox), a miniaturized submarine connects to human lung alveoli to replenish its accidentally emptied oxygen reservoir, thus advancing the idea that untethered micro devices could navigate inside the body while scavenging resources from biological components. In present day, micro robotics is considered to have a potential impact in bioengineering and in healthcare. Existing small-scale robots, however, still show limited mobility and reduced communication capabilities due to a number of reasons, chief among them the difficulty to solve the powering problem. The majority of centimetre-scale medical implant devices Here we propose to use a source of energy ubiquitously present inside a living organism: the potential difference existing across the plasma membrane of electrically-polarized cells. Each cell of a living organism is surrounded by a plasma membrane bilayer selectively permeable to ions, due to the presence of passive and active transport proteins for their passage. Some of these proteins (pumps) move ions against their electrochemical gradient, by using ATP (active transport). Others (channels) let ions flow passively through their central pore. The interplay of these transports ultimately results in an electrical potential across the membrane, which in the case of neurons and skeletal muscle fibres reaches the range 70-90 mV, negative inside Here we present the results obtained according to the following scheme: we begin with assessing the maximum power that can be extracted from a single cell. Subsequently we show that electrical energy can be harvested from a cell and stored in a proper capacitor. Finally we show that the energy harvested from the cell and stored in the capacitor can be used to transmit a radio signal to a nearby receiver. In order to assess the maximum electrical power that can be extracted from a bio cell, we performed a number of simulations (see Supplementary material -"Model and simulations"), which showed that, while cells with typical dimensions (5-20 μm in diameter) were predicted to release a very small power (in the order of picowatts), cells of larger dimensions, such as skeletal muscle fibres, could provide a power of several nanowatts (Supplementary material -Fig. We verified experimentally this prediction using as test cell the large, round-shaped, Xenopus oocyte (egg cell from frog Xenopus laevis), which has a diameter of about 1 mm, and expected power output comparable to the skeletal muscle fibre (Supplementary material -Fig. Given the relatively small power that can be harvested from a single cell, energy must be accumulated over time in order to reach the amount needed to drive a biosensor/transmitting device. We therefore performed experiments aimed at determining the ability of Xenopus oocytes to perform as a power supply, to charge small-size capacitors connected in parallel to it (Fig. Finally, we demonstrate that the energy extracted from a single Xenopus oocyte and stored in the capacitor can be used to transmit a radio signal to a nearby receiver. More specifically we used the harvested energy to generate a current through an LRC circuit, whose magnetic field was able to induce an electromotive force in a nearby (few centimetres) coil/antenna connected to an oscilloscope (Fig. We believe that the demonstrated possibility to harvest electrical energy directly from bio cells and use it to power wireless communications represents a new enabling technology that will foster the design of a novel class of micro devices aimed at interacting directly with biological components inside living organisms, with endless possibility for future biotechnological applications. Electrophysiology. Xenopus oocytes were either prepared as previously described Our model considered a cell expressing Na/K ATPases and ion channels selective for Na, K and Cl ions (Fig. Here i !" , i ! , and i !" represent the currents generated by Na, K, and Cl ions passing through their respective ion channels. These currents may be modeled through the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz relationship: that in the physiological condition, where ≪ 1, may be approximated to: Here P ! is the channel permeability to ion n, z ! is the ion n valence, F is the Faraday constant, R is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, V ! is the membrane potential difference (inside minus outside), [n]i/o are the intracellular/extracellular concentrations of ion n, is the macroscopic conductance of the ion channel selective to ion n, A is the cell model membrane surface and is the equilibrium potential for ion n. and gCl represent the conductances provided by the respective ion channels, each in series with a battery set at the equilibrium potential of the ion. The Na/K ATPase contributes as a current source, and the membrane phospholipid bilayer of the membrane will contribute as a capacitance Cm. The energy harvesting pathway is here represented by the load resistance RL. C) Simulation of the membrane voltage and harvested power dynamics when the load resistance associated to the harvesting electrode changes from 1000 to 3 GΩ. Parameters were as in the neuron model (Table The panels show plots of the membrane voltage (top) or harvested power (bottom) as a function of the load resistance connected to the harvesting electrode. The effect of varying the muscle length is also shown. F) Simulations of the power harvested with cell dimensions and parameters typical of Xenopus oocytes. The effect of varying the K conductance and density of Na/K pumps is shown. i ! represents the net current passing through the Na/K ATPases. This transporter, at each cycle, promotes the passage of three Na ions outside and 2 K ions inside the cell, thus generating a current equivalent to the passage of one positive charge outside. For our purposes i ! may be modeled by the following equation: where ρ is the maximal Na/K ATPase pump current density, and k ! is the affinity of the pump for intracellular Na ions. i !" represent the current passing through the harvesting electrode, obeying to Ohm's law . Finally i !" represents the current charging the capacitor and creating an electrical potential difference Where C ! is the specific membrane capacitance of the cell membrane. Substituting eqn. ( In our model the intracellular concentrations of Na, K, and Cl vary with time because of the passage of these ions through ion channels and transporters expressed in the cell plasmamembrane. In addition, it is assumed that the harvesting electrode, while injecting a current inside the cell, increases the intracellular proton concentration (this will occur for electrodes such as platinum or iridium, that catalyze the reaction 2H2O-> 4e + 4H + +O2). Excess protons will then be exchanged for external Na ions by the activity of the Na/H counter-transporter. This process will result in an increase of a Na ion for each electron passing through the harvesting electrode. Taking into account all the above sources of intracellular ion changes, we can write down the following differential equations for the intracellular moles of ions: Where γ = A F , n !" , n ! , and n !" are the intracellular moles of Na, K, and Cl, respectively. Finally, since the plasmamembrane is highly permeable to water (much more than to the cell will adjust its volume in order to preserve the iso-osmolarity condition Where From the intracellular ion moles and cell volume we can finally assess the intracellular ion concentrations as: Parameters used for the three cell models are given in Table1 and the solution of the set of differential equations ( We first performed simulations using parameters typical of a neuron, whose cell body was assumed to be spherical with a radius of 7 μm. As you can see from the results presented in Fig. We then turned our attention to the large, cylinder-shaped skeletal muscle cells, with a 100 μm diameter and length that may reach several centimetres -that is, a volume 3-5 orders of magnitude of neuronal cells. The large dimensions of these cells confer a larger electrical capacitance (i.e. the capacitance is proportional to the surface of the plasmamembrane) and thus a higher ability to accumulate energy, since Energy = In this study we experimentally tested the prediction that a biological cell may be used to harvest electrical energy by using as cell model the large Xenopus oocytes that can be easily taken from female frogs. These cells are round shaped with a very large diameter (about 1 mm), and a plasma membrane area approximately corresponding to that of a skeletal muscle fibre of 5 cm length. These cells do not have the same surface density of Na/K pumps and hyperpolarized membrane potential of a skeletal muscle fibre, yet a relatively high harvested power is expected. This is shown by the black trace in Fig. 