We present a study of the static magnetic properties and spin dynamics in Cobalt valence tautomers (VT), molecules where a low-spin (LS) to high-spin (HS) crossover driven by an intramolecular electron transfer can be controlled by the temperature, by the external pressure or by light irradiation. In the investigated complex, a LS-Co(III) ion bound to a dinegative organic ligand can be reversibly converted into the HS-Co(II) bound to a mononegative one. By combining magnetization measurements with Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) and Muon Spin Relaxation (μSR), we have investigated the static magnetic properties and the spin dynamics as a function of the temperature. Moreover, the effect of the external pressure as well as of the infrared light irradiation have been explored through magnetometry and NMR measurements to determine the spin dynamics of the HS state. The photoinduced HS state, which can have a lifetime of several hours below 30 K, is characterized by spin dynamics in the MHz range, which persist at least down to 10 K. The application of an external pressure causes a progressive increase of the LS-HS crossover, which reaches room temperature for pressures around 10 kbar. In the trend towards miniaturization of magnetic data storage media, the ultimate size reduction of the information units is limited by the superparamagnetism of nanosized magnetic media as well as by the complexity of achieving controlled electrical contacts at the nanoscale with a low dissipation Another class of materials characterized by the possibility of reversibly switching among different electronic states is the one of Valence Tautomers (VT) Remarkably, at low temperature cobalt-dioxolene electronic state can be switched with light irradiation The synthesis of the powder sample was carried out following a previously published procedure (1) χ 0 is the light enhanced magnetic susceptibility, T irr the build-up time and α M a stretching exponent with values ranging from 0.50, at T = 4 K, to 0.70, at T = 55 K. The FIG. The inset shows the temperature dependence of the build-up rate in a 0.1 T magnetic field. The line is a guide to the eye. build-up time increases at low temperatures and reaches several hours at 10 K. After switching off the light irradiation the susceptibility decays back to its thermal equilibrium value with an initial stretched exponential decay 1 H (nuclear spin I = 1/2) NMR experiments have been performed in 1.5, 1.1 and a 0.67 T in the 5 -300 K temperature range. The 1 H NMR spectrum was derived from the Fourier transform of half of the echo signal after a solid echo pulse sequence. The spectrum is characterized by a Gaussian shape with a weakly temperature dependent linewidth, increasing from 20 to 30 kHz by decreasing the temperature down to 10 K. 1 H nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1H was derived from the recovery of nuclear magnetization m(t) after a saturation recovery pulse sequence. The recovery law was a stretched exponential: where m 0 is the 1 H thermal equilibrium magnetization and α H a stretching exponent, ranging between 0.70 and 0.95, which accounts for a distribution of relaxation times due to the presence of inequivalent 1 H sites. The temperature dependence of 1/T 1H is shown in Fig. To explore the effect of pressure on the LS-HS conversion, high pressure 1 H NMR experiments have been performed in a 4.69 T magnetic field at 300 K. The applied pressure ranged from 0 to 14 kbar, and was progressively increased in 2 kbar steps. The proton spin-lattice relaxation rate pressure dependence is shown in Fig. μSR experiments have been carried out at ISIS facility on HIFI beam line. The measurements have been performed both in Zero Field (ZF) and in a 200 Gauss 59 Co nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate at 6.95 T: LED OFF (full black circles), LED ON (half up red circles). Fit according to Eq. 9. Fit parameters are reported in Table Longitudinal magnetic field (LF). The decay of the muon asymmetry in ZF, after background corrections, has been fit with a simple exponential decay where λ ZF is the muon's ZF decay rate. It is noticed that A 1 in zero field corresponds to about half of the total initial asymmetry, likely due to the presence of a muonium fraction where λ LF is the longitudinal relaxation rate and β LF a stretching exponent, with values ranging from about 0.35 at low temperatures to 0.60 at 20 -25 K and to 0.50 at higher temperature. As it can be noticed from Fig. The temperature dependence of χ M • T (inset of Fig. where N A is the Avogadro number and g ≃ 2 the Landé factor. The sum of the contribution from the uncoupled radical (S=1/2, χ M • T = 0.375 emu •K/mol) and from the high spin Co(II) (χ M • T = 2.4 -2.6 emu •K/mol that is the sum of a S=3/2 contribution (see Fig. The fraction HS LT of molecules which remain in the HS state even at low temperatures is given by: where χ LS is the magnetic susceptibility of the LS state and χ pure is the magnetic susceptibility of an isostructural compound, not displaying the VT transition, which remains in the HS state over the whole temperature range As the temperature is decreased the light conversion efficiency improves, due to the increased HS lifetime (Fig. The decay time of the light-induced HS state, driven by phonon processes, was derived at different temperatures and found to decrease with increasing ature. In order to compare with previous results in the literature we considered just the data above 30 K and fit them with a thermally activated law Even if characterized by a large uncertainty, one can roughly estimate an activation barrier ∆E ≃ 350 K for T > 30 K (data are reported in the Supplementary Material), which is consistent with the 390 K activation barrier previously reported At low temperatures (5 -80 K) 1 H 1/T 1H displays a peak around 20 K, suggesting a slowing down of the spin fluctuations to frequencies approaching the nuclear Larmor frequency for that fraction of VT molecules which are still in the HS state at low temperature, those yielding the non-zero contribution to χ M • T =0.24 emu•K/mol. This behaviour is similar to that observed in molecular magnets, where a peak in 1/T 1 is detected at temperatures of the order of the energy separation between the ground and the first excited states Thus, the fraction of VT in the HS state at a given temperature can be described as an ensemble of paramagnetic impurities embedded in a diamagnetic matrix, whose spin progressively slow down to frequencies approaching the tens of MHz range around 20 K. If one considers that the thermal population of the HS molecule states is given by p(T ) = exp(-E A /T )/Z, with E A an effective barrier between the low-energy levels involved in the HS fluctuations and Z the corresponding partition function, one can weight the amplitude of the local field fluctuations driving the spin-lattice relaxation by p(T ). Then, by assuming a Lorentzian broadening of the HS state due to phonon scattering processes, one can write for the spin-lattice relaxation rate We have considered a rectangular distribution for the activation energy E A with width ∆. τ 0 is the high tem-perature limit of the correlation time, δh 2 ⊥ is the mean squared amplitude of the local field fluctuations, γ the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio and ω n the nuclear Larmor frequency. The fit yields an average barrier E A ≃ 90 K and a smaller ∆ ≃ 60 K (see Table μSR measurements, both in ZF and LF, show that muon relaxation rate is not much sensitive to the VT transition (Fig. To get a deeper insight on the HS molecules spin dynamics we now turn to the discussion of 59 Co spin-lattice relaxation rate which is a more sensitive to spin fluctuations, thanks to the hyperfine coupling with the paramagnetic ion. As pointed out in Sect. II.2, the signal being detected is the one from 59 Co nuclei belonging to VT in the LS state. In fact, as it is shown in Fig. It is pointed out that at 180 K 1/T 1Co is much larger than 1/T 1H (Fig. The spin transition driven by the electron transfer causes a marked reduction of 59 Co nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate, with a decrease of 1/T 1Co by more than two orders of magnitude between 180 and 50 K. At lower temperature, around 25 K, a small peak is observed (see Fig. The low-temperature behaviour of 1/T 1Co upon irradiation can still be fit with Eq. 9 below 50 K with similar values for the activation energies (see Tab.I). In order to consider the spin dynamics due to the light-induced HS molecules only, we have subtracted the behaviour of 1/T 1Co before irradiation from the one in presence of irradiation. The resulting temperature dependence, shown in the inset of Fig. Finally we discuss the effect of an external pressure on the VT conversion. In Fig. By means of macroscopic magnetization and of nuclear and muon spin-lattice relaxation rate measurements we have investigated the magnetic properties of a cobalt compound showing Valence Tautomerism. In particular we have focused on the effect of infrared light irradiation at low temperatures and that of an external pressure on the interconversion between the two spin states associated with different intramolecular charge distribution. The SQUID magnetometry data result in good agreement with earlier reports and and point out two important quite long build-up times (up to 9 hours) are needed to reach a conversion efficiency close to 100 % and the decay rate of light-induced magnetization is determined by an energy barrier which leads to many hours lifetimes for the HS state at low temperatures. On the other hand, by means of NMR and μSR we have evidenced that spin fluctuations in the MHz range persist at low temperature. By increasing the number of HS molecules with infrared light irradiation the temperature evolution of the spin dynamics does not change significantly. Hence, although the light-induced HS state of VT can persist for hours at T ≃ 10 K, spin dynamics can be faster approaching timescale of seconds at temperatures around few Kelvin degrees. These results show that application of this material as a logic unit still needs further developments. On the other hand, we have shown that the VT transition can suitably be tuned by an external pressure and reaches room temperature at P ≃ 10 kbar, an observation which could pave the way to immediate application of valence tautomers as sensors. The marked increase in the crossover temperature with pressure suggests that the spin dynamics could also be significantly affected and possibly reduced by an external pressure.