The development of thin film transistor (TFTs) based integrated circuits on flexible substrates promise interesting approaches to human interface systems. Recently TFTs have been fabricated on textured surfaces such as textiles, paper, artificially corrugated or dimpled substrates, threads and fibers. This can result in the TFTs metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) stack being significantly distorted from a planar zero-curvature geometry to having non zero and potentially high curvature. Although the direct deposition on textured surfaces do not result in mechanical stress (as for example in bending, buckling or wrinkling), the geometry of high curvature can significantly influence the current voltage characteristics of the TFT. Here we present a closed form analytical model describing the geometrical impact of high curvature on the electrical performance of the TFT. Models are obtained from the solution to the Poisson-Boltzmann equation in polar co-ordinates and are verified using TCAD simulations. The techniques to generalize the results to adapt to any texture and semiconducting material are also discussed with experimental verification. This work forms an analytical basis to understand the impact of curvature on the electrostatics of the MIS stack and the current voltage characteristics of the TFT. Thin film transistors (TFTs) on flexible substrates promise applications such as bendable sensors and actuators High curvature geometry of the MIS stack results in changing the gate electric field distribution from nearly uniform to non-uniform. The importance of geometry on the performance of TFTs is seen from experiments performed on TFTs deposited on artificially engineered rough surfaces The aim of this work is the development of an analytical model to explain the purely geometrical impact of curvature on electrostatics of the MIS stack and the performance of the TFT. This is accomplished by obtaining the closed form solution to the Poisson-Boltzmann's equation in polar coordinates for positive and negative curvature. We demonstrate the occurrence of a pleasant symmetry in the positive and negative curvature case with the TFT chracteristics being strongly determined by the effective gate capacitance. Models are compared to TCAD simulations and then generalized and compared with experimental data for a corrugated gate TFTs. The disordered nature of the semiconductor in a TFT results in the appearance of localized states in the energy bandgap. These can be classified as deep states that are present around midgap and tail states that are present close to the mobility edge. In most inorganic disordered semiconductors (eg. amorphous hydrogenated silicon (a-Si:H) with n e0 being the effective carrier concentration at flat band. The parameters n e and φ e are influenced by the trapped and free carriers and tend to take values of the specie dominating the physics. This simplifies the analysis without much loss of accuracy and is justified by the simulations and experiments. Although the electrostatics of the device is determined by n e , the current voltage (IV) characteristics is determined by the free carrier concentration, n f . The geometry of the MIS structure used for analysis is shown in Fig. For simulations the arc length of the insulator-semiconductor interface was always kept constant. We also define an effective insulator capacitance per unit area C i0 for the MIS stack with zero curvature, C i+ for the case of concave curvature and C i-for the case of convex curvature. It is seen that, C i0 = i /t i , C i+ = i /(r si ln(r si /(r si -t i ))) and C i-= i /(r si ln((r si + t i )/r si )), where i is the insulator permittivity. We first consider the case when the MIS stack has no curvature. This case has been very well investigated Defining the surface potential φ(x = 0) = φ s , the second boundary condition can be set as C i0 (V gs -V f b -φ s ) = s ξ(φ = φ s ), with V f b being the flat-band voltage and V gs the gate to source voltage. In strong above threshold operation with e φs/φe >> 1, the solution to the boundary condition is given in terms of the zero order Lambert-W function, W 0 , as Here, the term s /l e can be imagined to be a characteristic trap capacitance per unit area. The approximated form of the above expression is obtained by approximating W 0 (.) = ln(.) -ln(ln(.)) for large V gs The potential profile, φ(x), is obtained using (2) along with the boundary condition φ = φ s at x = 0, φ(x) ≈ 2φ e ln sec sec -1 (e φs/2φe ) - x l e (4) In the presence of curvature, r si is finite and the Poisson equation can be defined in polar coordinates (r, θ) as, From the derivation shown in the Supplementary Information, the radial variation of the potential is of the form Here κ is a dimensionless coefficient and l b is a characteristic length. The radial component of the electric field can be shown to vary as with the + for the concave case and -for the convex case. At r = r si , φ = φ s with φ s being the surface potential. This sets the boundary condition , with the + for the concave case (φ decreases as r increases) and thefor the convex case (φ decreases as r decreases). Again considering strong above threshold operation, e φs/φe >> κl e /r si , the solution to Therefore, for all practical purposes the impact of the geometry of curvature on TFT performance is dictated through the cylindrical capacitive component defined by C i± . This model for φ s is validated by a good match with simulations. To obtain a good numerical estimate for complete variation of φ(r) as well as the surface potential, φ s , we impose another boundary condition permitting the bands to flatten at the back edge of the MIS capacitor. Therefore, ξ(r = r si ± t s ) = 0 and φ(r = r si ± t s ) = 0, with the + for the concave case and the -for the convex case. This condition helps identify the parameter κ to be Here the + and -signs are used for the concave and convex cases, respectively. Typically l e ∼ 60 nm and t s ∼ 100 nm and despite the high curvature under consideration, r si is expected to easily exceed these values with it taking a minimum value of about 200 nm for this study. Using the parameter κ in (6) and setting φ = φ s at r = r si , we can identify the parameter l b . This permits a closed form expression for φ(r) as, φ(r) = 2φ e ln κl e r sec ± sec -1 r si κl e e φs/2φe -κln r r si For a TFT with an applied drain to source bias voltage, V ds , the model for φ s still retains its form (Eq. 3) except for the incorporation of the threshold voltage term, V T 0 , and a channel potential term, V ch , instead of V f b . Therefore, φ s = 2φ e ln (C i(0,±) (V gs -V T 0 -V ch )/(qn e0 l e )). The free electron density per unit area, N f is computed by integrating the free electron concentration per unit volume, n f , along the thickness of the semiconductor, so that , where, α = 2φ e /φ th and γ = (n f 0 (qn e0 l e ) 2-α /(n e0 (α -1))) with φ th being the thermal voltage. Therefore, the I-V characteristics in above threshold operation when the TFT has no curvature can be shown to be with μ 0 being the band mobility, W the channel width and L the channel length. With curvature, the change in the effective insulator capacitance per unit area from C i0 to C i± also changes the threshold voltage from V T 0 to V T ± as threshold voltage is the ratio of the trapped charge to the insulator capacitance per unit area. Therefore, the I-V model for the case with the TFT experiencing curvature (details in Supplementary Information) is given by, with the + for the concave case and the -for the convex case. Therefore, the difference of the I-V characteristics in the zero and non-zero curvature case is primarily due to the difference in the effective capacitance per unit area. The IV model can be calibrated for TFTs with different materials by suitably changing the parameters γ, α, μ 0 and V T . Free or trapped carriers which will dominate the electrostatics in the above-threshold region is dictated by the values of α and γ. To validate the models, ATLAS TCAD simulations on cylindrical metal-insulatorsemiconductor TFTs were performed. Planar, concave and convex geometries were designed with 100 nm SiO 2 insulator, 100 nm a-IGZO semiconductor and Mo gate metal. The default material properties as defined in the simulator were used for the a-IGZO (electron affinity=4.16 eV, electron band mobility = 15 cm 2 /Vs). The DoS used is as shown in Fig. grounded and the arc length of the semiconductor-insulator interface was 1.2 μm for all structures. For TFT simulations, the arc length of the semiconductor-insulator interface was 4.2 μm, the channel length was 4 μm (large enough to reduce drain induced barrier lowering) and r si /t i was 7 for all geometries. The measurement of φ(r) was done using a precisely defined cut-line. A fine mesh was used in the semiconductor while keeping the number of mesh points constant for the different structures for the sake of accuracy. As the influence of the gate voltage at the back channel was negligible, φ s was measured by precisely probing and calculating the difference between the potentials at the interface and the back channel. The TCAD simulation results (markers) are compared with analytical models (bold lines) in Fig. The values for n e0 ∼ 8 ± 0.1 × 10 15 cm -3 and φ e ∼ 25.8 ± 0.7 mV were estimated by best fit between the model of (3) and simulation for the case of zero curvature. In the case of IGZO TFTs, calculation of n f and n t using methods described in Using the models described in ( Fig. Fig. Fig. In this section we detail how the analytical models described above can be used against experiments performed with TFTs of different materials and different surface curvatures. As a test example, we consider previously reported experimental data for an artificially corrugated gate a-Si:H TFT, whose schematic is given in Fig. V gs (V) V gs (V) V ds (V) As seen in Fig. If the capacitance were to be a continuous function it could be directly integrated in the above expression. However for the case of Fig. Although not used in the case of Fig. Before computing the current, it is also important to consider the material used for the TFT. While the simulations were performed using a-GIZO TFTs, the experiments of Fig. The parameter n e0 also takes into account the cumulative effect of free carriers, n f 0 , and trapped carriers. In a-GIZO, the free carriers dominated the trap carriers and n f 0 = n e0 and γ = 1. In a-Si:H The parameter γ can be used to compute the effective mobility. With a band mobility in a-Si:H being μ 0 =20 cm 2 /Vs, the effective mobility is γμ 0 ≈ 0.4 cm 2 /Vs. Based on the above discussion, the values for model parameters used to fit the experimental data are μ 0 = 0.44 ± 0.13 cm 2 /Vs, i = 7.5, γ = 1, α = 2, V T 0 = 3.5 ± 1 V. The model was also corrected for leakage currents as reported in This work presented a closed form analytical model describing the geometrical impact of high curvature on the electrostatics of the MIS stack and the performance of the TFT. The models for TFTs experiencing curvature were obtained from the solution to the Poisson-Boltzmann equation in polar co-ordinates. These models were compared with the case of planar TFTs having no curvature and verified using detailed TCAD simulations. The methods to generalize the results was also discussed using the example of corrugated a-Si:H TFTs. This work forms an analytical basis to understand the behavior of substrate geometry on TFTs, for example with regards to TFTs deposited on rough or textured surfaces such as textiles or paper, surfaces with high curvatures such as fibers or wires and on substrates experiencing buckling, wrinkling or significant bending. case approaches the field at the interface in the zero curvature case. Next, considering the spatial variation of ξ and φ we note that the polar coordinate system (r, θ) maps to the Cartesian coordinate x as x = ±(r -r si )cos(θ) with the interface at x = 0 and r = r si . As all parameters in the non-zero curvature case are invariant with θ, we set θ = 0 and use r = r si ± x in ( 