In this paper the first part of an axis symmetric 2D description of a single crystal micro fiber growth process by micro-pulling-down (μ-PD) method is presented. The description concerns the following aspects: the free surface equation and the pressure difference across the free surface (section 2); limits of the pressure difference p across the free surface (section 3); the fiber radius change rate, due to the change of the pressure difference p across the free surface , and the fiber radius size control (section 4);the static stability of the free surface (section 5). The above aspects are illustrated numerically in the case of the growth of a Si micro-fiber of radius 0.0001[m] by using the Maple 17 software. This description can be helpful in the better understanding of the growth process and in the automation of manufacturing. The near one-dimensional single crystal fibers have attracted some attention on the applications of optical and electronic devices The free surface of the meniscus (see Fig. Here:  is the melt surface tension; denote the main normal curvatures of the free surface at a point M of the free surface; a P is the pressure in front of the free surface; b P is the pressure behind the free surface. (Fig. (see Fig. g is the gravity acceleration; z is the coordinate of M with respect to the Oz axis, directed vertically downwards; m h denotes the melt column height between the horizontal crucible melt level and the shaper bottom level (Fig. The part p of p  is given by: is independent of the spatial coordinate z (it can depend on the moment of time t ) and the major part of p is For this reason thereafter is assumed that p is given by: Remark that p given by ( Therefore, for an axis-symmetric meniscus free surface the differential equation of the meridian curve is given by: where c R is the crystal radius , d R is the shaper radius and h R is the capillary channel radius. The function   r z , describing the meridian curve profile, verifies the following boundary conditions: The first condition in , where the thermal conditions for solidification have to be realized ( c h is the crystallization front level), the angle, between the tangent line to the meridian curve of the free surface and the vertical ,is equal to the growth angle g  . If this condition is satisfied during the whole process, then the fiber diameter is constant. The second condition in The first condition in where the meridian curve touches the outer edge of the shaper, the catching angle is equal to c  . The second condition in the meridian curve is fixed to the outer edge of the shaper. Condition Beside the conditions ( This last condition is called the static stability of the axis symmetric free surface and in real world only statically stable capillary free surfaces exists.. If p is arbitrary, then it can happen that there is no function which verifies ( , in order to have an axissymmetric meniscus free surface with convex meridian curve on   the pressure across the free surface has to be in the range given by: The proof of this statement can be found in the Appendix. In case of a Si microfiber for the following numerical data: h ,but the range where the value of p has to be is large and we don't know which value of p is appropriate. Moreover, is not sure that there exists a value of p in the above range for which an axis symmetric meniscus with convex meridian curve exists (the condition ( In order to answer these questions the following initial value problem: Starting from the condition of growth angle constancy, according to -if in the first 0. the fiber radius evolution during the first second can be seen in Fig. This section deals with the static stability of the free surface then the axis-symmetric meniscus is stable, i.e. ) (r z minimizes the free energy functional then the axis-symmetric meniscus is unstable, i.e. ) (r z is not a minimum for the free energy functional ) (z I . In the case of the Si fiber considered in section 3 we have: . Therefore, the static free surface is stable. In the framework of the presented description, the following quantities, related to the micro fiber growth process from the melt by pulling down method, can be computed:  pressure difference across the free surface for create a stable static meniscus appropriate for the growth of a fiber having a prior given radius.  pressure difference across the free surface for controlling the fiber radius size during the growth Proof of the Statement 1. which verifies ( The function defined as: So, the right hand side of the inequality ( In order to obtain the left hand side of (11) remark first the inequality: can be evaluated applying the mean value theorem for the function So, for p the following relations hold: This means that the left hand side of ( Since ( For obtaining the stability result remark that using ( This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.