We present gravimetrical and optical imaging experiments on the capillarity-driven imbibition of silicone oils in monolithic silica glasses traversed by 3D networks of pores (mesoporous Vycor glass with 6.5 nm or 10 nm pore diameters). As evidenced by a robust square-root-of-time Lucas-Washburn (L-W) filling kinetics, the capillary rise is governed by a balance of capillarity and viscous drag forces in the absence of inertia and gravitational effects over the entire experimental times studied, ranging from a few seconds up to 10 days. A video on the infiltration process corroborates a collective pore filling as well as pronounced imbibition front broadening resulting from the capillarity and permeability disorder, typical of Vycor glasses. The transport process is analyzed within a Darcy scale description, considering a generalized pre-factor of the L-W law, termed Lucas-Washburn-Darcy imbibition ability. It assumes a Hagen-Poiseuille velocity profile in the pores and depends on the porosity, the mean pore diameter, the tortuosity and the velocity slip length and thus on the effective hydraulic pore diameter. For both matrices a reduced imbibition speed and thus reduced imbibition ability, compared to the one assuming the nominal pore diameter, bulk fluidity and bulk capillarity, can be quantitatively traced to an immobile, pore-wall adsorbed boundary layer of 1.4 nm thickness. Presumably, it consists of a monolayer of water molecules adsorbed on the hydrophilic pore walls covered by a monolayer of flat-laying silicone oil molecules. Our study highlights the importance of immobile nanoscopic boundary layers on the flow in tight oil reservoirs as well as the validity of the Darcy scale description for transport in mesoporous media. Fluid transport in pores a few nanometers across is of relevance in many natural and technological processes Because of the extreme spatial restrictions in nanopores the validity of continuum hydrodynamics is questionable, both with regard to the coarsegraining procedure as well as the correctness of the standard no-slip velocity boundary condition at the pore wall. The first experiments to explore flow behaviour through mesoporous glasses were performed by Nordberg Depending on the relative size of the pores and the basic building blocks of the liquid, the temperature and the pressure of the fluid, transport in porous media can be governed by a complex interplay of adsorption processes, Knudsen, We focus here on spontaneous imbibition in porous silica monoliths with pore diameters of 6.5 and 10 nm and thus in the lower "mesoporous" regime. Previous studies on the flow of water Nanoporous glass samples were purchased from Corning glass (Vycor glass, code 7930). Vycor is virtually pure fused silica glass permeated by a threedimensional network of interconnected pores We cut regularly shaped cylinders and blocks of height d (∼ 10 mm) from the delivered rods. To remove any organic contamination we subjected them to a cleaning procedure with hydrogen peroxide and nitric acid followed by rinsing in deionized Millipore water and drying at 200 • C in vacuum for two days. The pore walls of Vycor are polar due to a silanol termination. This hydroxylation renders these matrizes highly hydrophilic. As oily model liquids we employed the diffusion pump oils DC704 and DC705 from Dow Corning. Their main building blocks are siloxane molecules, see Fig. The capillary rise dynamics of the silicone oils have been recorded gravimetrically and by means of a CCD monochrome camera placed in front of the imbibition setup. The imbibition dynamics can be tracked by recording the increase in the sample's mass due to liquid uptake In the following we outline a phenomenological treatment of the capillary rise in a porous medium, as described in detail in Refs. and thus also for the sample's mass increase m(t) due to the liquid uptake m(t), where the proportionality constant becomes: In the pre-factor C m of Eq. 2 σ, η, ρ, A refer to the surface tension, the shear viscosity, the density of the imbibing liquid, and the cross-sectional area A of the sample in contact with the bulk liquid reservoir, respectively. The contact angle θ describes the wettability of the pore wall by the liquid. The tortuosity τ = 3.6 describes the connectivity and meandering of the pores in Vycor glasses The imbibition ability allows one to directly compare imbibition experiments with different liquids The gravimetric experiments are illustrated by a representative mass increase measurement depicted in Fig. This mass jump is a constant offset that does not affect the subsequent imbibition process. The latter is the outstanding effect in regime (b) and can also nicely be tracked by optical imaging, see the picture in Fig. The mass uptake in regime (b) can be described by a √ t-fit in accordance to Eq. ( Analogous experiments are performed also for DC705 and V10 matrices, see Fig. These slip lengths are all negative, indicating a reduced hydraulic radius r h and thus indicate a sticking boundary layer, whose thickness is approximately 1.4 nm. The mean value determined from the 4 experiments is b = -(1.4 ± 0.3) nm. Interestingly this result is independent of both the sample type and the silicone oil. This encourages us to attribute this observation, similarly as in previous studies on water, hydrocarbon, and liquid crystal imbibition in silica Arguably, the largest uncertainty in the determination of the slip length results from the ambiguities in the concept and the measurement of the tortuosity Hence the hydraulic permeability in the Darcy sense is reduced by a factor of 3. A value larger than three reflects the extended length of a meandering capillary beyond that of a straight one. According to Eq.3 τ scales ∝ (r 0 + b) 4 for a fixed Γ and mean radius. Thus, large uncertainties in τ result in comparably small changes in the slip lengths determined in our experiments, and, vice versa, small changes in the slip length b necessitate significantly altered τ s. For example, to explain the measured Γ s in our experiment with the standard no-slip boundary condition b = 0 (no sticky boundary layer), we would need τ = 27, 38, 13, and 11 to explain the Γ s for the V5/DC704, V5/DC705, V10/DC704 and V10/DC705 fluid/matrix combinations, respectively. These values are unreasonable. Moreover, we would need for the identical sample type (V5 or V10) values which differ significantly as a function of employed silicone oil. By contrast, the consistent use of τ =3.6±0.5 for the analysis of all 4 fluid/pore-radius combinations results in quite similar slip lengths, i.e. b = -(1.4 ± 0.3) nm. Note that Cai and Yu extended the classic Lucas-Washburn law towards the consideration of flow heterogeneity in porous media originating in the tortuosity of a porous medium At first glance, the oily character of the fluids employed may suggest a polymeric rheology, and thus one may have expected faster flow kinetics than predicted by a no-slip velocity boundary condition From previous analogous experiments on hydrophilic Vycor glasses For the mobile, inner region (away from the interface) classical concepts of hydrodynamics based on continuum-like properties such as shear viscosity and surface tension remain valid and we also find no hints for shear thinning or thickening. It would result in deviations from the √ t-L-W dynamics The partitioning in immobile interfacial liquid layers and bulk-like fluidity in the pore centers are also in accord with measurements on the self-diffusion dynamics of other, simple liquids in nanopores. The formation of layered structures of silicone oils at capillary walls has also been inferred from imbibition experiments performed for silicone oil in macroscopic borosilicate capillaries It is interesting to remark that a significant light scattering is observable at the invasion front, in particular in the late stages of the imbibition process after several days, see the imbibition video in the supplementary. As is outlined in detail in Ref. Note, that the mean position of the imbibition front in Vycor is still well defined We experimentally explored spontaneous imbibition of silicone oils in mesoporous, monolithic silica glass. The kinetics follow Lucas-Washburn laws typical of spontaneous imbibition in macroporous media with homogeneous porosity. A Darcy analysis indicates that imbibition speeds can be quantitatively traced to bulk fluid parameters, if a sticking boundary layer of 1.4 nm of flatlying silicone molecules and a monolayer of water adsorbed at the pore walls is assumed. These rheological insights are in good agreement with previous experiments on simple, wetting liquids in nanoporous media The complex sponge-like geometry of our nanoporous media resemble on the one hand many technological and natural porous systems, on the other hand experiments on straight independent nanopores would reduce experimental ambiguities with regard to pore size distributions and tortuosity The pore space in tight oil reservoirs, in particular shale, can often roughly be segregated in inorganic hydrophilic pores and organic hydrophobic pores [100] Also multiscale porosity is present in many oil reservoirs, soils, rocks, and shales and materials such as concrete with a pore distribution spanning orders of magnitude, frequently from the macroscale down to sub-nm dimensions. Therefore, it would be also particularly interesting to explore spontaneous imbibition in sub-nm pores in the future. There, a non-Darcy behavior is expected Fluid properties: Dow Corning silicone oils at T = 25 • C. The values are taken from pycnometer and rheometer measurements as well as from Ref.