We have performed x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements on the ironbased superconductor Sr 2 VFeAsO 3-δ to study the origin of weak ferromagnetism (WFM) reported for this compound. While Fe 3d electrons show a magnetic response similar to the other iron pnictides, signals from V 3d electrons remain finite at zero magnetic field and may be responsible for the WFM. Iron-based superconductors have attracted extensive interest since their discoveries. Despite the lack of thorough understanding on the microscopic mechanism of Cooper pairing, there is a consensus that the proximity to antiferromagnetism plays a key role as in the cuprates. Bulk single crystals of Sr 2 VFeAsO 3-δ (δ = 0.25) were grown by the self-flux method. Superconducting and ferromagnetic transition temperatures were determined from magnetic susceptibility measurements using a SQUID magnetometer to be 20 K and 210 K, respectively. At 50 K, a remanence magnetization of 2 × 10 -3 μ B /f.u. was detected. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and XMCD measurements were conducted at beamline BL23SU of SPring-8 in the total electron-yield (TEY) mode at T = 50 K. Magnetic fields of 0.2-10 T were applied parallel to the c-axis of the crystal. The samples were cleaved in vacuum (< 1 × 10 -9 Torr) to obtain clean surfaces. Figures The spectrum gains weight at higher energies also for Fe XAS of the same samples. These results suggest that the cleaved surfaces on samples #2 and #3 are somewhat oxidized probably because the crystals originally had cracks and were cleaved along them. The oxidation also affects the magnetic states as evident from XMCD spectra [Figs. The susceptibility value is of similar magnitude to BaFe 2 As 2 or its Co-doped compounds (∼ 5 × 10 -4 emu/Oe mol), As for V, the XMCD signal remains finite down to H = 0.2-0.5 T. Although the spin sum rule cannot be applied to light transition-metal elements such as V due to the overlap between the L 2 and L 3 edges, one can still discuss the magnetic moment from the magnitude of the XMCD signal. We first assumed that the XMCD line shape does not depend on magnetic field. This is reasonable since relevant parameters such as Coulomb interaction and transfer integrals should not change significantly by the application of magnetic field. Then, all the V XMCD spectra were fitted to the H = 10 T line shape with varying its magnitude. Thus extracted XMCD magnitude is plotted as a function of the magnetic field in Fig. Very recently, Tojo et al. In conclusion, we have conducted XMCD measurements on Sr 2 VFeAsO 3-δ (δ = 0.25) and studied its magnetic states element-specifically. Magnetic susceptibility of Fe was found to be comparable to that of the other iron pnictides such as Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 , and no signature of ferromagnetism was observed. One order of magnitude larger magnetic moment was detected for V, which appears to remain finite (∼ 10 -3 μ B ) even under zero magnetic field. Our results are thus compatible with scenarios that V is the origin of the WFM. This work was performed under the Shared Use Program of Japan Atomic Energy Agency 