A recent experimental study showed that an induced folded flap of graphene can spontaneously drive itself its tearing and peeling off a substrate, thus producing long, micrometer sized, regular trapezoidal-shaped folded graphene nanoribbons. As long as the size of the graphene flaps is above a threshold value, the "tug of war" between the forces of adhesion of graphene-graphene and graphene-substrate, flexural strain of folded region and carbon-carbon (C-C) covalent bonds favor the self-tearing and self-peeling off process. As the detailed information regarding the atomic scale mechanism involved in the process remains not fully understood, we carried out atomistic reactive molecular dynamics simulations to address some features of the process. We show that large thermal fluctuations can prevent the process by increasing the probability of chemical reactions between carbon dangling bonds of adjacent graphene layers. The effects of the strength of attraction between graphene and the substrate on the ribbon growth velocities at the early stages of the phenomenon were also investigated. Structures with initial armchair crack-edges were observed to form more uniform cuts than those having initial zigzag ones. Our results are of importance to help set up new experiments on this phenomenon, especially with samples with nanoscale sized cuts. The advent of graphene created a new revolution in materials science. Graphene presents unique electronic Recently, an experiment with graphene membranes revealed a new, simple but surprising, phenomenon: the spontaneous self-tearing and self-peeling off towards the formation of a folded micrometer-size graphene nanoribbon Recently, we have presented some results of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of self-driven graphene tearing and peeling off the substrate There are many studies in the literature about the different conditions and external features concerning the peeling off process Ibarra et al. The experiments on the self-driven growth of folded graphene nanoribbons were performed on micrometer sized samples We considered only one graphene layer on top of a substrate. In Figure The values of initial width, w, considered in this study are ~ 80 and 160 nm. Detailed structural information are presented in Table Lennard Jones potential, as given by: where ε, σ and rc are the strength (in eV), the size of the particles as they interact with the wall, and the cutoff distance, respectively. σ and rc are fixed in 3.5 Å and 12 Å, respectively, while ε will be varied from 0.0005 to 0.01 eV, which correspond to adhesion strengths from 0.003 to 0.058 J/m The force field used here is the AIREBO potential The protocols of the simulations try to mimic the experiment itself. The starting point of simulations is a cut graphene structure possessing an initial part of graphene structure folded over itself, as shown in Figure A series of MD simulations at 300 K and 600 K using the Langevin thermostat are, then, performed for several nanoseconds, until the nanoribbon stops growing/propagation. MD time step and thermostat damping factors were set to 0.5 fs and 1 ps, respectively. In all cases, no periodic boundary conditions were used along the direction perpendicular to the graphene plane as allowed by the LAMMPS package. As mentioned before, for the dynamics simulations, the extremities of the system were kept fixed in order to mimic the inertial effects of a large system, as it is the case of the experiments By inspecting the structure as a function of time, it is possible to obtain an estimative for the average front velocity, local structure of the teared graphene nanoribbon, number of broken C-C bonds along the crack-edge, as well as the number of new C-C bonds formed among the graphene layers. The average front velocity will be estimated by calculating the change of the position of the middle part of the graphene nanoribbon front edge with respect to the position of the vertices of the triangular hole initially formed during the last 1 ns of simulation. In Figure Based on that we did not include additional figures for the same structure for each different substrate. The second panel on top of the Figure Table From Table The value of the initial front velocity decreases with the adhesion strength for ε ≥ 0.005 eV or ≥ 0.03 J/m 2 . Graphite-silica interface, for example, has an adhesion strength of ~ 0.08 J/m 2 , thus above this minimum value. The approximated rate of decrease of this initial velocity, estimated by the ratio of variation of the front velocity to the variation of the graphene-substrate adhesion strength, is about 12.3 (14.8) m/s per J/m 2 for the zigzag (armchair) initial chirality of the crack-edge. For all cases, the front velocity strongly decreased from the first to the second period of 1 ns of simulation at 300 K. For adhesion strengths larger than 0.003 eV or 0.017 J/m 2 , the front velocity decreased to practically zero in the second period of 1 ns of simulation. During the first 1 ns of simulation, just after increasing the temperature from 300 to 600 K, the front velocity, in most of cases increased again due to the thermally induced breaking of additional C-C bonds along the crack-edge. However, in some cases, i. e., the values of the front velocity during the first 1 ns at 600 K, were approximately the same as or smaller than the one calculated at previous 1 ns at 300 K. It happened only for the zigzag crack-edge structures with ε = 0.0005 eV, 0.003 eV and 0.005 eV. Analyzing the data for the number of broken and/or formed C-C bonds, these three cases have in common the fact that new chemical bonds are created involving carbon atoms of adjacent graphene layers. As shown in the insets of Figures Another observation that can be inferred from the data presented in Table Based on that we can conclude that the front velocity increases with either the increasing temperature, as described in the previous paragraph, or with the breaking of carbon bonds, but decreases with the formation of new bonds between adjacent graphene layers. However, as the increase of temperature led to the increase of the probability of formation of new bonds between the layers, it will also indirectly contribute to the decrease of the front velocity. Thus, although thermal fluctuations can help triggering the break of carbon bonds at the cracking edges, they also can contribute to prevent the nanoribbon growth/propagation process to continue, by increasing the chance of formation of new bonds between graphene layers. From Table In Figures ns of simulation at 300 K (i. e., maintaining the same temperature), and other with more 4 ns of simulation at 600 K. The results are presented and discussed below. A visual inspection of Figures Thus, during the first 2 ns of simulation the most of the C-C bond breaks occurred. We also noticed that the nanoribbon front edge reached its maximum distance to the opposite vertices of the hole during these first 2 ns of simulation. After that, the additional 4 ns of simulations at 300 K showed only additional C-C bond breaks until the front line of the nanoribbon becomes straight (bottom panels of Figures We have performed MD simulations of the self-peeling off and self-teared graphene nanoribbon growth on substrates of different adhesion strengths. Structures with initially zigzag and armchair crack-edges were studied and the local atomistic structure of the growing crackedge as well as some dynamical variables related to the process as the nanoribbon front velocity, number of broken C-C bonds and number of formed bonds between graphene layers were investigated. In summary, our results show that thermal fluctuations can either favor the process or not, depending on their magnitude. Increase of the temperature leads to the increase of the rate of the breaking of C-C bonds at the cracking-edge. However, increase of the temperature also leads to the increase chance of formation of new C-C bonds between adjacent graphene layers, what helps decreasing the growth process. We observed a direct correlation between the front velocity of the nanoribbon growth and the number of the C-C bond breaking or formation. We found out that the room temperature is a good choice to obtain the best thermal effects on the growth process. We also observed some features on the atomic structure of the cracking-edges. One of them is the difference in the shape of the cracking-edge line between the structures initially having zigzag and armchair crack-edges. The structure having initial armchair crack-edges gave rise to regular zigzag edges (Figs. Our results reveal details of the self-peeling off and self-teared process of formation of graphene nanoribbons on substrates that cannot be observed through the original experiments See comments in: https://www.newscientist.com/article/2097359-graphene-sheets-open-like-aflowers-petals-when-poked/ Accessed in 05-18-2018. LAMMPS Molecular Dynamics Simulator: http://lammps.sandia.gov/ Accessed on 05-18-2018.