Quantum confinement was found to play a critical role in the formation of Au(111) islands grown on the surface of MoS 2 . These confinement effects are fully three dimensional, with a strong correlation to the relatively large Fermi wavelength associated with the Au(111) planes. The confinement effects result in preferred heights with a periodicity of nearly 2 nm and persist to much higher temperatures than are typically seen in electronic growth mode systems. These findings indicate the potential to explore electronic growth modes in a new class of systems based on metal -layered semiconductor interfaces. Quantum well states can play a role in determining the geometric structure of nanometer scale metallic films. Film stability increases as quantum well states shift farther from the Fermi level. Energy contributions due to quantum confinement perpendicular to the substrate minimized when the film thickness is a half integer multiple of the Fermi wavelength, resulting in the opening of a gap at the Fermi level of the metal. Such contributions to the electronic configuration cause oscillations in the total energy of the film with thickness. The set of preferred or "magic" heights resulting from these energy considerations have been reported in various systems such as Pb/Si(111) Theoretically, quantum size effects could be used to create atomically flat films with a high degree of uniformity, ideal for the creation of metallic contacts for either scientific investigations or device applications on the nanometer scale. In practice, this can be challenging as the energies associated with quantum confinement are typically too small to make a significant impact, even at room temperature. To observe quantum size effects the relatively large contributions from sources such as surface free energy, strain due to lattice mismatch, and surface kinetics must be minimized. This has been accomplished through cryogenic deposition using materials with either a high degree of lattice matching In this paper, we present scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) evidence that quantum size effects play a defining role in the morphology of Au(111) islands on MoS 2 . Room temperature deposition results in atomically smooth triangular structures with a Gaussian height distribution. Upon annealing, these structures coalesce into islands with quantized dimensions that correlate strongly with a portion of the Au Fermi surface. MoS 2 substrates were purchased from commercially available sources similar to those used in other recent studies After deposition, samples were attached to STM appropriate sample holders ex situ using a conductive silver paste and introduced into a variable temperature UHV STM system (Omicron) with base pressure of 7×10 -9 mbar. Tips were made from a W wire electrochemically etched in a 5 M potassium hydroxide solution with a 5 V rms bias. Differential spectra were extracted at room temperature using a lock-in amplifier with a 3.5 kHz, 76 mV modulation. Beginning at ambient temperature, the sample was heated in steps of approximately 25 K as measured by a Pt100 thermistor in contact with the imaging stage. The surface was scanned at each incremental temperature up to 575 K, the maximum temperature of the imaging stage. Scanning was paused after each temperature increase to allow the sample to achieve thermal equilibrium. In ordered to reach higher temperatures, the sample was transferred to a separate preparation stage located adjacent to the STM head. Samples were annealed at temperature for approximately five minutes and cooled to room temperature before being transferred back to the imaging stage to scan the surface. This was done in 75 K increments up to 725 K, the highest effective working temperature of the conductive paste (i.e. electrical conduction is lost with the sample). Prior to deposition, MoS 2 substrates were found to be extremely flat with several microns between step edges. The image in Fig. As the islands grow in height, the substrate is exposed and produces an MoS 2 peak that is first visible at 420 K. The MoS 2 peak is used as a reference to determine the absolute height of the Au islands for each annealed data set. When possible, the preferred heights are determined by the location of individual monolayer peaks found in the distribution. When individual monolayers could not be distinguished, a Gaussian peak analysis was used. The location of the first and second peaks are labeled in Figs. Similarly, the closed squares represent the lower peak and the open squares represent the higher peak. Error in the measurement of these preferred heights is estimated to be no more than ± 0.24 nm (a single atomic layer). From Fig. The lateral sizes of these islands also exhibited quantization correlated with λ F of the Au(111) surface. The distribution of side lengths for the equilateral triangular islands is plotted in Fig. The depth of the potential well was determined by the sum of the (111) band minimum and the work function of Au taken to be W = 5.31 eV Each well was surrounded by a vacuum layer no less than 25% of the side length to account for wave penetration into the forbidden region. The Schrödinger equation was solved for each potential well using an eighth order finite difference method with a 750×750 mesh. Convergence of our results with respect to the mesh size was thoroughly tested. Side lengths resulting in quantum well states farthest from the Fermi level are labeled by vertical arrows in Fig. The Au islands exhibit both lateral and vertical quantization correlated with the Au(111) Fermi surface. Lateral quantization naturally couples to these states, as has been seen in Bi nanostructures with quantized widths grown on HOPG In summary, we have observed that the growth of Au(111) islands on MoS 2 exhibits quantum size effects in three-dimensions. The island heights and lateral dimensions correlate well with the Fermi wavelength in the Au{111} planes, indicating that quantization is driven by quantum well states. These effects persist to at least 725 K, an unusually high temperature for an electronic growth mode. This is likely due to the weak bonding at the Au/MoS 2 van der Waals interface, which minimizes strain but can still induce epitaxial growth without a wetting layer or significant lattice matching. The abrupt van der Waals gap at the interface also gives rise to strong electronic confinement, ideal for the formation of quantum well states. While further study is needed to fully understanding of the microscopic origins of this quantization, this discovery creates a new class of magic size systems and a new route for the control of metal film growth parameters on van der Waals surfaces. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Grant No. DMR-1410496. 