Significant advances have been made in predicting new topological materials using high-throughput empirical descriptors or symmetry-based indicators. To date, these approaches have been applied to materials in existing databases, and are severely limited to systems with well-defined symmetries, leaving a much larger materials space unexplored. Using tetradymites as a prototypical class of examples, we uncover a novel two-dimensional descriptor by applying an artificial intelligence (AI) based approach for fast and reliable identification of the topological characters of a drastically expanded range of materials, without prior determination of their specific symmetries and detailed band structures. By leveraging this descriptor that contains only the atomic number and electronegativity of the constituent species, we have readily scanned a huge number of alloys in the tetradymite family. Strikingly, nearly half of which are identified to be topological insulators, revealing a much larger territory of the topological materials world. The present work also attests the increasingly important role of such AI-based approaches in modern materials discovery. Topological insulators (TIs) constitute a new class of quantum materials with insulating bulk but metallic boundary states. Protected by time-reversal symmetry Theoretically, the TIs are characterized by a non-vanishing topological invariant Z2, which can be determined by parity considerations or by integration of the Berry curvature in momentum space through detailed electronic structure calculations Earlier search efforts for potential TIs were performed on a case-by-case basis, as exemplified by the successful predictions and experimental confirmations of the wellknown strong TIs Bi2Te3, Sb2Te3, and Bi2Se3 Beyond the systems listed in the existing databases, there exists a much larger materials space, e.g., compounds that can be created by alloying or fractionally varying the stoichiometric compositions. While these immensely vast material classes were out of the scope of the symmetry-based approaches, they are the focus of the present study. Using tetradymites as a prototypical class of examples, we establish an artificial intelligence (AI)-based descriptor for the prediction of TIs without prior determination of their specific symmetries and detailed band structures, covering a previously uncharted and much larger territory in the materials space. To this goal, we first investigate a moderate number (hundreds) of layered tetradymites by using highlevel electronic structure calculations that account for van der Waals (vdW) interactions In contrast to other AI-based approaches applied to the prediction of TIs SISSO is built to determine descriptors that are elementary functions of key physical inputs, thus enabling human inspection into the underlying mechanisms. To construct a reliable training set, we have computed the topological characters of 243 (or 3 5 ) tetradymites by combining group-VA elements (As, Sb, and Bi) with group-VIA elements (S, Se, and Te) in a five-atom unit cell. These systems can be viewed as stackings of quintuple layers (QLs) along the c-direction, where vdW interactions bind neighboring QLs to each other. As an example, Fig. Based on the high-level electronic structure data, we utilize SISSO Secondly, the optimized descriptor is obtained via the SISSO approach and is used to determine a low-dimensional representation of the materials space, in which the TIs and the normal insulators (NIs) belong to well-defined, non-overlapping domains. Since the transparent functional form of the identified descriptor reflects the mechanism underlying the topological character, it is physically meaningful and suitable for extrapolation, as also demonstrated below. By performing accurate first-principles calculations for the set of 243 teradymites, we identify 177 systems that are mechanically stable (namely, without pronounced negative phonons), while 66 are unstable. We also find that the topological characters of 230 systems do not depend on the special choice of the vdW functional, while the other 13 systems give different Z2 values for the optB86b-vdW and optB88-vdW functionals mentioned in Section 1 of the Supplemental Material It should be noted that the training data set naturally includes the TIs Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, Sb2Te3, Sb2Te2S, Sb2Te2Se, Bi2Te2Se, Bi2Se2Te and BiSbSeTe2 that have already been previously identified The SISSO training has been performed for the described data set of 152 tetradymites by using different combinations of key physical inputs: (1) the atomic number Z , the electronegativity  , and the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) strength  Here, the subscripts A , B , L , M , and N refer to the sites occupied by the atoms (see Fig. showing that larger values of A Z , B Z , L Z and M Z lead to higher 1 D , making the system to be in the TI region. This is consistent with the common understanding that heavier atoms usually have larger SOC, which is a key factor in inducing topological band inversion and anions ( 52 ). It should also be noted that N Z does not appear in Eq. ( Here we stress that, though 1 D is the decisive descriptor for a large majority of these tetradymites, it alone is not sufficient to predict the topological character in the region with 1 6806 < < 7854 D (enclosed by two vertical lines in Fig. Conceptually, 2 D is the relative electronegativity difference between the anions (at the L and M sites) and cations (at the A sites). As the electronegativity difference is approximately positively correlated with the band gap of an inorganic compound (1 ) (1 ) and site-specific electronegativities as: (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) In close analogy to the virtual crystal approximation x x x   , Utilizing the weighted elemental properties to evaluate the descriptor in Eq. ( (2) immediately allows to map out the topological phase diagram for the tetradymites with any fractional stoichiometry. This is illustrated in Fig. , , , , , , , , , x x a a a y y b b b are all multiples of 0.2. Even in this relatively small subset of alloyed tetradymites, we already obtain 1,965,047 systems located on the right side of the dividing line, i.e., they are predicted to be TIs. Noteworthy enough, the obtained predictions are consistent with the few available experimental data, i.e., the topologically non-trivial alloyed tetradymites Bi2Te1.6S1.4, Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3, Bi1.5Sb0.5Te3, Bi1.5Sb0.5Se1.3Te1.7, and Bi1.1Sb0.9STe2 Collectively, these findings also attest the increasingly important role of such AIbased approaches in modern materials discovery. As Sb Bi S Se Te We see from Fig.