In order to overcome the limitations of graphene due to lack of intrinsic bandgap, it is generally functionalized with hydrogen or halogen atoms like fluorine and chlorine. Generally, such functionalization yields a moderate to high bandgap material in case of 100% coverage, for example ≈ 1.5 eV in graphene functionalized with chlorine atoms or chlorographene. In this paper, using ab initio calculations, we report very interesting transformations observed in chlorographene under external strain, driving it to a state with nearly vanishing bandgap (under tensile strain) and even converting it to a metal (under compressive strain). We also show the importance of spin-orbit coupling, responsible for the few meV bandgap of chlorographene observed under high tensile strain, which would have been a gapless semi-metal otherwise. The past decade has seen a tremendous growth of two dimensional (2D) materials, with numerous discoveries of atomically thin layers with fascinating properties suitable for applications in next generation electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic devices. The origin of exotic electronic-transport properties of graphene lies in it's linear energy dispersion (resembling the Dirac spectrum of massless fermions) at the highsymmetry points located at the six corners (denoted as K points) of the hexagonal Brillouin zone. Fabrication of nanoribbons and quantum dots is one possible solution, as bandgap appears due to quantum confinement effect. Being atomically thin, 2D materials can not screen the external fields very effectively. As a result, perturbations like applied strain and electric field are known to significantly change the electronic band structure of 2D materials. For example, in case of MoS 2 , experimental studies have reported nearly 100 meV bandgap decrease per percent of applied strain, accompanied by direct-toindirect transition of the character of the bandgap. Structural optimizations and electronic band structure calculations are carried out using QUANTUM ESPRESSO The electronic band structure is plotted along the high symmetry lines Γ-K, K-M and M-Γ [see Fig. Impact of deformation on electronic band structure is investigated by applying compressive (upto 7%) and tensile (upto 13%) strain bi-axially, such that the symmetry of the pristine material is preserved after contraction or expansion of the unit cell vectors. The strains applied are within the elastic limit predicted for chlorographene, as predicted by ab initio calculations. First, let us focus on the semi-metallic phase appearing beyond 12% tensile strain. A representative electronic band structure of semi-metallic phase of chlorographene (under 13% tensile strain) is shown in Fig. The inner red circle in Fig. Interestingly, what appeared as a semi-metallic state of chlorographene beyond 12% tensile strain; after inclusion of spin-orbit coupling, turns out to be a semiconducting phase with a vanishingly small bandgap, measuring ∼ 20 meV [see Fig. In conclusion, we show that chlorographene, which has a sizeable bandgap, can be driven to a state of vanishingly small bandgap or even a metal, by applying external strain. The semiconductor to metal transition takes place under compression, while tensile strain reduces the bandgap to a vanishingly small value of a few meV. Two bands are also found to be touching each other (at certain points lying on a circle surrounding the Γ point in the Brillouin zone) under sufficiently large compression, although they split marginally due to spin-orbit coupling. SB acknowledges funding from SERB Fast Track Scheme for Young Scientist (SB/FTP/ETA-0036/2014). We also thank CC IITK for providing HPC facility.