Understanding the applicability and limitations of electronic-structure methods needs careful and efficient comparison with accurate reference data. Knowledge of the quality and errors of electronic-structure calculations is crucial to advanced method development, high-throughput computations and data analyses. In this paper, we present a test set for computational materials science and engineering (MSE), that aims to provide accurate and easily accessible crystal properties for a hierarchy of exchange-correlation approximations, ranging from the well-established mean-field approximations to the state-of-the-art methods of many-body perturbation theory. We consider cohesive energy, lattice constant and bulk modulus as representatives for the first-and second-row elements and their binaries with cubic crystal structures and various bonding characters. A strong effort is made to push the borders of numerical accuracy for cohesive properties as calculated using the local-density approximation (LDA), several generalized gradient approximations (GGAs), meta-GGAs and hybrids in all-electron resolution, and the second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) and the random-phase approximation (RPA) with frozen-core approximation based on all-electron Hartree-Fock, PBE and/or PBE0 references. This results in over 10,000 calculations, which record a comprehensive convergence test with respect to numerical parameters for a wide range of electronic structure methods within the numerical atom-centered orbital framework. As an indispensable part of the MSE test set, a web site is established http://mse.fhi-berlin.mpg.de. This not only allows for easy access to all reference data, but also provides user-friendly graphical tools for post-processing error analysis. First-principles electronic-structure calculations have become an indispensable complement to experiments in physics, chemistry, and materials science, etc. Since the exact description of interacting electrons and nuclei is intractable for most systems, it is a perpetual challenge to find an "optimal" approximation that reconciles computational accuracy, efficiency, and transferability across different chemical environments and dimensionality. In quantum chemistry for atoms and molecules, test sets with accurate reference values for various relevant chemical and physical properties have been since long established For most existing test sets, the developers provide all essential information for each calculation, including molecular geometry, basis set, and/or code-specific numerical setting Condensed-matter physics and materials science is lacking behind, so far, with respect to comparable benchmark datasets. Two types of accurate reference data are crucial. One is essentially the exact values, obtained from either precise experiments or high-level theoretical calculations. They are prerequisite for an unbiased benchmark of the intrinsic errors associated with, for example, the exchange-correlation (XC) approximations in DFT or more generally the treatment of relativistic effects. The other type of reference data can help to quantify the numerical error in calculated values using any chosen method, which might come from the basis set incompleteness, finite k-point sampling, or other approximations made in the numerical implementation. Unfortunately, for condensed-matter systems, neither of these two types of reference data are easy to obtain. We also mention here the Born-Oppenheimer approximation that decouples the dynamics of nuclei and electrons. This should be assessed as well, but will not be done in this paper. The paper is structured as follows: After a detailed survey of the test sets that are widely used in quantum chemistry, as well as in materials science, we discuss the arXiv:1808.09780v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 29 Aug 2018 underlying challenges to obtain numerically accurate reference data in the latter. In Section II, a representative test set for materials science and engineering (MSE) is established. It is followed by an overview of a dedicated web site http://mse.fhi-berlin.mpg.de. We take three examples to demonstrate that the web site features a multi-mode access framework, versatile visualization, and a linear regression tool for post-processing data analysis. Section IV presents the numerical strategies applied in this work to obtain the numerically wellconverged data on a diverse levels of theory. We make our conclusions and present outlooks in Section V. The importance of reliable test sets for the success of quantum-chemistry methods was first realized by Pople and co-workers It may appear plausible that reference data, i.e. the accurate values of the relevant chemical and physical properties of atoms and molecules, can be acquired from experiments As the most popular choice in quantum chemistry, the atom-centered Gaussian-type orbital (GTO) basis sets provide well-converged total energies of atoms and molecules with a reasonable basis set size for the meanfield methods, including the local-density approximation (LDA), generalized gradient approximations (GGAs) and hybrid functionals in DFT, and the Hartree-Fock method in WFT. For an all-electron approach and for heavier atoms (e.g. Z>18), i.e. when wave-functions oscillate more strongly at the core region, it is more convenient, efficient, and accurate to use numerical atom-centered orbital (NAO) basis sets For advanced correlation methods which require unoccupied single-particle states, e.g. the second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) In computational materials science, the situation is more complex and less developed than in the quantum chemistry of molecules, and there is an urgent need of accurate test sets for the developement of advanced DFAs for solids. Staroverov and co-workers considered lattice constants, bulk moduli, and cohesive energies of 18 solids, as well as jellium surface energies to benchmark the TPSS functional, a meta generalized gradient approximation (meta-GGA) For reasons of comparability and consistency, reference values from theory provide the unique opportunity to compare calculations based on exactly the same atomic structure and exclude finite-temperature, zero-point vibration, relativistic and electron-vibration coupling effects. Recently, the "gold standard" method in quantum chemistry, CCSD(T), has gained attention in materials science Unlike the molecular systems investigated by quantum chemistry, the extended periodic materials are often simulated in reciprocal space with periodic boundary conditions (PBC) for the sake of fully taking advantage of the periodic symmetry. However, it also introduces extra numerical difficulties: The first Brillouin zone in reciprocal space must be sampled by a finite number of k points, for which different kinds of k-mesh have been proposed to provide an efficient sampling according to different periodic symmetries Such diversity of methods leads to a need for a standard data set that is comparable among different numerical implementations. This is indeed the purpose of the ∆-value concept introduced by Cottenier et al. Despite the enormous success achieved by the (semi)local density-functional approximations, e.g. LDA and GGA PBE, there are several notorious failures of these methods. For instance, there exist serious self-interaction errors and significant underestimation of vdW interac-tions for these functionals, which demand more sophisticated approximations. The meta-GGAs, in which the orbital kinetic energy density is added to the density functional evaluation, belong to a higher rung of the Jacob's Ladder in DFT. Representative are the nonempirical TPSS In this context, it becomes imperative for computational materials science to have a representative test set with numerically well-converged reference values at various levels of theory. In spirit of the existing quantumchemistry test sets and the ∆-value concept, we introduce in the following our test set for materials science and engineering, coined MSE, which is based on results acquired using density functional methods from LDA, PBE, PBEsol, SCAN, TPSS, M06-L, HSE06; and state-of-theart MP2 and RPA. The numerical convergence of these methods is investigated in terms of total energy. Cohesive energies, lattice constants and bulk moduli are then reported. A comprehensive understanding of the numerical errors, particularly in MP2 and RPA, is discussed in order to aid the community's pursuit of a numerically stable implementation of CCSD(T) and full-CI for the exact description of solids. In this project, we select 7 elemental solids and 12 binaries with cubic structure, as the first step in creating the MSE test set. As illustrated in Fig. • The numerical accuracy of the FHI-aims package has been shown to be equivalent to the accuracy of other high-quality codes • A range of popular DFAs have been implemented in FHI-aims and can be used routinely for atoms, molecules, clusters, and periodic systems. Besides the conventional (semi)-local functionals, e.g. LDA, PBE, PBEsol, SCAN, TPSS and M06-L, a realspace implementation of the exact exchange operator in PBC by Levchenko et al. has been demonstrated to allow for a practical use of hybrid functionals (including HSE06) and the Hartree-Fock method, as well, for both molecular and periodic systems • FHI-aims employs numerically tabulated NAO basis sets • To address the slow basis set convergence of advanced correlation methods (MP2 and RPA in this project), FHI-aims provides a sequence of NAO basis sets with Valence Correlation Consistency At present the NAO-VCC-nZ basis sets in FHI-aims are only available from H to Ar Relativistic effects were investigated as well, using the atomic zeroth order regular approximation (atomic ZORA) A key feature of our MSE test set project is to establish a dedicated web site http://mse.fhi-berlin.mpg.de, which allows for easy access and analysis of the data. At the MSE home page, an overview of the MSE test set project is given along with a table that summarizes all materials available for a given DFA. The materials are sorted by their crystalline structures with a layout similar to Fig. The MSE web site provides a quick and easy-to-use visual display of the test set data. For any individual reference value calculated for a given material and using a specific DFA, the crystal structure and the wellconverged equation of state are displayed. If available, one can also visualize the numerical convergence towards this reference data; this includes convergence tests for basis set, k-mesh, and internal numerical parameters. Furthermore, a statistic analysis of the basis-set convergence for the whole test set can be visualised, which is derived using the mean absolute deviation (MAD). As an example of this functionality, Fig. For the benchmark studies of the DFAs, the MAD and the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) are often used to quantify the numerical errors in calculations. For a given group of materials with the number of materials The CBS of n and the targeted observables of {Y i }, if the computational data are {y i } with the errors distributed as x i = Y i -y i , we then define the relevant MAD and RMSD as Despite both MAD and RMSD being measures of accuracy, we note that larger errors have a disproportionately large effect on RMSD, making it more sensitive to outliers. A linear regression by means of a least-squares fit allows us to separate the error into predictable (or systematic) and material-specific (or residual) parts allows the analysis of the material-specific deviations { i } and the corresponding root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) as The systematic error can be determined by the difference between RMSD and RMSD. It was argued that the material-specific deviations represent a true measure of the inadequacy of the method or the numerical incompleteness of the basis set and k-mesh In three examples, we will demonstrate how to gain insight into the numerical and intrinsic limitations of a state-ofthe-art DFAs. (1) Basis set convergence in the MP2 lattice constants: Slow basis set convergence is a well-documented problem for advanced correlation methods like MP2 and RPA. Figure Figure (2) Starting point (SP) influence on meta-GGAs and RPA: The common practice of evaluating meta-GGAs, TABLE II. RMSDs and material-specific RMSD of the starting-point influence on cohesive energies per atom. "DFA@SP" denotes which method is based on which starting point orbitals. "sc-DFA" denotes the self-consistent study. (unit: eV) Methods to compare RMSD RMSD sc-SCAN vs SCAN@PBE 0.015 0.015 sc-M06-L vs M06-L@PBE 0.049 0.043 sc-TPSS vs TPSS@PBE 0.035 0.033 RPA@PBE vs RPA@PBE0 0.119 0.030 like TPSS, M06-L and SCAN, and advanced many-body perturbation methods, like RPA, is by performing an energy evaluation a posteriori using LDA, GGA or hybrid GGA orbitals Table For meta-GGAs and RPA, the starting point influences on lattice constant and bulk modulus are similar: the material-specific deviations are mild, though the systematic deviation is quite large for RPA results. The readers interested in this topic can easily access the data and perform the linear regression online by themselves. It is also easy to investigate the influence of relativistic effects on different methods and properties in the same manner. (3) Cross-over comparison between different methods: Figure LDA and RPA are the density functional approximations on the lowest and highest rungs of the Jacob's ladder, respectively, and they show the largest deviation in the cohesive energy calculations, leading to a RMSD of over 1 eV. In fact, LDA shows a large disagreement with all other methods, with the average RMSDs about 0.7 eV. This observation agrees with a widely accepted argument that the local density approximation derived from homogeneous electron gas completely misses the high order density derivative or response information that is important for a proper description of chemical bonding. However, our linear regression analysis suggests that this error is quite systematic: The material-specific RMSD is only 0.16 eV between LDA and RPA. A similar analysis can be applied to study the intrinsic limitations in MP2 and RPA. It is well-known that the RPA method performs unsatisfactorily in the calculations of cohesive energy for solids We also compared the results of different methods with experimental data that were corrected for thermal and zero-point vibrational effects To summarise this section, we took three examples to demonstrate the usage of our MSE web site. In the context of ongoing innovation in computational materials science, driven by data technology, there is a growing awareness of the importance of effective data sharing and recycling. Here, we argue that a dedicated test-set web site should be about more than an easy, static access of the reference data. In order to liberate the power of test sets, of key importance is providing friendly analysis interface that facilitate the users to play with the online data, repeat the observation in the original papers, and even gain new insights from the data by themselves. In this section, we introduce the numerical strategies applied to obtain the reference data in the MSE test set. Numerically well-converged reference data at various levels of theory are crucial to achieve an unbiased benchmark and discussion in the previous section. Due to the use of NAO basis sets, the electronicstructure problem is addressed using numerical integration in FHI-aims. The specific technical aspects behind the numerical setting of the grids used for threedimensional integrations are described in Ref. For hybrid functionals (HSE06 in this work) and more sophisticated treatments of the exchange and correlation (e.g. MP2 and RPA), the evaluation of electron repulsion integrals (ERIs) is a major computational bottleneck. Within FHI-aims, an efficient localized resolutionof-identity (called "RI-LVL") method In FHI-aims, the RI-LVL method has also been adopted in the periodic implementation of HSE06 In contrast, the numerical error in terms of k-mesh and basis set sizes is a universal difficulty for any software implementation. In the following section, we focus on the numerical convergence in both aspects for the total energy per atom of each method and each material in the MSE test set. The k-mesh convergence for LDA and PBE methods is investigated together with Γ-center (GC) and Monkhorst-Pack (MP) sampling strategies A linear-scaling HSE06 method for condensed matter systems has been implemented in FHI-aims Table where n k is the number of k points in each direction (n k × n k × n k ). Our results reveal that a Γ-center mesh with 6 × 6 × 6 grid points is enough for HSE06 to address this singularity issue, thus providing a similar k-mesh sampling quality as LDA and PBE. In the framework of the mean-field approximations, the evaluation of the exchange-correlation energy needs only the electron density and/or occupied orbitals. However, the advanced correlation methods, i.e. MP2 and RPA, explicitly consider the excitations that are between occupied and virtual orbitals and that cross over different k points. Therefore, it is not surprising to see that MP2 and RPA calculations for solids have a much higher demand on the sampling of the first Brillouin zone. The k-mesh convergence of the periodic MP2 method has been investigated with the Γ-center sampling strategy by Grüneis et al. The k-mesh incompleteness error in C diamond remains to be 15 meV for both MP2 and RPA total energies with a dense 8 × 8 × 8 k-mesh. We notice that other off-set evenly sampled k meshes The exponential "α" determines the speed of the k-mesh convergence of different methods. On a logarithmic scale (see Eq. 5 and Fig. Table In this project, we optimize "α" for the CKM(4,6) extrapolation, and find that α = 3.95 improves the CKM(4,6) extrapolation consistently, resulting in the MAD of only 1.6 meV. The CKM We notice that the periodic MP2 and CCSD(T) results reported in the literature were often extrapolated using CKM The difficulty of using the GTO basis sets, the de facto choice in quantum chemistry, to extended systems has been studied extensively in different kinds of crystals mainly using the CRYSTAL program The NAO basis sets of FHI-aims Table V lists the basis set incompleteness errors in HSE06 total energies per atom using the tier-n series, which are the default choice for mean-field approximations in FHI-aims. The tier-2 basis set is recommended, and tier-3 is considered to be good enough to reach the complete basis set limit FHI-aims provides a larger tier basis set (tier-4) for some light elements. We notice that for the binaries with mainly ionic bonding characters (LiF -MgS), the SCF procedure with can fail. In this work, we report HSE06 total energies per atom using tier-4 for C and Si with diamond structure, SiC and AlP with zincblende structure. Compared with tier-3 results, a noticeable change can be observed only for AlP (about 3 meV). It suggests that tier-3 is competent to provide numerically well-converged HSE06 total energies for most of materials. Concerning the two worst cases of tier-3, i.e. Na bcc and Ar fcc, the basis set incompleteness errors are about 5 meV and 9 meV, respectively. For Na and Ar, the tier-4 basis sets are unavailable. We then introduce 2 s-type and 2 p-type hydrogen-like functions from NAO-VCC-3Z as an additional s, p group to the tier-3, denoted as tier-3+. Table The NAO basis functions used in the tier-n series are apt to saturate the bonding region in the middle of two atoms, as they are optimized to minimize the LDA total energies of symmetric dimers For MP2 and RPA calculations, the results are extrapolated to the CBS limit using a two-point extrapolation formula Here E[n] is the RPA or MP2 total energy per atom using NAO-VCC-nZ basis sets (with n=3 and 4). The accuracy of the CBS(3,4) scheme has been demonstrated in the RPA and MP2 calculations of 18 symmetric dimers from H 2 to Ar 2 Taking C diamond as an example, Table In this work, we adopt a similar downsampling concept to estimate the MP2 total energies per atom with the NAO-VCC-4Z basis set and the 8 × 8 × 8 k-grid: using the energy change between 6 × 6 × 6 and 8 × 8 × 8 with the NAO-VCC-3Z (or 2Z) basis set ∆E nZ total [n k = 8] (n = 3 or 2) of: In summary, the reference data for the MP2 and RPA total energies (and also valence correlation energies) per atom are obtained by the combination strategy of CKM Based on the efforts discussed above to achieve the complete k-mesh and basis set convergence in terms of absolute total energy for various levels of theory, we next focus on the calculated lattice constants, bulk moduli and cohesive energies using these parameters. To find the optimized lattice parameters for each material and each method, we calculate seven points within a range of ±5 % around the initial value of the lattice constant, and fit the respective (volume, energy) data points to the Birch-Murnaghan equation of state to obtain the optimized lattice constant. If all 7 lattice constants used to generate the equation of state lie within a range of ±7 % around the optimized value, the value is taken as the final, optimized lattice constant a 0 . Otherwise, this optimized lattice constant is used as a new starting point and more (volume, energy) data points are calculated, so that finally all materials' optimized lattice constants are obtained from an equation of state fitted to seven points with lattice constant values in a range of ±5% to ±7% around the final, optimized lattice constant a 0 . We have carefully tested the stability of this procedure using the PBE functional. The obtained optimized lattice constants and bulk moduli are accurate within 0.02 Å and 0.1 GPa, respectively. The cohesive energies E M coh of the materials are then calculated at the optimized lattice constant a 0 : where N atom is the number of atoms in the unit cell, E M the total energy of the unit cell for material M, and the sum is taken over the total energies E atom of the constituent atoms in their spin-polarized symmetry-broken ground state, i.e. no fractional occupancies. For (semi-)local and hybrid DFAs, the best basis sets and k-grid settings recommended in Table Table VII reveals that the basis set convergence is relatively fast in the MP2 calculations of lattice constants. NAO-VCC-3Z is good enough to provide a well-converged lattice constant (the convergence criterion is 0.01 Å) for all five materials (for details see also the first example in Sec III). In agreement with the previous investigations using plane-wave basis sets Inspecting Table VII also reveals the capability of NAO-VCC-nZ to provide a consistently improvable description of cohesive properties. In general, the calculated MP2 cohesive energies increase with the cardinal index (n) of NAO-VCC-nZ. On the one hand, it allows for an accurate extrapolation to the CBS limit; and on the other hand, the NAO-VCC-4Z values set up a quite rigorous lower bound for the converged values of MP2. In other words, any results smaller than the NAO-VCC-4Z values might be unreliable. The canonical MP2 method was implemented in VASP for periodic systems in 2009 a In inverse relation between the MP2 correlation energy and the energy cutoff E χ that represents the overlap charge densities for the CBS extrapolation. Meanwhile, an efficient composite scheme was proposed to reduce the computational cost due to the unfavorable scaling of the kpoint number. To be specific, the Hartree-Fock total energy is calculated with a dense 10 × 10 × 10 Γ-centered k-mesh, but the MP2 second-order direct and exchange terms are evaluated with 6 × 6 × 6 and 3 × 3 × 3 kmeshes, respectively. In 2013, Booth et al. updated the MP2 cohesive energies of three materials With the materials science and engineering (MSE) test set, we have accomplished the first step towards a representative test set with well-defined and relevant cohesive and electronic properties and reference values obtained from a hierarchy of the first-principles calculations. The accuracy of the reference values in the MSE test set is mainly determined by the well-defined numerical setting of each applied DFA. A strong effort has been made to provide numerically converged values from state-of-theart theory, including periodic MP2, and RPA calculations in the complete basis set limit and the complete k-space limit as well. At present, we provide 14 accurate data for MP2 and RPA. A web site of the MSE test set, http://mse.fhi-berlin.mpg.de, is equipped with a multi-mode access framework, versatile visualization, and a linear regression tool for post processing data analysis. In this work, we demonstrate that these features dramatically assist the post-processing data analysis that is necessary to detect the numerical error in calculations and uncover the intrinsic limitations of DFAs. The presented paradigm for the test set construction is applicable to any new material and materials' property. The authors thank Fawzi Mohamed for his support in setting up the MSE web page, Steffen Kangowski for creating the layout of the MSE web page, and Norina A. Richter and Toktam Morshedloo for their contribution in the preparation stage of the MSE project. AJL is grateful to the Royal Society of Chemistry for the award of a Researcher Mobility Fellowship, and acknowledges the use of the ARCHER high performance computing facilities, and associated support services, via membership of the UK HPC Materials Chemistry Consortium (EP/L000202). a