The thermal conductivity of classical multi-component fluids is seemingly affected by the intrinsic arbitrariness in the definition of the atomic energies and it is ill-conditioned numerically, when evaluated from the Green-Kubo theory of linear response. To cope with these two problems we introduce two new concepts: a convective invariance principle for transport coefficients, in the first case, and multi-variate cepstral analysis, in the second. A combination of these two concepts allows one to substantially reduce the noise affecting the estimate of the thermal conductivity from equilibrium molecular dynamics, even for one-component systems. The transport properties of macroscopic systems are determined by the dynamics of conserved currents, i.e. of the long-wavelength components of the currents associated to the densities of conserved extensive variables where, in order to simplify the notation, the vector character of fluxes and affinities has been overlooked or their Cartesian indices are incorporated in the suffixes. The Green-Kubo (GK) theory of linear response where k B is the Boltzmann constant, V is the system's volume, • indicates a canonical average, and where the system is in thermodynamic equilibrium , where J 0 and J s are the energy and particle-number flux samples of all molecular species, respectively, and h s are the corresponding partial enthalpies where F nm = -∂ m /∂R n and n runs over all the atoms. In solids and one-component fluids, energy is the only conserved quantity relevant to heat transport because the convective fluxes either vanish or do not contribute to energy transport In multi-component fluids the convective fluxes of individual species are not identically vanishing. As a consequence, the expressions for J 0 and J Q do not coincide and the Onsager coefficient Λ 0i are affected by the spurious atomic self-energies, as described before. The Green-Kubo integrals Λ Qi (see Eq. ( where Λ0 = 1/ Λ -1 00 = Λ 00 - is the inverse of the energy block of Λ -1 , that is to say the Schur complement of the convective block (SCCB) in Λ m=1 c m J m , while the whole Λ matrix is not. We dub this remarkable property the convective invariance of heat conductivity in multi-component systems. An important consequence of convective invariance is the independence of the heat conductivity on atomic self-energies, thus solving the first of our problems. Another important consequence is that the heat conductivities computed from the heat or energy fluxes coincide, thus dispensing us from the task of computing partial enthalpies to evaluate the former. Having thus cleared the way, we now move to evaluating Eq. ( In order to cope with the latter problem, we have generalized to multivariate processes our cepstral analysis approach to evaluating transport coefficients from EMD In the multi-component case, an EMD simulation samples M stationary stochastic processes, J i (i = 0, • • • M -1), one for each conserved flux, which can be thought of as different components of a same multivariate process. For such a process it is customary to define a cross time-correlation function, C ij (t) = J i (t)J j (0) , and a cross power spectrum, S ij (ω) = lim τ →∞ S ij τ (ω) , where is the sample cross-spectrum of the multivariate process. The Onsager coefficients of Eq. ( In analogy to the uni-variate case, the reduced sample spectrum can be shown to be a process distributed like where the ξ's are independent identically distributed random variables, ξ ∼ 1 ν χ 2 ν , χ 2 ν being the chi-square distribution with ν = 2( -M + 1) degrees of freedom, where M is the number of conserved fluxes and ≥ M is the number of flux samples used to sample the spectrum. This means that the above formulas apply to an effective sample spectrum, defined as the average over independent samples of the spectrum. For instance, in an isotropic fluid one has one equivalent flux process per Cartesian component ( = 3); multiple flux samples can be created by either running multiple EMD trajectories for different initial conditions or, equivalently, by breaking a long trajectory into multiple segments. Eq. where the Cs are the (inverse) Fourier coefficients of the logarithm of reduced sample spectrum, L 0 = log(ξ) = ψ( -M + 1)log( -M + 1), and σ 2 0 = log(ξ) 2 -L 2 0 = ψ ( -M + 1), ψ and ψ being the di-and tri-gamma functions In order to validate our methodology, we have computed the thermal conductivity of an equimolar waterethanol mixture. Not aiming at an optimal description of the system, but just at a realistic benchmark, we used the simple OPLSAA In Fig. FIG. This behavior can be partially corrected by replacing the GK estimate of the Onsager coefficients through Eq. ( Even so, the statistical accuracy that can be achieved with even longer trajectories is totally inadequate. Cepstral analysis was performed over a 100 ps EMD trajectory using the ThermoCepstrum open-source code, which is freely available for download Multivariate cepstral analysis turns out to be instrumental in heat-transport simulations even for onecomponent systems. The recently discovered gauge invariance of heat conductivity We conclude by noticing that the combination of the newly devised convective invariance and multivariate cepstral analysis, besides providing fresh theoretical insight in transport phenomena, will hopefully broaden the scope of heat-transport simulations to complex multicomponent fluids, as well as provide new tools to make ab initio simulations possible. This work was partially funded by the EU through the MaX Centre of Excellence for supercomputing applications (Projects No. 676598 and 824143). We are grateful to D. Tisi for a critical reading of the revised version of our manuscript. Riccardo Bertossa, 1 Federico Grasselli, 1 Loris Ercole, 1 and Stefano Baroni Practical numerical equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD) simulations provide access to discrete samples of several flux process, i.e. to finite multivariate time series. Let us then suppose to have independent such samples, of length N : { p J i n } (p = 1, . . . ; i = 0, . . . M -1; n = 0, . . . N -1). For instance, the three Cartesian components of a current in an isotropic medium may be thought of as different samples of a same process, and so would different segments of a same long time series. Stationarity implies that J i n does not depend on n and that J i n J j m only depends on nm. We further assume that J i n = 0 and that J i n J j 0 is an even function of n, which is the case when J i and J j have the same signature under time-reversal. We define the cross-periodogram as the average discrete-frequency spectrum of the samples: where is the discrete Fourier transform of the p-th time series and its sampling time. The Wiener-Khintchine theorem S ij = lim N →∞ S ij . In the large-N limit the real and imaginary parts of J i k are normal deviates that are uncorrelated amongst themselves and for k = k . Therefore, for each discrete frequency k, the cross-periodogram is a random matrix distributed as a complex Wishart deviate The Schur complement of the convective-current block (SCCB) of the cross-periodogram, S0 , (dubbed the reduced periodogram) has rank L = 1. Therefore, since the Wishart distribution for rank-one matrices is a χ 2 distribution, we conclude that, for each frequency k, where the ξ's are independent identically distributed (iid) random variables, ξ ∼ 1 ν χ 2 ν , χ 2 ν being the chi-square distribution with ν = 2( -M + 1) degrees of freedom. Strictly speaking, this distribution holds for k / ∈ {0, N 2 } because for these two frequencies the Fourier components of the flux time series are real, and ν = -M + 1. For the purposes of the following discussion, we overlook this exception, thus making an overall error ∼ O(1/N ), which vanishes in the N → ∞ limit that is assumed throughout our statistical analysis. Moreover for clarity we included a factor /ν in the SCCB, that is needed to obtain the correct mean value, see Ref. Equation (S4) shows that the SCCB of the crossperiodogram (that we dub reduced periodogram) is an unbiased estimator of the SCCB of the cross-spectrum (the reduced spectrum), which is proportional to κ. Unfortunately, this estimator is not consistent, in that its variance does not vanish as N → ∞ (actually, it is independent of N ). A consistent estimator is obtained by applying a low-pass filter to the logarithm of the reduced periodogram, thus introducing a bias, which however can be made arbitrarily small as N → ∞. Eq. (S4) shows that are iid stochastic variables whose expectation and variance are: L 0 = log(ξ) = ψ( -M + 1)log( -M + 1) and σ 2 0 = log(ξ) 2 -L 2 0 = ψ ( -M + 1), ψ and ψ being the di-and tri-gamma functions According to a generalized central-limit theorem for the Fourier transform of iid stochastic variables where k , e -2πi kn N , and the variance, that can be computed in a similar way, is The assumption that S is a smooth function implies that the number of significant cepstral coefficients C n in the cepstral expansion of Eq. (S6) is hopefully small, allowing us to implement here a low-pass filter. We thus indicate by P * a small integer such that Unfortunately, the expectation value of the inverse Fourier transform of C n does not represent log( S0 k ), because of the additional L 0 factor: Since we are interested in the k = 0 component and Eq. (S7), we must consider the stochastic variable whose expectation value and variance are L 0 is thus an unbiased estimator for the logarithm of the SCCB in the zero-frequency cross-spectrum of the conserved fluxes and, hence, of the thermal conductivity we are after. At fixed P * , the variance of L 0 vanishes in the N → ∞ limit, thus making the estimator consistent. Of course, any finite choice of P * introduces a bias, which is a decreasing function of P * , while the statistical error is an increasing function of it. Its optimal value is the one which makes the bias of the order of the statistical error. By adopting this value in the N → ∞ limit both the bias and the statistical error can be made arbitrarily small. An estimate of the "optimal" value for P * can be obtained with any of the many model selection techniques available in the statistics literature In this section we present the results obtained for molten sodium chloride (NaCl), paradigmatic of a twocomponent (neutral) mixture of charged particles. As for the water-ethanol mixture, classical MD simulations were run with the LAMMPS package We notice that the red and blue curves substantially differ at low frequencies, thus giving a different zerofrequency value, and demonstrating the importance of employing Eq. (S10) in place of κ = V 2k B T 2 S 00 (0), when there is more than one conserved flux. From a standard Green-Kubo analysis of the whole trajectories (34 ns) we obtained κ ref = (0.485 ± 0.005) W/mK, that can be con- sidered as a reference. Furthermore, for each of the 100 ps segments we computed S0 k , and obtained an estimate S0 (0) and the thermal conductivity κ, according to Eq. (S10). We set = 3 (Cartesian components) and M = 2 (number of conserved fluxes) to define the theoretical statistical distributions necessary for the cepstral analysis. As in the case of the water-ethanol mixture, the parameters are L 0 = 1γlog 2 ≈ 0.270 and σ 2 0 = π 2 /6 -1 ≈ 0.644. For the cepstral analysis we employed the cutoff frequency f * ≈ 14 THz. The estimate of κ has been verified to not depend on the specific value of f * . The number of cepstral coefficients P * has been estimated by the optimization of the AIC In a nutshell, our cepstral method requires the following list of operations, summarized in this Section for clarity: 1. Extract independent samples of N (equally spaced) steps of the time series for the energy flux J 0 n , n = 1, . . . , N , and for a complete set of independent particle fluxes J m n , m = 1, . . . , M -1. 2. Compute the discrete Fourier transforms of these fluxes, J i (ω k ), the cross-periodogram S ij (ω k ), i, j = 0, . . . , M -1, and the SCCB of the crossperiodogram (with the factor /ν) for each frequency, S0 (ω k ), where k = 1, . . . , N . 3. Calculate the logarithm of the SCCB of the crossperiodogram, log S0 (ω k ). 4. Compute the inverse discrete Fourier transform of the result to obtain the cepstral coefficients C n . 5. Retain the first P * cepstral coefficients, the optimal number P * being computed via the Akaike information criterion 6. Evaluate the thermal conductivity and its statistical uncertainty estimated as: where L 0 and σ 0 are properties of the χ 2 distribution, as discussed before. The relative error in the conductivity results from the estimate of the absolute error in its logarithm. P * depends in general on the cutoff (Nyqvist) frequency, f * , used to analyze the spectrum, while the final value of κ and its statistical uncertainty are largely independent of it 