This paper presents space-time varying (STV) metasurfaces for simultaneously controlling the spatial and temporal spectra of electromagnetic waves. These metasurfaces transform incident electromagnetic waves into specified reflected and transmitted waves, with arbitrary temporal and spatial frequencies. They are synthesized in terms of time-domain generalized sheet transition conditions (GSTCs). Moreover, they are characterized using an analytical method and the unstaggered finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) technique adapted to space-time metasurfaces. STV metasurfaces performing pulse shaping, time reversal and differentiation are demonstrated as examples. Metasurfaces are arrangements of sub-wavelength scattering particles in subwavelengthly-thin sheets, whose geometry and constituents are engineered for specific field transformations Although metasurface technology has experienced major advances in the past few years, the fundamental option of making them time-variant has been almost unexplored. Given that linear time invariant (LTI) media are limited by bounds imposed by physical laws on static media, the exploration of dynamic metasurfaces, which are free of such limitations, may provide new functionality unobtainable in the realm of static metasurfaces. Such physical limitations involve limits on dispersion engineering imposed by Kramers-Kronig relations, related to causality, or bounds on impedance matching bandwidth of LTI systems imposed by the Bode-Fano criterion Introducing time variation into metasurfaces both lifts such physical limitations, and provides more degrees of freedom for controlling electromagnetic waves. Moreover space-time variation can naturally break Lorentz reciprocity Polytechnique Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3T 1J4, Canada. This paper leverages space-time variation for general control of the spatio-temporal spectrum of electromagnetic waves. It proposes a systematic approach to design the corresponding susceptibilities for precisely transforming electromagnetic waves in terms of their shape, frequency contents and direction of propagation, over a wide bandwidth. Time reversal and differentiation are presented as examples. With the emergence of tunable materials such as graphene The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II presents the principle of operation of STV metasurfaces. Section III derives a method for designing such metasurfaces. Section IV derives energy relations and verifies energy conservation. Section V develops analytical and numerical techniques for characterizing STV metasurfaces. Section VI demonstrates some applications. Finally conclusions are given in Sec. VIII. Figure To understand how STV metasurfaces work, it is instructive to first examine the principles of their time-invariant counterparts. Consider a linear time-invariant (LTI) metasurface illuminated by a monochromatic wave with angular frequency ω 0 . Since the structure is LTI, different frequencies can be treated independently. The incident wave induces effective electric or magnetic polarization currents on the metasurface according to electromagnetic polarizability of its scattering particles at ω 0 . The effective polarization currents then radiate waves corresponding to the scattered fields The interaction of a LTI metasurface with a wide band pulse follows Fourier principles Fig. metasurfaces is governed by Kramers-Kronig relations STV metasurfaces may potentially break these limits. Although such metasurfaces are still described by linear differential equations, they do not follow similar Fourier principles, since the frequency components get coupled through the STV modulation. The response of STV metasurfaces is best understood by considering their instantaneous interaction with the electromagnetic fields and the modulation, in the time domain. In the STV metasurfaces presented here, the fields scattered from the metasurface are engineered to follow the temporal evolution of the specifications. Any scattered field can be modeled by equivalent field distributions at x = 0 + and x = 0 -, and the metasurface is controlled in space and time to create such equivalent fields at any instant t. Susceptibilities of the metasurface, are dynamically modulated such that, at any instant t, the polarization currents follow the temporal profiles dictated by the specified transformations. The required temporal profile of the polarization currents corresponding to the specified transformation are obtained by applying the timevarying form of the generalized sheet transition conditions (GSTCs) Consider an arbitrary STV field transformation, as depicted in Fig. These relations connect the equivalent surface electric and magnetic current densities, to the discontinuity of the electromagnetic field across the metasurface. J, K, P and M are the electric and magnetic current densities and the electric and magnetic polarization densities, respectively, and ∆E = E + -E -, where + andrefer to the fields at x = 0 + and x = 0 -, respectively, n is the unit vector normal to the metasurface, and the subscripts n and t refer to normal and tangential directions with respect to the metasurface components. For simplicity where ρ = (0, y, z) represents an arbitrary point on the metasurface. Integrating these relations yields the surface polarization densities required for the specified transformation, namely Note that the electric and magnetic fields in the right-hand side of (3) are assumed to be known from the specified transformation. Therefore P t (ρ, t) and M t (ρ, t) can be directly computed by performing the integrals in (3). The sought after susceptibilities connect the polarization densities in (3) to the average electric and magnetic fields on the metasurface through constitutive relations, which read in the most general (bianisotropic) case where the subscript "av" denote the average fields, given by For the sake of simplicity, we restrict ourselves here to diagonal monoanisotropic susceptibilities, i.e., χee = χ zz ee ẑẑ + χ yy ee ŷŷ, (6a) χmm = χ zz mm ẑẑ + χ yy mm ŷŷ, (6b) χem = χme = 0, (6c) which, with the above tangential polarization assumption, reduce (4) to The discussion of more general constitutive relations is deferred to the end of this section. Inserting ( where ./ is the array division operator, whose resulting z component is the ratio of the z component of the numerator to the z component of the denominator, and y component is the ratio of the y component of the numerator to the y component of the denominator, while the zy and yz components are zero. Equations ( This section derives energy relations for the problem of scattering from an STV metasurface which is represented in Fig. We first calculate the divergence of the Poynting vector as where J represents enforced and conduction currents. Note that ( where U is the electromagnetic energy density in V 0 , which reads and P M is the power delivered by the metasurface which is expressed as In ( where J s is the enforced current source and σ is the conductivity inside V ∞ . The energy conservation relation finally reads where P J is the power delivered by source currents and P L is the power lost in heat. This equation states that the time rate of change in the electromagnetic energy density, U , equals the sum of power delivered by the metasurface, P M , and the enforced currents, P J , minus the power that is dissipated in heat, P L , and the power that propagates out of S ∞ . In what follows we assume that J s = P J = 0, and that the metasurface is composed of lossless media, i.e., P L = 0. Equation (14a) integrates as We assume that the incident wave is a pulse that is finite in both space and time and the surface S ∞ is at infinity, so that the scattered waves never cross S ∞ . We also let d → 0 so that only the terms involving the delta functions in This relation states that the change in the electromagnetic energy density is balanced by the power delivered by (for P M > 0) or absorbed by (for P M < 0) the metasurface, where P M reads The expressions involving time derivatives can be further simplified using ( which simply involves the average electromagnetic field on the metasurface and the field on either side of it. This relation states that the amount of power required for an STV transformation with finite electromagnetic fields is finite. V. ANALYSIS This section presents analytical and numerical techniques for characterizing time varying (TV) and STV metasurfaces. The goal is to find the fields scattered by the metasurface, for given susceptibilities and incident field, in order to validate the synthesis performed in Sec. III. When the incident, reflected and transmitted fields are plane waves that are normal to the metasurface, the susceptibilities are purely time-varying, i.e., include no spatial variation. In this case, the problem can be analyzed using analytical techniques. For the more general case of STV metasurfaces, these analytical techniques becomes intractable, and we therefore resort to numerical simulation using the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) technique Consider a normally incident z-polarized plane wave )ẑ impinging on a metasurface with purely time-varying isotropic electric and magnetic susceptibilities. The GSTCs (2) reduce then to and the constitutive relation ( Equation ( Substituting these expressions into Note that Eqs. 22 represent decoupled electric and magnetic equations. This is not surprising since the magneto-electric susceptibilities, that produce electric-magnetic coupling effects, were assumed to be zero. Equations ( Scattering from general STV metasurfaces can be numerically simulated using FDTD. However, such metasurfaces are not compatible with the conventional staggered (Yee) grid. In the staggered grid, the electric and magnetic currents are placed at electric and magnetic nodes, respectively. As metasurfaces generally produce both electric and magnetic polarization currents, placing a metasurface in this grid would introduce a distance of half a unit cell between the electric and magnetic metasurface currents. Moreover, the electric and magnetic nodes are also staggered in time, which introduces undesired delays between the electric and magnetic metasurface currents. These inaccuracies would produce unphysical errors in the scattered fields. For example a matched metasurface with equal isotropic electric and magnetic susceptibilities would appear as mismatched to a normal incident field by an erroneous amount that is proportional to the cell size, due to these staggered grid effects. Eliminating such errors would require dramatically reducing the mesh size. Introducing virtual nodes between the electric and magnetic nodes, and placing the metasurface at such virtual nodes, reduces the error To avoid these problems, we put here the electric and magnetic metasurface currents at the same nodes and therefore use the unstaggered FDTD technique Figure Figure In the unstaggered grid the spatial and temporal derivatives are expressed in terms of central difference schemes, The stability conditions of this scheme are identical to those of the staggered (Yee) grid, and its error is similarly proportional 1 Note that the topic computation analysis of metasurfaces has received considerable attention recently, particularly on FDTD modelling of STV metasurfaces (a) to the square of the grid resolution This section presents examples of STV metasurface of increasing complexity. The examples are broadly presented in Fig. Consider an asymmetric plane-wave pulse impinging normally on the TV metasurface in Fig. (c) waves). The asymmetric incident pulse is given by where ζ 0 = T 0 /4 and τ = 3T 0 , corresponding to a pulse with temporal width T 0 . The time-varying susceptibilities, computed by The amplification is provided by the pump. Note that in time varying systems, electromagnetic energy is not conserved. The fields can be amplified or attenuated without employing any gain or loss material. The extra energy is provided to or extracted from the system through the pump mechanism. Figure Note that the permittivity and permeability corresponding to the susceptibilities in Fig. Consider an asymmetric Gaussian pulse normally incident on the time-reversal refractive STV metasurface represented in Fig. at the launching plane x 0 = -20λ 0 , where the function f (.) is given in (24a). The Gaussian-pulse waist is W = 5λ 0 , where λ 0 = cT 0 and ω 0 = 2π/T 0 . Away from the launching plane x = x 0 , at any other point in the xy plane, the electromagnetic field vectors can be obtained using the plane-wave (spectral) expansion method (see Section 6.5 in The corresponding STV susceptibilities, computed by We simulated the scattering from this STV metasurface using the unstaggered FDTD scheme described in Sec. V-B. Figures The spatio-temporal spectrum of the incident and transmitted fields, obtained by space-time Fourier transformation, are presented in Figs. Consider an asymmetric Gaussian pulse normally incident on the STV metasurface in Fig. These field profiles explain the peculiar space-time profile of the susceptibilities in Fig. The spatio-temporal spectrum of the incident and transmitted fields are presented in Figs. The synthesis technique presented in Sec. III provides the required STV metasurface parameters for any given transformation. As examples, we presented metasurfaces that transform a pulse into its time-reversed or differentiated pulses. However, it should be noted that the synthesized metasurface only time reverses or differentiates the specified incidence pulse. For incident pulses slightly different from the specified one, the transformation would deteriorate, and for completely different incident pulses the behaviour of the metasurface would be erratic. This is an inherent limitation of GSTC designs and applies to both static and STV metasurfaces synthesized with this technique. Another limitation of time varying structures is that their transformations are (time-)shift variant, i.e., the transformation is different for input pulses shifted in time. As a consequence, the incident pulses in all the examples presented in Sec. VI must be synchronized with the metasurface. Thus, it would be more appropriate to regard the presented transformations in Sec. VI as pulse-shaping transformations using coherent STV metasurfaces, rather than time-reversal or differentiation in the broad sense. However, it should be noted that pulse coherency is now a well established technique that is present in most digital radio and optical communication systems, and can be achieved using phase-locked loops or similar feedback systems. The presented STV metasurfaces may find applications in radio or optical detection systems where for example binary state incident pulses are transformed to pulse shapes that are more easily detectable by the available optical or radio detectors. For example the metasurface could transform information encoded in complex pulse shapes into on-off keying logic. Finally, it is worth mentioning a paradoxical transformation where a zero incident field is specified to produce non-zero reflected and transmitted fields. As with previous examples, one may proceed to find corresponding STV susceptibilities using STV metasurfaces have been proposed for simultaneously controling the temporal and spatial spectra of electromagnetic waves. A systematic technique based on time-varying GSTCs has been presented for the design of such metasurfaces. Analytical and numerical techniques for analysis of such metasurfaces, has been presented, and used to demonstrate operations such as time-reversal, differentiation and perfect pulse refraction. The proposed metasurfaces may find applications in pulse shaping devices. Moreover, they may extend the functionality of static metasurfaces by lifting physical limits imposed on LTI systems. STV metasurfaces naturally break Lorentz reciprocity and therefore may find applications in magnetless non-reciprocal metasurfaces as well. This appendix derives the analytical solution to the firstorder differential equations where f represents P t or M t and t 0 is a zero of χ ee (t) or χ mm (t), and g(t) is proportional to E i (t). Equation ( and next noting that the left hand sides makes a perfect derivative Integrating ( where c is an arbitrary constant to be fixed by the initial condition. Using integration by parts (29) becomes Close to the singularity t = t 0 we may use L'Hôpital rule, which changes where, the last equality uses which is obtained from Note that χ ee (t) or χ mm (t) may have multiple zeros in general. In that case the time axis can be subdivided into contiguous intervals each containing only one zero, and the process outlined in this section can be repeated for each interval. This appendix presents derivation details for the unstaggered FDTD scheme, used in this paper, for both 1D and 2D uniform Cartesian grids. Figure where J z and K y are the electric and magnetic current densities, respectively. Applying the central difference schemes in ( The electric and magnetic fields can be explicitly updated at the time step n + 1, using the fields at previous time steps, as follows where K n i and J n i are zero everywhere except on the metasurface. The metasurface polarization densities are updated using where χ n ee = χ ee (n∆t), χ n mm = χ mm (n∆t). Finally, the equivalent current densities can be computed using which can be updated using first-order or second-order backward-difference schemes. For the former case the resulting equations take the form which can be written explicitly in terms of the susceptibilities and the electromagnetic fields as Figure The corresponding 2D Maxwell equations read where J z ẑ and K x x + K y ŷ are the equivalent electric and magnetic current densities, respectively. Applying the central x y i : Fig. difference schemes in where the x, y, z vector component letters are placed before the fields, as in z E n ij , in order to avoid mixing them with the grid indices i, j, n. The electric and magnetic fields can be explicitly updated at the time step n + 1, using the fields at previous time steps, as follows -∆t 0 ∆y x H n i,j+1x H n i,j-1 - y (x, y, t) -∂ ∂y H x (x, y, t) = 0 ∂ ∂t E z (x, y, t)