The cuprate high temperature superconductors develop spontaneous charge density wave (CDW) order below a temperature T CDW and over a wide range of hole doping (p). An outstanding challenge in the field is to understand whether this modulated phase is related to the more exhaustively studied pseudogap and superconducting phases Crucially, we find that, upon approaching the parent Mott state by lowering p, ∆ CDW increases in a manner similar to the doping dependence of ∆ PG and ∆ SC . This shows that CDW is an unconventional order, and that the above three phases are controlled by the same electronic correlations. In addition, we find that ∆ CDW ≈ ∆ SC over a substantial doping range, which is suggestive of an approximate emergent symmetry connecting the charge modulated phase with superconductivity In recent years, many experiments and different techniques have established the ubiquity of CDW order in cuprates The energy scale ∆ CDW associated with the CDW has attracted far less experimental attention, even though this quantity is crucial to address several important ques-tions such as the following. (a) First, whether the CDW is a conventional order i.e., a phase whose existence can be understood within a scenario of weakly interacting electrons. A tell-tale signature of it would be if T CDW (p) ∝ ∆ CDW (p). On the other hand if their doping trends are different, as is famously the case of the superconducting order, it implies unconventional order, which is a consequence of strongly interacting electrons. Here we show that this is also the case of the CDW and, therefore, it is an unconventional order. (b) Second, a comparison of the magnitudes and the doping dependencies of ∆ CDW (p), ∆ SC (p) and ∆ PG (p) is important to understand the relation between these three phenomena. We show that these three energy scales have rather similar doping evolutions, implying that it is likely that they have a common origin in terms of a driving electronic interaction. Moreover, we find that the magnitude of ∆ CDW (p) and of ∆ SC (p) are comparable over a significant doping range, which is consistent with a concept that has gained importance in recent times, namely the presence of an emergent approximate symmetry that links CDW, which is a particle-hole instability, with superconductivity, which is an instability involving particle-particle excitations. This symmetry is exact only at the so called "hot spots" of the Fermi surface A typical signature of a density wave in Raman spectroscopy is the loss of spectral weight of the electronic continuum at low energy, followed by a recovery of spectral weight at higher energy, as the order sets in as a function of temperature A second technical challenge, from a materials point of view, is to identify the cuprates family which has the cleanest CuO 2 layer where the CDW order can set in. Here, we identified the inner CuO 2 layer of HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8+δ (Hg-1223) to be most suitable because it is homogeneously doped and screened from outof-plane disorder by the outer planes, as demonstrated by the analysis of the 63 Cu-NMR line-width We performed electronic Raman scattering measurements on Hg-1223 single crystals grown with a single step synthesis Our first central observation is that the B 2g Raman response χ B2g (ω, T ) of an underdoped Hg-1223 crystal displays a well defined gap-structure, typical of a density wave, at 120 K, which is above T c = 117 K but below the pseudogap temperature T * ≈ 360 K as defined from the NMR Knight shift at this doping level Furthermore, we find that a very similar CDW gap structure is also observed in the B 2g Raman response of under-doped Hg-1201 and Y-123 cuprates, which have one and two CuO 2 layers, respectively (Fig. Next we show theoretically that the formation of the CDW leads to a B 2g signal with low-frequency depletion followed by a hump at a higher frequency, which is qualitatively in line with what is reported in Fig. , where ξ k is the electron energy dispersion (whose Fermi surface is displayed in Fig. We suppress the spin index since it does not play in role in the following. Q x = (π/2, 0) and Q y = (0, π/2) describe a bi-collinear charge modulation of four unit-cell periodicity in the x and y directions As in Fig. In other words, the transition temperature and the energy scale associated with the CDW are not proportional to each other. This is reminiscent of the dichotomy between the dome-like behavior of the superconducting T c (p) and the anti-nodal superconducting gap ∆ SC (p), which is a hallmark of an unconventional order, i.e. an instability that cannot be understood within scenarios of weakly interacting electrons. In Fig. Raman experiments have been carried out using a JY-T64000 spectrometer in single grating configuration using a 600 grooves/mm grating and a notch filter to block the stray light. The spectrometer is equipped with a nitrogen cooled back illuminated CCD detector. We use the 532 nm excitation line from a diode pump solid state with laser power maintained at 4 mW. Measurements between 10 and 300 K have been performed using an ARS closed-cycle He cryostat. This configuration allows us to cover a wide spectral range (90 cm -1 to 2500 cm -1 ) with a resolution sets at 5 cm -1 . Spectra have been obtained in one frame. Each frame is repeated twice to eliminate cosmic spikes. All the spectra have been corrected for the Bose factor and the instrumental spectral response. They are thus proportional to the imaginary part of the Raman response function χ (ω, T ). The direction of incident electric field is contained in the (ab) plane. The B 2g and B 1g geometries are obtained from crossed polarizations, respectively, along and at 45 • form the Cu-O bond directions. They respectively give access to the nodal region (along the diagonal of the Brillouin zone) and to the anti-nodal region (along the principal axes of the Brillouin zone). The crystal is rotated using a Attocube piezo-rotator ANR 101 put inside the cryostat. The T CDW (p) values extracted from the Raman spectra of Fig. In the absence of X-ray scattering data for Hg-1223, we have used the criterion of maximum of 1/T 1T vs T to define the onset of CDW correlations. Although very few NMR studies have been performed on Hg-1223 We display in Fig. exhibit respectively a pair breaking peak at 2∆ SC ≈ 800 cm -1 and ≈ 1150 cm -1 . We can also observe that each 2∆ SC peak is associated on its right energy side to a dip in the electronic continuum. In previous works, we showed this peak-dip structure detected in the superconducting B 1g Raman response results from the interplay between the PG and the SC gap, and can be smoothly connected to the PG appearing in the electronic spectrum above Tc In order to have a cuprate band structure close to the one that we considered in the experiments, we adopt in ξ k the band parameters of the Hg-1201 provided by abinitio calculations The bi-collinear charge modulation described by H CDW describes a four unit-cell periodicity in both the x and y directions. We can therefore work in the Brillouin zone reduced 16 times by the ordering vectors Q n = n 1 Q x + n 2 Q y , where Q x = (π/2, 0) and Q y = (0, π/2) and n 1 , n 2 = 0 . . . 3. We can rewrite the Hamiltonian: H = H 0 + H CDW k +Qn c k +Qn-Qy + + h.c. ( We can express then the Hamiltonian as a 16×16 matrix Ĥ 