By considering the spin connection, we deduce the effective equation for a spin-1/2 particle confined to a curved surface with the non-relativistic limit and in the thin-layer quantization formalism. We obtain a pseudo-magnetic field and an effective spin-orbit interaction generated by the spin connection. Geometrically, the pseudo-magnetic field is proportional to the Gaussian curvature and the effective spin-orbit interaction is determined by the Weingarten curvature tensor. Particularly, we find that the pseudo-magnetic field and the effective spin-orbit interaction can be employed to separate the electrons with different spin orientations. All these results are demonstrated in two examples, a straight cylindrical surface and a bent one. During the last decade, inspired by the technical progress in the fabrication of low-dimensional nanostructures Certainly, people want to give the explicit SOI Hamiltonian for spinor fields on curved surface. Traditionally, in the planar two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) systems, there are two main types of SOI, the Rashba SOI and the Dresselhaus SOI, which originate from the inversion asymmetry of the confining potential For both of them, the intrinsic or external electric field are considered necessary to generate the SOI. Previous investigations The spin connection, emerging naturally in the covariant derivative of a spinor field, guarantees that a covariant derivative of a spinor transforms still like a spinor. In the language of quantum field theory, it can also be viewed as a non-Abelian gauge field generated by local Lorentz transformations Another aim of this paper is about the gauge potential from higher dimensions. In Ref. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we briefly give the non-relativistic limit form of Dirac equation in a curved space. In Sec. III, we use the confining potential approach to get an effective equation for a non-relativistic spin-1/2 particle constrained to a curved surface, and analyze the effective SOI and pseudo-magnetic field. In Sec. IV, we explore the effective SOI and pseudo-magnetic field in strait and bent cylindrical surfaces. In Sec. V, we extend the theory to include the model electric and magnetic field. Finally, we present our conclusion in Sec. V. In this section, we briefly review the derivation of the non-relativistic limit form of Dirac equation in a curved space and compare it to the ordinary Schrödinger equation. Before the derivation, we would like to introduce the meaning of indices used in the following. The Greek letters { μ, ν, . . . } and {α, β, . . . } run from 0 to 3, denoting curved and flat space-time indices, respectively; the capital Latin letters {A, B, . . . } and {I, J, • • • } run from 1 to 3, denoting curved and flat space indices, respetively, and the lowercases {a, b, . . . } and {i, j, . . . } run from 1 to 2, denoting curved and flat 2D space indices, respectively. In a curved space-time the Dirac equation can be described by by γ α , the usual gamma matrices in a flat space-time. Here E μ α are vierbeins with the definition where q μ describe the coordinate variables in a curved space-time, x α do those in a flat space-time. By virtue of the vierbeins E μ α , G μν can be given by where G μν is the inverse metric tensor in a curved spacetime, while η αβ is that in a flat space-time with η αβ = diag(1, -1, -1, -1). And the spin connection Γ μ can be expressed as where Σ αβ = [γ α , γ β ]/2 are the generators of the Lorentz group in the spinorial space, and with Γ κ μν being the Christoffel symbol. For investigating the specially geometric effects, in the present paper we just consider the space curved without time, and we can write ds 2 in the following form where G 00 = 1. As a result, the vierbein E α μ can be simplified as In this case, the time component of spin connection Γ 0 is naturally vanished, the space components of gamma matrices γ A in Dirac representations are represented as and the space components of the generator Σ IJ are where σ I are the usual Pauli matrices and ǫ IJK is the Levi-Civita symbol. For the convenience of description, we write the wave function Ψ in Eq. ( where χ and φ stands for the positive and negative energy solution, respectively. According to the above discussions, the Dirac equation Eq. ( where From Eq. ( here, E is the total energy. By defining E s = E-mc 2 and keeping the lowest term in the expansion of 1 E+mc 2 with E s ≪ mc 2 , we can obtain the non-relativistic equation In a curved space, the covariant derivative of the Dirac matrices is According to the "tetrad postulate" of van Nieuwenhuizen and then we can deduce the following expression where R is the Ricci scalar. Thus the non-relativistic equation for a spin-1/2 particle in a curved space should be described by where DA is a new gauge covariant derivative with DA = ∂ A + ΩA . It is interesting that the equation Eq. ( where 1 4 ǫ IJK γ IJ plays the role of rotation angle. It is obvious that ΩA transforms as a gauge field in the adjoint representations of SU(2). The required effective equation of a spin-1/2 particle confined to a curved surface will be achieved in this section. For the achievement the thin-layer quantization approach where the Weingarten curvature matrix is For the convenience of statement, we refer to the coordinate system (q 1 , q 2 ) as a surface frame (SF), and the coordinate system (q 1 , q 2 , q 3 ) as an adapted frame (AF), where q 3 is the coordinate variable in the n direction. From Eq. ( and The introduction of the confining potential plays an essential role in the thin-layer quantization scheme. The confining potential raises the energy of normal excitations far beyond the energy scale associated with motion tangent to the surface, and entirely determine the separation of the normal and tangent dynamics. By introducing the confining potential V c (q 3 ), we can deduce (the calculation details are shown in Appendix A) the effective Hamiltonian and the normal component where D a denotes a gauge covariant derivative with D a = ∂ a + iσ 3 w a , wherein w a can be taken as a gauge potential with w a = 1 4 ǫ ij ω aij , K is the Gaussian curvature, and S ab is the coupling tensor defined by S ab = ǫ ac α b c . As a consequence, the effective surface dynamics is and the normal dynamics as In Eq. ( and H so describing the SOI on the curved surface S in the following form Notice that the geometric potential -h2 2m (-K 2 ) in Eq. ( Ωa appearing in Eq. ( . In other words, the presence of the spin degree of freedom can influence the geometric effects of the curved surface Furthermore, it is worthwhile to notice that the gauge potential w a and the effective SOI H so are present in the effective Hamiltonian H eff due to the appearance of the spin connection. Mathematically, the spin connection is determined by the derivative operators and the rotation transformation of the spin orientation in adjacent different local positions. Therefore, the geometry of the curved surface can be used to deform the forms of the pseudo-magnetic field defined by the gauge potential w a and the effective SOI. The two geometric effects will be given further discussions. It is easy to prove that the effective dynamics Eq. ( In terms of the gauge potential w, the pseudo-magnetic field can be defined by where ∇ 2D × w = -K 2 and the curl operator is defined in 2D spaces. In the calculation we have utilized the formula R 1212 /g = -K, where R abcd is the Riemann curvature tensor. We notice that in Ref. Obviously, in Eq. ( gKdq 2 and w 2 = 0. It's well known that the external magnetic field breaks the time reversal symmetry, however, this doesn't happen for the pseudo-magnetic field. This conclusion can be tested by obtaining the commutator [T, H 0 ] = 0, where the time-reversal operator T is choosen as T = iσ y C with C the complex-conjugation operator. A physical interpretation is that the pseudo-magnetic field couples with the matrix σ 3 rather than a scalar constant, hence under time inverse, the pseudo-magnetic field is reversed spatially or changes it's sign accordingly, keeping the total system invariant. The largeness and time reversal symmetry of pseudo-magnetic field may help to manufacture materials with topological properties. On the one hand, the application of quantum Hall effect requires large magnetic field, on the other hand, the time reversal symmetry protects the robustness of the quantum spin Hall edge state Another interesting property of the pseudo-magnetic field is about the topology in a real space. According to Gauss-Bonnet theorem, for a surface S without a boundary, we have where g is the genus of the surface. Straightforwardly, the pseudo-magnetic flux is where Φ 0 = h 2e is the magnetic flux quantum. This result shows that the pseudo-magnetic flux for a closed surface is a topological invariant, which is independent of it's geometric details. For example, the pseudo-magnetic flux for a sphere and a torus is 2Φ 0 and 0, respectively, no matter how their size and shape change continuously. Particles with opposite charge will be separated by Lorentz force when they are moving in a magnetic field, which is known as Hall effect. In the presence of the pseudo-magnetic field, the spin-1/2 particles with different spin orientations in the normal direction should also be separated by a Lorentz-like force. The phenomenon is the spin Hall effect, which will be found in a bent cylindrical surface. In Eq. ( where the second term provides the hermiticity of the Hamiltonian. However, we can't simply refer this effective spin-orbit interaction as the effect induced by a "pseudo-electric field", since in general the coupling tensor S ab is anisotropic. Specifically, when α 1 1 = α 2 2 , the Hamiltonian has the form of linear Rashba spin-orbit interaction, and if α 2 1 = α 1 2 , the Hamiltonian contain the form of linear Dresselhaus spin-orbit interaction. In the case where the surface has the symmetry α 1 1 = α 2 2 , we can define a "pseudo-electric field" which is oriented to the normal direction, that is As the situation in the planar 2DEG, this "pseudoelectric field" results in spin Hall effect. We have mention that the pseudo-magnetic field also leads to spin Hall effect, thus it is worthwhile comparing the two effective interactions. It is convenient to follow the previous research and reexpress the the SOI as a non-Abelian gauge field, which is exactly (A so ) a in Eq. (A6). Using Eq. ( where F a (q 1 , q 2 ) is a vector function of the coordinates. Interestingly, the part of this curl that is coupled with σ 3 , is equal to the curl of the gauge field w. For the spin orientations normal to the surface, the effective SOI seems to provide an effective field which is identical with the pseudo-magnetic field. That is to say the effective SOI and the pseudo-magnetic field may contribute exactly the same forces for the spin Hall effect. We will demonstrate this conjecture on a bent cylindrical surface. Besides, we have to emphasize that, although the pseudo-magnetic field and the effective SOI show common effects on the normal spin component, they are not equivalent for the dynamics of spin components tangential to the surface. To estimate when the effective SOI can be ignored, we need compare the coupling strengths between the effective SOI and intrinsic SOI of specific materials. It is found that if the two coupling strengths are commensurable, the curvature radius should be where ζ = m/m e with m the effective mass and m e the electron rest mass. For instance, the intrinsic SOI coupling constant of InGaAs In this section, using the previous results we will investigate two simple examples, a straight cylindrical surface and a bent one. In a cylindrical coordinate system (ρ, θ, z), as shown in Fig. where the spin-orbit coupling term -i h2 2mρ 2 σ z ∂ θ is just contributed by the spin connection. In this simple geometry, the pseudo-magnetic field disappears because of the vanishing of the Gaussian curvature, but the effective SOI still exist, showing the difference between the pseudo-magnetic field and the effective SOI. Neglecting the spin-orbit coupling term, as what we used to do, in θ direction, the corresponding energy spectrum and wavefunctions are Ẽn = n 2 h2 2mρ 2 and |n, ± = u ± e inθ , respectively, where u + = (1, 0) T and u -= (0, 1) T are the eigenstates of the Pauli matrix σ z and the magnetic quantum number n = 0, ±1, ±2, • • • , as shown in Fig. , where the total angular momentum Ĵz = Lz + ŝz = -ih∂ θ + h 2 σ z , and the well known geometric potential -h2 8mρ 2 is recovered. Hence we ought to apply new quantum number j ± = n ± 1/2 and eigenstate notation |j ± , ± to describe the system, which acts as replacing the orbital angular momentum with the total angular momentum in the Hamiltonian without spin connection contribution. Indeed, including the spin connection makes the model more symmetric and physically sound. Experimentally, the conductance in a cylindrical 2DEG may manifest the existence of the effective SOI. As shown in Fig. To investigate the combined effect of both the pseudomagnetic field and the effective SOI, we consider a bent cylindrical surface [Fig. and where ρ is the radius of the cylinder, and R the curvature radius of the axis. Using the Heisenberg equation of motion, we obtain where To reveal the effect of the pseudo-magnetic field, we give the boundary condition that θ ∈ [-θ 0 , θ 0 ] and R ≫ ρ, where θ 0 is small so that sin θ ≈ 0, cos θ ≈ 1, as shown in Fig. where p s = -ih∂ s is the momentum operator along the axis s. For the effective SOI, we find Here the relation ∂ θ (σ θ ) = ρσ 3 is utilized. As predicted in Section III B, the forces from the pseudo-magnetic field and the effective SOI are equal. Hence the total force where B = h 2e cos θ ρ(R+ρ cos θ) and v s = p s /m. It is found that this geometry induced force is in a form similar to the Lorentz force, leading to spin Hall effect. In the representation of σ 3 , spin-up particles and spin-down particles are acted on by the force in opposite direction, respectively, or equivalently, the particles in the two different spin states feel the pseudo-magnetic field in different directions, that is parallel and antiparallel to the normal direction. The same phenomenon appears when θ ∈ [π -θ 0 , π + θ 0 ] (see Fig. In this paper, we started from Dirac equation in curved space and performed the non-relativistic limit and thinlayer procedure to obtain the effective dynamics for a spin-1/2 particle constrained to an arbitrary curved surface. We have shown that an effective SOI, a 2D gauge field and a scalar potential appear in the effective equation as contribution of the spin connection. The effective SOI and the gauge field are associated with the spin orientation parallel and orthogonal to the surface, respectively. Furthermore, we have found the pseudo-magnetic field generated by the gauge field is proportional to the Gaussian curvature, which makes the corresponding flux for a closed surface is topological invariant. The effective spin-orbit coupling strength is determined by the Weingarten curvature tensor, being comparable with the intrinsic SOI strength of semi-conducting materials when the curvature radius is in nanoscale. To manifest the effect of the pseudo-magnetic field and the effective spin-orbit interaction, we have proposed two different geometries, namely a straight and a bent cylinder. In the straight cylinder, energy level shifts due to the effective SOI have been displayed, and accordingly we suggest a conductance experiment to demonstrate the existence of this interaction.In the bent cylinder, Lorentzlike force from the pseudo-magnetic field and spin-orbit force from the effective SOI have been found equal and lead to spin Hall effect. Our model gives a lucid picture of a spin-1/2 particle moving in a 2D curved space with confinement and is well suited to the study of 2DEG systems with curved features. It shows that by bending the 2D semi-conducting materials in nanoscale, the effective SOI and pseudomagnetic field from the spin connection could be locally enormous, which are easier to control than the external electric and magnetic field.This implies new possibility in constructing materials with topological properties.