The k-projection method provides an approach to separate the contributions from different constituents in heterostructure systems, and can act as an aid to connect the results of experiments and calculations. We show that the technique can be used to "unfold" the calculated electronic bands of interfaces and supercells, and provide local band structure by integrating the projected states over specified regions of space, a step that can be implemented efficiently using fast Fourier transforms. We apply the method to investigate the effects of interfaces in heterostructures consisting of a graphene bilayer on H-saturated SiC(0001), BAs monolayer on the ferromagnetic semiconductor CrI3, silicene on Ag(111), and to the Bi2Se3 surface. Our results reveal that the band structure of the graphene bilayer around the Dirac point is strongly dependent on the termination of SiC( Doping has been an important means of tailoring electronic properties of materials, and exploring novel physical phenomena, such as doping Mott insulators to obtain high T c superconductors, This correspondence is a general issue and can provide insights into the the underlying physics. An early application A number of strategies have been developed to unfold the electronic bands from supercell calculations, often based on plane-wave methods or tight-binding methods. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss the k-projection band unfolding technique and computational details of density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. In Section III, we present applications of the method to four interface structures: graphene bilayer (gr-2L) on H-saturated SiC(0001), BAs monolayers on the ferromagnetic semiconductor CrI 3 monolayer, silicene on Ag(111), and the bulk-surface decomposition of the Dirac state on the topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 . In a system with translational symmetry defined by the set (of order h) translation operators Tt , the irreducible representations (irreps) can be labeled by k within the first Brillouin zone. (The set of translations {t} are integral multiples of the direct lattice vectors a i , while reciprocal lattice vectors G as well as k are given in terms of b j .) The character of the Tt for the k irrep is χ k (t) = e ik•t . Applied to a function ψ, the projection operator will project out that part ψ k that transforms as the kth irrep and Pk ψ k = ψ k . Since k Pk = 1, any function can be decomposed into pieces that transform as the irreps labeled by k and ψ k |ψ k measures the relative weight of this k to ψ. Note that this is general, and the function ψ itself need not actually possess any translational symmetry, thus allowing this k-projection to be applied even to single impurity (GF) calculations where the translational symmetry is explicitly lost. Since the irreps labeled by k and k+G are the same, the projection operator puts ψ k into the form where ψ k (G) is related to the standard Fourier transform ψ(q), q = k + G, This connection to the Fourier coefficients ψ(q) provides a prescription for making the k-projected decomposition. When the system possess, at least approximately, the translational symmetry defined by the a i , the Fourier coefficients will have peaks at the corresponding q values; when this is not the case, i.e., the projection is done on the "wrong" translational symmetry, the weights will be spread throughout q-space. In practice, calculations are often done in a supercell geometry relative to a primitive cell (c.f., Fig. where M i , m j are integers, a i • b j = δ ij , G belongs to the primitive lattice, and κ = j κ j b j = G s 0 is in the first BZ of the primitive cell (κ j is fractional), but is equal to a reciprocal lattice vector of the supercell. If the supercell is N times as large as the primitive, then there will be N distinct G s 0 , and hence a function calculated at k s in the supercell can be decomposed (k-projected) into pieces corresponding to k = k s + G s 0 of the primitive cell. For an ideal supercell, this decomposition is exact since it is a simple consequence of translational symmetry and recovers the primitive band structure with | ψ ks |ψ k | = 1 or 0; for defect systems and interfaces, the norm will be between zero and one. The above scheme requires determining ψ k and then the weight ψ k |ψ k for k in the "primitive" cell. For bulk defect systems, the spatial integration is over the whole space. For interface systems, or for modeling STM or other probes that measure local properties, the integration volume entering the weight calculation should be restricted. Our implementation, which uses FFTs, provides an efficient approach and has been used in plane wave (pseudopotential and PAW) methods and augmented methods (FLAPW and LASTO), and also can be adapted to LCAO ones. The first step is to determine ψ k from the wave function calculated in the supercell at k s , ψ ks . For plane wave-based methods, all the G s wave function coefficients not corresponding to k and G are simply zeroed out; for other basis sets (e.g., LCAO) or when the lattices are not commensurate, an initial step is to evaluate the wave function in real space on the FFT mesh, back transform to reciprocal space, and then zero out the appropriate coefficients. The projected wave function ψ k at this point can be put back into the normal basis used to represent the wave function, but now with modified coefficients. Then the standard machinery used to calculate overlaps (e.g., local density of states) can be used to calculate the weight, restricting the integration to a particular region of space as necessary. This restriction corresponds to including a step function U (r) (non-zero only in the region of interest) in the calculation of the weight. For plane wave components (including augmented methods like the FLAPW), this convolution is easily done: (i ) FFT ψ k to real space; (ii ) square, ρ k (r) = |ψ k (r)| 2 |; (iii ) back transform to reciprocal space to obtain the Fourier coefficients ρ k (G); and finally (iv ) performing the sum Note that the maximum |G| in the sum is simply twice the plane wave cutoff of the wave functions, and hence the sum is exact despite the fact that the step function has a slow (G -1 ) convergence. For layer regions of space, z 1 < z < z 2 (with a 3 = a 3 ẑ), the Fourier coefficients of the step function are particularly simple Our implementation is different from Ref. 24 that directly uses a projector built from the Heaviside function (Θ(z)) to seperate contributions of different layers. Prior to the band unfolding, we carried out DFT calculations using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package The plane wave cutoffs were 220 and 2000 eV for the wave functions and density/potential, respectively, and a 12×12 k-point mesh was used. A. Effects of surface termination: graphene bilayer on 6H-SiC The 6H-SiC has two different (0001) surface terminations, either Si or C, and therefore, two different types of interface structures for bilayer graphene. Here we consider the situation where the two faces are saturated by H to model those experiments where H is used to passivate the interfaces between graphene layers and SiC(0001) surfaces; The k-projected (unfolded) bands around the K point for gr-2L on the Si-and C-faces are shown in Figs. Using the picture proposed for heterostructures composed of silicene (germanene) monolayers and substrates, the perturbation on the bands of the overlayer about the Dirac point depends on the strength of the hybridization (V int ) and the energy differences (∆E) between the substrate states and the Dirac point. BAs was recently predicted to possess intriguing properties, i.e., a hexagonal structure with a direct gap of about 1.1 eV at the K point and a high mobility comparable to that of graphene. Since ARPES is surface-sensitive, the experiments of Ref. 46 using a photon energy of 21.218 eV for the ARPES experiments may have detected the surface bands of Silicene/Ag(111). According to Ref. 48 the expected probing depth is ∼5 Åfor photons of ∼20-22 eV. Thus, we consider states with weight in W2 (silicene and the first Ag(111) layer) and k-project them onto the BZs of 1×1 of silicene (Figs. The topological surface states of Bi 2 Se 3 (0001) have been well studied, and calculations (and experiments) have shown that a minimum of about 5 QLs are necessary for the topological state to form a Dirac cone. For thinner films, there are still surface states, but are of the "normal" variety that can be understood as splitting off from the bulk bands. Since there is an evolution of the Dirac with thickness, there should be a connection between the models of standard and topological surface states. Here briefly analyze this connection. We consider 10 QLs of Bi 2 Se 3 . The calculated surface k bands, Fig. In summary, we have presented a technique for unfolding electronic bands of materials, including an efficient scheme using FFTs to calculate the local k-projected bands. This method allows us to effectively study the effects of interfaces by examining the spatial characteristics of the band structure, which is useful for understanding ARPES and STM/STS experiments. We applied the method to interfaces systems of gr-2L/SiC(0001), BAs/CrI 3 , silicene/Ag(111), and Bi 2 Se 3 /vaccuum. Our results revealed that the interactions of gr-2L and the two surfaces of SiC(0001) behave differently: The Si-face has minor effects on the band structure of the gr-2L, with a gap at the K point of only about 10 meV; on the Cface, however, a gap of about 130 meV at K is induced and gr-2L is n-doped, caused by a strong electric dipole at the interface caused by a charge polarization. For the vdW heterostructure BAs/CrI 3 , we showed that the magnetic proximity effect can cause spin splittings of up to 50 meV in BAs that depend on the lateral registry of the two layers. For silicene/Ag(111), our results are consistent with recent ARPES experiments that find interface states whose dispersions on the edge of the first Brillouin zone of Ag(111) appear to be half Dirac cones, but demonstrate that they are not Dirac states. Finally, we have shown that the k-projection can provide insight into the bulk origin of surface states, including the topological Dirac states.