The existence of a body centered tetragonal phase of Cu has been investigated in this manuscript when the single crystal FCC Cu is subjected to both high pressure and high temperature. The results have been demonstrated through DFT calculations (which are typically done at 0 K) followed by Helmholtz free energy calculations (for high temperature). The new metastable phase of Cu demonstrates higher thermal conductivity compared to that of the FCC phase and thereby may be beneficial for high temperature engineering applications. Landau's theory of phase transition states that different phases of a material may be stable when it is subjected to different types of external imposed constraints which could be temperature, pressure, magnetic field, concentration degree of cross linking or any number of other physical quantities. Typically, the Landau free energy functional is assumed to be function of external constraint and an order parameter which undergoes a discontinuity whenever there is a first order phase transition. For the case of crystal structures, the primary parameter upon which the Landau energy functional depends is on the mass density ρ(r) ρ(r) = ρ + q∈G ρ(q)e -iq•r + c.c. ( where ρ is the mean density and G is the set of reciprocal vectors that characterize the crystal structure. The wavenumber is given as q = 2π/λ where λ represents the wavelength. A complex conjugate (c.c) is added to retain a real number for mass density. It can be adjudged from the above formulae that solid-solid phase transition in a crystal structure is dependent upon phonon vibrations. Typically Cu exists as a face-centered-cubic material at ambient temperature and pressure conditions. The nonexistence of body centered phase of Cu at ambient pressure and 0K temperature has been proved by numerous researchers through DFT based studies. It should be realized that in Cu-based soft memory alloys, the Cu crystal structure is constrained (due to presence of other materials eventually resulting in development of pressure) which undergoes a phase transition to that of a body centered phase on high temperature. Thereby, given this observation it is quite conceivable that under high temperature and pressure conditions there may exist a body centered phase of Cu. Body centered tetragonal phase of Cu was also demonstrated to develop when Cu single crystals are subjected to shock compression along the [100] direction at a piston velocity of around 1.5 -2 km/s. We perform density functional theory calculations using the full potential linearized augmented plane wave (FLAPW) method implemented in the WIEN2K package. Phonon dispersion spectra and Helmholtz free energies are calculated within the framework of quasi-harmonic approximation using the finite displacement method in the PHONOPY code. We determine the elastic constants by analyzing the changes in the calculated stress values resulting from changes in the strain as implemented in the VASP code. In the stress-strain approach, a set of linear equations are constructed from the stress tensors calculated from each deformation and the solutions of the linear system of equations are found by using orthogonal matrix factorizations. This approach uses the well-known tensorial form of the Hooks law, that describes the following relation between the stress component and the applied strain Transport properties are determined with the Boltz-TraP code It is well known that at ambient pressure and temperature, Cu crystallizes in a face-centred cubic (FCC) structure with space group symmetry Fm 3m (no. 225), as shown in Fig. where, P , V 0 , V , B, B denote the pressure, reference volume, deformed volume, bulk modulus and the pressure derivative of the bulk modulus respectively. a ratio at high pressure (∼ 80 GPa). At high pressure, a local minimum appears for c a ∼ 0.966. Energy of this high pressure BCT phase is lower than the BCC phase. However, the global minimum corresponds to the FCC phase. At ambient pressure, we find that the minimum energy structure of the FCC phase corresponds to the equilibrium lattice parameter of a = 3.605 Å. Again at ambient pressure, the total energy optimization with respect to the c a ratio shows that for the BCT phase (space group I4/mmm, no. 139), the minimum occurs at the FCC structure with c a ∼ 1.414. Keeping c a fixed at 1.414, we minimize the total energy of the BCT structure as a function of volume (Fig. However, when it is subjected to high pressure, the FCC structure becomes unstable with respect to a tetragonal distortion and at shock pressure of ∼ 80 GPa, the FCC structure is transformed into a body centred tetragonal (BCT) structure. In order to check the mechanical stability of the high pressure BCT phase found, we have calculated the phonon spectrum of the BCT structure using the equilibrium lattice parameters and compared it with the phonon spectrum of the FCC phase. As seen from Fig. The calculated elastic constants of the FCC and BCT structures are shown in Table FIG. However, the dynamical instability of a crystal structure at low temperature does not mean that the crystal structure is unstable at high temperature. Since our ab initio calculations are carried out at ground state (T = 0 K), there may be a possibility that the BCT phase may attain stability at high temperature. For example, the body centred cubic (BCC) phase of Fe gains stability at high temperature, FIG. The calculated electronic band structures of FCC and BCT phases of Cu (Fig. The possibility of existence of a metastable body centered tetragonal phase for Cu has been established in this DFT study. These states may be achieved on simultaneous application of high temperature and pressure to a bulk sample of Cu which is possible through shock loading. The Helmholtz free energy distribution at a high pressure demonstrates more stability for the BCT phase compared to the FCC phase at high temperatures (which can be realized through shock loading). The BCT phase of Cu is observed to have high thermal conductivity compared to that of the FCC phase and may be beneficial for different high temperature engineering applications.