This paper describes a radiation pressure meter based on a diamagnetic spring. We take advantage of the diamagnetic property of pyrolytic carbon to make an elementary levitated system. It is equivalent to a torsional spring-mass-damper system consisting of a small pyrolytic carbon disc levitated above a permanent magnet array. There are several possible measurement modes. In this paper, only the angular response to an optical power single-step is described. An optical detection composed of a laser diode, a mirror and a position sensitive detector (PSD) allow measurement of the angular deflection proportional to the voltage delivered by the PSD. Once the parameters of the levitated system depending on its geometrical and physical characteristics have been determined regardless of any optical power, by applying a simple physical law, one can deduce the value of the optical power to be measured from the measurement of the first maximum of the output voltage amplitude. High power lasers (of a few kilowatts) are used in a wide range of industrial manufacturing processes ranging from welding, cutting, marking and additive manufacturing of structures made of various materials including metals. The laser is a working tool with a long lifetime, can be included in monitoring and control systems based on intelligent sensing techniques, and allows zero-fault production. This makes it necessary to improve high optical power measurement. At the same time, intermediate optical powers (from a few milliwatts to a few watts) are used in different fields such as telecommunications, alignment, laser shows, microlithography and energy sources. The two most common techniques used to measure optical power use either non-thermal sensors based on photo-electron interaction (photodiodes for example) or thermal sensors based on thermal energy absorption (thermopile sensors). Photodiodes can be used to measure the high power by sampling only a fraction of the optical power only if the small fractional splitting ratio is known. In addition, photodiodes are sensitive to temperature and the optical power distribution. Thermopile sensors can measure high-power directly, but are somewhat slow and require the full laser power be incident on the power meter. These two measurement techniques are exclusive operations. Measurements of laser power using radiation pressure have been reported recently 2. Principle of the spring-mass-damper system and experimental set-up The concept of radiation pressure grew in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries starting from Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism Measuring optical power via a radiation pressure measurement has been suggested previously In a real case, the surface is neither plane nor perfectly reflecting. One part of the incident photons is reflected and the other is absorbed. Let  be the fraction of absorbed photons and R the reflectivity of the mirror. The resultant coefficient r of reflectivity and absorption is r = R + (1-R)/2. In addition, the incident photon beam is never perfectly normal to the mirror surface. If  is the angle of incidence, the force component along the normal to the mirror is proportional to cos . Thus Equation (1) becomes: Pyrolytic carbon has interesting thermal, optical and electrical properties that can be used for various applications. In this work, however, we focus on its strong diamagnetism used to maintain a PyC disc levitated in a horizontal x-y plane at a height zL above a magnet array made of cubic NdFeB magnets. The magnetic interaction force between the PyC disc and the magnet array allows the disc to be levitated and acts as a magnetic spring with six degrees of freedom. However, the force components in the six degrees of freedom are different. They are functions of the PyC volume magnetic susceptibility , the imperfections of the PyC disc and the distribution of the magnetic flux density B provided by the magnets. Given that the PyC magnetic susceptibilities x-y and z are respectively -8.510 -5 and -4.510 -4 for the pyrolytic carbon used here, the restoring magnetic force gradients acting on the PyC disc are very different in the x-y plane and along the z-direction. In this work, we use as perfectly circular a PyC disc as possible (about 20 mm in diameter and 1.0 mm thick). The magnet array is made of nine cubic grade N42 NdFeB magnets (edge a = 10 mm). The manufacturer specifies a remanent induction Br for each magnet between 1.29 and 1.32 T. Under these conditions, the PyC disc remains at a stable levitation position in the horizontal plane. The levitation height zL between the magnet array surface and the lower face of the PyC disc supporting various mechanical and optical elements is about 0.32 mm (measured using an optical method). Consequently, the levitation height at the middle of the PyC disc where the magnetic force acts is z0 ≈ 0.82 mm. Provided the magnetic flux density B is vertical, homogeneous and constant in any horizontal plane x-y, a homogeneous piece of diamagnetic PyC can slide freely in the x-y plane at its levitation height z. The levitation force Fz is given roughly by: where A is the area of the sheet of material (PyC) and μ0 the vacuum permeability (μ0 = 4  10 -7 H m -1 ). This force balances the weight mg of the mass m of the levitated system subjected to the acceleration due to gravity g. In fact, the magnet array is composed of a juxtaposition of small identical permanent magnets alternating vertically south and north poles in the horizontal x-y plane. Consequently, the B field in the x-y plane at a height z above the magnet array exhibits a quasi 2D periodicity. As explained by Simon and Geim Among the different possible configurations for developing an optical power meter based on a diamagnetic spring, we have chosen to develop the rotational one, designated hereafter by the letters LPM (Laser Power Meter). Figure The sensitive part of our device is housed in a small box with three holes, one for the IR beam of the laser under test, another for the detection laser beams and a third for the IR beam reflected by the right-angle prism mirror. The same box protects the PyC disc against draughts and spurious IR reflections. It also improves the temperature stability of the PyC disc. The sensitivity of the magnetic spring depends not only on the horizontality of the magnet array, the symmetrical magnetic flux density distribution, the radial runout of the PyC disc and the lever arm between the impact point of the laser beam and the centre of rotation of the levitated system, but also on whether the centre of gravity of the levitated system and the centre of rotation of the PyC disc lie on the same vertical axis so as to limit the influence of any unwanted linear and angular motions. where Br = 1.3 T, a = 10 mm and  = 1.6. We obtain B1 = 0.69 T for z1 = 1.4 mm and B2 = 0.85 T for z2 = zL = 0.32 mm. Note that the value  is chosen to obtain a calculated value of z0 as close to the measured one as possible. To justify the choice of developing a system based on torsional oscillations around the rotation axis of the PyC disc, we examine other possible configurations. First, we assume the PyC disc has only a single degree of freedom along the vertical z-axis. When the vertical light beam power P is modulated as P0cost, the system is driven by a sinusoidal force FR caused by the laser beam hitting the mirror and modulated at the same angular frequency . The equation of motion for the forced damped harmonic oscillator is: where kz is the spring constant for translation along the z-axis, z the mechanical resistance (or damping constant) and F0 the amplitude of the modulated force FR. Here, the centre of gravity of the levitated system lies on its symmetry axis, as does the line of incidence of the laser beam. In equation This yields kz ≈ 14 N m -1 . The balanced levitation height z0 is deduced from the following equation: where g  9.81 m s -2 . Note that the centre of gravity of the levitated system lies about 2.8 mm above the magnet array surface, but the magnetic force acts on the PyC disc whose the centre lies a distance z0 above the array. Equation ( Any analysis of sensors having an air film between two movable parts Gabrielson where k is the Boltzmann constant and T the thermodynamic temperature of air. Starr where μ is the dynamic viscosity (1810 -6 kg m -1 s -1 for air at 20 °C). Equation Without friction, the natural angular frequency 0 of the undriven undamped oscillator is given by: Here, we obtain 0 = 108.9 rad s -1 (i.e. a natural frequency of 17.3 Hz). The resonance (maximum value of the amplitude) occurs when: The calculation with the numerical values of equation For the lightly-damped oscillator, ω0 >> /2m, the resonance occurs when  ~ 0 and the amplitude zA at resonance is: Equation ( The ratioz/2m is about 11 s -1 . Consequently, the system can be regarded as lightly-damped which makes the resonance amplitude zA about 3 nm for r = 1,  = 0 and P0 = 1 W. Such a tiny amplitude is too difficult to measure accurately and would be buried in the noise, so this method was abandoned. As a comparative example, the same type of estimate can be made for the horizontal diamagnetic spring. Equation ( We can determine experimentally the logarithmic decrement  that characterises the rate at which the oscillations of the system are damped: where Td is the pseudo-period and tmax the time at which a maximum of angular amplitude occurs. From three experimental observations, using equation The angular frequency of a damped oscillation d is given by: For the natural angular frequency of oscillation along the x-axis (or y-axis), we find  ≈ 6.18 rad s -1 . Using equation The aforementioned experimental and theoretical considerations on the use of linear translation of magnetic spring subjected to a radiation pressure show their limits and led to our studying torsional configuration similar to a torsion balance. In equation ( where I is the moment of inertia. Given we know the mass, size and position of the centre of gravity of each element of the levitated system. We can calculate its moment of inertia for rotation about its centre by adding the moments of inertia of the PyC disc Id, the three polyamide balls Ib, the cover glass Ic and the two right-angle prism mirrors Im. Its standard uncertainty is the quadratic sum of the standard uncertainties of each component. Moreover, the magnitude of the torque depends on the radiation force FR applied, the length lm = 11 mm of the lever arm connecting the axis to the point of force application, and the angle between the force vector and the lever arm. If the force vector (incident laser beam) is normal to the mirror surface, the moment of force for a laser power of 1 W is a mere 74×10 -12 N m. At the beginning, we machined a PyC disc as circular and perfect as possible. This turned out not to be a good idea because the rotational stiffness was too weak and the angular frequency too low to determine easily. Under these conditions, the angular position of the PyC disc wobbled due to draughts, so the deviation due to the irradiation force was indistinguishable from the noise. To fix the ball position, we drilled three holes (Ø= 1.5 mm) in the PyC disc. This was sufficient to provide a steady angular position with a non-negligible angular spring constant k given by: where is the logarithmic decrement and Td the pseudo-period given by equation The LPM can be used in two measurement modes: -amplitude resonance mode, which consists in forming a chain of regular short laser beam pulses with a shutter placed in front of the laser head (for instance short shutter aperture of about 0.1 s every second or so), the period being chosen to produce an amplitude resonance (example given in Figure In the following, we consider only the transient mode (example given in Figure From experimental recordings of damped oscillations as a response to an optical power step, the first two output voltage amplitude maxima Vtmax1 and Vtmax2 and the time between them corresponding to the pseudo-period Td are determined using Matlab  toolbox software (tmax2 = tmax1 +Td). The output voltage values must be corrected by the voltage V0 delivered by the PSD for an optical power of 0 mW (here V0 = -0.34 mV). In the following example, , Td and k are determined from the measurements of voltage response to a radiation pressure single-step obtained at five different optical powers. The angular spring constant k is calculated from equation From equation ( The standard uncertainty for  determined from the measurements for an optical power between 0.5 and 1 W is 0.026. The standard uncertainty for Td is the quadratic sum of the measurement uncertainty for an optical power between 0.5 and 1 W of 0.025 s and the uncertainty of repeatability, reproducibility and hysteresis effect of about 0.01 s, i.e. 0.027 s. From equation ( For a moment of force of 74×10 -12 N m corresponding to a laser power of 1 W, the theoretical torsion angle at static equilibrium should be 28 μrad. However, the radiation force is reduced slightly due to the imperfect reflection of the mirror (r <1) and the nonnormal angle of incidence of the laser beam (cos < 1). The experimentally determined sensitivity S of the PSD is 1.75 mV/μm. The PSD is placed at a distance ld 162 mm from the rightangle prism mirror of the detection laser beam. Assuming the torsion angle  is very small and lm << ld, we deduce  from the measured voltage change V = V-V0 of the PSD output using: At static equilibrium, the moments are balanced according to: a b where Pr is the optical power detected by the LPM. We deduce: With a small angle of incidence and over a limited range of optical power where  remains small, Pr is linearly proportional to V. We determine the uncertainty of the coefficient  from equation The laser used for this study is a frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser (Innolight Prometheus 20NE) providing outputs at both the fundamental 1064 nm (1 W) and the second harmonic 532 nm (20 mW). The current (from 1 to 2 A) of the laser diode that pumps the NPRO (Non-Planar Ring Oscillator) crystal is used to vary the laser power. In our example, of course the optical power is measured after the photon beam has passed through three diaphragms. The maximum amplitude Vtmax1 of the first oscillation allows one to deduce the stabilization value Vs using: From equation Several errors limit the accuracy of force measurement using torsion balance techniques In previous studies Temperature change also affects magnetic fields. A variation of temperature T causes a variation of magnetic induction B = B  T with a temperature coefficient of remanence  of -0.1 % °C-1 . In a room where the ambient air temperature was (20.0 ± 1.0) °C throughout the measurements, the relative variation of the induction is about a part in a thousand. In our experiment, the influence of magnetic fluctuations is negligible because the temperature of the magnet array measured by a thermistor is regulated by means of a Peltier module to within ± 4 mK. Thus, we can expect the temperature of the magnet array to be stabilized to better than ± 0.1 °C. In fact, the largest thermal effect is caused by temperature gradients related to small draughts near the levitated system. These are reduced by housing the device in a small almost airtight box with holes for the beams of the detection laser and the laser under test. Despite this protection, draughts remain one of the main sources of instability of the LPM. We now consider only molecular bombardment of our torsion device and we assume the device is bombarded isotropically by air molecules. Under these conditions, the limit on the effect of thermal noise can be determined by a Langevin analysis method by applying the principle of equipartition connecting fluctuations and dissipation. The article by M c Combie where  is the duration of measurement (observation time) and * the damping time (time constant) of the pendulum. From experimental results, T ≈ 300 K, * ≈ 1.7 s and ≈ 5 s. Under these conditions, we obtain  = ± 7.5 nrad. The second major source of fluctuation is caused by the vertical and horizontal components of vibrations transmitted mechanically to the magnet array. All vibrational modes can couple into the levitated system and lead to increased noise. Speake and Gillies Newton's law states there is an attractive force between two objects, proportional to the product of their masses. If one of them moves with respect to the other (e.g. displacement of the experimentalist with respect to the LPM), the attraction force varies. This fact could modify the LPM behaviour. Gillies and Ritter where G is the Newtonian gravitational constant, C a coupling coefficient taking the angular dependence of interaction into account (-1 < C < +1) and rm the distance from the mass M to the centre O of the PyC disc. Note that there is no gravitational effect if the centre of gravity of the mass M is located either on the alignment axis of the two mirrors (axis Oy) or on the symmetry axis of the two mirrors parallel to the x-axis (axis Ox). There is a torque only for the other positions in the x-y plane. For instance, if C = 1 for the LPM, we obtain ∂ = -15×10 -15 N m for M = 1 kg, rm = 10 cm and ∂rm = 1 mm corresponding to a torsion angle change = 0.6 prad. For a mass M = 100 kg at rm = 0.5 m displaced by ∂ rm = 10 cm, the torsion angle change = 0.9 nrad. Another gravitational effect that might modify the behavior of the levitated system is the global effect on the system mass m which could cause a horizontal displacement of the centre of gravity of the system. For a mass of 100 kg located 1 m away from the levitated system, we obtain a lateral gravitational force ∂Fg = 1 pN. Given the approximate value (4310 -3 N m -1 ) of the horizontal spring constant kx, the centre of gravity of the levitated system is displaced horizontally by about 24 pm. In this theoretical example, the gravitational effects on the LPM are negligible. The standard and relative standard uncertainties related to the results presented in Table -one based on the law of propagation of uncertainty and the characterization of the output quantity by a Gaussian distribution (evaluation of the standard uncertainty associated with an estimate of the output quantity); -the other based on the propagation of probability distributions using a mathematical measurement model (Monte Carlo method). The present example shows, amongst other things, the influence of seismic vibrations. The measurements for increasing power (up) were carried out one morning while there were ground roadworks close to the laboratory. Those for decreasing power (down) were carried out on the afternoon of the same day once the roadworks had stopped. In this case, the relative standard uncertainty is 7%, except for the smallest optical power. To compare the agreement of the two methods for measuring optical powers P and Pr, we calculate the normalized error En using formula The measured values P and Pr are not significantly different if En < 1. Given the relative calibration uncertainty of the commercial optical power sensor is about 7 % (manufacturer's data), the calculation for the 14 paired values in Table Williamson's method where P is expressed in mW and Vs in mV. In fact, the standard uncertainty ub = 6.0 mW for b is quite large while the experimental covariance cov(a,b) is found to be negligible. Consequently, it is realistic to assume Vs = 0 for P = 0. The standard uncertainty for a is ua = 0.14 mW/mV. Taking an overall uncertainty for Vs of 0.35 mV, the standard uncertainty of the optical power in mW determined from equation ( For instance, if Vs = 15 mV, equation Figure We have demonstrated a new optical power meter (laser power meter or LPM) based on the measurement of radiation pressure with a diamagnetic spring. The results obtained in transient measurement mode with a very simple and inexpensive experimental set-up lead to the following findings: -The linear model validated in the range from 0.1 to 1 W gives a relative expanded uncertainty for optical power measurement from about 20% to 5% in the range 0.3 to 1 W. -The main uncertainty, related to voltage measurement, yields a minimum uncertainty of 46 mW at the 95 % confidence level. -The measured values P (integrating sphere photodiode power sensor) and Pr (LPM) are not significantly different, the relative deviation between P and Pr being 10% or less. -The extrapolation of the linear model up to 10 W looks a promising approach for measuring optical powers with an accuracy of a few percent. The LPM is sensitive to vibrations, draughts and temperature changes resulting in deviation if the optical power is measured at different times. The device demonstrated is an absolute optical power meter which means one needs only to determine some of its characteristics independent of the optical power. This characterization consists in the measurement of the total moment of inertia I, the distance between the right-angle prism mirror and the PSD sensor ld, the distance between a prism mirror and the rotation axis lm, the coefficient of reflectivity and absorption r, the pseudo-period Td, the logarithmic decrement , the sensitivity of the PSD sensor S and the angle of incidence. Moreover, both the accuracy and sensitivity of the LPM could be improved. To improve the accuracy, one needs to reduce the uncertainties of the moment of inertia I of the levitated system and of the measurements of the voltage and the pseudo-period Td. To reduce the voltage measurement uncertainty, the LPM should be protected against vibrations. In addition, a suitable enclosure would protect it efficiently against draughts. The PyC disc and the magnet array must be maintained at constant temperature, in particular, no infrared radiation should fall on the disc while the temperature of the magnet array must be servo-controlled e.g. using a Peltier module. The LPM sensitivity could be increased by reducing the angular spring constant k, e.g. by reducing the size of the holes in the PyC disc. Note that k could be also reduced by placing the LPM under vacuum to reduce the damping constant . In this case, however, the three damping constants x,yand z would also be reduced, making the LPM far more sensitive to vibrations. Several authors In future work, we shall study the behavior of the LPM in amplitude resonance mode which consists in modulating the incident laser beam at low frequency (around 17 Hz). There are also other possible applications of PyC for measuring weak contact forces 