Despite most of the applications of anatase nanostructures rely on photo-excited charge processes, yet profound theoretical understanding of fundamental related properties is lacking. Here, by means of ab-initio ground and excited-state calculations we reveal, in an unambiguous way, the role of quantum confinement effect and of the surface orientation, on the electronic and optical properties of anatase nanosheets (NSs). The presence of bound excitons extremely localized along the (001) direction, whose existence has been recently proven also in anatase bulk, explains the different optical behavior found for the two orientations when the NS thickness increases. We suggest 1 Among semiconducting oxides, TiO 2 is the most widely used for energy and environmental oriented applications. Since 1972 when Fujishima and Honda discovered the phenomenon of photo-catalytic water splitting by shining TiO 2 nanoparticles with ultraviolet (UV) radiation, 1 a plethora of works has appeared in literature dedicated to the study of this manifold and extremely appealing material. It is important to stress that even if the (001) facets seem to be more photo-reactive than (101) ones, experiments do not provide homogeneous results. Indeed, in terms of presence of fivefold Ti atoms at the surface, the (001) facet should be more photoreactive than the (101) one, but the opposite should be true because highly reductive electrons should be generated at the (101), being the conduction band minimum higher in energy. For this reason, we have specifically selected NSs with the simplest surface models, avoiding reconstructed and/or hydroxylated facets, with the idea to leave to future investigations the study of many-body effects in NSs with less ideal surface motifs. By means of Density Functional Theory (DFT) and post-DFT excited-state (namely GW ad Bethe-Salpeter Equation(BSE)) calculations, we demonstrate the mismatch between electronic and optical gap, with the latter mainly associated to the presence of strongly bound bidimensional excitons, confirming the results recently reported by Baldini et al. Ground-state atomic structures have been relaxed using DFT, [001] direction of anatase For a comparison with anatase bulk band structure, obtained at the same level of theoretical approximation, we refer the reader to Fig. To further illustrate the role of quantum-confinement in Fig. As reported in previous literature (see i.e. refs. Still looking at Fig. This can be explained by the fact that the self-energy correction, due to the reduced dielectric screening and localization of the wavefunctions, strongly increases reducing the NS thickness. The scaling exponents able to fit the direct and indirect gaps are 1.05 and 0.88, respectively. Similar exponents (∼1) have been obtained in previous works On the other hand, as the NS thickness increases, the optical (excitonic) direct gaps converge more rapidly to the corresponding optical direct gap of the bulk. Again this finding is consistent with previous studies of many-body effects in low-dimensional materials We aim now to discuss the spatial character of the first bright exciton (B) of the (001)- By fitting the exciton wavefunction with a 2D hydrogen model, the exciton Bohr radius results ∼ 3.2 nm, while the 90% of the excitonic squared modulus wavefunction is contained within 1.5 nm. It is worth pointing out that this localized behavior is substantially the same placing the hole in different positions and that it holds both in the case the hole is fixed in a bulk (shown in Fig. Then from this specific, quasi 2D, spatial distribution of the exciton, mainly induced by the lattice geometry (see ref. To summarize, by means of the Bethe-Salpeter equation solution, we have here investigated the excitonic behavior of anatase nanosheets with majority and minority surface orientation. In particular, for (101) and (001)-oriented NSs, we have focused on quantum-confinement effects and on the role they play on the optical properties of such NSs. While the former show a more marked QC ascribed to the exciton confinement induced by the two {101} delimiting surfaces, in the case of the (001) orientation we instead observe the existence of a threshold thickness value (∼ 2 nm) above which the bulk optical behavior is recovered. The specific quasi two-dimensional character of the exciton can be related to the difference in terms of photo-reactivity between the two orientations, with relevant consequences in devices exposing the two different facets. 