The field and temperature dependencies of the longitudinal and Hall resistivity have been studied for high-quality FeSe 1-x S x (x up to 0.14) single crystals. Quasiclassical analysis of the obtained data indicates a strong variation of the electron and hole concentrations under the studied isovalent substitution and proximity of FeSe to the point of the majority carrier-type inversion. On this basis, we propose a "doped semimetal" scheme for the superconducting phase diagram of the FeSe family, which can be applied to other iron-based superconductors. In this scheme, the two local maxima of the superconducting temperature can be associated with the Van Hove singularities of a simplified semi-metallic electronic structure. The multicarrier analysis of the experimental data also reveals the presence of a tiny and highly mobile electron band for all the samples studied. Sulfur substitution in the studied range leads to a decrease in the number of mobile electrons by more than ten times, from about 3% to about 0.2%. This behavior may indicate a successive change of the Fermi level position relative to singular points of the electronic structure which is consistent with the "doped semimetal" scheme. The scattering time for mobile carriers does not depend on impurities, which allows us to consider this group as a possible source of unusual acoustic properties of FeSe. The energy of the superconducting pairing increases with the number of interacting particles. Therefore, possible enhancement of superconductivity by increasing the electron density in the case where the Fermi level is near Van Hove singularities has been studied starting with V 3 X type compounds The discovery of cuprate superconductors motivated an in-depth study of the Van Hove scenario for high-temperature superconductivity For iron-based superconductors (IBS), many phenomena have also been discovered which are in good agreement with the Van Hove scenario of HTSC. Moreover, it has been suggested that density waves or their fluctuations which are considered responsible for superconductivity in many families of IBS are a consequence of tuning to the nearest Van Hove instability in multiband materials Among IBS, iron selenide possesses superconductivity in almost stoichiometric form A group of carriers with distinguishing properties have long been noticed in the transport properties of some IBS Here we present the experimental magnetotransport data for high-quality FeSe 1-x S x crystals and results of quasiclassical multicarrier analysis of these data. The quasiclassical analysis reveals a minority highly mobile band in all studied crystals. The carrier concentration in this band does not exceed a few percents and rapidly decreases with increasing substitution or impurity level. The scattering time for this carriers does not depend on the impurity level that perhaps explains the detected record values in acoustic properties. The properties of the main carriers also strongly change under substitution, suggesting the possibility of the majority carrier-type inversion in FeSe family. The carrier-type inversion makes it possible to consider a model of "doped semimetal" for the phase diagram of the iron-based superconductors in an analogy of the model of "doped Mott insulator" for superconducting phase diagrams of cuprates. Thus, both phase diagrams of HTSC can be described consistently under the assumption that the principal factor is the position of the Fermi level relative to the bands' extrema. The crystals of FeSe 1-x S x were prepared using conventional KCl/AlCl 3 flux technique Magnetoresistance and Hall effect measurements were done using the EDC option of MPMS 7T with Keithley 2400 and Keithley 2192. Electrical measurements were done on cleaved rectangular samples with lengths in the range of 0.5 -2 mm, widths about 0.5 mm and thicknesses in the range of 0.03 -0.1 mm. The potential electrodes where 0.1 x 0.1 mm 2 pads located from each other at a distance of 0.5, 1.0 or 1.5 mm in dependence on the crystal size The distance between the electrodes is well defined because electrodes are sputtered with a fine mechanical mask. The characteristic ratio of the distance between the Hall contacts to the distance between the current electrodes is about 3 which provides a negligible shortening of the Hall potential The dimensions of the crystals were measured using a Zeiss optical microscope and AxioVision software. The uniformity of the thickness was checked by direct observation under the microscope and the thickness values used to calculate the resistivity were obtained from the mass of the crystal and the lateral area of the crystal. For thin crystals this method still gives a large error in absolute values of resistivity and, consequently, in the absolute values of the carrier concentrations determined by the three-band model. The growth method used provides good homogeneity of the properties of crystals in one batch, while the crystals from different batches can differ significantly, possibly due to deviations of the growth conditions from the optimal ones. Several crystals of FeSe 1-x S x with x=0, 0.037, 0.048, 0.09, and 0.014 have been studied. For unsubstituted FeSe, we studied the crystals of two different batches. The magnetoresistance (MR) at 15 K for these batches is six times different. Apparently, crystals with a lower MR have much more defects The origin of the crossover in R(T) for the FeSe family is not clear. Saturation can be an important factor because of the high resistance of the compounds at room temperature (0.5 -1.0 mΩcm) which is close to the Ioffe-Regel limit The resistance at room temperature shows a tendency to decrease with increasing x (see Fig. In the magnetotransport properties of all the crystals studied, we observed the features that indicate the presence of carriers with significantly different mobilities. This is a nonlinear field dependence of ρ xy and also a deviation from the simple square law for MR. For a characterization of the carrier transport, we fitted the field dependence of the components of the conductivity tensor, measured at 15 K, with quasiclassical threeband expressions. Details of the method used have been described elsewhere Figure Figure Figure Figures Isovalent sulfur substitution in FeSe 1-x S x causes a rapid decrease in the concentration of mobile carriers (see Fig. The variation of the mobility in Fig. The stability of the mobility value in the mobile band of the studied series can indicate that the scattering time for this carriers does not depend on the impurity level which can be expected for carriers of a certain type. In particular, this behavior can indicate a high value of the electron-phonon interaction for the studied mobile carriers from which it can be concluded that it is this group of carriers that provides the record values of acoustic absorption observed in the ultrasonic study of FeSe discussed in the introduction. Figure5 shows the ratio of mobilities plotted versus the concentration of the mobile carriers. The linear dependence can be explained by mass renormalization and the change of the pocket size. In our opinion, this confirms that the number of mobile carriers depends on the size of the pocket near the Van Hove singularity and, thus, indicates the position of this point relative to the Fermi level. Iron-based superconductors are usually considered as semimetals. The type of conductivity in these multiband materials may depend on many factors. Nevertheless, Table It is important that a "doped semimetal" model for IBS in conjunction with a doped insulator model for cuprates allow us to give a unified scheme for the formation of a superconducting phase diagram. In Fig. The point of carrier-type inversion is probably a quantum critical point. Within the framework of the band theory, a non-compensation in simple semimetals can be explained by a band nonparabolicity. In this case, the quantum criticality can be related to a Lifshitz transition. In a localized-state approach, the charge compensation is destroyed by a perceptible non-stoichiometry of the studied compositions. In this case, the position of the point corresponding to the "imperfect" FeSe in 3 (b) may indicate the largest deviation in stoichiometry. Taking into account that for the series studied there was no direct correlation between stoichiometry and compositions, this inversion may be a consequence of the charge inversion in the selenium vacancy or (in other words) the inversion of the charge transfer between the selenium and iron layers. The listed assumptions, as well as many other possible explanations, require further study. The Van Hove concept is the most natural way to bind the individual energy band and the dome in the superconducting phase diagram. Not necessarily the maximum of the critical temperature should be achieved when the position of the Fermi level and the singularity coincide. For fluctuations of different types, the optimal position may have an energy gap. 