The magnetization dynamics for ferrimagnets at the angular momentum compensation temperature T A is believed to be analogous to that for antiferromagnets. We investigated the pulsed-laserinduced magnetization dynamics in amorphous rare-earth transition-metal ferrimagnet films with a T A just above room temperature. For a low pulse fluence, the magnetization precession frequency decreases as the applied magnetic field increases, whereas for a higher pulse fluence, it increases as the applied field increases. The result was well explained by the left-handed and right-handed precession modes of the antiferromagnetic-like resonance at temperatures below and above T A , respectively, and the data were in agreement with the theoretical simulation. The study demonstrated the experimental route to achieving antiferromagnetic resonance in ferrimagnets using a pulsed laser. The fundamental research on antiferromagnets started with the classic work of Néel, and the spin dynamics in antiferromagnets has been extensively studied in the past Most of the antiferromagnetic resonances have been observed for materials with a lower Néel temperature using the microwave or infrared technique Herein, we focus on rare-earth (RE) transition-metal (TM) amorphous ferrimagnets. Alloys films such as GdFeCo have recently been considered as a prototype of ferrimagnets with a perpendicular magnetic easy axis. They serve as good playgrounds for exploiting the fundamental ultrafast physics The ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and the exchange modes at T below or around T M have been well discussed in relation to such amorphous RE-TM ferrimagnets and crystalline ferrimagnetic oxides using all-optical pulse laser methods The resonance dynamics in ferrimagnetic films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy 1. An illustration of the antiferromagnetic-like resonance for ferrimagnets at a temperature T near the angular momentum compensation temperature T A when the applied magnetic field H is parallel to the magnetic easy axis, i.e., the film normal in the present study. (PMA) are discussed based on the coupled Landau-Lifshitz equations for the magnetization vectors of the sublattices M 1(2) (1) Here, , and are the absolute values for the gyromagnetic ratio, the effective PMA field, and the effective magnetic field of the antiferromagnetic exchange coupling for the magnetization M 1(2) of sublattice 1(2), respectively. μ 0 is the permeability in a vacuum. We simplify Eq. ( so that it is determined by the difference in the angular momentum density S 1(2) (≡ ) for sublattice 1 (3) with kHz, respectively. The angle of incidence of the p-polarized pump and s-polarized probe beams were ∼3 • and ∼8 • , respectively, with respect to the film normal. The respective spot sizes for the pump and probe beams, which were focused on the film surface with spatial overlapping, were 1.3 and 0.37 mm in diameter. The maximum magnetic field applied was 2 T, with variable field directions. between the frequencies and the magnetic fields are found at fluences of 0.9 and 3.6 mJ/cm 2 , regarding which the negative and positive slopes are considered to be those for the ω -and ω + modes, as depicted in Figs. At the intermediate fluence 1.8 mJ/cm 2 , the frequency falls off near 2 T, which may be understood as the mode crossing from the ω + mode to the ω -mode. Namely, the frequency for the ω -mode becomes lower than that for the ω + mode at such high field. Before proceeding further, note the mechanism of the laser-induced magnetization precession. The primary mechanism of the excitation of these two modes can be attributed to the sudden change in PMA. This change in the anisotropy functions as the effective torque triggering magnetization precession, as discussed in relation to the all-optical FMR The effective torque works only when the magnetization makes an angle with respect to the magnetic easy direction or plane and reaches its maximum (zero) when the magnetic field is parallel (perpendicular) to the film plane in the present case. The magnetization precession amplitudes tend to decrease as the magnetic field angle θ H decreases. Hence, it is difficult to observe the dynamics when the applied field is parallel to the film normal in the case depicted in Fig. The magnetic field angle dependence of the precession frequency was also examined to gain insight into the role of PMA in the dynamics observed. Figures Instead of Eq. ( CoFe(Gd) . The two-mode precessional dynamics was computed in the time domain for various field strengths and directions, where a sublattice-independent Gilbert damping parameter of 0.001 was input. Then, the mode frequencies were evaluated via the fast Fourier transform. Note that we also employed a theoretical calculation based on the fully analytic formula for an arbitrary magnetic field and direction, with Eq. ( In summary, the pulsed-laser-induced magnetization precessional dynamics in the Gd-CoFe ferrimagnetic film with T A just above the ambient temperature was reported. An inversion of the relation of the gyromagnetic precession frequency with respect to the magnetic field was clearly observed as the pump laser fluence changed. This inversion was well explained by the change between the right-handed and left-handed precession modes, being attributed to the antiferromagnetic-like resonance modes at T below and above T A , under laser-induced heating. This unique dynamics was also examined for different magnetic field angles, with all experimental data being consistent with the micromagnetic simulation. The findings of this study will contribute to development of the physics of the antiferromagnetic spintronics underlying these ferrimagnets. 