In photoacoustic imaging, ultrasound waves generated by a temperature rise after illumination of light absorbing structures are measured on the sample surface. These measurements are then used to reconstruct the optical absorption. We develop a method for reconstructing the absorption inside the sample based on a discrete linear state space reformulation of a partial differential equation that describes the propagation of the ultrasound waves. Fundamental properties of the corresponding state space model such as stability, observability and controllability are also analyzed. By using Stokes' equation, the frequency dependent attenuation of the ultrasound waves is incorporated into our model, therefore the proposed method is of general nature. As a consequence, this approach allows for inhomogeneous probes with arbitrary absorption profiles and it accounts for the decrease in laser intensity due to absorption. Furthermore, it provides a method for optimizing the laser modulation signal such that the accuracy of the estimated absorption profile is maximized. Utilizing the optimized laser modulation signal yields an increase in reconstruction accuracy compared to short laser pulses as well as chirp modulation in many scenarios. Photoacoustic imaging, also called optoacoustic or thermoacoustic imaging, is based on the generation of ultrasound following a temperature rise after illumination of light absorbing structures within a (semi)transparent and turbid material, such as a biological tissue. It provides optical images with specific absorption contrast In photoacoustic tomography the temporal evolution of the acoustic pressure field is sampled using an array of ultrasound detectors placed on or outside the tissue surface or by moving a single detector across the detection surface. Images of the optical absorption within the tissue are then reconstructed by solving an inverse source problem Usually, for illumination short laser pulses are used, where the generated acoustic pressure just after the pulse is proportional to the absorbed optical energy density In this work, the influence of acoustic attenuation for choosing the optimal temporal laser excitation is investigated. At depths larger than the range of the ballistic photons, i.e. more than a few hundreds of microns in tissue, light is multiply scattered and the spatial resolution is limited by acoustics. As higher acoustic frequencies, which have smaller wavelengths and allow a better resolution, are stronger damped than lower frequencies, the spatial resolution decreases with depth. The spatial resolution is limited at such depths by the acoustic diffraction limit that corresponds to the highest detectable frequency. The ratio of the imaging depth to the best spatial resolution is roughly a constant of 200 There have been several attempts for mathematically compensating the acoustic attenuation to get images with a higher spatial resolution. Already in 2005, La Rivière et al. proposed an integral equation that relates the measured acoustic signal at a given transducer location in the presence of attenuation to the ideal signal in the absence of attenuation Burgholzer et al. have compensated directly the attenuation in photoacoustic tomography by using a time reversal finite differences method with a lossy wave equation All these attempts have in common that the compensation of the frequencydependent attenuation is an ill-posed problem, which needs regularization. The physical reason for this ill-posedness is thermodynamics: acoustic attenuation is an irreversible process and the entropy production, which is the dissipated energy of the attenuated acoustic wave divided by the temperature, is equal to the information loss for the reconstructed image The first and most basic description of an attenuated acoustic wave has been given already in 1845 by Stokes In the proposed approach, the linear partial differential equation (PDE), which describes the propagation and attenuation of the acoustic wave, is discretized to bring it into the form of a linear state space model (SSM). This can be done for any of the wave equations describing acoustic attenuation, as long as the source term containing the heating function, which describes the absorbed optical energy density per unit time deposited at a certain depth, can be written as a product of a space and a time dependent function. In this work Stokes' equation is used as being the first one and just one attenuation term has to be added compared to the wave equation without attenuation where p(z, t) is the local pressure at depth z and at time t, c 0 is the ultrasound wave velocity, τ is the relaxation time, β denotes the coefficient of thermal expansion, and C p the specific heat. The heating function H(z, t) = R(z)i(t) is the product of the fractional energy absorption R(z) at depth z and the temporal profile of the illumination i(t) The main idea of the proposed approach is the following: (i) Discretize the PDE in (ii) Apply linear estimators on the measurements to estimate this vector. During the discretization, we will show that this vector origins from a non-linear transformation of the absorption profile. (iii) Estimate the absorption profile based on the estimated vector. We will show that our method observes the following features: a) it allows for probes with arbitrary absorption profiles; b) it accounts for frequency dependent attenuation of the ultrasound waves; c) the decrease in laser intensity because of absorption is incorporated; d) the laser modulation signal can be completely arbitrary and it is not constrained to signals with a well-behaving autocorrelation function; e) structural properties of the model such as stability, observability and controllability can be easily verified. Besides the fact that the proposed estimation method allows to estimate the absorption profile considering all mentioned effects, it furthermore allows to optimize the laser modulation signal such that the accuracy of the estimated absorption profile is maximized. We will show how this optimization is performed and we will demonstrate the improvement in accuracy by utilizing the optimized laser modulation signals. It will turn out that the reconstruction accuracy can significantly be increased by utilizing the optimized laser modulation signal. In what follows the lower-case bold face variables (a, b,...) indicate vectors, and the upper-case bold face variables (A, B,...) indicate matrices. We further use (•) T to denote transposition, I n×n to denote the identity matrix of size n × n, and 0 m×n to denote the zero matrix of size m × n. If the dimensions are clear from context we simply write I and 0, respectively. In this section, the workflow of deriving a discrete SSM that approximates the physical processes according to Stokes' equation in We assume the 1D probe begins at z = 0. The z-axis is divided into N z equally spaced elements. The width of each element is denoted by ∆ z and the left border of each element is located at z n = n∆ z with n = 0, . . . , N z -1. The locations z n are referred to as grid points. The vector z ∈ R Nz×1 is defined as the vector containing all grid points z n for n = 0, . . . , N z -1. The function p(z, t) in (1) describes the local pressure at location z and at time t. Based on that, we define the vector p k ∈ R Nz×1 as the local pressure at all grid points in z at the time t = k∆ t , where ∆ t is the step width of the time discretization. We now turn to the first term in For the time t = k∆ t , the right hand side of (2) can be written as a vector matrix product according to where the matrix D ∈ R Nz×Nz is given by The second term in (1) can be discretized and written in terms of p k as which corresponds to the second order central finite difference. Similarly, the third term in (1) can be discretized using (3) as follows: For the right hand side of (1), we utilize H(z, t) = R(z)i(t) ĩk (z n ) evaluated for every grid point z n for n = 0, . . . , N z -1 can be written in vector We are now able to evaluate H(z, t) = R(z)i(t) for every grid point at time t = k∆ t , which is denoted by h k ∈ R Nz×1 . Then, h k follows from (8) by multiplying every element of ĩk with χ and the corresponding μ n , yielding With this result, the right hand side of (1) follows to where the backward difference was used to approximate ∂h k /∂t in and further This result shows that for approximating the pressure profile p k+1 , the current pressure profile p k as well as the previous one p k-1 are required. In order to bring this equation into the form of an SSM, we define the state vector which allows to bring (17) into the form of which represents the final form of the discretized Stokes' equation in where c T ∈ R 1×2Nz is a row vector with a 1 at its first entry and all zeros elsewhere. The measurement noise w k in ( Note that in We draw the attention to the fact that in Also note that in our model the only unknown material parameter is the absorption profile μ, which is related to the vector d via • introduce a perfectly matched layer at the boundaries of the simulation area; • make the simulation area larger such that the reflected waves do not disturb the measurements. In this work, we implement the latter solution and thus we refer to the unaltered simulation area as area of interest. In control system design, stability is a fundamental requirement, which describes the properties of the equilibrium points in the state space. There are various interpretations of the stability such as convergence to an equilibrium, the speed of the convergence, boundedness of the input, the output and the state. In this section, we give a necessary and sufficient condition for the asymptotic stability of the noise free SSM, i.e. q k = 0, w k = 0 in ( The proposed discrete SSM is also a linear and time-invariant (LTI) system, which is asymptotically stable if and only if all the eigenvalues of the state matrix A lie inside the unit circle. In order to examine this property, we first prove some identities about the eigenvalues of A. Lemma 3.1. The eigenvalues of the matrices M i ∈ R Nz×Nz (i = 1, 2, 3) in ( where Proof. Note that the second order finite difference matrix D is also a symmetric tridiagonal Toeplitz matrix. According to Section 3 in where λ k (D) are always strictly negative. Now let us consider the eigenvalues λ k (D) and the corresponding eigenvectors v k . Then we have The proof is analogous for M 2 and M 3 . Proof. In Lemma 3.1 we showed that the matrices M i (i = 1, 2, 3) have the same eigenvectors v k (1 ≤ k ≤ N z ). In addition, M i 's are symmetric and so the matrix V = (v 1 , . . . , v Nz ) is orthogonal. Therefore, they can be diagonalized as follows where . Furthermore, by Using these identities, the state space model can be transformed into an equivalent form where x k = Tx k , g = Tg, c = Tc, and T is an orthogonal matrix: The matrices A and A share the same eigenvalues, which satisfy the following equation where k and by substitution we have k . After rearranging and multiplying both sides by λ k ( A) • Λ 1 we get the following matrix equation Λ w (1) Note that Λ is a diagonal matrix, for which every diagonal element is a quadratic polynomial in λ k ( A). Therefore, the eigenvalues are equal to the roots of these polynomials: The statement of the Lemma follows from the similarity of the matrices A, A and M i , are pairwise distinct and nonzero then A in the transformed SSM (30) can be diagonalized as follows where the matrices Λ -, Λ + ∈ R Nz×Nz contain the first and the second roots of the quadratic polynomials in Proof. First, we prove that A W = WΛ. By applying Vietà's formulas to the quadratic polynomials in If A has pairwise distinct eigenvalues then the corresponding eigenvectors, i.e. the columns of W are linearly independent, thus it is invertible. The validity of the explicit formula for W -1 can be verified via simple matrix multiplication: W W -1 = I. Theorem 3.4. The state space model in Proof. In order to prove the stability of a discrete time state space model, one should show that the eigenvalues λ k ( A) lie inside the unit disc. To this end, we apply two steps of the well-known Schur-Cohn algorithm (see Section 6.8 in Step 1. Let us consider the diagonal elements of the polynomial matrix in | should be satisfied, otherwise there is at least one eigenvalue that lies outside the open unit disc. In the notations of ( According to the sign on the left hand side, we have the following two cases: | is satisfied. Now we can proceed by applying the Rouchè's theorem on which has as many zeros inside the unit disc as P 1 . Step 2. We can simplify Again by Vietà's formulas, the condition Considering the signs of the left hand side we have The first inequality is true for all 1 ≤ k ≤ N z , hence the eigenvalues of the state matrix lie inside the unit disc if and only if the second condition is satisfied. The statement of the theorem follows by substituting back the definitions of λ k (D) and α into In order to demonstrate the results we displayed the eigenvalues of the matrices D and A in Fig. Proof. First, we prove the observability by applying the so-called Popov-Belevitch-Hautus (PBH) test. To this end, we give the explicit formulae for the left and right eigenvectors of A. Lemma 3.3 and (32) implies that A = T T WΛ W -1 T = QΛQ -1 , where Q is as follows: According to the PBH condition, the SSM in ( Theorem 3.6. If we choose the parameters c 0 , τ, ∆ t , ∆ z ∈ R + such that the eigenvalues of A are pairwise distinct and non-zero then the state space model in where d is generated by the corresponding absorption profile μ in Proof. In order to analyze the controllability, we consider the matrix Q -1 that contains the left eigenvectors of A in its rows: For the sake of simplicity, we will apply the PHB test on the rows of P only, since multiplying by S is just a scaling of the eigenvectors. Namely, we should verify that Pg = 0, where g is defined in (45) Since the diagonal elements of Λ + , Λ -, Λ 1 are non-zero, the kth coordinate of the product Pg will be equal to zero if and only if v T k d = 0. The orthogonality of V implies that this condition can be satisfied if and only if ∃i Due to this fact and to the non-negativity of the absorption profile, v T i d = 0 if and only if d = s • v 1 (s ∈ R + ), which along with Corollary 3.6.1. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.6 the state space realization in We emphasize that the conditions in Theorems 3.4-3.5 can be easily verified since the eigenvalues are defined exactly in Lemma 3.2. Therefore, one can set the time resolution ∆ t , the spatial resolution ∆ z , the relaxation time τ , and the ultrasound wave velocity c 0 in such a way that the corresponding SSM is asymptotically stable, observable and controllable. Another advantage of the proposed method is that the state matrix can be transformed into a diagonal canonical form by using Lemma 3.3. Therefore, the transfer function of the SSM can be defined via partial fraction expansion, which permits frequency-domain analysis as well. We will now derive a linear connection between d and the measurements. For that, we introduce the vector representation of all measurements y k for k = 0, . . . , N y -1 as y ∈ R Ny×1 . We begin with the impulse response h u,y [k] from the input u k to the measurements, which is given as We write the elements of h u,y [k] for k = 0, . . . , N y -1 compactly in vector form as u k is connected with the laser intensity according to or in vector form as Note that in contrast to h u,y [k], h i,y [k] practically decreases to zero and can be well approximated as finite impulse response (FIR) with length N y . We assume the discretized laser intensity i k has significant values within the first N i < N y time steps and is zero for all remaining time steps. These N i values of i k written in vector form are denoted by i ∈ R N i ×1 . In the following, we refer to i as laser modulation signal. The vector of measurements is then given by where C ∈ R Ny×Ny represents the corresponding discrete convolution operator, i.e. it is a Toeplitz matrix constructed by the elements of i, and w is a zero mean Gaussian noise vector containing the noise samples w k in Furthermore, b is connected with d according to This result shows that the unknown vector d, which contains the unknown absorption profile according to In this section we apply various estimators on the measurement vector y in order to estimate the vector d. It is followed by a non-linear procedure that allows for estimating the absorption profile μ based on the estimates of d. By doing so, instead of estimating the unknown pressure profile p k , we can directly estimate the vectors d and μ based on the measurements y. The noise vector w in (53) is assumed to consist of N y white Gaussian noise samples with variance σ 2 w . Hence, the noise covariance matrix is a scaled identity matrix C ww = σ 2 w I. With this condition, the optimal estimator for the model in (53) in a least squares (LS) sense is given by Although this is the best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) of d, it is only applicable if H has full column rank. Typically, the matrix H is highly ill-conditioned, thus the solution d is very sensitive to small perturbations, therefore regularization is inevitable. In our experiments we apply two widely used direct methods: the Tikhonov regularization and the truncated/damped singular value decomposition (TSVD/DSVD). These are biased estimators The filter factors f j 's are responsible for controlling the spectral contents of the solution. Generally, they are chosen to eliminate high-frequency components with small σ j . In Section 7, we will apply the following filter factors: where k c is called truncation or cutoff index, and ω > 0 is the regularization parameter. Note that the TSVD applies an ideal filter to the spectral content of the solution, while Tikhonov regularization and DSVD allows smoothing in a wider transition band. In order to control the rate of smoothing the regularization parameters k c and ω should be chosen properly. Here, we utilize the work of Hansen and O'Leary . The point with maximum curvature is called corner, which separates the solutions into under-and overregularized sets. Therefore, choosing k c and ω corresponding to the corner point is a good tradeoff between regularization and perturbation errors. Generalized cross-validation (GCV) is another option for estimating the optimal regularization parameter. However, in (cf. ( We emphasize that the proposed reconstruction method is very general and widely applicable. It can deal with completely arbitrary laser modulation signals and it is not constrained to signals with a well-behaving autocorrelation function, chirped signals, or signals with varying spaces between short pulses. Many effects are accounted for such as frequency dependent attenuation and a decrease in laser intensity due to absorption inside the probe. Estimating the absorption profile is a difficult problem due to the ill-conditioned system of linear equations in (53), and therefore, we used various methods for estimating the absorption profile. Although the BLUE was the simplest estimator among them, it provides a possibility for finding an optimal laser modulation function. To this end, let us consider the vector μ that results from a non-linear transformation of the estimates d. However, the more accurate the estimated vector d is, the more precise μ becomes. Hence, we focus on the estimation accuracy of d since the measurements are linear in d and the error statistics of d are analytically tractable in case of the BLUE. We investigate if an optimal laser modulation function in terms of the discrete-time laser modulation signal i can be found to minimize the error variances in d. The corresponding error covariance matrix of the estimates d in ( Note that this error covariance matrix does not account for the process noise in With this restriction, it describes the confidence in the estimates d. Furthermore, since H in (54) is a function of i according to (52), the confidence in the estimates d is also a function of i. This fact is utilized in the following where (59) is used as basis for formulating an optimization problem in order to find an optimal laser modulation signal i. The main diagonal elements of C dd in (59) contain the variances of the estimates. In order to minimize these variances we use the trace of C dd as cost function Now the goal is to find the vector i that minimizes this cost function. However, we define several constraints on i, such that it represents a practicable modulation sequence. Some obvious constraints are as follows: (i) i must be time-limited. (ii) The elements of i must be larger than or equal to 0 and smaller than or equal to 1. The first requirement origins from the fact that a laser intensity is always positive from a physical point of view. The upper bound accounts for the restriction that every laser has a maximum output power that cannot be exceeded. (iii) The energy shall be below some upper limit. (iv) i shall be band-limited in order to easily transform i into a continuous-time laser modulation function i(t) without aliases. These are just some meaningful examples of possible constraints. In practice, maybe more constraints origin from the concrete laser setup. In Sections 7.1-7.3, we present two examples applying the same constraints as listed above, and discuss the resulting optimized laser modulation signals. Note that the cost function in (60) as well as some constraints are non-linear in i. Hence, the optimization problem is very demanding and a global minimum is unlikely to be found. However, local minima can be found by numerical optimization. We will show the potential in this approach by presenting several simulation results in the next section. We begin with two examples where our reconstruction method is demonstrated. After that, we discuss the performance gain of the proposed optimization procedure. In these demonstrations, we estimate the absorption profile from synthesized measurement data y with the methods described in Section 5. This gives an impression about the accuracy of the proposed algorithm for estimating d and the absorption profile μ. The following numerical experiments and the corresponding MatLab implementations can be found as supplementary material of the paper, in which we used external libraries such as the regularization tool package We begin with a single reconstruction task. For that, we choose the parameters listed in Tab. 1. Furthermore, as laser modulation signal i k we take a short pulse with a duration of approximately 10 ns as shown in Fig. Table Value The measurement vector y is generated using the state space model in ( Repeatedly performing this estimation procedure allows deriving statistics about the estimation error. The resulting root mean square errors RMSE( d ] plotted over the spatial coordinate are shown in Fig. This graph reveals that the errors tend to increase as the spatial depth increases. This behavior has several reasons. 1) The arriving laser intensity decreases due to absorption inside the probe. 2) The damping of the ultrasound waves between generation and arriving at the sensor increases as the spatial depth increases. 3) Since the ultrasound waves generated at larger indexes n require a longer time to arrive at the sensor, more noise samples q k in ( In order to investigate the impact of the measurement noise on the accuracy of our method, we varied σ 2 w between 10 -10 and 10 -1 . One can see the results in Fig. We emphasize that basically the same model utilized for generating the measurements was also used by the reconstruction method except for the process noise in Instead of the smooth absorption profiles employed for the previous simulations, we now use a piecewise constant μ. Other changes compared to Tab. 1 are listed in Tab. 2. The area of interest now spans a depth of N z ∆ z = 3 cm, while the laser modulation signal i is a chirp signal depicted in Fig. Again, the RMSE values of the estimations d and μ averaged over 100 simulation 10 -9 10 -7 10 -5 10 -3 10 -1 10 1 runs are shown in Fig. Finally, in order to demonstrate the impact of the laser modulation signal i on the accuracy of the estimation, we repeated the simulation by using the same short pulse as in Example 7.1. For a fair comparison, we set the energy of the short pulse to be equal to the energy of the chirp signal. It can be seen that the resulting ARMSE of the estimations μ in Tab. 3 are better for the short pulse in this example. In the following section we reshape the laser modulation signal i in such a way that the error of the estimation is minimized. Now we demonstrate the performance gain using an optimized laser modulation signal obtained by the methods described in Section 6. It will turn out that the resulting optimized laser modulation signal strongly depends on the considered problem. In order to demonstrate this relation, two different experiments with same optimization constraints are performed. More precisely, we utilize the following constraints: (i) The elements of i must be larger than or equal to 0 and smaller than or equal to 1. (ii) i must be time-limited with a maximum length N i = 50, or N i = 100 for Examples 7.1-7.2, respectively. (iii) In order to provide a fair comparison between different laser modulation schemes, A Linear State Space Model for Photoacoustic Imaging in an Acoustic Attenuating Media25 their energy shall be equal. This constraint is implemented via (iv) The last constraint is that i shall be band-limited. This band-limitation is implemented the following way. Let B 1 be a matrix that inserts N zeros number of zeros at the beginning and the end of i We utilize the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) to transform B 1 i into the frequency domain. Let F denote the DFT matrix of size N dft × N dft with N dft = N i + 2N zeros . The product q = FB 1 i produces a double-sided discrete spectrum of i. The singlesided spectrum q s ∈ C Ns×1 has a length N s and q s is given by where B 2 = B 3 0 Ns×N dft -Ns and where B 3 is a diagonal matrix of size N s × N s whose first diagonal element is 1 and all remaining diagonal elements are 2. A possible way of generating a band-limited i is to enforce abs (q hf ) = abs (B 4 q s ) ≤ ε, where B 4 = 0 N hf ×Ns-N hf I N hf ×N hf is a matrix that sorts out the N hf highest frequencies of the single-sided spectrum, and ε ∈ R N hf ×1 is a vector with positive but arbitrary small values. In this example, we consider a uniform ε according to ε = 1, where 1 is a column vector of length N hf with all elements being 1. We mainly use the same settings as for Examples 7.1-7.2 with additional parameters for the optimization process that are listed in Tab. 4. For Example 7.1, the optimization process was initialized with a random sequence of length N i = 50 and with values between 0 and 1. In Fig. We developed a method for reconstructing the absorption profile in photoacoustic imaging based on surface measurements of the ultrasound waves. For approximating the original Stokes' PDE we introduced a discrete linear SSM. This approximation accounts for frequency dependent attenuation of the ultrasound waves as well as a decrease in laser intensity due to absorption. Then we proved that the parameters of the SSM can be chosen in such a way that the model is asymptotically stable, observable and controllable. The conditions of these properties are simple, and thus they can be easily verified. We also emphasize that our algorithm is of general nature, namely it allows for inhomogeneous probes with an arbitrary absorption profile. In addition, the SSM allows to linearly estimate a certain vector that depends on the absorption profile. Based on this algorithm, the absorption profile is estimated via a non-linear routine. We provided several simulations that demonstrate the reconstruction accuracy of the proposed approach for different noise levels. In these experiments, various regularization methods were studied to overcome the ill-posedness of the problem. Furthermore, a method to optimize the laser modulation signal has been introduced such that the accuracy of the estimated absorption profile is maximized. Utilizing the optimized laser modulation signals may yield a significant increase in reconstruction accuracy compared to short pulses as well as chirp modulation. The concrete performance gain depends on the utilized constraints of the optimization process. For a limited frequency bandwidth the result of the reconstruction gets better if a single short pulse is separated into smaller pulses having in total the same energy as the single short pulse. Sometimes it might be advantageous to use several smaller pulses instead of one larger excitation pulse, e.g. to meet safety guidelines for the maximum light fluence or because of power limitation of the excitation laser. If adequate reconstruction is used, such as our proposed state space model, the reconstruction error is the same for more pulses with less amplitude if the total energy is the same. Compensation of acoustic attenuation and dispersion in two or three dimensions can always be reduced to a one-dimensional problem in a two-stage process: first, for each detector location the ideal signal in the absence of attenuation is calculated from the measured signal. This one-dimensional reconstruction can be performed with our presented state space model approach. In a second step, any reconstruction method for photoacoustic tomography can be used for reconstructions in higher dimensions Lemma 3.2. If the state matrix A in (