We report on a many-electron wavefunction theory study for the reaction energetics of hydrogen dissociation on the Si(100) surface. We demonstrate that quantum chemical wavefunction based methods using periodic boundary conditions can predict chemically accurate results for the activation barrier and the chemisorption energy in agreement with experimental findings. These highly accurate results for the reaction energetics enable a deeper understanding of the underlying physical mechanism and make it possible to benchmark widely used density functional theory methods. Reactions of gas-phase molecules on surfaces play an important role in many physical and chemical processes. Along a surface reaction path, the energetics of the combined molecule-surface system varies significantly according to the rearranged chemical bonds featuring charge transfer, covalent bonding, and weak van der Waals interactions. Arrhenius relation indicates a small error in the activation energy can cause a large change of the reaction rate. Thus a many-electron theory able to describe a wide range of exchange and correlation effects in molecules, solids, and molecule-surface systems simultaneously is required to estimate a reaction scheme with chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol). The computational method of choice for such problems is density functional theory (DFT) due to its good trade-off between accuracy and computational cost In this work we consider a prototypical moleculesurface reaction: the dissociative adsorption of molecular hydrogen on the Si(100) surface Here, we present a periodic quantum chemical description of the reaction using a recently implemented periodic CC theory, applicable to molecule-surface systems We employ periodic slabs for all density-functional and wavefunction based calculations. A Si(100)-2 × 2 surface with 8-layers is used, terminated with hydrogen atoms to passivate dangling bonds at the bottom layer. All calculations involve a plane-wave basis within the full potential projector-augmented-wave method (PAW) as implemented in the VASP code Figure We now switch from DFT to the wavefunction based hierarchy for treating electronic correlation. HF theory, approximating the many-electron wavefunction by a single Slater determinant, overestimates the reaction energy by as much as 0.7 eV compared to experiment. In passing we note that this is in contrast to atomization energies of molecules and cohesive energies of solids, which are usually underestimated by HF Having confirmed experimental measurements for the chemisorption energy using accurate electronic structure theories, we now seek to discuss the activation barrier height for the dissociation, which is defined by E ads a = E transition -E initial . Establishing accurate estimates of barrier heights is more difficult compared to reaction energies for theory as well as experiment. Transition states often exhibit strong electronic correlation effects that can only be treated accurately using higher levels of theory. Furthermore experimental measurements of adsorption barriers are usually lower bounds and do not allow to determine directly whether the reaction proceeds via the H2 or H2 * mechanism. Adsorption barriers for both pathways are depicted in the middle panel of Fig. We now turn to the discussion of wavefunction based ab-initio calculations for the barrier. HF theory yields barriers larger than 1 eV for both pathways. In contrast to DFT based findings, HF favors the H2 * path over the H2 one by 0.16 eV. In order to better understand the difference between HF and DFT, we consider the different paths as a competition between stretching the H 2 molecule and flattening the Si dimers of the surface. In Fig. The picture emerging from the results discussed above is qualitatively different within the methods we examine. The two barriers are approximately degenerate using the more sophisticated CCSD and CCSD(T) theories, in contrast to LDA, PBE and SCAN functionals, where the H2 path is favored. Hybrid functionals remedy partly the self-interaction error and thus yield barriers that differ less than the GGA and LDA ones. An exception is B3LYP, where although the barriers are higher in energy, the H2 path is favored by 0.16 eV. The reason is that part of the exchange-correlation functional is based on a mixture of LDA and GGA rather than solely on GGA as in PBE0 and HSE06. Thus B3LYP contains part of the LDA errors and deficiencies, hence the higher barriers and the larger difference between the two pathways. Barriers for the two mechanisms based on the RPA also differ significantly. We associate the discrepancy between the CCSD(T) barriers and the RPA ones with the use of PBE orbitals for the RPA calculations as opposed to the HF ones for CCSD(T). It is likely that a sizeable fraction of the error exists already in the original DFT functional, leading to an overestimation of the H2 barrier. In order to get more insight into the disagreement of CC methods and DFT based methods, we performed non-self-consistent calculations for the activation barriers of the two mechanisms at the level of DFT-PBE using HF orbitals. The results are shown in Table . I. We observe that when HF orbitals are employed for DFT-PBE calculations the H2 barrier is appreciably higher, whereas the H2 * one remains almost the same. The difference between the two barriers is 0.04 eV in close agreement with the accurate CCSD(T) and hybrid DFT results. This is partly due to the cancellation of the density driven oneelectron self-interaction error 60 , and similar results have been obtained for simple molecular reaction barriers and adsorption energies We have performed a range of DFT and quantum chemical wavefunction based calculations for the H2 and H2 * adsorption/desorption mechanisms of H 2 on the Si(100) surface at low coverage. We show that periodic CCSD(T) calculations yield excellent agreement with experimental results for the adsorption barriers and the reaction energy. In contrast to previous calculations, we find similar activation energies for the H2 and H2 * adsorption mechanisms. DFT-GGA and DFT-meta-GGA functionals over-stabilize the H2 adsorption mechanism due to incorrect ground state densities caused by selfinteraction errors. We argue that both a correct description of the H 2 molecule dissociation, as well as of the surface dimer reconstruction is essential for a precise interpretation of the reaction mechanisms. We note that hybrid functionals, like PBE0 and HSE06 slightly underestimate the adsorption barriers, however, they yield adequate results for the energetics of the reaction. We have demonstrated that high level periodic wavefunction based methods have the potential to serve as accurate benchmark theories for predicting reaction energetics on periodic surfaces, which will ultimately help to further improve upon computationally more efficient yet less accurate methods.