Recent research in two-dimensional (2D) materials has boosted a renovated interest in the pn junction, one of the oldest electrical components which can be used in electronics and optoelectronics. 2D materials offer remarkable flexibility to design novel p-n junction device architectures, not possible with conventional bulk semiconductors. In this Review we thoroughly describe the different 2D p-n junction geometries studied so far, focusing on vertical (out-of-plane) and lateral (in-plane) 2D junctions and on mixeddimensional junctions. We discuss the assembly methods developed to fabricate 2D p-n junctions making a distinction between top-down and bottom-up approaches. We also revise the literature studying the different applications of these atomically thin p-n junctions in electronic and optoelectronic devices. We discuss experiments on 2D p-n junctions used as current rectifiers, photodetectors, solar cells and light emitting devices. The important electronics and optoelectronics parameters of the discussed devices are listed in a table to facilitate their comparison. We conclude the Review with a critical discussion about the future outlook and challenges of this incipient research field. The p-n junction has become an important component in modern electronics since its serendipitous discovery by Russel Ohl almost 80 years ago. Using two-dimensional (2D) materials a large variety of p-n junctions can be produced. These can be junctions based on a single 2D material (homostructures), on the junction between two different 2D materials (heterostructures) or junctions based on the combination of a 2D material with a material with higher or lower dimensionality (mixed-dimensional structures). Different concepts of p-n junctions within these categories are shown. Figure 2D materials can be extracted out of layered materials by mechanical or chemical exfoliation. While 2D materials supported on bulk substrates are known since at least 50 years, their isolation and integration in devices is more recent. In 2004 Geim and Novoselov 9 demonstrated the first electronic device based on a 2D material, fabricated by isolating single-layer graphene from bulk graphite using mechanical cleaving. In this section we will discuss the different approaches developed to produce 2D materials and to integrate them in p-n junctions, including top-down approaches (which are very powerful in creating different and novel p-n junctions) and bottom-up approaches suitable for large-scale integration. Atomically thin 2D materials can be isolated from bulk layered crystals by mechanical cleaving. The presence of strong bonds in the plane of the layers and weak bonds between them allows these materials to cleave perfectly along the atomic plane. As mentioned above, the first technique developed is mechanical cleavage, also known as the "Scotch tape method". In this method a piece of tape is pressed against the surface of a natural or artificial bulk layered crystal and then it is peeled off, cleaving the crystal and leaving debris and flakes of the material onto the tape surface. The flakes can then be transferred to an arbitrary surface by pressing on it the tape containing the flakes and subsequently releasing the tape gently. The main drawback of the Scotch tape method is that it produces flakes with different sizes and thicknesses randomly distributed over the sample substrate and only a small fraction of these flakes are atomically thin. This limitation can partially be circumvented by the use of optical identification methods to find atomically thin crystals from the crowd of thicker, bulky flakes. Many 2D materials can be directly grown in the form of single-or few-layer nanosheets on various substrates. In 2014 Gong et al. Using to the top-down and bottom-up approaches described in the previous section, a large number of p-n junction devices based on 2D materials has been demonstrated in literature. In this section, we will review these results by passing from homojunctions to heterojunctions and ending with the mixed-dimensional junctions. Homojunctions devices are p-n junctions based on a single 2D material. Figure Figure The reduced thickness of 2D materials usually comes along with a large electric field effect tunability. Figure In addition to making 2D materials sensitive to external electric fields, the reduced thickness gives them a high sensitivity to the environment surrounding their surface. Molecules physisorbed or chemisorbed onto the surface can influence transport in the 2D material for example by introducing doping effects A different approach to dope 2D materials is elemental doping, a technique that has proven to be successful for controlling carrier types in bulk materials. In bulk TMDCs elemental doping with Nb (five valence electrons), Fe or Re (seven valence electrons) has been used as a substitutional p-type or n-type dopant to replace the metallic atoms such as Mo or W (six valence electrons). The combination of two different 2D materials to form a heterostructure is one of the most promising strategies because of the large variety of bandgap energies and doping types available among the different 2D materials. Figure Vertical heterostructures represent a popular architecture in 2D materials. Due to a surface free of danglingbonds and interlayer van der Waals interactions it is possible to stack 2D materials on top of each other without constraint on the lattice constants. While in literature one can find many examples of vertical 2D junctions, the same is not true for lateral heterojunctions. In this case a direct mechanical assembly is not possible and one has to rely on bottom-up fabrication methods, as discussed in section 2.2.2. Figure Apart from a purely 2D architecture, many efforts were dedicated to produce hybrid p-n junctions where a 2D material is in contact with a material of lower dimensionality, such as in the case of a molecular crystal or a nanotubes film, or higher dimensionality, like in the case of a bulk semiconductor such as Si. Molecular organic crystals and nanotube films have surfaces with saturated bonds and are therefore free from dangling bonds. They typically interact via van der Waals forces and this allows the integration of these low-dimensional materials with 2D materials in van der Waals heterostructures. The first use of a p-n junction that we will discuss is that of a current rectifier. The built-in electric field at the p-n interface allows the flow of charge carriers in one direction (forward bias) while blocking the current in the other direction (backward bias). Many 2D based p-n junctions have been used as rectifiers, showing excellent performances and novel functionalities. One such example is the control of the rectification ratio with a gate field. Deng and coauthors reported gate-tunable rectifying current-voltage characteristics (IVs) in a monolayer MoS2-BP p-n junction (see Fig. Although the shape and features of the IV characteristics of 2D p-n junctions are similar to those of a conventional p-n junction, the underlying physical mechanism of rectification can be very different. When considering the two model junctions depicted in Fig. The depletion region in a bulk p-n junction is modified by the application of a voltage as schematically depicted in Fig. P-n junctions constitute the central building blocks of photodetectors, solar cells and light emitting diodes (LEDs). Their main application is thus in optoelectronics. Typically, there are two operating modes for p-n junctions: photovoltaic mode (PV), in which the p-n junction is not biased, and photoconductive mode (PC), where the p-n junction works under reverse external bias. The experiments discussed above were performed under global illumination, that is by illuminating the device with a spot larger than its size. We will now turn to local illumination and specifically to scanning photocurrent (SPC) studies. By scanning a diffraction-limited light spot over a device while measuring the current one can construct SPC maps that yield information on the spatial profile of the bands or the electric fields present in the device. Compared to global illumination, the SPC map highlights that photocurrent generation can be non-homogeneous across the overlapping region. In Fig. Electroluminescence is the result of radiative recombination of electrons and holes in a material, usually a semiconductor, which release their energy as photons. The most basic requirement for efficient light emission is a direct optical transition in the semiconductor, as in the case of monolayer semiconducting TMDCs. Electrically driven light emission produced by a unipolar current in single layer MoS2 FETs has been reported to take place near the contact electrodes via impact excitation 147 or in a suspended sheet by Joule heating. The difference between the energy of the emission peaks is attributed to different dielectric environments that can influence the exciton binding energy. Zhang et al. have employed mono-and few-layer WSe2 in p-i-n (i, intrinsic) junctions with an electric doublelayer transistor (EDLT) architecture, 149 where the doping of the semiconductor channel is modified by tuning the voltage between the drain and source electrodes with respect to the gate electrode, enabling the accumulation of opposite charge carriers close to each of the electrodes. This device configuration circumvents the requirement of using monolayers for light emission due to the breakdown of the inversion symmetry in few-layer flakes under high-gate fields, and it also enables the emission of circularly polarized light as shown in Figure In this section we show three tables that list the different p-n junctions based on 2D materials found in literature. Table Despite the large number of experiments discussed in this Review, many challenges still need to be overcome for the integration of 2D p-n junctions in mass-produced electronic components. The two most important challenges are the large-scale fabrication of 2D p-n junctions and the environmental degradation of 2D materials. The first main challenge is related to the large-scale production of tailored van der Waals heterostructures with well-controlled interfaces. Even if the deterministic placement methods are very successful for laboratory-scale experiments, they are not suited for commercial applications. Growing methods like the CVD growth described in Section 2.2.2 have already proven to be capable of growing high-quality 2D materials including lateral and vertical heterostructures at a laboratory-scale. Van der Waals epitaxial methods hold even more promises to the synthesis of high-quality 2D heterostructures. Up-scaling of these growth methods is possible and in the years to come the realization of higher quality devices can be expected. A second challenge is the environmental degradation of many of the known 2D materials. For example, when exposed to air, black phosphorous in its ultrathin form tends to uptake moisture which degrades the electronic properties of the material. Apart from conventional optoelectronic applications, 2D p-n junctions hold still many unexplored applications and fundamental questions. For example, thermoelectric applications of 2D p-n junctions have not been thoroughly investigated yet. The traditional Peltier device, a component largely used in electronics for cooling (and less commonly for heating), is based on a p-type and a n-type semiconductor thermally connected in parallel and electrically in series. Van der Waals heterostructures could be used to fabricate atomically thin cooling (or heating) elements combined with the other attractive properties of 2D materials, such as the high transparence or the flexibility. Another interesting route is the study of novel p-n junction geometries (like for example circular p-n junctions recently demonstrated in graphene In recent years we have witnessed the production of p-n junctions that take advantage of the ultrathin nature of 2D materials. Both bottom-up and top-down production methods have proven capable of creating p-n junctions of high quality with exquisite optoelectronic properties. In this Review we have revised the recent progress on 2D p-n junctions, discussing the most used materials and fabrication methods and examples of 2D p-n junctions from literature belonging to eight different junction architectures. With these architectures different applications have been realized and we have discussed experiments that use 2D p-n junctions respectively as rectifiers, as photodetectors/solar cells and as light emitting diodes. Finally a comparison between the important figures of merit of the various devices from literature is made. By no means, this field is closed. 2D materials continue to offer many opportunities to fabricate novel p-n junctions with outstanding properties that open up exciting scientific routes both in terms of fundamental questions and in term of applications. SnS/WS2200/0.7 15 -173