A complete analytical prescription is given to perform three basic (OR, AND, NOT) and two universal (NAND, NOR) logic gates at nano-scale level using simple tailor made geometries. Two different geometries, ring-like and chain-like, are taken into account where in each case the bridging conductor is coupled to a local atomic site through a dangling bond whose site energy can be controlled by means of external gate electrode. The main idea is that when injecting electron energy matches with site energy of local atomic site transmission probability drops exactly to zero, whereas the junction exhibits finite transmission for other energies. Utilizing this prescription we perform logical operations, and, we strongly believe that the proposed results can be verified in laboratory. Finally, we numerically compute two-terminal transmission probability considering general models and the numerical results matches exactly well with our analytical findings. Designing of logic gates has always been the subject of intense research since these are considered as the basic building blocks of digital electronics. Among the widespread applications, logic gates carry the electronic information in a traditional computer system where around 100 million gates are embedded to execute computational operations and these gates are made from field-effect transistors (FETs) and metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs). The rapid progress of epitaxial and lithographic techniques has allowed us to fabricate phase-coherencepreserving samples where quantum interference effects could be observed Several other proposals have also been given for logical operations. For instance, photo-induced logic gates using DNA molecules and other nano structures To find whether simple tailor made geometries are capable of designing logic gates at nano-scale level, few years back one of the authors of us has suggested the possibilities of getting logical operations using simple quantum rings to be fixed at half-flux quantum (i.e., φ = φ 0 /2, where φ 0 = ch/e). Utilizing the concept of complete destructive interference under symmetric condition at φ = φ 0 /2 all possible logic gates have been explored. But to confine this magnetic flux in a nano-sized ring unrealistically large magnetic field is required In the present work we intend to establish how logical operations can be achieved in simple two-terminal tailor made geometries without considering any magnetic field, which of course yields an important step along this direction. To do this we consider two different shaped conductors, chain-like and ring-like, and in each case the bridging conductor is coupled to local atomic site(s) through dangling bond(s) (for instance see Fig. The work is arranged as follows. In Sec. II we present theoretical prescription for a general model. The results are thoroughly analyzed in Sec. III, and finally, we conclude our findings in Sec. IV. The logical response is described in terms of transmission probabilities in a two-terminal setup. Finite (high) transmission corresponds to the 'ON' state of the output, while the 'OFF' state represents zero (or vanishingly small) transmission probability. Here, we present the theoretical prescription based on transfer matrix (TM) method Let us begin with Fig. of the bridging conductor sandwiched between S and D, H elec and H tun correspond to the Hamiltonians of the electrodes and chain-to-electrode coupling, respectively. These Hamiltonians are written as: and, where c † i (c i ) corresponds to the creation (annihilation) operator, ǫ i gives the on-site energy and τ represents the inter-atomic interaction between the neighboring atomic sites of the wire. a † n (a n ) and b † n (b n ) represent the creation (annihilation) operators in the source and drain electrodes, respectively, and they are parameterized by site energy ǫ 0 and nearest-neighbor hopping integral τ 0 . Now we discuss the method of calculating transmission probability for this setup using TM method. Let us start with the Schrödinger equation where the wave function |ψ is expressed in terms of the Wannier functions |ψ p of different sites as |ψ = C p |ψ p . C p 's are the coefficients. In TM approach, the TM essentially connects the wave function of a particular site with its neighboring sites. For an arbitrary site p, its wave function ψ p (from now on we write |ψ p as ψ p , for simplification) can be linked with the wave functions ψ p+1 and ψ p-1 of the neighboring sites through the transfer matrix (P ) as Thus for a N -site chain we can write the matrix equation as where M , representing the transfer matrix of the full system, becomes where, P i 's are the transfer matrices for the sites labeled as 1, 2...N -1, N , respectively, whereas, M L and M R correspond to the transfer matrices for the boundary sites at the left and right electrodes, respectively. Solving Eq. 4 and doing some simple mathematical steps we get all the transfer matrices and they look like where k is the wave vector. Assuming plane wave incidence with unit amplitude we can write the wave functions for the source and drain electrodes as where r and t are the reflection and transmission coefficients. Thus, Eq. 6 can be re-written as Solving the above equation (Eq. 8) we get the coefficient of transmission probability t for each wave vector k, associated with incidence energy E, and eventually find the transmission probability This is the general prescription for the calculation of transmission probability through a two-terminal conducting junction. Depending on the bridging system i.e., the conductor sandwiched between two electrodes we only modify the sub-Hamiltonian H wire keeping the rest unchanged. Since all the logical operations described in the next section are analyzed for very small sized conductors, the average spacing of successive energy levels are considerably large such that moderate temperatures have very minor impact on the proposed analysis. Therefore, we ignore the temperature effect and set it to zero throughout the discussion. Based on the above theoretical prescription, worked out for a general model, we analytically calculate transmission probabilities of different specific models required to achieve respective logical operations. Below we discuss them one by one. For the case of one-input logic gate (NOT gate) a single atomic site having site energy ǫ α is coupled with parent lattice via a dangling bond. This coupling is described by the parameter τ λ . Whereas two such atoms are considered in the case of two-input logic gates. Their site energies are defined as ǫ α and ǫ β , and they are coupled with the identical strength τ λ , like oneinput gate. The site energies ǫ α and ǫ β , treated as the inputs, are controlled by suitable gate electrodes. When no voltage is applied in the electrodes ǫ α = ǫ β = 0 and it is called as the OFF state of the two inputs, whereas in presence of finite gate voltage ǫ α = ǫ β = 1 which is defined as ON state of the inputs. For simplification of analytical calculations we fix all the inter-atomic interactions (τ, τ 0 , τ S , τ D , and τ λ ) at 1 eV and choose site energies of all the atomic sites apart from local atomic site(s) to zero, though one can choose any other set of parameter values. Only the thing is that the expressions will be quite longer and difficult to read, but the physics will be exactly same. Thus, in the OFF state condition (ǫ α = ǫ β = 0), site energies of the local atomic sites become identical to the parent lattice sites. NOT gate: The bridge setup for NOT gate operation is schematically shown in Fig. equations look very simple as we choose all the inter-atomic interactions at 1 eV and fix site energies of the electrodes and parent lattice sites to zero. Now substituting ψ 2 we get the renormalized difference equation for site 1 as where the renormalized site energy of site 1 becomes Thus the setup given in Fig. . Doing the necessary steps we eventually reach to the expression of transmission probability as At a first glance it seems that the energy E is dimensionless since transmission probability does not have any dimension. But this is not the case at all. We reach to this relation Eq. 14 only due to the fact that we set all the site energies apart from local atomic site(s) (α and/or β) to zero, and fix the inter-atomic hopping integrals at 1 eV. From the expression Eq. 14 we can clearly explain the NOT gate operation setting the injecting electron energy E at 1 eV. When the input is high i.e., ǫ α = 1 eV, trans- mission probability drops exactly to zero (OFF state), while high transmission viz T = 0.75 (ON state) is obtained when the input is low (ǫ α = 0). The response is summarized in Table In order to check the robustness of our analysis for any such general model in istics which we calculate numerically for a 40-site chain considering N α = 20 (N α represents the location of the parent atomic site with which the local site is coupled through the dangling bond). Figure To achieve AND and NOR gates, the setup is slightly modified than the previous one i.e., the configuration used for NOT gate. Using the bridge configuration, given in Fig. Here two atomic sites, labeled as 3 and 4, having energies ǫ α and ǫ β are connected to the parent sites 1 and 2 respectively. In one step re-normalization the system maps exactly to the 1D lattice (see Fig. Under this situation the full transfer matrix M becomes Finally solving Eq. 8 we get the following expression of transmission probability From this expression we can explain two logical operations (AND and NOR) setting the energy E at two different values. For E = 0, we get AND operation and the corresponding truth table is given in Table . II. Whereas for E = 1 eV, the NOR operation is obtained and its truth table is shown in Table . III. In Fig. In the first step, the effects of 5th and 6th atomic sites are incorporated into site numbers 2 and 4, respectively, to get a regular diamond shaped conductor (see Fig. In the second step re-normalization, diamond shaped conductor moves to a linear one (see Fig. Once we get this effective linear geometry we can employ T M method, like previous cases, and the transmission probability becomes, where x = two distinct values. For E = 0 we get OR operations, whereas for E = 1 eV NAND operation is is observed. And their corresponding truth tables are given in Table. IV and Table . V, respectively. At the end, in Fig. In the present work we intend to establish how logical operations can be performed using simple tailor made geometries. Comparing all the propositions we can argue that our proposed model is the most suitable one, particularly due to its simplicity, to design logic gates at nano-scale level. A complete analytical prescription is given to understand three basic (OR, AND, NOT) and two universal (NAND and NOR) logic gates. Two geometrical shapes of the bridging conductor, chain-like and ring-like, are taken into account where in each case the conductor is coupled to a local atomic site or two such sites depending on one input or two input logic gates. By using gate electrode site energy of the local site is controlled which determines the OFF or ON state of an input signal. The key idea is that whenever the site energy of a local atomic site matches with the injecting electron energy, transmission probability drops exactly to zero. This phenomenon is utilized to design the logical operations. In this paper we propose five logical operations and unable to establish other two operations viz, XOR and XNOR gates using such simple setups. Hopefully we will do that in our forthcoming work. Finally, we would like to state that all these results are valid for a reasonable range of parameter values which we confirm through our extensive numerical analysis and here we present some of them considering more general models with higher number of lattice sites. Thus, we strongly believe that the present proposal can be easily tested in laboratory. MP would like to thank University Grants Commission, India (F. 2-10/2012(SA-I)) for her research fellowship.