We consider a new model system supporting Majorana zero modes based on semiconductor nanowires with a full superconducting shell. We demonstrate that, in the presence of spin-orbit coupling in the semiconductor induced by a radial electric field, the winding of the superconducting order parameter leads to a topological phase supporting Majorana zero modes. The topological phase persists over a large range of chemical potentials and can be induced by a predictable and weak magnetic field piercing the cylinder. The system can be readily realized in semiconductor nanowires covered by a full superconducting shell [1], opening a pathway for realizing topological quantum computing proposals. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) hold the promise to revolutionize quantum computation through topological quantum information processing In this Article, we show that a superconducting cylinder filled with a semiconducting core is an ideal alternative candidate for creating MZMs. While being of similar simplicity and practical feasibility While it is known that well-chosen superconducting phase differences can be used to break time-reversal sym-FIG. metry and localize MZMs in semiconductor heterostructures Theoretical model.-We consider a nanowire consisting of a semiconducting core and a full superconducting shell, see Fig. Here p is the electron momentum operator, e > 0 the electric charge, m * the effective mass, μ is the chemical potential, α the strength of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, and finally σ i are spin-1 2 Pauli matrices. r, φ and ẑ are the cylindrical unit vectors. For ease of presentation, we consider r-independent μ and α in our effective model, which may be viewed as averaged versions of the corresponding r-dependent quantities. The vector potential A φ = Φ(r)/2πr, where Φ(r) = πBr 2 is the flux threading the cross-section at radius r. For simplicity, we neglect the Zeeman term due to the small magnetic fields required in these devices. The shell (e.g., made out of Al) induces superconducting correlations in the nanowire due to Andreev processes at the semiconductor-superconductor interface. If the coupling to the superconductor is weak, the induced pairing in the nanowire can be expressed as a local potential ∆( r) (see Appendix B). In the Nambu basis Ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ † ↓ , -ψ † ↑ ), the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for the proximitized nanowire is then given by We assume that the thickness of the SC shell is smaller than London penetration depth: R 3 -R 2 λ L . Therefore, the magnetic flux threading the SC shell is not quantized. However, the magnetic field induces a winding of the superconducting phase, i.e. the order parameter ∆( r) = ∆(r)e -inφ with φ the angular coordinate and n ∈ Z the winding number. In practice, the winding number n adjusts itself to the value of the external magnetic field so that the free energy of the superconducting shell is minimized. This is the familiar Little-Parks effect We notice the following rotational symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian: [J z , H BdG ] = 0 with J z = -i∂ φ + 1 2 σ z + 1 2 nτ z , where we introduced τ i matrices acting in Nambu space. Eigenstates of H BdG can thus be labeled by a conserved quantum number m J : Ψ m J (r, φ, z) ∝ e i(m J -1 2 σz-1 2 nτz)φ Ψ m J (r, z). The wave function has to be single-valued, which imposes the following constraint on m J : We remove the angular dependence of H BdG via a unitary transformation Here ∂ ∂r and p z = -i ∂ ∂z . Note that naively one would expect spin-orbit coupling to average out. However, the non-trivial structure of m J -eigenvectors yields finite matrix elements proportional to the Rashba spin-orbit coupling. We will now show that the above BdG Hamiltonian supports topological superconductivity and MZMs. Hollow cylinder model.-We now focus on the limit in which the semiconductor forms a thin-wall hollow cylinder (i.e., R 1 ≈ R 2 in Fig. Here, ∆ ≡ ∆(R 2 ) and the parameters μ m J and V Z correspond to the effective chemical potential and Zeeman energy. A m J and C m J represent the coupling of the generalized angular momentum J z with magnetic field and The energy gap is multiplied by the topological index Q = ±1, so that red regions correspond to the gapped topological phase. The black dashed line denotes the boundary of the topological phase in the mJ = 0 sector, according to Eq. ( with φ = n -Φ(R 2 )/Φ 0 . Particle-hole symmetry relates states with opposite energy and angular quantum number m J , i.e., PΨ E,m J = Ψ -E,-m J with P = τ y σ y K, where K represents complex conjugation. Thus, the m J = 0 sector, which is allowed when the winding number n is odd, is special as it allows non-degenerate Majo-rana solutions at zero energy. Let us consider the m J = 0 sector and n = 1. In this case, A 0 = 0 and C 0 = 0, and one can map Eq. (C1) to the Majorana nanowire model of Refs. closes. The resulting phase diagram is shown in Fig. with v = α∆/ ∆ 2 + μ 2 0 and corresponding coherence length ξ ∼ v/E (0) gap . We now consider the effect of m J = 0 sectors. In general, the topological phase diagram can be obtained by calculating the topological index Q where Q = 1 and Q = -1 correspond to trivial and topological phases, respectively. A well-defined topological phase requires the quasiparticle bulk gap to be finite for all values of m J . Due to the angular symmetry of Eq. (C1), different m J sectors do not mix and, as a result, the condition for a finite gap in the Thus, the topological phase supporting MZMs appears due to the change of Q in the m J = 0 sector. In Fig. In Fig. The evolution of the local density of states (DOS) at the end of a finite wire as a function of magnetic field is shown in Fig. In Fig. Effect of angular-symmetry-breaking perturbations. We now investigate perturbations breaking the angular symmetry of the Hamiltonian (4). Such perturbations (e.g., shape deformations or disorder in the superconducting shell) are ubiquitous in realistic devices and would couple different m J eigenstates. This may actually have beneficial consequences for the stability of the topological phase. Indeed, the perturbations that couple different m J sectors may open a gap in regions of large μ and α, see Fig. We have also numerically studied the effect of disorder in the superconductor within the full cylinder model, see Fig. Conclusions and Outlook. In this Article we investigated a novel physical system supporting MZMs based on semiconductor nanowires covered by a superconducting shell where Φ(r) = πBr 2 and Φ 0 = h/2e. It follows from this argument that the solution of Eq. (A1) should be periodic with Φ 0 , see Fig. We neglect the Zeeman contribution since the typical magnetic fields of interest are smaller than 100 mT for which the Zeeman splitting is negligible. In order to understand the magnetic field dependence of the quasiparticle gap, one needs to calculate the Green's functions for the disordered SC shell as a function of Ãφ . The disordered superconductor is characterized by an elastic mean free path l e and a corresponding diffusive coherence length ξ d = √ l e ξ 0 l e , where ξ 0 = v F /∆ is the coherence length in the bulk, clean limit (v F is the Fermi velocity in the SC). For simplicity, we assume henceforth that the thickness of the superconducting shell d ξ d (A4) where H = eB/4m and m J is the angular momentum eigenvalue and is the eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian The functions Ḡ and F are determined by the following equations: with τ being the elastic scattering time and mJ ∼ p F R 3 being the angular momentum cutoff. In the limit H → 0, the leading order corrections to the above equations appear in quadratic order since linear terms vanish due the averaging over m J . Indeed, one can show that the self-consistent solution for τ → 0 is given by where κ = 3H 2 τ m 2 J /∆ is the characteristic scale for the magnetic field effects in the problem. Here Thus, corrections to the pairing gap are governed by the small parameter κ 1. In terms of the flux quantum, this condition reads Φ/Φ 0 R 3 /ξ d . Note that disorder suppresses orbital effects of the magnetic field and leads to a weaker dependence of the pairing gap on magnetic field (i.e., quadratic vs linear). In other words, the disordered superconductor can sustain much higher magnetic fields compared to the clean one, see Fig. This estimate is consistent with the numerical calculations, see Fig. 1. In this case, one can neglect magnetic field dependence of the self-energy for the entire lobe. (Alternatively, when ξ d ∼ R 3 one can neglect magnetic field effect when n -Φ Φ0 1). Thus, one can use zero field Green's functions for the disordered superconductor to investigate the proximity effect which are obtained by substituting n + ∆ 2 0 in the clean Green's functions. One can now integrate out the superconducting degrees of freedom and calculate the effective self-energy due to the tunneling between semiconductor and superconductor. Using the gauge convention when ∆ 0 is real, tunneling Hamiltonian between SM and SC is given by where r and r refer to the SM and SC domains, respectively. T (r, r ) is the tunneling matrix element between the two subsystems, and Ψ and Ψ † are the fermion annihilation and creation operators in the corresponding subsystem. One can calculate the SC self-energy due to tunneling to find where Γ(r) is a quickly decaying function away from r = R 2 describing tunneling between the two subsystems. Note that the SC self-energy in this approximation is the same as for a clean superconductor because the ratio of ωn / ∆0 is independent of τ . The Green's function for the semiconductor can be written as In order to calculate quasiparticle energy spectrum one has to find the poles of above Green's function. In the hollow cylinder limit, Γ(r = R 2 ) is a constant and one can find low energy spectrum analytically. Indeed, after expanding Eq. (B3) in small ω n , the quasiparticle poles are determined by the spectrum of the following effective Hamiltonian: FIG. By comparison with Eq. ( Appendix C: Effect of higher mJ states on the gap As demonstrated in the main text, states with larger m J = 0 have the potential to close the gap and thus limit the extent of the topological phase. Here we provide analytical estimates within the hollow cylinder model for the regions in parameter space that become gapless due to higher m J states. We start with the BdG Hamiltonian (5) of the main text assuming n = 1, with with φ = 1 -Φ(R 2 )/Φ 0 . With respect to the main text, we also introduced anisotropic spin-orbit coupling with α 1 and α 2 representing the strength of coupling to the transversal and longitudinal (z) momentum direction. In the main text, we used isotropic spin-orbit α 1 = α 2 = α but it is convenient for the discussion below to distinguish the two contributions. Example energy spectra for the lowest m J sectors are shown in Fig. One may notice that the term A mj + V Z σ z acts as a Pauli limiting field for a given subband and leads to pairbreaking effects. We can understand the generally finite extent of the gapped regions in the α-μ plane by considering conditions (C8) and (C9). Condition (C8) is either met for sufficiently large m J or sufficiently large α 1 (when m J is kept constant). At the same time, large m J states generally violate condition (C9) since the bottom of the band is shifted up ∝ m 2 J which needs to be compensated by sufficiently large μ. We therefore expect to find gapless states for large μ (which enable large m J ) or very large α which fulfill condition (C8) while still being compatible with condition (C9). is not important for the demonstration of the existence of the topological phase. We restrict our analysis to the m J = 0 sector for n = 1 in the limit 1/m * R 2 2 α/R 2 . In this case, the problem at hand can be simplified since the Hamiltonian becomes separable at α → 0 and effect of spin-orbit can be included perturbatively. In the limit α → 0, the electron spin is conserved and the Bogoliubov transformation diagonalizing Hamiltonian (E1) can written as where the transformation coefficients U λ,pz,σ (r) and V λ,pz,σ (r) are given by the solution of Eq. (E1). Neglecting the spatial dependence of ∆(r), the functions U λ,pz,σ (r) and V λ,pz,σ (r) can be approximately written as where the single-particle wave functions f λ,σ (r) are defined by the following radial Schrödinger equation: The linear term in b represents a constant energy shift, After introducing the dimensionless coordinate x = r/R 2 and the dimensionless energies κ λ,σ = 2m * R 2 2 (ε λ,σ + δ σ ), the above equation becomes The normalized eigenstates of this equation, satisfying the boundary condition f λ,σ (x = 1) = 0, are Here, 1 F 1 is the is the Kummer confluent hypergeometric function and the coefficients C λσ are determined by the normalization condition The corresponding eigenvalues are where κ λ,σ are zeros of the appropriate Kummer confluent hypergeometric function for the two spins. Taking all into account, for b = 1 and n = 1 the lowest eigenvalues of Eq. (E5) are Note that different values of b will affect the numerical coefficients reported above. In the limit 1/2m * R 2 2 α/R 2 , ∆, one can project the system to the lowest energy manifold (i.e. λ = 1) and integrate over radial coordinate. After some algebra, the effective Hamiltonian takes the simple form (up to a constant): where the effective parameters are given by: One can notice that the Zeeman term remains finite at b = 1 (i.e. one flux quantum) in contrast to the hollow cylinder model. As mentioned in the main text, this is because the semiconducting states are distributed through the semiconducting core rather than localized at r = R 2 , so that the flux cannot perfectly cancel the effect of the winding number. In summary, we have shown that full cylinder model also maps onto Majorana nanowire model of Refs. Note that so far we have considered m J = 0 sector. One needs to investigate other m J sectors and make sure that quasiparticle gap does not close in the topological phase. This can be done numerically, see main text. example, in the middle of the wire. We focus on n = 1 lobe in Fig. 