In this work, the authors fabricated Cu2O porous nanostructured films (PNFs) on glass slide substrates by the newly developed positive bias deposition approach in a balanced magnetron sputtering (MS) system. It was found that the surface morphology, crystal structure and optical property of the as-deposited products were greatly dependent on the applied positive substrate bias. In particular, when the substrate was biased at +50 V and +150 V, both of the as-prepared Cu2O PNFs exhibited a unique triangular pyramids-like structure with obvious edges and corners and little gluing, a preferred orientation of (111) and a blue shift of energy band gap at 2.35 eV. Quantitative calculation results indicated that the traditional bombardment effects of electrons and sputtering argon ions were both negligible during the bias deposition in the balanced MS system. Instead, a new model of tip charging effect was further proposed to account for the controllable formation of PNFs by the balanced bias sputtering deposition. As one of the most common two kinds of copper oxides, cuprous oxide (Cu2O) is an important p-type transition metal oxide semiconductor material. Due to the advantages of low-cost, non-toxicity and abundant copper sources and the potential applications in the fields of gas sensors In the existing literature, the main preparation methods of Cu2O films include direct oxidation Dealloying was initially proposed for the fabrication of porous metal thick films and then was further developed to fabricate metal oxide PNFs by Su et al Similarly, can we also use MS equipment or make some targeted improvement to realize the flexible preparation of Cu2O PNFs? With the above considerations, in this work we successfully prepared various Cu2O PNFs by our newly developed positive bias sputtering deposition approach via adjusting the applied substrate bias voltage in a balanced MS system. It was observed that the surface morphology, crystal structure (or texture) and optical property of the as-prepared Cu2O PNFs were greatly dependent on the applied substrate bias voltage. A new mechanism of tip charging effect was proposed for a full explanation of the substrate bias voltage-dependent formation of PNFs while the traditional ion bombardment effect was demonstrated to be negligible. All samples were deposited onto glass slides in a JGP500A mode radio-frequency balanced MS system. A Cu target of 99.99 wt.% purity was fixed to a 6 kGs magnetic cathode, which was connected with a 13.56 MHz RF power supply. The distance between the Cu target and the glass slide substrate was set to be ~15 cm. The chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of 5.0×10 -4 Pa and subsequently back-filled with a steady flow of high pure Ar (15 sccm, 99.999 wt.%) to maintain a chamber pressure of 0.10 Pa. Note that no external oxygen gas flow was introduced to the chamber due to the sufficient residual oxygen in the pre-pumped high vacuum chamber The as-achieved deposits were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, ZEISS SUPRA 55), powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD, RIGAKU D/Max 2500 PC) and ultravioletvisible (UV-vis) spectrophotometer (SHIMADZU UV-2450). FESEM images in Fig. The GIXRD patterns in Fig. Fig. On the contrary, the other PNF structures without obvious edges and corners or with more gluing (see Fig. Through the above analysis, we find that the surface morphology, crystal structure and optical property of the Cu2O PNF change accordingly when different positive bias voltage is applied on the substrate. This means that a certain effect of substrate bias plays an important role during the bias deposition of Cu2O PNF. In the existing literature, the research on bias deposition is mainly focused on the thin films prepared under a negative substrate bias in an unbalanced MS system where n,v are the concentration and velocity of Ar + or e -respectively near the substrate, q=1.6×10 -19 C, and S is the basal area of the 3-inch Cu substrate holder. As driven by the electric field of negative or positive substrate bias, some of the Ar + or e -would be accelerated respectively and travel through the working gas in the chamber. Meanwhile, the Ar + or e - would collide with the gas atoms and degrade the energy on their way to the substrate. According to Eqn. (8) in ref. where α is a constant (α=0.835 for the case of Cu target and Ar sputtering gas According to Eqn. (3), the average retained energy Ek1 of Ar + (Ek1,Ar) or e -(Ek1,e) under different substrate bias is shown in Table According to Eqn. (4), we can calculate the concentration values of Ar + (nAr) and e -(ne) close to the substrate at different substrate bias, which are shown in Table When the incident e -or Ar + bombards the Cu atoms or Cu2O molecules on the substrate, the transfer of energy will be carried out. In this process, we assume that both energy and momentum are conserved for simplicity. Therefore, the transferred energy (Ek2) to the Cu atoms or Cu2O molecules can be expressed by the following equation: where m1 is the mass of an Ar + or an e -, and m2 is the mass of a Cu atom or a Cu2O molecule. After a simple calculation, we can obtain the transferred energy to the Cu atoms (Ek2, Cu) or Cu2O molecules (Ek2, Cu2O), as listed in Table In the above, we have excluded the impact of bombardment of Ar + and e -on the bias deposition of thin films, especially the bombardment of e -during the positive bias deposition, in the balanced MS system. In the following, we propose a new model instead for the present positive bias deposition of Cu2O PNFs. As schematically illustrated in Fig. (1) When Vs =0 V, there is no effect of substrate bias. The as-deposited Cu atoms or Cu2O molecules have no sufficient energy to ensure the effective diffusion and migration on the substrate, and also can not selectively deposit at the tip of the film surface. As a result, the surface of Cu2O film presents a randomly-oriented bicontinuous "ligament-channel" PNF structure. (2) When Vs =+50 V and +150 V, Force II plays the major role. Under the constraint of the electric field of one's own locating tip, the Cu atoms or Cu2O molecules deposit and grow in a columnar form. Meanwhile, the adsorption of Cu atoms or Cu2O molecules is also affected by the neighboring tip fields, which likely leads to a lateral face-selective adsorption, thereby causing an anisotropic crystal growth of triangular pyramids with little adhesion to each other. (3) When Vs =+100 V and +200 V, the contribution of Force I is greater than that of Force II. The atoms or molecules deposited at the tips will further diffuse along the surface of the film to a certain extent, so that the surface of the film is more glued and compacted. In the balanced MS, we believe that the deposition mechanism for negative substrate bias is similar to that for positive substrate bias. However, there are still some differences, big or small, besides the above mentioned bombardment effect of e -and Ar + . As we know, the mobility of electrons and holes in a semiconductor film is different. Consequently, they differ on the response speed under the positive and negative bias and the feedback effect of the tip charging. In general, the mobility of electrons is higher than that of holes. Thus, we infer that the response speed of electrons is faster than that of holes, and it is easier to gather electrons at the tips of the film, and thus the negative bias effect will be more obvious. Similarly, the carriers in the metal film are electrons, and the electrons can be more easily aggregated on the tips under the negative bias. In contrast, the metal cations are much more passive at the tips of the film surface under the positive bias. Based on this, we think that the effects of positive and negative bias on the tip charging effect or the bias deposition effect of the film will be different although a quantitative analysis is missing. In this work, we successfully fabricated Cu2O PNFs on positively-biased substrates in a balanced MS system. It was found that the morphology, structure and optical property of the as-deposited products were non-linearly dependent on the applied positive substrate bias. In particular, when the substrate was biased at +50 V and +150 V, both of the obtained Cu2O PNFs exhibited a triangular pyramids-like structure with obvious edges and corners and little gluing, a preferred orientation of (111) and a blue shift of energy band gap at 2.35 eV. Quantitative calculation results indicated that the traditional bombardment effects of electrons and sputtering ions were both negligible during the bias deposition in the balanced MS system. Based on the experiment results and the related theoretical analysis, a new model of tip charging effect was further proposed to account for the flexible formation of PNFs by the balanced bias sputtering deposition. 