In civil, mechanical, and aerospace engineering, structural dynamics is commonly understood to be a discipline concerned with the analysis and characterization of the vibratory response of structures. Key elements of the response are the amplitude, phase, and damping ratio, which are quantities that vary with the excitation frequency. In this paper, we extend the discipline of structural dynamics to the realm of materials engineering by intrinsically building localized substructures within, or attached to, the material domain itself-which is viewed as an extended medium without defined external boundaries. Our system is essentially a locally resonant elastic metamaterial, except here it is viewed from the perspective of unique dissipation characteristics rather than subwavelength effective properties or band gaps, as widely done in the literature. We provide a theory, validated by experiments, for substructurally synthesizing the dissipation under the conditions of free-wave motion, i.e., waves not constrained to a prescribed driving frequency. We use an extended elastic beam with attached pillars as an example of a metamaterial. When compared to an identical infinite beam with no attached substructures, we show that within certain frequency ranges the metamaterial exhibits either enhanced or reduced dissipation-which we refer to as positive and negative metadamping, respectively. These regimes are rigorously identified and characterized using the metamaterial's band structure and wavenumber-dependent dissipation diagram. This theory impacts applications that require a combination of high stiffness and high damping or, conversely, applications that benefit from a reduction in loss without the need to change the backbone constituent material. The dynamic response of a structure depends primarily on the properties of the materials from which it is formed. Important elements of the response are the amplitude, phase, and damping ratio (loss factor), which are all quantities that vary with the excitation frequency. The aim of vibration engineering is to select the most appropriate materials and use these materials to design a structure with the desired response characteristics When presented with an engineering material in its raw form, i.e., without the proposed intervention of dissipation engineering, damping is generated primarily by thermoelastic effects which are influenced typically by the following underlying features Metadamping has been realized by introducing locally resonant substructures within a host material where the level of dissipation is enhanced compared to an equivalent material that does not include oscillating substructures Figure We define the ratio r = b pil /b un , where "pil" and "un" denote pillared and unpillared, respectively, as a metric for metadamping. A ratio greater than unity signifies positive metadamping, i.e., the time response of the pillared beam decays faster than that of the unpillared beam. Conversely, a ratio less than unity indicates negative metadamping. Here, we report an experimental metadamping ratio r exp = 1.49 which is indicative of nearly 50% positive metadamping, i.e., the pillared beam exhibits 50% higher dissipation than the unpillared beam for this particular form of excitation. To support these experimental findings, we perform a numerical experiment using an in-house, finite-element (FE) code In elastic metamaterials such as our pillared beams, local resonances appear as horizontal lines in the frequency versus wavenumber diagram and couple with the dispersion curves of the underlying medium. These couplings may generate band gaps, which are frequency ranges characterized by strong spatial attenuation. Figure Experimentally-fitted Bloch damping model Numerous studies on phononic materials have established a relation between dispersion analysis of the unit cell and eigenanalysis, the FRF, or transient response of a structure formed from a finite repetition of the unit cell Theory of Metadamping With our experimentally validated Bloch waves dissipation model in place, we now examine the concept of metadamping from a rigorous theoretical perspective. Figure To demonstrate the effects of these metadamping properties on the temporal response of a corresponding finite structure, we separately apply two impulse excitation signals, each with a frequency content concentrated mostly within the respective metadamping frequency window mentioned above. The Fourier spectrum of each of these signals is shown on the right side of Fig. To determine how the spacing of the pillars affects metadamping (positive and negative), we perform a parametric study and vary the unit-cell length a while keeping the pillar size constant. In this analysis, we define two metrics, D p and D n , to quantify the degree of positive and negative metadamping, respectively. These metrics are evaluated by performing calculations on the damping ratio diagrams for the unpillared and pillared cases (see details in Supplementary Information). Figure To further characterize the metadamping phenomenon, we resort to an analytical model of a locally resonant rod admitting only longitudinal motion (which is the relevant mode of motion for all previous results). In a recent study, Maznev , where E is the standard Young's modulus and is assumed to be frequency independent. Deriving the dispersion relation for the damped rod yields the complex frequency λ s in the form given by (A1) in the Methods section. From λ r , we extract the wavenumber-dependent damping ratio ζ r (κ) = -Re(λ r )/ Abs(λ s ). Note that because of our choice of the material damping model for the rod, ζ r is constant over the whole wavenumber range (unlike the case of the beam models analyzed earlier). Similarly, we derive the dispersion relation for the locally resonant rod (the derivations are detailed in Supplementary Information) and obtain the two solutions λ 1 (acoustic) and λ 2 (optical). From these two solutions, we extract the frequencies and the damping ratios ζ 1 and ζ 2 . The acoustic branch in this system is associated with positive metadamping; hence for positive metadamping to hold over the whole wavenumber range, the inequality ζ 1 (κ) -ζ r (κ) > 0 has to be satisfied for all κ. Conversely, the optical branch in this model is associated with negative metadamping, thus the inequality for negative metadamping to hold over the entire BZ is ζ s (κ) -ζ 2 (κ) > 0. We find that for an arbitrary choice of the coupling parameter β = 0.01, the condition for positive metadamping is true for any prescribed η and the condition for negative damping is satisfied for 0 < η ≤ 0.14 (see Supplementary Information for details). Metadamping is a dissipation emergence phenomenon whereby the level of dissipation may be enhanced or reduced in a metamaterial compared to a statically equivalent material with the same mass and type and quantity of prescribed damping. Using a novel experimentally fitted damping model for accurate prediction of wavenumber-dependent dissipation, we provided evidence of metadamping in a finite metastructure setting with direct correlation to theory as described within the corresponding infinite metamaterial dispersion framework. Both positive and negative metadamping have been demonstrated. Our results show that either an increase or a decrease in dissipation, beyond nominal levels, is realizable by the proposed concept. In both cases, metadamping may in principle be tailored to desired frequency ranges. While elastic metamaterials are known to provide strong spatial attenuation inside band gaps, this work demonstrates the ability to exhibit strong, or weak, temporal attenuation. Future work will extend the phenomenon of metadamping to the microscale and to waves driven at prescribed frequency. using a CNC milling machine. In our finite-element (FE) model, we assume a density of ρ = 2700 kg/m 3 , a Young's modulus of E = 68.9 GPa, and a Poisson's ratio of ν = 0.33. The FE mass M and stiffness K matrices in Eq. ( Following the treatment of general damping models by the state-space approach, which was originally developed for vibrations of finite structures (e.g., where n is the total number of modes. The imaginary part ω ds represents the damped frequency corresponding to the sth Bloch mode, and the real part is the product of the wavenumber-dependent damping ratio ζ s and, in the case of Rayleigh (proportional) damping, the undamped frequency ω s . From (A1), we obtain the damped dispersion diagram and the damping-ratio diagram. The latter diagram provides us with the level of dissipation that each Bloch mode exhibits. Experimental frequency response functions (FRF) are obtained as follows. The beam under investigation is suspended using nylon cords in order to simulate free-free boundary conditions. An accelerometer (PCB WJ35C65) is fixed on one of the ends of the beam, at the center point of the cross-section. Impulsive excitations are applied with an impact hammer (PCB 086C02) at a point located at the center of the opposite cross-section, such that only the longitudinal modes are excited and measured. The measurements are collected with a NI-DAQ 9234 data acquisition system (the frequency rate is set to 25.6 kHz and the sample time is 5 s). The inertance spectrum is obtained by post-processing the time data using a commercial software package (MATLAB, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, 01760, USA). As described in the main article, the experimental curve fitting of our numerical model is done in two steps. In the initial step, a direct fitting is done to match the numerical FRF to an experimentally generated FRF. In the second step, the model damping parameters are fine-tuned by correlating the finite and infinite problems using the proposed procedure demonstrated in Fig. Here we describe in the initial curve fitting step. The modal damping ratios associated with the two measured resonance frequencies in the range of interest (0-8 kHz) are extracted using the circle-fit modal analysis technique. The code EasyMod The numerical time responses are obtained by implementing a direct time integration scheme for exponentially damped systems The constants are a = 0.01 and b = 8 × 10 -5 ; these values are selected to have the numerical excitation profile match the profile of the experimental impulse. The frequency content of this profile falls mostly within the positive metadamping range of 2.5-3.75 kHz. For the negative metadamping case, a prescribed force is applied that is also of Gaussian form: where a = 0.01, b = 3 × 10 -4 and c = 2.5 × 10 4 . Here, the constants are selected such that most of the frequency content falls within the negative metadamping range of 3.75-5 kHz. To study the effects of the pillar spacing on the degree of metadamping, we perform a parametric study and vary the unit-cell length a. Two metadamping metrics, D p and D n , are defined to help quantify the amount of positive and negative metadamping, respectively, in the unit cell. The procedure to obtain these metrics is as follows. First, the Bloch modes are sorted using the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) criterion. As demonstrated in Fig. The middle line is drawn such that it passes through the extrema of the two pillared branches. The wavenumbers at which these extrema occur are determined based on the curvature (i.e., second derivative; see insets on Fig. We want to ensure that the added mass of the pillar is not a factor into our metadamping study. The unpillared beam has a volume of V un = 32 in 3 whereas the pillared beam has a volume of V pil = 34 in 3 . Therefore, to show that the metadamping is due to the local resonance phenomena only and not due to the addition of extra mass that exhibits material damping, we perform a similar analysis as that of Fig. In this section, we follow the recent work by Maznev where c * L = E * /ρ = c L (1 + iη) is the longitudinal speed of sound, ρ is the density, and E * = E(1 + iη) is the complex Young's modulus. For the locally resonant rod, an inertia term for the oscillator mass is added where M is the mass of the oscillator and U is its displacement. The volume fraction of the oscillator is negligible compared to the rod; therefore, the density and the modulus of the rod are not affected. The equation of motion of the spring-mass oscillator is where K is the spring constant and η is the damping coefficient. Note that the damping coefficient is chosen to be identical to the prescribed damping paramter (loss factor) for the supporting rod. Assuming solutions of the form u = ue iωt-iκx and U = U e iωt-iκx , (A6), (A7) and (A8) respectively become branch exhibits positive metadamping over the whole wavenumber, i.e., ζ 1 (κ) -ζ s (κ) > 0 is satisfied for 0 < κ < π, and the optical branch simultaneously exhibits negative metadamping over the whole wavenumber range., i.e., ζ s (κ)-ζ 2 (κ) > 0 is satisfied for 0 < κ < π. Using (A19), we plot the damped frequencies Im(λ s ) and Im(λ 1,2 ) for prescribed values β = 0.01 and η = 0.1 (see Fig. In Fig. Figure Dissipation engineering at the macroscopic level is additive; it builds on what may be achieved at the micrscopic level. Furthermore, it enables increased, or decreased, dissipation at very low frequencies, i.e., frequencies far lower than what can be accessed by microscopic mechanisms. The "equivalence" may be established by ensuring that the metamaterial is compared to another material with identical overall unit-cell mass and static stiffness The MAC criterion is a measure of the degree of orthogonality between two vectors.