We report a detailed formalism aimed at the thermal modeling and heat mitigation in high-power doubleclad fiber amplifiers. Closed form analytical formulas are developed that take into account the spatial profile of the amplified signal and pump in the double-clad geometry, the presence of the amplified spontaneous emission, and the possibility of radiative cooling due to anti-Stokes fluorescence emission. The formalism is applied to a high-power Yb-doped silica fiber amplifier. The contributions to the heat-load from the pump-signal quantum defect, as well as the pump and signal parasitic absorptions are compared to the radiative cooling. It is shown that for realistic cases, the local heat generation in kiloWatt-class fiber amplifiers is either dominated by the quantum defect or the parasitic absorption depending on the pump wavelength. In conventional designs, radiative cooling can be substantial only in properly designed amplifiers, when the pump power is tens of watts or lower, unless the parasitic absorption is reduced compared to the commonly reported values in the literature. We also explore the impact of the non-ideal quantum efficiency of the gain material. The developed formalism can be used to design fiber amplifiers and lasers for optimal heat mitigation, especially due to radiative cooling. High-power rare-earth-doped double-clad fiber lasers and amplifiers have proven to be reliable and versatile for many industrial and directed energy applications, enjoy excellent power efficiencies, and provide near diffraction-limited beam qualities Radiative cooling has been suggested as a potentially attractive method to mitigate the heat generation in fiber lasers and amplifiers In this paper, we explore the thermal modeling and heat mitigation including radiative cooling of high-power double-clad fiber amplifiers. We present a detailed formalism that takes into account the spatial profile of the amplified signal and the pump in the double-clad geometry, the presence of the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE), and the possibility of radiative cooling We already mentioned that the wavelength of the pump (and the amplified signal) must be larger than λ f for radiative cooling. For efficient radiative cooling in fiber lasers and amplifiers, the cooling material-in this case the doped fiber core-must ideally be cooling grade and have a high quantum efficiency To the best of our knowledge, there is no published work on radiative cooling of Yb-doped silica glass. However, we think that there is no fundamental reason why high-purity Ybdoped silica cannot have very high quantum efficiency The optical fiber considered here has a step-index core of radius a, which is uniformly doped with Yb ions at a density N 0 . The pump propagates in a double-clad geometry of radius b and is assumed to be uniformly distributed over the transverse cross section of the heavily multimode inner cladding. The core is assumed to be quasi-single-mode where r is the radial coordinate and w is the field radius. This Gaussian approximation is reliable for our purposes and w can be determined from an analytic approximation accurate to within 1% for the core V parameter in the range 1.2 < V < 2.4 given by The total ion concentration N t is given by The rate equation for the upper manifold population density N 2 is given by The pump frequency (wavelength) is ν p (λ p ). The signal spectrum is sliced into n adjacent segments, where δλ is the bandwidth for each segment. The signal frequencies and wavelengths are ν j (λ j ), where j = 1, • • • , n. The emission and absorption cross sections are defined as The pump and signal local intensities are defined as I ± j for j = p and j = 1, • • • , n, respectively. The ± superscripts indicate forward and backward propagation. Note that I ± j and N 2 are functions of both radial (r) and longitudinal (z) coordinates. The upper manifold lifetime is , where τ r is the radiative lifetime and τ nr is the non-radiative lifetime. The (internal) quantum efficiency is defined as Throughout this paper, we assume that due to small size of the fiber core, the external quantum efficiency is very close to the internal quantum efficiency The steady-state condition for the upper manifold population (dN 2 /dt = 0) results in Here, n 2 (r, z) = N 2 (r, z)/N 0 and we have used the following definitions: Later in this paper, we will frequently encounter sums of the forward and backward propagating pump and signal intensities. In order to simplify, we identify such sums with a tilde overline: Another definition that will prove useful later is The propagation of the right-and left-moving pump intensities along the fiber follows the following differential equation: = - α b characterizes the undesirable pump attenuation due to scattering (α bs ) and parasitic absorption (α ba ), where α b = α ba + α bs . At any point along the fiber, the total pump (signal) power is obtained by integrating the local pump (signal) intensity over the transverse cross section. This can be formally expressed as where we have implicitly assumed azimuthal symmetry in the fiber geometry and beam profiles. Earlier we stated that the pump power is uniformly distributed over the inner cladding of radius b and the signal has a Gaussian profile. Therefore, the pump and signal intensity profiles can be approximately related to the powers by Here, f w (r) = 2 g w (r)/(π w 2 ) and ∞ 0 (2π r dr) f w = 1. Therefore, we can conveniently express the pump propagation equation 12 as where we have used the following definitions: If we integrate Eq. 15 over the transverse plane and use Eq. 29, we end up with where The propagation of the right-and left-moving signal intensities along the fiber follows the following differential equation: where Π j = 2hc 2 δλ/λ 3 j . α b characterizes the undesirable signal attenuation due to scattering ( α bs ) and parasitic absorption ( α ba ), where α b = α ba + α bs ; the signal attenuation parameters are assumed to be the same for all signal wavelengths considered in this paper, because they all propagate through the fiber core. Using the signal and pump transverse profiles, we can conveniently express the signal propagation equation 19 as If we integrate Eq. 20 over the transverse plane and use Eq. 30, we end up with where we have and C and D are defined in Eq. 18. We note that in using Eq. 20, it is understood that Θ b remains equal to unity over the domain of integration, which is forced to be relevant only over the fiber core due to the overall Θ a factor in the rightmost term in Eq. 20. The heat density generated in the gain medium can be calculated using the net balance of energies. The pump and signal absorption by the ions as well as the absorption by impurities contribute to the heating. The spontaneous emission radiates some of the power out of the fiber sides and causes radiative cooling. The ASE also contributes to the radiative cooling by removing some of the power out of the fiber ends. The rate of heat volume density generation du(r, z)/dt at radial distance r from the fiber center and location z along the fiber is given by The linear heat density (per unit length) generated per unit time across the fiber cross section at location z along the fiber is given by Q where where P± p = P + p + P - p and P± j = P + j + P - j . The first term in Q p is the heat generated over the entire inner-cladding of the fiber; while the rest of the terms in Q p relate to the heat generated exclusively in the core, as is the case with Q j and Q f . Q p and Q j contain parasitic absorption terms proportional to α ba and α ba , respectively. The rest of the terms in Q p + Q j correspond to the heat generated due to the pump-signal quantum defect. Q f is the radiative cooling due to the anti-Stokes fluorescence. The temperature variation in the fiber is very small as shown in where b o is the radius of the whole fiber, i.e. the outer cladding and H is the convective heat transfer coefficient for the medium surrounding the fiber. The value of H is around 30 W/m 2 K for air and 1000 W/m 2 K for water. The exact value of H depends on the flow properties of the convection, but these values are reasonable for the conditions in which typical fiber amplifier experiments are carried out. Assuming a maximum acceptable temperature rise of ∆T=100 K and b o = 300 μm (see next section), the maximum acceptable value for the linear heat density is Q air = 5.7 W/m for air-cooled and Q wat = 188 W/m for water-cooled designs. Similarly, the maximum acceptable value for the linear heat density is Q air = 1.18 W/m for air-cooled and Q wat = 39 W/m for water-cooled designs, if a smaller outer cladding radius of b o = 62.5 μm is used. These values will guide us in the next section to convert the calculated heat density values for various scenarios to the actual temperature rise of the fiber. In practice, all Yb-doped double-clad optical fibers are coated with a layer of polymer coating For the following simulation, we consider a system inspired by the amplifier described in For the absorption parameters, we assume α ba , α bs α ba , and α bs are each 5 dB/km. In all simulations, unless explicitly mentioned (in Fig. We start our discussion by considering an amplifier of length L = 35 m and plot the amplified signal gain as a function of the input pump power P p0 in Fig. Figure In Fig. As we observed in the previous subsection, the heat generated due to the quantum defect totally overshadows that of the parasitic absorption and radiative cooling. In order to reduce the impact of the quantum defect, the pump wavelength must be chosen closer to the wavelength of the amplified signal. However, λ p = 976 nm corresponds to the peak absorption wavelength of the pump; therefore, the amplifier gain will be reduced if the all other factors including the total input pump power and amplifier length are unchanged. In Fig. In order to explore the impact of the pump wavelength on the generated heat, we explore the heat density generated along the fiber amplifier, similar to what we previously presented in Fig. For λ p = 1030 nm in Fig. Fig. An important reason behind the rapid drop in the signal gain for larger wavelengths in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. The parasitic absorption heat generated by the pump and signal is given by α ba P± p and α ba P± j , respectively. In order for radiative cooling to have a chance in reducing the temperature of the fiber amplifier, the parasitic absorption heat must be comparable in size to the radiative cooling term Q f (assuming that the contribution due to quantum defect is minimal). A useful estimate of the radiative cooling can be obtained from Eq. 26 in the limit where the signal and/or the pump intensity is much larger than the corresponding saturation value. This limit is quite reasonable and is readily satisfied due to the small transverse cross sections in fiber amplifies. This estimated radiative cooling power is given by if the normalized pump intensity (relative to the pump saturation intensity) dominates over the normalized signal intensity. If the normalized signal intensity dominates, β p much be replaced by the β s (β j=51 ) corresponding to the amplified signal. For λ p = 1030 nm and λ s = 1067 nm, Q f is estimated to be -0.106 W/m when the normalized pump intensity is dominant and -0.022 W/m when the normalized signal intensity is dominant. Using the previously stated values of α ba and α ba , a maximum estimate for the pump and the amplified signal powers is near 20 W or 90 W, depending on which estimate for Q f is considered (depending on the amplifier design). These values are substantially different from the pump and signal powers of the high-power amplifier studied in the previous section. Therefore, no optimization of the amplifier design would have resulted in any respectable radiative cooling effect, simply due to the large size of the pump and signal powers. In order to design an amplifier with considerable radiative cooling, either the parasitic absorption coefficients need to be reduced, or the amplifier must operate at lower power values. The first option is a fiber material design issue and is outside the scope of the present paper. Therefore, we focus on changing our designs to the case of an amplifier with lower power values to explore the radiative cooling effect. We note that the values of α ba and α ba used in this paper are comparable to the values in conventional Yb-doped optical fibers. As an example, consider the same fiber discussed before, except the outer cladding radius is reduced to b = 62.5 μm and the fiber length is increased to L = 50 m. The input pump power is P p0 = 20 W, and the amplified signal is seeded at P s0 = 0.1 W, and is amplified to 6.97 W at more than 18 dB of gain. The reduced powers are intended to decrease the parasitic absorption powers, while the reduced cladding size is aimed at increasing the pump intensity to maintain an adequate population inversion. In Fig. In practice, η q is never equal to unity. In order to achieve net radiative cooling We note that τ f appears primarily in saturation intensities, while τ r appears in the expression for Q f (radiative cooling due to the anti-Stokes fluorescence) in Eq. 26. In order to see the impact of η q < 1, consider hypothetically a scenario where τ f remains fixed, while lowering η q results in an increased value of τ r , which in turn lowers the impact of Q f in Eq. 26 proportionally. However, this is just a hypothetical example helping to visualize the issue more clearly. In reality, τ r is usually fixed and impurities lower τ nr , which in turn lower τ f and result in η q < 1. However, the overall effect on the heat balance is similar in nature. In Fig. We presented a detailed analytical formalism intended for the thermal modeling and heat mitigation including radiative cooling for high-power double-clad fiber amplifiers. The formalism takes into account the spatial profile of the amplified signal and the pump in the double-clad geometry, the presence of the ASE, and the possibility of radiative cooling. The formalism is applied to the analysis of a high-power Yb-doped silica fiber amplifier inspired by published experimental results. It is observed that the pump-signal quantum defect is the dominant source of heat generation in the KiloWatt-level amplifier when the amplifier is pumped at 976 nm wavelength. As the pump wavelength is increased to reduce the quantum defect, the parasitic absorption of the pump (and amplified signal) dominate the heat generation. In this case, if the pump wavelength is longer than the mean florescence wavelength, radiative cooling can provide notable cooling only if the pump and signal powers are reduced to several tens of watts or lower. This can be achieved by using a (1) smaller inner cladding in order to increase the local pump intensity to achieve an adequate population inversion, and (2) longer fiber to increase the total signal gain. We also explored the impact of the non-ideal quantum efficiency of the gain material. The formalism presented here can be readily used to design fiber amplifiers and lasers for optimal heat mitigation, especially due to radiative cooling. We use the following identities in this paper: η is the fractional signal power in the core and is given by η = 1exp(-2a 2 /w 2 ). (31) This material is based upon work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-16-1-0362 titled Multidisciplinary Approaches to Radiation Balanced Lasers (MARBLE).