Two ordering states, antiferromagnetism and nematicity, have been observed in most iron-based superconductors (SCs). In contrast to those SCs, the newly discovered SC CaK(Fe1-xNix)4As4 exhibits an antiferromagnetic (AFM) state, called hedgehog spin-vortex crystal structure, without nematic order, providing the opportunity for the investigation into the relationship between spin fluctuations and SC without any effects of nematic fluctuations. Our 75 As nuclear magnetic resonance studies on CaK(Fe1-xNix)4As4 (0≤ x ≤ 0.049) revealed that CaKFe4As4 is located close to a hidden hedgehog SVC AFM quantum-critical point (QCP). The magnetic QCP without nematicity in CaK(Fe1-xNix)4As4 highlights the close connection of spin fluctuations and superconductivity in iron-based SCs. The advantage of stoichiometric composition also makes CaKFe4As4 an ideal platform for further detailed investigation of the relationship between magnetic QCP and superconductivity in iron-based SCs without disorder effects. The relationship between antiferromagnetism (AFM), nematicity, and superconductivity in iron-based superconductors (SCs) has received wide interest Different from the 122 family, the newly discovered stoichiometric iron-based SC CaKFe 4 As 4 with T c ∼ 35 K adopts a structure where the Fe-As layers are separated by alternate Ca and K planes In this Letter, we show the experimental evidence which suggests that a hidden AFM QCP exists around x = 0 from systematic 75 As NMR measurements on CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 single crystals. In particular, this is the first indication of a QCP with the newly discovered hedgehog SVC state. Nematic order and associated fluctuations, as well as the disorder caused by substitution, are absent in the stoichiometric SC CaKFe 4 As 4 Figures Figures Figures , where the sum is over the wave vectors q within the first Brillouin zone, A( q) is the form factor of the hyperfine interactions. On the other hand, K reflects the q = 0 component of magnetic susceptibility χ ′ ( q, ω 0 ). Therefore, the enhancement of 1/T 1 T at low T where K is almost constant indicates a growth of AFM spin correlations with q = 0. According to the previous analysis of 1/T 1 T for x = 0 and 0.049 Figure In general, one expects that a magnetic QCP exists in proximity to an AFM phase boundary. For CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 , therefore, an AFM state may be expected in the Ni-1.7% sample whose T N is expected to be lower than T c from a simple extrapolation of the values of T N of the higher Ni concentration compounds. As shown in Figs. It is generally believed that, in proximity to an AFM QCP, the scattering process of quasiparticles is strongly affected by the quantum fluctuations, leading to non-Fermi-liquid behavior. As a result, electrical resistivity (ρ) increases linearly with temperature, which has been actually observed in high-T c cuprates and some ironbased SCs around a QCP The possibility of the avoided magnetic QCP in doped 122 compounds has been suggested by the observation of a distribution of T 1 and also of a secondary incommensurate magnetic phase near the optimal T c In summary, our 75 As NMR measurements of CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 provide evidence for a QCP asso-ciated with hedgehog SVC fluctuations near x = 0. In contrast to other reported iron-based SCs with QCP, stoichiometric CaKFe 4 As 4 is free of the substitutional disorder from chemical doping and also nematic transition. The magnetic QCP without accompanying nematicity in CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 highlights the close connection of spin fluctuations and SC in iron-based SCs. These advantages makes CaKFe 4 As 4 an ideal platform to investigate the relationship between magnetic QCP and SC in iron-based SCs.