Thermal expansion is a problem in many technological applications and its control represents a challenge in materials design. In this Letter, after studying the correlation between thermal expansion, cubic-to-rhombohedral transition and lattice parameter of ReO 3 -type structures, I show how in the different methods for controlling thermal expansion the key element is actually the lattice parameter. By varying the lattice parameter through external pressure, chemical modifications or other methods, the single-well potential energy of the octahedral rotation, responsible for Negative Thermal Expansion (NTE), can be turned into a quartic anharmonic potential or into a doublewell potential, thus enhancing or suppressing the NTE, respectively. This result can be extended to other framework-structures and should be taken into account to overcome the challenge of controlling thermal expansion. The vast majority of materials expand on heating, while rare exceptions contract with increasing temperature. This fascinating property, known as negative thermal expansion (NTE), is very interesting both from a scientific and technological perspective. As a matter of fact, thermal expansion represents a problem for many materials and engineering applications, because when two coupled-materials expand differently when heated, this can lead to thermal shock breakage and failures of the system. For this reason, controlling thermal expansion represents a challenge for material design, and NTE is the starting point to develop materials with controlled thermal expansion Different methods are under investigation to control the thermal expansion. The application of external pressure represents a possible physical route to this goal. Indeed, on the basis of thermodynamics considerations, it is expected that the positive thermal expansion is diminished by the effect of pressure, while the negative thermal expansion is enhanced under pressure Another promising route to control the thermal expansion is represented by chemical modification The aim of this Letter is to understand how the pressure, the chemical modification or also other methods like nano-size effects, can act to tune the thermal expansion, shedding light on the switching between negative and positive thermal expansion and viceversa. I have adopted as reference for our study the MZrF 6 series. This series, with the exception of CaZrF 6 , show a cubic to rhombohedral structural phase transition which occurs with decreasing temperature Based on what we have just stated, in panel (a) of Fig. Ref. Another very interesting relationship can be found between thermal expansion coefficient and lattice parameter in the cubic phase (panel (b) of Fig. The CRYSTAL-14 package was used in this calculation, a periodic ab initio program which uses a Gaussian-type basis set to represent the crystalline orbitals (8s)-(6511sp)-(3d) for calcium The geometry optimization for CaZrF 6 gives a lattice parameter of about 8.4260 Å with fluorine position x=0.23889, while that for CoZrF 6 leads to a lattice parameter of about 7.8247 Å and fluorine position x=0.25695. These lattice parameters are in good agreement with the experimental data (Fig. However, when we calculate the vibrational frequencies at the Γ-point of the Brillouin zone, we find that the vibrational mode with F 1g symmetry, corresponding to rigid rotation of MF 6 and ZrF 6 octahedra, has a negative frequency (about -1.09 THz) in the case of CoZrF 6 . As expected, this means that CoZrF 6 at 0 K is instable in the cubic form, unlike instead of CaZrF 6 . By performing an energy scan of the F 1g mode, i.e, the energy study as a function of angular rotation θ of ZrF 6 (or MF 6 ) octahedra According to Fig. and performed an energy scan of the F 1g vibrational mode. The result is reported in Fig. It is very interesting to observe that reducing the lattice parameter, the single-well potential firstly turns into a quartic anharmonic potential, then it turns into a double-well potential, progressively deeper and with increasingly distant minima positions (Fig. At this point, what we are most interested in, is the thermal expansion behavior reported in Fig. where a 0 is the lattice parameter with no rotation, θ 2 T is the mean-square angular displacement of the ZrF 6 (or MF 6 ) octahedra at temperature T . According to Eq. ( where k B is the Boltzmann constant. Then using the energy potentials shown in Fig. and depends on the "temperature evolution" of the mean-square angular displacement θ 2 , which can be calculated at any temperature and compression by equation The panel (a) of Fig. ii ) at higher lattice compressions (here starting from -0.9 %) the thermal expansion switches from negative to positive. This because the single-well potential in which the octahedra rotate, turns into a double-well potential (Fig. In summary, in this Letter, thanks to the study of the relationship between thermal expansion, cubic-rhombohedral transition and lattice parameter of ReO 3 -type structures, I have found out that the absolute value of the lattice parameter plays a key role in the control of thermal expansion. By varying the lattice parameter through external pressure, chemical modifications or also other methods, the single-well potential in which the octahedra rotate can be turned into a quartic anharmonic potential or into a double-well potential, thus enhancing or inhibiting the NTE, respectively. This rule can be extended to other framework-structures and should be kept in mind to overcome the challenge of controlling thermal expansion. 2, the lattice parameter should play a key role in the phase-transition and thermal expansion behavior. As a consequence, by applying an external pressure (up to about 2.8 GPa), I have progressively reduced the lattice parameter of CaZrF 6 (up to -1.2 %) 6 (red squares). The double-well potential found in CoZrF 6 is consistent with the cubic-to-rhombohedral transition observed experimentally at low temperature.