The recent discovery of quasi-one-dimensional Chromium-based superconductivity has generated much excitement. We study in this work the superconducting instabilities of a representative compound, the newly synthesized KCr3As3 superconductor. Based on inputs from density functional theory calculations, we first construct an effective multi-orbital tight-binding Hamiltonian to model its low-energy band structure. We then employ standard random-phase approximation calculations to investigate the superconducting instabilities of the resultant multi-orbital Hubbard model. We find various pairing symmetries in the phase diagram in different interaction parameter regimes, including the triplet f -wave, pz-wave and singlet s ± -wave pairings. We argue that the singlet s ± -wave pairing, which emerges at intermediate interaction strength, may be realized in this material. This singlet pairing is driven by spin-density wave fluctuations enhanced by Fermi-surface nesting. We point out that phase-sensitive measurement can distinguish the s-wave pairing in KCr3As3 from the pz-wave previously proposed for a related compound K2Cr3As3. The s ± -wave pairing in KCr3As3 shall also exhibit a subgap spin resonance mode near the nesting vector, which can be tested by inelastic neutron scattering measurements. Another intriguing property of the s ± -pairing is that it can induce time-reversal invariant topological superconductivity in a semiconductor wire with large Rashba spin-orbit coupling via proximity effect. Our study shall be of general relevance to all superconductors in the family of ACr3As3 (A=K, Rb, Cs). There has been a recent surge in the discovery of quasi-1D Cr-and Mo-based superconductors at ambient pressures These quasi-1D Cr-based compounds can be classified into two families with 133 and 233 chemical compositions, respectively: ACr 3 As 3 and A 2 Cr 3 As 3 , where A=K, Rb, Cs stands for the alkaline elements. Following the discovery of SC in the 233 family In this paper, we construct effective models to study the pairing symmetry of a representative Cr-based 133 superconductor, KCr 3 As 3 . Based on the electronic structure obtained from first principle calculations, we build an effective tight-binding (TB) model with Wannier orbitals of d-wave symmetries. Adopting general Hubbardlike interactions between the multiple Wannier d-orbitals, we then employ the random phase approximation (RPA) approach to evaluate the effective interactions in the Cooper channel, from which we obtain the pairing symmetry. This approach is a descendant of the celebrated Kohn-Luttinger mechanism We obtain a phase diagram similar to that of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we provide our results from first-principle calculations based on density-functional theory (DFT) for the band structure of KCr 3 As 3 , after which we construct its effective TB model. In Sec. III, we study the superconducting pairing symmetry of the system and present a phase diagram. In Sec. IV, we focus on the properties of the obtained s ± -wave SC. Our results are summarized in Sec. V. The crystal structure of KCr 3 As 3 and its sister compounds is shown in Fig. The band structure of KCr 3 As 3 was predicted by using DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation pack (VASP) The band structure thus obtained is shown in Fig. To obtain an effective model, a sparse 4 × 4 × 6 Γcentered sampling is utilized for establishing Wannier orbitals of virtual atoms localized at the center of each Cr triangle via WANNIER90 package where m, n = A, B label sublattices, σ =↑, ↓ label spins and μ, ν = 1, 2, 3 label orbitals d z 2 , d xy and d x 2 -y 2 , respectively. Note that physically the orbital bases d z 2 , d xy and d x 2 -y 2 here are not the maximally localized Wannier wave functions around a real single Cr atom, but the superposition of the three atomic wave functions around the virtual center. Such Wannier wave functions can be dubbed as "molecular orbital" The minimum TB model which can capture all the qualitative aspects of the low energy part of the DFT band structure contains up to the next-nearest-neighbor hopping parameters in the xy-plane and the next-nextnearest-neighbor hopping parameters in the z-direction. The point-group symmetry allowed h mn μν (k) thus obtained can be expressed as following, (2 -δ n,0 ) cos(2nz) t 0,n μν + t 1,n μν e 2iy + p 1,n μν e -i(x+y) + d 1,n μν e i(x-y) + t 2,n μν e 2ix + p 2,n μν e i(3y-x) + d 2,n μν e -i(3y+x) 2 cos[(2n + 1)z] t0,n μν + t 1A,n μν e 2iy + p 1A,n μν e -i(x+y) + d 1A,n μν e i(x-y) + t 2A,n μν e 2ix + p 2A,n μν e i(3y-x) + d 2A,n μν e -i(3y+x) + (terms with μ ↔ ν, A → B, x → -x, y → -y) (3) and Here The values of the above parameters are listed in the Appendix. The TB model actually adopted in our following calculations is a more rigourous one expressed as, with μ, ν = 1, • • • , 6 indicating the orbital-sublattice indices. The elements of the h(k) matrix is, Here 2 a 0 , -1 2 a 0 , 0), a 2 = (0, a 0 , 0) and a 3 = (0, 0, c 0 ). The data of t r1,r2,r3 μν for r 1,2 ∈ [-2, 2], r 3 ∈ [-4, 4] and μ, ν ∈ We adopt the following Hamiltonian in our study: Here, the interaction parameters U , V , and J H denote the intra-orbital, inter-orbital Hubbard repulsion, and the Hund's rule coupling (as well as the pair hopping) respectively, which satisfy the relation U = V + 2J H . We tune U and J H /U to obtain a phase diagram of the pairing instabilities and density wave orders. Note that as the "molecular-orbital" Wannier bases adopted here are much more delocalized than conventional local "atomic-orbital" Wannier bases, the effective interaction parameters U , V , and J H defined here are much weaker than those defined for conventional local Wannier bases. While the former group of parameters are not easy to be estimated directly through first principle calculations, they are related to the latter group by a complicated formula under coarse approximations Following the standard multi-orbital RPA approach Here • • • 0 denotes the thermal average for the noninteracting system, T τ denotes the imaginary time-ordered product, and p, q, s, t = 1, • • • , 6 are the orbital-sublattice indices. Fourier transformed to the imaginary frequency space, the bare susceptibility can be expressed by the following explicit formulism: where α, β = 1, • • • , 6 are band indices, ε α k and ξ α (k) are the α-th eigenvalue (relative to the chemical potential μ c ) and eigenvector of the TB model, respectively, and n F is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. In Fig. Here the nonzero elements U (s,c)μν θξ of U (s,c) satisfy μ, ν, θ, ξ ≤ 3 or > 3 simultaneously, which are as follow, In Eq.( Generally, repulsive U (s,c) enhances χ (s) and suppresses χ (c) . Increasing U to some critical value U c (fixing J H /U ), χ (s) (k, iω n = 0) will diverge first at the momentum k = Q = (0, 0, π), in close competition with the momenta k = Q = (π, 0, 0), (0, π, 0) and (π, π, 0), suggesting the onset of SDW order with the corresponding wavevectors. Note that the SDW wavevectors Q in the KCr 3 As 3 obtained here suggest inter-unit-cell SDW order, which stands in strong contrast with the interunit-cell ferromagnetic order with Q = (0, 0, 0) obtained for the A 2 Cr 3 As 3 family At U < U c , Cooper pairing may develop through exchanging spin and/or charge fluctuations. In particular, we consider Cooper pair scatterings both within and between the bands, hence both intra-and inter-band effective interactions V αβ (k, k ) Here the integration runs along the β-FS, v β F (k ) is the corresponding Fermi velocity, and k is the component of k along the FS. Superconducting pairing in various channels emerge as the eigenstates of the above gap equation. The leading pairing ∆ α (k) is given by the eigenstate corresponding to the largest eigenvalue λ. The critical temperature T c is related to λ through T c ∝ e -1/λ . The eigenvector(s) ∆ α (k) for each eigenvalue λ obtained from gap equation ( The phase diagram as parameterized by the interactions (U, J H /U ) is shown in Fig. The most striking difference between Fig. The p z -wave pairing for weak U and J H /U shown in Fig. For J H /U > r c , the f -wave pairing in the 133 and 233families also share the same origin: the orbitals become unstable to Cooper pairing at the bare level of the onsite Hubbard interactions. This pairing possesses a significant on-site pairing component. This pairing is even about the k z = 0 mirror plane, but changes sign under C 6 rotations. Therefore it also possesses line nodes. The three degenerate components of the triplet p z -and f -wave pairings are split once spin-rotational invariance is broken by SOC. In the present system, to leading order the symmetry-allowed SOC takes the following form, where 2, 3 stand for the orbital indices, and we take λ SOC = 10meV. Classified according to the S z quantum number of Cooper pairing, possible pairing components include the S z = 0, i.e., ↑↓ + ↓↑ component, and the S z = ±1, i.e., ↑↑ and ↑↑ component. The J H /U dependence of the largest pairing eigenvalues λ of the S z = 0 and S z = ±1 components of the p z -and the f -wave pairings obtained from RPA is shown in Fig. Here we argue that among the various phases exhibited in Fig. Note that the s ± -SC obtained here by RPA has accidental line nodes on the two 3D bands α and β, as shown in Fig. The s-wave SC predicted here in the KCr 3 As 3 can be distinguished from the p z -wave predicted in the K 2 Cr 3 As 3 by the following dc SQUID device as shown in Fig. Here I 0 is the critical current of one Josephson junction, Φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum. The phase shift δφ depends on the pairing symmetry. It is zero for an s-wave pairing and π for p z -wave. The different patterns of I c -Φ relation can then be used to distinguish the two superconducting states, as demonstrated in Fig. The above Josephson interferometry is oblivious to the sign-changing character of the s-wave pairing. However, there exists another distinguishing feature of the s ± -wave pairing -the in-gap spin resonance mode in the superconducting state. The corresponding resonance peak emerges in the imaginary part of the dynamic spin susceptibility. Such a quantity can be easily obtained in the present RPA formalism. Let's define the following bare susceptibility in the superconducting state, where • • • sc,0 denotes the thermal average in the BCS mean-field state. In σ i αβ , α, β denote spin indices and σ i represents the i-th component of the Pauli matrix. S C s t a t e N o r m a l s t a t e FIG. In the spin-singlet pairing state, the spin SU(2) symmetry requires χ (sc,0)ij pqst (q, τ ) = δ ij χ (sc,0)ii pqst (q, τ ), which allows us to only calculate χ (sc,0)+pqst (q, τ ) and obtain The above bare susceptibility function χ (sc,0)+pqst (q, τ ) is first Fourier transformed to the imaginary frequency space and then analytically continued to the real frequency axis via iω n → ω + i0 + , after which we obtain the following retarded bare susceptibility: with and Here the pairing gap ∆ α k is a product of the dimensionless normalized gap function ∆ α (k) solved in Eq.( . Here, we take ∆ 0 = 2meV on account of the experimental superconducting T c ≈ 5 K. The RPA susceptibility in the superconducting state is still defined by Eq.( The Hamiltonian for the Rashba wire with SC acquired via proximity to KCr 3 As 3 reads, Here t is the NN hopping coefficient, λ R is the coefficient of the Rashba SOC, μ c is the chemical potential, ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 are the on-site and NN-pairing amplitudes respectively. After Fourier-transformed to the momentum space, the Hamiltonian can be written as with ψ k = (c k↑ , c k↓ ) T , h(k) = (-2t cos k -μ c ) I + 2λ R sin kσ y and ∆ k = iσ y ∆ (k). Here ∆ (k) = ∆ 0 + 2∆ 1 cos k is the gap function. This Hamiltonian is TRI. From the criterion of TRI TSC in 1D where the summation index s represents any Fermi point between 0 and π, and the real number δ s is defined as Here |n s , k s is the eigenvector of h k , with k s and n s denoting the momentum and band index for the Fermipoint s, T = iσ y is the time-reversal matrix For each k, the two eigenvalues ε ± (k) of h k are solved as ε ± (k) = -2t cos k-μ c ±2λ R sin k. For each μ c , we have two Fermi-points k ± within (0, π), satisfying ε ± (k ± ) = 0 respectively, with k + < k -. Therefore, the FSTI defined in Eq.( from which the criterion of TRI TSC is that the signs of ∆(k ± ) are different, known as the negative pairing. Noticing that the node of the gap function ∆(k) = 0 within (0, π) solved as k 0 = arccos(-∆ 0 /2∆ 1 ) is unique, the situation of negative pairing requires k + < k 0 < k - as shown in Fig. ). Particularly, the width of the energy window of μ c required by TRI , which is non-zero when ∆1 ∆0 > 1 2 . Such condition can be easily satisfied. To check how the electron correlation affects the band structure of KCr 3 As 3 , we have performed an LDA+U calculation on the system. The on-site Coulomb interaction is added on the localized 3d orbitals of Cr atoms (note that we adopt the "atomic-orbital" here) by using the method introduced by Dudarev et al. In conclusion, we have studied the pairing symmetry in the new Cr-based superconductor KCr 3 As 3 based an effective model constructed from the input provided by DFT calculations. Our RPA analyses of the Hubbard-Hund model of this material reveals three possible pairing symmetries in different regimes of the interaction parameter space, i.e. the f -wave, the p z -wave and the s ±wave. For realistic parameters, we argue that the singlet s ± -wave pairing is the leading pairing symmetry. This singlet pairing is driven by SDW fluctuations enhanced by FS nesting. The pairing possesses accidental nodal lines on the 3D bands. We also pointed out phase sensitive measurement to identify the pairing symmetries in KCr 3 As 3 and the related compound K 2 Cr 3 As 3 . An interesting aspect of the s ± -SC is the presence of a spin resonance mode in the superconducting state. Signatures of this collective mode shall appear in inelastic neutron scattering experiment and can thus serve as a smokinggun evidence for the s ± -wave pairing predicted in the present work. Remarkably, this quasi-1D s ± -wave SC with dominant intra-chain inter-site pairing can be utilized to engineer 1D TRI TSC by proximately coupling it to a Rashba wire with large SOC. As a result of the nontrivial Z 2 FSTI, there should be a topologically protected Majorana Kramers pair on each end of the Rashba wire. The present study mainly focuses on the weak-coupling regime. As for the strong-coupling case, the superexchange interactions should be considered, instead of the Hubbard-Hund interactions studied here. Previous spin-dependent DFT calculations The values of the hopping parameters appearing in the TB Hamiltonian in the main text are listed in the following. 