In addition to novel surface states, topological insulators can also exhibit robust gapless states at crystalline defects. Step edges constitute a class of common defects on the surface of crystals. In this work we establish the topological nature of one-dimensional (1D) bound states localized at step edges of the [001] surface of a topological crystalline insulator (TCI) Pb0.7Sn0.3Se, both theoretically and experimentally. We show that the topological stability of the step edge states arises from an emergent particle-hole symmetry of the surface low-energy physics, and demonstrate the experimental signatures of the particle-hole symmetry breaking. We also reveal the effects of an external magnetic field on the 1D bound states. Our work suggests the possibility of similar topological step edge modes in other topological materials with a rocks-salt structure. The discovery of topological insulators In this work, we elucidate the topological nature of the in-gap states localized at step edges on the surface of a topological crystalline insulator Pb 0.7 Sn 0.3 Se crystallizes in a rock-salt structure (Fig. A dI/dV map recorded in the same area at energies close to the Dirac point (Fig. To further characterize and distinguish between the odd-and even-step edge modes, we investigated their behavior under an external magnetic field. Fig. To theoretically reveal the topological index and stability of these 1D step edge modes we perform explicit calculations based on the k • p model of Pb 0.7 Sn 0.3 Se [001] surface states, as we discuss in detail in the next section. The low energy physics of [001] surface states of Pb 0.7 Sn 0.3 Se is described by the following k • p theory 10 where m(x 1 ) and m (x 1 ) depend on coordinate x 1 across the step edge. In addition to time reversal symmetry T = is 2 •K, Hamiltonian (2) also exhibits an emergent particle-hole symmetry (PHS) C = s 1 σ 2 • K. At each fixed k 2 along the (0,1,0) step edge, the zero modes localized at the edge are classified by the topological indices for C-and T -symmetric 1d insulators To show this, we first consider an odd step edge of height ∆h = 1 2 a (n = 1) described by Hamiltonian (2). As depicted in Fig. since Pb/Sn and Se orbitals are switched across an odd step edge at x 1 = 0. In particular, the mass domain wall of m (x 1 ) at the step edge x 1 = 0 induces a Kramers pair of Jackiw-Rebbi solitons (zero modes) at energy E = 0: where we define v 2 ± = v 2 1y ± v 2 1x and The zero-energy Kramers degeneracy in s 1 σ 2 = 1 subspace cannot be split as long as time reversal is preserved. Moreover, PHS pins it at zero energy (Direc point). It has a one-to-one correspondence to the nontrivial topological index ν = 2 of symmetry class AIII associated with this step edge. This explains the observed in-gap dI/dV peaks at odd step edges in Fig. We emphasize that the PHS in the minimal model ( With the above understanding of a ∆h = 1 2 a odd step edge, we now consider an even step edge of height ∆h = a. Topologically, such a step edge can be viewed as two odd step edges of ∆h = 1 2 a merging with each other. Therefore the natural low-energy model for such an even step edge is to consider 2 Kramers pairs (or 4 zero modes) of in-gap flat bands from the 2 constituent odd step edges, and analyze the symmetry-allowed mixing terms between them. First of all, we notice that the topological index of an even step edge is the sum of index for each constituent odd step edge, such as the two step edges in Fig. Using our theory, we can understand the response of the step edge states to an external magnetic field. For the odd step edge with ∆h = 1 2 a, the Kramers pair will split under an external magnetic field in an anisotropic way. As shown in the Appendix, the in-gap zero modes only directly couple to a perpendicular magnetic field at lowest order. A perpendicular field (along [001] axis) induces a splitting ∼ gμ B h proportional to field h, and in-plane field will lead to a splitting ∼ h 2 /∆ where ∆ stands for the bulk gap. Taking g = 2 as a rough estimate, a 11 T perpendicular field can induce a splitting of ∼ 1 meV, which is difficult to resolve as was seen in the dI/dV curve shown in Ref. 7. For our field of 7.5T, the splitting is of the order of 0.7meV, far less than the peak width and can therefore not be resolved. At an even step edge with ∆h = a, on the other hand, the two separated Kramers pairs (separated due to mixing) will split into 4 energy levels under a perpendicular magnetic field (Fig. In this paper we establish the topological nature of 1D in-gap states localized at step edges on [001] surface of TCI Pb 0.7 Sn 0.3 Se, both theoretically and experimentally. The emergent particle-hole symmetry (PHS) in the lowenergy surface theory gives rise to one Kramers pair of in-gap flat bands at odd step edges of height ∆h = (n + An important point is that although the explicit calculations shown here were carried out for step edges along (0,1,0) direction, as long as Pb/Sn and Se atoms are switched across the step edge, the domain wall configuration of m and m remains valid and the zero modes follow as Jackiw-Rebbi solitons on the domain wall The experiment was performed in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system with a base pressure lower than 10 -10 mbar and at a temperature of ∼4 K. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) were used to detect the step edges on the sample surface and to reveal the electronic properties of the 1D conducting channels trapped within them. Single crystal samples of TCI Pb 0.7 Sn 0.3 Se were cleaved at a temperature of ∼80 K before being transferred into the STM head. Further details of the theoretical calculations are provided in the supplemental information. The step edge bound state is classified by the extension problem of complex Clifford algebra: where γ 1,0 are Dirac matrices describing one side of the step edge, as a 1d system with a fixed k 2 since only the combination T C of time-reversal and particle-hole operations preserves momentum k 2 . This leads to a classification of characterized by an integer-valued winding number ν in symmetry class AIII (since T C can be regarded as the chiral symmetry). For the 1d system at k 2 = 0, both time reversal T and particle-hole symmetry C are present, also leading to an integer classification of π 0 (R 3-1+2 ) = Z. Due to the time reversal symmetry at k 2 = 0 and Kramers theorem, the winding number of the 1d Hamiltonian at a general fixed k 2 ≈ 0 (near X) must be an even integer Notice that particle-hole symmetry C in (B4) is only a special property of minimal model (B3). A generic surface Hamiltonian (A11) will not have this particle-hole symmetry C, e.g. the small v 2x term in (B2) breaks the symmetry (B4). With only time reversal symmetry the 1d system has a trivial classification (i.e. symmetry class AII), hence breaking of particle-hole symmetry will generally split the zero-energy bound states at the step edge away from zero energy. The splitting will be roughly proportional to the size of particle-hole symmetry breaking in the surface states. Here we solve the minimal model ( Eigenstates of step edge Hamiltonian (2) satisfy the following Schrodinger equation: For zero modes with E = 0, we have As illustrated in FIG. where X denotes ordering w.r.t. coordinate x for the integral and Notice that the eigenvalues of non-Hermitian operator Ĥ0 (x 1 , k 2 ) are given by As long as the following condition is satified the zero mode wavefunction (B12) is always localized around the step edge at x 1 = 0. This indicates a flat band of zero modes at all small k 2 ≈ 0 at the odd step edge, as illustrated in FIG. therefore the zero modes described in (B12) form one Kramers pair, which cannot split due to time reversal symmetry. However, applying an external magnetic field can split the two zero modes. As shown in Fig. instead of +1 for the step edge at x 1 = 0. These two types of odd step edges are characterized by topological index ν = +2 at x 1 = 0 and ν = -2 at x 1 = x 0 respectively. When we bring the two step edges closer to each other by decreasing their distance x 0 , these two pairs of Kramers doublets will be mixed and can be gap out each other without breaking the PHS, since together they have a total topological index of ν tot = +2 -2 = 0. Below we quantitatively compute the splitting of the Kramers pair localized at the (0,1,0) odd step edge in the presence of an external Zeeman field. Note that both zero modes of the Kramers pair satisfy where P 0 denotes the projection operator into the zero-modes subspace. Note that only out-of-plane magnetic field along (0,0,1) direction will split the two zero modes by h 1 . Meanwhile any in-plane field h 2,3 will only mix these two zero modes with other states, causing a splitting ∼ (h 2,3 ) 2 /∆ where ∆ is the energy difference between the zero modes and other high-energy states. The simplest model for an even step edge is to consider two odd step edges (such as the two step edges in Fig. Here we use Dirac matrices μ for the flavor index of the two odd step edges, and τ for the Kramers doublet index at each step edge. By appropriately choosing the basis, the time reversal symmetry in the Hilbert space of four zero modes at the even step edge can be written as while particle-hole symmetry is implemented by The possible mixing terms preserving both time reversal and particle-hole symmetries have the following form δH even = δ 1 μ 1 + δ 2 τ 2 μ 2 . (B25) and they will split the 4 zero modes into two Kramers pairs at an even step edge. The energy splitting |δ| ≡ δ 2 1 + δ 2 2 between the two Kramers pairs generally depends on the microscopic condition of the even step edge, and is not a universal quantity. Similar to an odd step edge, in the lowest order the zero modes at an even step edge only couples to an external magnetic field along s 1 i.e. (0,0,1) direction, and generally the Hamiltonian of an even step edge under a magnetic field can be written as Its spectrum is E = ± (h 1 ± δ 1 ) 2 + (δ 2 ) 2 . We find that the magnetic field can further split these two Kramers pairs. With a small magnetic field h 1 |δ|, the gap 2 (h 1 -δ 1 ) 2 + (δ 2 ) 2 between two energy levels in the middle scales as ∼ 2|δ| -2δ 1 h 1 /|δ|, and decreases with an increasing magnetic field. When the field reaches h 1 = δ 1 , the middle gap reaches its minimum |δ| min = |δ 2 |. With a large field h 1 |δ|, the gap scales linearly with field as ∼ 2h 1 . https://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/MAR18/Session/C08.11