Optical beam steering is key for optical communications, laser mapping (lidar), and medical imaging. For these applications, integrated photonics is an enabling technology that can provide miniaturized, lighter, lower-cost, and more power-efficient systems. However, common integrated photonic devices are too power demanding. Here, we experimentally demonstrate, for the first time, to the best of our knowledge, beam steering by microelectromechanical (MEMS) actuation of a suspended silicon photonic waveguide grating. Our device shows up to 5.6°beam steering with 20 V actuation and power consumption below the μW level, i.e., more than five orders of magnitude lower power consumption than previous thermo-optic tuning methods. The novel combination of MEMS with integrated photonics presented in this work lays ground for the next generation of power-efficient optical beam steering systems. Optical beam steering is required in a wide range of applications, such as high-speed optical communications Integrated photonics, and silicon photonics in particular, can potentially address these challenges by densely integrating photonic devices for beam steering and optical signal processing, optical sources, and detectors Integrated photonics approaches to beam steering have focused mostly on optical phased arrays. An optical phased array consists of an array of emitters (usually grating couplers), resulting in a diffraction pattern in the far field highly dependent on the relative phases of the emitted waves. By tuning the relative phases of such waves using waveguide phase shifters, the output beam angle is tuned. These systems allow a very tight control over the beam shape and direction, and previous work has shown 1D steering A different approach to beam steering used a single thermooptically tuned grating coupler, and achieved a limited steering of 2.7°while consuming 130 mW of electrical power in static operation MEMS tuning of photonic waveguide devices can provide more than five orders of magnitude lower power consumption compared to traditional tuning methods (sub-μW for MEMS In this Letter, we experimentally demonstrate, for the first time, low-power beam steering using a MEMS tunable waveguide grating. Our results show beam steering up to 5.6°at a wavelength of 1550 nm with actuation voltages below 20 V and sub-μW static power consumption. Our beam steering device is based on changing the spacing between the teeth of a waveguide grating coupler using MEMS actuation. Figure An analytical estimate of the effect of varying the gap in a suspended grating can be obtained by using the standard grating equation assuming in-plane excitation, and estimating the effective grating index n eff as a weighted average between the effective refractive indices of the air gaps (width g) and silicon grating teeth (simulated n wg 2.4, width d ): Thus, an equation relating the out-coupled light angle θ to the gap width g was obtained. The white curve in Fig. The mechanical design is based on a suspended comb drive actuator, with the attached tunable grating as an additional soft spring. The grating was designed using a tooth width of 300 nm, with 300 nm wide initial gaps, and grating width 20 μm abutting a waveguide taper with a wider end of 12 μm width [see Fig. with ε 0 the permittivity of vacuum, t the device layer thickness, N the number of comb finger pairs, s the finger spacing, w the width of each finger, D the initial distance between the end of a finger and the beginning of the opposite one, x the comb displacement, and V the applied voltage. Our designed comb parameters are t 220 nm, N 36, s 400 nm, w 300 nm, and D 1.8 μm. The maximum displacement for our designed actuator is close to 900 nm, at a voltage of 40 V. Combining Eqs. ( The device was fabricated using the simple process presented in Laser light at 1550 nm wavelength and 1 mW power is edge-coupled via a polarization controller through a standard optical fiber into the quasi-TE mode of the on-chip waveguides. On the chip, the light is guided to the tunable grating, which emits light out of plane into a large NA microscope objective, part of the Fourier imaging setup. In order to visually inspect the sample, visible light is sent into the objective using a beam splitter, and the reflected light is routed through a set of lenses for magnification, and finally onto a CCD camera [a visible light image is shown in Fig. To obtain an image of the IR k-space, an additional lens can be placed in front of the IR camera [labeled removable lens in Fig. The substrate of the sample is electrically grounded via a copper plate, and two soft electrical probes, in direct contact with the silicon device layer, connect the comb drive electrodes to a voltage source for MEMS actuation. Actuation of the comb drive then results in pulling forces on the grating, changing the tooth spacing and resulting in beam steering. Figure The large beam divergence is due to the high-index contrast, and thus the limited number of grating teeth contributing to the diffraction pattern. This can be overcome by designing a lower-refractive-index-contrast grating by, e.g., thinning down the silicon device layer, or by choosing a different low-index material platform such as silicon oxide or silicon nitride. The limited actuation range, less than half of the theoretical prediction, is due to premature collapse of the MEMS actuator, stemming from the grating spring, and can be observed in the tunable grating area in Fig. Compared to free-space optics, the presented technology is orders of magnitude smaller and lighter, lower in cost, less prone to mechanical noise, and requires very limited assembly. Integrated thermo-optic phased array systems have at least five orders of magnitude (limited by measurement, seven orders of magnitude based on our estimate) higher power consumption than our device, and suffer from thermal cross-talk problems, which our technology inherently avoids. Compared to elecro-optic tuning, our device features at least one order (more likely three orders) of magnitude lower power consumption. Furthermore, we achieve more than two times larger beam steering than previously reported thermo-optic tunable single gratings We have introduced, for the first time, MEMS tunable waveguide gratings for beam steering, and experimentally demonstrated beam steering up to 5.6°, with an actuation voltage below 20 V. Our results show more than twice the beam steering of previously reported thermo-optic tuning of waveguide gratings The optical beam steering technology presented here can provide the long-sought reduction in cost and power consumption necessary to extend artificial vision to battery-powered devices, including mobile phones or drones, to enable active probes for in vivo medical imaging, and to grow the optical communication bandwidth by SDM. Funding. Vetenskapsrådet (VR) (621-2012-5364); H2020 European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) (780283). 0146-9592/19/040855-04 Journal © 2019 Optical Society of America Vol. 44, No. 4 / 15 February 2019 / Optics Letters Vol. 44, No. 4 / 15 February 2019 / Optics Letters