To date only a few two-dimensional (2D) magnetic crystals were experimentally confirmed, such as CrI 3 and CrGeTe 3 , all with very low Curie temperatures (T C ). High-throughput first-principles screening over a large set of materials yields 89 magnetic monolayers including 56 ferromagnetic (FM) and 33 antiferromagnetic compounds. Among them, 24 FM monolayers are promising candidates possessing T C higher than that of CrI 3 . High T C monolayers with fascinating electronic phases are identified: (i) quantum anomalous and valley Hall effects coexist in a single material RuCl 3 or VCl 3 , leading to a valley-polarized quantum anomalous Hall state; (ii) TiBr 3 , Co 2 NiO 6 and V 2 H 3 O 5 are revealed to be half-metals. More importantly, a new type of fermion dubbed type-II Weyl ring is discovered in ScCl. Our work provides a database of 2D magnetic materials, which could guide experimental realization of high-temperature magnetic monolayers with exotic electronic states for future spintronics and quantum computing applications. The discovery of two-dimensional (2D) materials opens a new avenue with rich physics promising for applications in a variety of subjects including optoelectronics, valleytronics, and spintronics, many of which benefit from the emergence of Dirac/Weyl fermions. One example is transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) monolayers, whose finite direct bandgap enable novel optoelectronic controls as well as valley-dependent phenomena, such as circular dichroism and valley Hall effect (VHE) In contrast to fermions in nonmagnetic systems, such as massless Dirac fermions in borophene, black phosphorus, Cu 2 Si To date 2D magnetic materials are limited to marginal modifications to existing compounds, for instance by: (i) adsorbing hydrogen on graphene 23 ; (ii) reconstructing surface/edge In this work, we employ high-throughput first-principles calculations to systematically screen monolayer materials with intrinsic magnetism at a high temperature, better if they are equipped with nontrivial topological properties. We have successfully identified 56 ferromagnetic (FM) monolayers, including 24 monolayers with a Curie temperature (T C ) higher than that of monolayer CrI 3 . We also find that quantum anomalous and valley Hall effect coexist in FM monolayers of VCl 3 and RuCl 3 , supporting the native existence of valleypolarized, topologically protected, quantized spin current. Monolayer ScCl possesses 2D type-II Weyl nodal ring centering on Γ point, which may lead to intriguing electronic properties beyond known fermions. Our work provides a rich data set of materials potentially supporting high-temperature 2D magnetism as well as new topological states. The computational screening process is schematically shown in Figure To determine magnetic ground state, the total energy of antiferromagnetic (AFM) state (E AFM ) is compared with that of FM state (E FM ). With regard to the magnetic structure of AFM state, checkerboard configuration is adopted preferentially. When the self-consistence convergence of computation fails for checkerboard case, stripe configuration is also considered (see Figure Unlike the binaries, there are rich structural prototypes for ternary compounds, which can be used as prototypes to extend the candidate list to a larger compositional space by atomic substitution. This candidate list also serves as a guidance towards experimental synthesis of FM and AFM monolayers (see Table Next, the Curie (Néel) temperature T C (T N ) is calculated to give the upper limit of the transition temperature of screened FM (AFM) monolayers. The critical transition temperature of ferromagnets T C and antiferromagnets T N in the mean field approximation is calculated by 40-43 where E FM and E AFM are the total energy of magnetic monolayers with N magnetic atoms in monolayers decrease as element X is replaced by I, Br, Cl (Ge, Si) successively, which is consistent with Monte Carlo simulations The Curie temperature of FM CrI 3 monolayer (T C | CrI3 = 290 K) is taken as a reference to screen high-temperature 2D magnets. As shown in Figures where n and n' are band indexes, and are velocity operators along x and y directions. As shown in Figures Integrating the Berry curvature in the first Brillouin zone (FBZ) leads to nonzero Chern number C = -1, indicating that FM monolayer RuCl 3 exhibits QAHE. The calculated Chern number is consistent with the band structure of RuCl 3 nanoribbon with a width of 386 Å, where there is one quantized spin polarized current channel protected from scattering on each edge (Figure Besides the superior materials to realize already-known states, new electronic state is also identified. The FM monolayer ScCl, with magnetic moment of 1.5 μ B /unit cell and T C = 1.03 × T C | CrI3 , consists of two chlorine atomic layers intercalated by two scandium atomic layers (see Figure Due to weak SOC of Sc and Cl atoms, the band gap on the ring is negligible, as shown in Figure In conclusion, we have identified 89 magnetic monolayers, including 33 binary, 39 ternary, 13 quaternary and 4 quinary compounds through high-throughput computational screening based on first-principles calculations. We find 24 monolayers with higher T C than that of experimentally confirmed ferromagnet CrI 3 . Furthermore, from these high T C monolayers, new half-metals TiBr 3 , Co 2 NiO 6 and V 2 H 3 O 5 are proposed, and new ferromagnets RuCl 3 and VCl 3 are found to support valley-polarized QAHE. Besides, novel electronic state named type-II Weyl ring is predicted in monolayer ferromagnetic ScCl. Our work provides a significant clue to realize 2D high-temperature ferromagnets with novel Dirac/Weyl fermions. This work may stimulate further investigations on the effect of layer thickness, magnetic configurations, light-magnetism interaction of these magnetic 2D crystals. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: XXX.XXX. It includes the follo wing parts: co mputational methods, magnetic configurations, the atomic and electronic structures of semiconducting, metallic, half-metallic 2D magnetic materials with high T c .