We report the realization of simultaneously negative effective mass density and shear modulus in a single-phase asymmetric double-sided pillared metamaterial. The negative effective mass density is achieved by the combination of bending and compressional resonances of one pillar whereas the rotational resonance of the other pillar leads to the negative effective shear modulus. The coupling between these two pillars is investigated to describe the formation of the doubly negative property. Then, a pillared system featuring chirality is designed in order to make efficient the excitation of the rotational vibration, the occurrence of which is demonstrated by the transmission spectrum. Finally, numerical simulations of the zero-index refraction are carried out to prove the occurrence of the doubly negative property. The advent of locally resonant metamaterials almost two decades ago, 1 and the great deal of research that ensued, 2-7 have significantly contributed to the possibilities we have now for controlling the propagation and the dispersion of acoustic/elastic waves. Some effective elastic properties of these artificial structures, may exhibit abnormal behaviors in narrow frequency bands where they may be infinite positive, null or even negative. suitable candidates in that respect are probably the pillared metamaterials We first describe and analyze the dynamic behavior of a single-phase asymmetric double-sided pillared metamaterial (DPM) whose unit cell is shown in Fig. , where V ∂ stands for the lateral boundaries of the unit cell and γ represents the applied simple shear strain. The result displayed in Fig. To validate this approach, we have computed the band structure of DPM. As expected, an isolated negative-slope branch, highlighted in red in Fig. Additionally, we show in Fig. As mentioned before, the effective shear modulus turns negative in the frequency interval between these two points. Therefore, both NMD and NSM are achieved in this interval which perfectly explains the occurrence of the negative-slope propagative branch in Fig. 