A variety of electrostatic phenomena, including the structure of electric double layers and the aggregation of charged colloids and proteins, are affected by nonuniform electric permittivity. These effects are frequently ignored in analytical and computational studies, and particularly difficult to handle in situations where multiple dielectric contrasts are present, such as in colloids that are heterogeneous in permittivity. We present an extension to the iterative dielectric solver developed by Barros and Luijten [Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 017801 (2014)] that makes it possible to accurately compute the polarization of anisotropic particles with multiple dielectric contrasts. This efficient boundary-element method-based approach is applicable to geometries that are not amenable to other solvers, opening the possibility of studying collective phenomena of dielectrically anisotropic particles. We provide insight into the underlying physical reasons for this efficiency. Electrostatic effects play a crucial role in colloidal suspensions, affecting their stabilization, aggregation, and electrokinetics. For dielectrically isotropic and homogeneous spherical colloids, the traditional method of images is applicable to single-colloid systems, where the image potential of an external charge is represented by the total electrostatic potential of its Kelvin image and a line image charge. Although in principle BEM-based matrix equation solvers can be applied to obtain the electrostatic potential around dielectric objects of arbitrary geometry and dielectric configuration, their accuracy and convergence rate are highly dependent on the conditioning of the boundary-element equations. Unlike finite-difference methods (FDM) We consider a dielectrically inhomogeneous system in space V consisting of piecewise uniform dielectric domains separated by smooth boundaries S, i.e., at arbitrary interface location s with outward unit normal n(s) we have different relative permittivities ε in (s) and ε out (s) on the opposing sides. We assume free charge distributions σ f (s) on the interfaces and ρ f (r) in the bulk, which give rise to the induced surface charge density σ pol (s), for which various boundary integral representations have been derived. Following Refs. 24 and 31 we choose where ε(s) = [ε in (s) + ε out (s)] /2, ∆ε(s) = ε out (s)ε in (s), and ε 0 the vacuum permittivity. The electric field E(s) comprises contributions from all (free and in-duced) surface and bulk charges, where, to avoid the divergence of the layer potential, the infinitesimal disk |s -s | ≤ δ is excluded. ε(r ) is the relative permittivity at the off-surface location r . Equation (1) relates the induced charge density at surface location s directly to all other charges, and thus has to be solved self-consistently. To this end, the BEM discretizes the interfaces and represents the continuous surface charge density σ(s) with a set of basis functions f i (s) defined at each of N boundary patches, where σ i is the weight at the ith patch. where s i is the enclosure of patch i. Under this approximation, σ(s) is discretized onto the N boundary patches, each carrying a charge density σ i . For a finite number of patches, this approximate σ(s) does not satisfy Eq. ( The nested integral in Eq. ( If s is evaluated at s j , we arrive at the qualocation approach, where Eq. ( with εi ≡ ε(s i ), ∆ε i ≡ ∆ε(s i ), and ni ≡ n(s i ). To retain the dimensionality of Eq. ( Since these basis vectors may be linearly dependent, Arnoldi iteration is used to find orthogonal basis vectors {q 1 , q 2 , . . . , q m }, and the mth approximate solution σ (m) is obtained via linear combination. The computational cost of GMRES is dominated by the generation of each basis vector in Eq. ( The high accuracy of IDS for this test case arises from two aspects of the spectrum of the matrix operator A. The large discrepancy between these data and the analytical result can be significantly reduced by using one-point quadrature 31 (dashed lines marked "without constraint," for comparable patch numbers, namely 372 (red) and 1472 (blue)). Enforcing the net induced-charge constraint (cf. Ref. 31 and main text) improves the data (small red and blue solid circles) such that they become indistinguishable from the analytical result, except near the two surface boundary points (z = ±5 Å), where discretization effects dominate. This improvement, which is achieved at negligible additional computational cost, can be understood from the eigenvalue spectrum of the operator employed in the IDS (see main text). FIG. First, A is well-conditioned. For Aσ = b, the L 2 -norm condition number κ(A) = η max (A)/η min (A) characterizes the sensitivity of the solution σ to a perturbation in b, where η max (A) and η min (A) are the largest and smallest singular values of A, respectively. A perturbation δb in b will lead to a perturbation δσ in σ, whose norm is bounded by the condition number, 58 A typical MD simulation employs a fast Ewald solver with moderate accuracy, leading to inaccuracies in b. Thus, an accurate solution of σ requires a small condition number κ(A). For a normal matrix, κ(A) = |λ max (A)|/|λ min (A)|, with λ its eigenvalues. Whereas the sphere of Fig. (14) yielding κ(A) = 41/2, sufficiently small to guarantee a well-conditioned matrix. In Fig. The second contribution to the accuracy of the IDS also follows from the spectrum. Namely, the convergence rate of GMRES depends on the eigenvalue distribution of A in the complex plane. The IDS, including the net-charge constraint, has been successfully applied to calculate the self-assembly and polarization of suspensions of binary mixtures of isotropic spherical colloids. To study the accuracy of the IDS, we compute the polarization charge induced on a Janus sphere by a monovalent ion and compare the resulting surface potential to a finite-element calculation performed using the COM-SOL package (Version 5.1, 2015). The Janus particle has azimuthal symmetry about the z-axis. The positive unit charge is placed 9σ from its center, at a polar angle θ = π/2 (i.e., in the equatorial plane of the Janus particle), so that the external source field acts equally on both hemispheres (Fig. Figure particle-i.e., for the entire system comprised of the patches on the two hemispheres as well the patches at the silica-metal interface-these deviations are significantly reduced, but by no means negligible (Fig. To understand and resolve these discrepancies, we again turn to the spectrum of the operator A. We find that the large dielectric mismatches at the metalwater interface and the central metal-silica interface have a detrimental effect on the condition number, yielding κ(A) = 2.93 × 10 3 . Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. prohibitively costly in situations where A is dynamic. Instead, we observe that the simple Jacobi (or diagonal) preconditioner M = diag(A) = diag(ε ii ) can be applied here. It is efficient for diagonally dominant matrices, 