We systematically investigate the perpendicular magnetocrystalline anisotropy (MCA) in Co-Pt/Pd-based multilayers. Our magnetic measurement data shows that the asymmetric Co/Pd/Pt multilayer has a significantly larger perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) energy compared to the symmetric Co/Pt and Co/Pd multilayer samples. We further support this experiment by first principles calculations on the CoPt 2 , CoPd 2 , and CoPtPd, which are composite bulk materials that consist of three atomic layers in a unit cell, Pt/Co/Pt, Pd/Co/Pd, Pt/Co/Pd, respectively. By estimating the contribution of bulk spin-momentum coupling to the MCA energy, we show that the CoPtPd multilayer with the symmetry breaking has a significantly larger perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) energy than the other multilayers that are otherwise similar but lack the symmetry breaking. This observation thus provides an evidence of the PMA enhancement due to the structural inversion symmetry breaking and highlights the asymmetric CoPtPd as the first artificial magnetic material with bulk spin-momentum coupling, which opens a new pathway toward the design of materials with strong PMA. The interplay between magnetism, electronic structure and spin-orbit coupling From now on, we use the term "Rashba" to describe all odd-order-in-k contributions for simplicity. Since the Rashba interaction only develops in non-centrosymmetric systems, the strength of Rashba parameter can provide an indication to the degree of structural inversion symmetric breaking. Although it was originally proposed in nonmagnetic materials We report in this work our analysis on the effects of asymmetric stacking of Co-Pt/Pdbased multilayer systems by combining experimental magnetic measurements and firstprinciples calculation. Co/Pt and Co/Pd-based layered structures have been well known to exhibit strong PMA of about 3-10 Merg/cm 3 In order to study the effect of the symmetry of the stacking structure on the magnetic behavior, three variations of the multilayer structures were fabricated as follows: [Co(0.2 nm)/Pt (0.2 nm)] 10 , [Co (0.2 nm)/Pd(0.2 nm)] 10 and [Co(0.2 nm)/Pd(0.2 nm)/Pt(0.2 nm)] 10 . Our films have been fabricated with a sputtering apparatus (Canon-Anelva C-7100) on thermally oxidized Si substrates at room temperature. A Ta(4 nm)/Ru(1 nm)/Pt(0.5 nm) seed/buffer layer was first deposited on the substrate. Then a Co-based multilayer was grown by alternate deposition of Co, Pd and Pt at room temperature All of them display typical perpendicularly magnetized properties as the sharp reversals in the out-of-plane (op) loop and the gradual saturation in the in-plane (ip) loop with a substantial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy field (H k ). The values of the effective PMA are consistently observed in various samples with different thicknesses, see Supplemental Material We now turn to our first-principles calculations in the basis of Density Functional Theory (DFT) approach to CoPt 2 , CoPd 2 , and CoPtPd model systems in order to understand the origin of this behavior (see Supplemental The structures resemble that of nonmagnetic noncentrosymmetric semiconductor BiTeI which exhibits bulk Rashba spin-momentum coupling. and it may be related to one of the following scenarios: (i) the difference in the number of valence electrons in all unit cells The trivial scenarios (i) and (ii) can immediately be ruled out, as discussed in the Supplemental Material [37], due to the same total number of valence electrons in the unit cell, which is 29, and the presence of Pd in CoPtPd which has larger PMA than CoPt 2 . Additionally, the anisotropy of the orbital magnetic moment, induced as a direct consequence of SOC, can be considered by defining μ anis orb = μ ip orbμ op orb . From our fully self-consistent SOC calculations, we obtain μ anis orb to be -0.025 μ B for CoPt 2 , which is larger than -0.023 μ B for CoPtPd. Therefore, a larger MCA does not trivially correspond to a larger orbital moment anisotropy in the CoPtPd system here, thus making scenario (iii) inapplicable. Indeed, it has been pointed out that an extra care should be taken when considering the Bruno model for systems with strong spin-orbit coupling such as those containing 5d transition metal elements To assess the relevance of scenario (iv), we calculated the Densities of States (DOSs) of these systems, as shown in Fig. In ferromagnetic systems, the degeneracy of the up-and down-spins are already lifted, and Rashba interaction enhances/reduces the splitting depending on the sign of k • (ẑ × m). The resulting splitting is thus asymmetric with respect to k and the sign of asymmetry gets reversed when m is reversed. The asymmetric splitting is most pronounced along the k direction parallel to ẑ × m. Therefore, in order to consider the role of structural asymmetry in the present model systems, we first visualize the spin splitting by following the prescription introduced in previous works The Rashba-type splitting also manifests further in the distortion of Fermi contour (Figs. as indicated by the blue arrow in Fig. We can proceed further by defining the E MCA as the E(m +x )-E(m z ) or E(m -x )-E(m z ). Both definitions give the same total MCA energy as reported in Table which is exactly the E MCA within the whole Brillouin zone. The estimation of this contribution to each model system is also shown in Table can also be defined. This quantity provides an estimation on the shift of the Fermi surface, thus the estimation of the degree of inversion symmetry breaking. As summarized in the last row of Table To gain an additional insight on the role of the broken inversion symmetry, one may use a simple argument in which the MCA energy is expressed as E MCA = λ εuo in the second-order perturbation theory, where ε uo denotes the energy gap between the occupied and unoccupied states, while the λ contains the spin-orbit interaction between these states and depends on the SOC coupling constant. The E εuo+∆ε , in which ±∆ε denotes the widening or narrowing of the energy gap due to the departure from the symmetric band structure, and hence is absent (∆ε = 0) in the symmetric cases (Fig. Since ( ∆ε ε 0 ) 2 is always positive, Eq. ( At this stage, it is appealing to consider the origin of Rashba-type splitting in the CoPtPd. Returning to the band structure of CoPtPd (with SOC, Fig. In real materials, interlayer mixing is likely to occur during the growth process. Such mixing can influence the MCA, especially for multilayer systems with small monolayer thickness as in our cases. We have therefore performed the calculation to estimate the effect of the intermixing (see Supplemental Material [37]). We found that although the calculated MCA is quantitatively altered by the intermixing, the perpendicular MCA of CoPtPd is consistently larger than that of CoPt 2 case, indicating that the effect of inversion symmetry breaking on MCA is still effective in multilayers with interlayer mixing, although detailed effects of the structural disordering to the MCA require a further study. Finally we note the similarity between the structure of CoPtPd system in the present work and that of the nonmagnetic noncentrosymmetric semiconductor BiTeI In summary, from our combined first-principles calculation and experimental results, we provide for the first time an evidence for the asymmetric-structure-driven enhancement of PMA in the transition metal multilayers. In agreement with previous prediction on the MCA modulation due to the change in the Rashba parameter The different behaviors of K eff in [Co/Pt] n and [Co/Pd] n multilayer with the decreasing Co thicknesses as shown in Fig. Our calculations employ the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) S4 functional as implemented in the Full-Potential Linearized Augmented Plane Wave (FLAPW) code S5-S7 . The in-plane lattice constant has been fixed to the optimized value of bulk Pt, but the out-ofplane atomic positions and lattice constants, i.e. normal to the layer plane, have been relaxed for all systems. The MCA energy E MCA has been defined in the calculations as E MCA = E ip -E op , where E ip (E op ) refers to the total energy of the in-(out-of-)plane magnetization, implying that positive E MCA indicates the preferred out-of-plane magnetization. The SOC has been included self-consistently, so that full relaxation of the charge and spin densitites is allowed upon the treatment of SOC. The MCA energies obtained in this self-consistent field (SCF) manner are indicated by E MCA (SCF) in Table In order to model the multilayers, three different bulk systems have been chosen in the calculations so that the unit cells contain three layers of Pt/Co/Pt (referred to hereafter as CoPt 2 model system), Pd/Co/Pd (referred as CoPd 2 ), and Pt/Co/Pd (referred as CoPtPd) stacked in an fcc(111) pattern, such that the Co atoms are sandwiched between 2 Pt layers, 2 Pd layers, or between a Pt layer and a Pd layer, respectively (see Fig. [S12] A. Bansil and S. Kaprzyk, Phys. Rev. B 43, 10335 (1991). 0.040 meV/ Å3 for the CoPtPd system, in qualitative agreement with our experiment. If MCA arose entirely from each individual interface, the expected MCA for CoPtPd would be 0.028/2+0.027/2 = 0.0275 meV/ Å3 considering that there are two types of interfaces, Co/Pt and Co/Pd. This value is smaller than the calculated value of 0.043 meV/ Å3 (see Table