Ultralight mechanical resonators based on low-dimensional materials are well suited as exceptional transducers of minuscule forces or mass changes. However, the low dimensionality also provides a challenge to minimize resistive losses and heating. Here, we report on a novel approach that aims to combine different 2D materials to tackle this challenge. We fabricated a heterostructure mechanical resonator consisting of few layers of niobium diselenide (NbSe 2 ) encapsulated by two graphene sheets. The hybrid membrane shows high quality factors up to 245'000 at low temperatures, comparable to the best few-layer graphene mechanical resonators. In contrast to few-layer graphene resonators, the device shows reduced electrical losses attributed to the lower resistivity of the NbSe 2 layer. The peculiar low temperature dependence of the intrinsic quality factor points to dissipation over two-level systems which in turn relax over the electronic system. Our high sensitivity readout is enabled by coupling the membrane to a superconducting cavity which allows for the integration of the hybrid mechanical resonator as a sensitive and low loss transducer in future quantum circuits. Van-der-Waals heterostructures based on complementary two-dimensional (2D) materials are a topic of intense research Another interesting question is how mechanical vibrations will interact with exotic states in encapsulated 2D materials such as 2D superconductors The as-fabricated device has an initial separation of d = 95 nm, which is weakly reduced by 8 nm for the maximum applied voltage of V g = -4 V in this work. This static displacement is inferred from the shift of the cavity frequency ω c /2π ≈ 7.5 GHz as a function of V g due to the change of the cavity capacitance. We use sufficiently low pump fields such that we can neglect optomechanical backaction. In order to evaluate the mass of the membrane we measure the V g dependence of ω m (see Fig- Here ω 0 /2π is the maximum resonance frequency at the mechanical charge neutrality point (V 0 = 0.6 V), 0 is the electric constant, m eff = 0.27πr 2 ρ 2D the effective mass of the fundamental mode, ρ 2D the two dimensional mass density of the membrane and r g = 1 μm the radius of the gate electrode. From a fit to the data we obtain m eff = 37.7 fg and ω 0 /2π = 52.6 MHz. Given the radius of the membrane, this effective mass corresponds to the mass of roughly 20 layers of graphene with ρ gr = 0.76 fg μm -2 . Considering that one layer of NbSe 2 (ρ NbSe2 = 4.1 fg μm -2 ) has the mass of 5.2 graphene layers, the mass is in agreement with a heterostructure composed of three layers of NbSe 2 encapsulated by two layers of graphene and some extra mass that might be attributed to polymer residues from the fabrication. From ω 0 we can estimate the initial tension of the circular membrane 9 with E 2D = n gr E 2D,gr +n NbSe 2 E 2D,NbSe 2 the combined two-dimensional Young's modulus. Here ) is the elastic stiffness of graphene (NbSe 2 ). 30,31 Amplitude (pm) Figure 2: (a) Energy decay measurements at various V g . The resonator drive is stopped at t = 0 s which leads to a subsequent decay of the mechanical amplitude. The plotted traces are the results of 10000 averaged energy decay measurements. The highest quality factors are obtained at low gate voltage with values up to Q = 245000 at V g = 0.3 V. (b) V g dependence of the inverse quality factor of the membrane (blue). Electronic dissipation is induced over capacitive displacement currents to compensate for the mechanical motion (schematic inset). The fitting parameter for the electronic dissipation is an effective resistance with R eff = 50 Ω (black line, see text). Every point is the average of three measurements. In order to probe the mechanical energy dissipation independent of frequency noise and mechanical nonlinearities, we perform ring-down measurements (see Figure is still maintained at increased gate voltage in contrast to few-layer graphene mechanical resonators. with R eff an effective resistance of the membrane and ∂C m /∂z the derivative of the capacitance with respect to the deflection z, which is obtained over the measured shift of the cavity resonance frequency as a function of V g . The data agrees well with with 1/Q = 1/Q Joule + 1/Q 0 with an intrinsic dissipation Q 0 = 237 000 and R eff ≈ 50 Ω (black line in Figure This is because the stronger temperature dependence would dominate at higher temperatures. It is important to note that this behavior is not related to the heterostructure type of our membrane as a very similar dependence has been observed in a Q ≈ 10 6 few-layer graphene resonator (see SI Section 3). Looking at previous low temperature measurements in graphene or nanotube-based resonators 24,32-34 a proportionality of Q -1 to T or T 1/3 has been observed individually. However, an increase of the temperature dependence at lower temperature has not been reported before. We attribute this difference to the higher precision and reduced heating involved in the detection with a superconducting cavity combined with ring-down measurements. Next we will show that these features can be understood in the framework of two-level fluctuators that are relaxed by the interaction with conduction electrons. We now recall the model of a two-level fluctuator or tunneling system, which has been proposed to describe low temperature effects in a wide range of isolating and metallic glasses and crystalline resonators. (I) Resonant absorption is dominant at low temperatures where k B T ≈ E ≈ hω m . The standard TLS model predicts Q -1 ∝ tanh (hω m /(2k B T )) and a resonance frequency shift ∆ω m /ω m,co ∝ ln T for this process. (II) Absorption relaxation is dominant for k B T ≈ E hω m . In this process the mechanical strain fluctuations are affecting the TLS energy mainly over changes in the asymmetry energy ∆. Standard TLS model A quantitative comparison between theory and experiment is generally difficult and will serve here only to get a qualitative understanding of the parameters. We compare our measurements with the standard TLS theory. . The difference between C ωm and C Q might arise from changes in the density of the contributing TLS at the different temperatures. In resonators with lower Q factors we observe usually a saturation or reduced temperature dependence at low temperatures. This might be related to clamping induced loss We have not found any indication for superconductivity in the measured heterostructure device. First, the electric resistance extracted from the dissipation as a function of gate voltage is compatible with normal conducting NbSe 2 . Second, we would expect the superconductivity to suppress the coupling of the TLS to electrons below T c /2, 28,42 which would lead to a higher kink temperature and increased temperature dependence compared to the measured data. In conclusion, we presented a mechanical resonator based on van-der-Waals heterostructures of two-dimensional materials. The high mechanical quality, frequency tunability and low electrical resistivity measured in a graphene/NbSe 2 /graphene resonator exemplifies the opportunities of 2D-heterostructures for mechanical resonators. The enhanced and partially linear temperature dependence of the dissipation is understood with mechanically mediated relaxation of two-level systems by conduction electrons. It might be possible to further improve the mechanical quality by using electrically isolating boron nitride for the encapsulation or reducing polymer residues in the fabrication. In future experiments, the combination of superconductivity and low mass in a 2D membrane opens the potential for ultra low loss and high sensitivity mechanical resonators. This is because a superconducting mechanical resonator suppresses electrical losses induced by mechanical motion and allows for higher pumping fields in a cavity based readout. Both are important for the exploration of quantum motion and improvements of force sensitivity in atomically thin mechanical resonators. The single phonon-photon coupling rate g 0 is estimated by 3 Here ω c is the cavity resonance frequency, C tot = 135 fF is the total capacitance of the cavity, z zp = h/(2m eff ω m ) = 6.5 • 10 -14 m is the zero point motion of the resonator and ∂C m /∂z is the derivative of the capacitance between the mechanical resonator and the gate with respect to the center position of the membrane z. For ∂C m /∂z we obtain from a plate capacitor estimation ∂C m /∂z ≈ 0 πR 2 g /d 2 = 3.1 • 10 -9 F m -1 , yielding g 0 /2π = 5.6 Hz in close agreement with ∂C m /∂z = 3.6 • 10 -9 F m -1 (g 0 /2π = 6.5 Hz) extracted from the change of the cavity resonance frequency by pulling on the membrane with V g . Due to the limited coupling we are not able to confirm the estimation of g 0 with thermal calibration measurements. However, the coupling is compatible with 2 Hz-10 Hz from previous samples with similar geometry. The resonance frequency change ∆ω m /ω m in Figure Above 100 mK the data follows a logarithmic temperature dependence expected from res-onant interaction with TLS. The deviation below 100 mK is at least partially attributed to heating of the membrane due to the increased cavity pump power needed to resolve the thermal motion. The extracted value for C ωm = 5.31 × 10 -5 is in the expected range. The Q -1 temperature dependence in Figure Such a dependence has been observed in several graphene based resonators above 1 K. It will be interesting to investigate this regime in more devices and for higher mechanical modes to gain more insight. The inverse Quality factor dependence of the encapsulated device (Figure In the measured range the heterostructure device does not show the expected saturation of the dissipation when increasing the drive voltage at T mc = 8 mK but rather shows a decrease of Q as shown in Figure 