Charged particles exhibit the Hall effect in the presence of magnetic fields. Analogously, ferromagnetic skyrmions with non-zero topological charges and finite fictitious magnetic fields exhibit the skyrmion Hall effect, which is detrimental for applications. The skyrmion Hall effect has been theoretically predicted to vanish for antiferromagnetic skyrmions because the fictitious magnetic field, proportional to net spin density, is zero. We experimentally confirm this prediction by observing currentdriven transverse elongation of pinned ferrimagnetic bubbles. Remarkably, the skyrmion Hall effect, estimated with the angle between the current and bubble elongation directions, vanishes at the angular momentum compensation temperature where the net spin density vanishes. This study establishes a direct connection between the fictitious magnetic field and spin density, offering a pathway towards the realization of skyrmionic devices. The skyrmion where M is the soliton mass, D is the viscous coefficient, and F is the sum of the internal force originating from the potential energy and external driving force. The skyrmion Hall effect results from the first term on the right-hand side, an effective Lorentz or Magnus force, defined 4πs z , where n is the spin order parameter and s is the net spin density. The skyrmion Hall effect is thus determined by the topological charge Q and fictitious magnetic field B, similar to the Hall effect determined by the electric charge and external field. For ferromagnetic skyrmions, both topological charge and spin density are finite so that the skyrmion Hall effect emerges Hall effect for antiferromagnetic skyrmions The significance of experimentally demonstrating the vanishing skyrmion Hall effect is twofold. First, it is crucial for realizing spintronic devices that utilize magnetic skyrmions as information carriers Furthermore, antiferromagnetic spin textures are expected to move faster than ferromagnetic ones In this work, we experimentally demonstrate the vanishing skyrmion Hall effect using We fabricate perpendicularly magnetized ferrimagnetic GdFeCo/Pt films 28 via sputtering. The Pt layer serves as a spin-current source, and an in-plane charge current generates a spin-orbit torque (SOT) Figure This current-driven bubble domain elongation however does not alter the main conclusion of this research, as explained below. In Fig. indicates that the current-driven elongation of bubble domains is a consequence of halfskyrmion motion (Fig. To validate the above interpretation, we investigate current-driven elongation of bubble domains at various temperatures. If the above interpretation is valid, θ must vary gradually with T and change its sign at T because the skyrmion Hall effect for a bubble domain with a well-defined Q is determined by the net spin density. Figures To further support the proposed interpretation with experimental observations, we develop a simple theory for the elongation of a pinned magnetic bubble driven by SOT. Specifically, we model an elongated bubble with one pinned end at the origin (Fig. where s is the sum of the sublattice spin density magnitudes, α is the Gilbert damping constant, λ is the DW width that forms the bubble boundary, and r is the radius of the half skyrmion. The elongation angle obtained for the bubble is identical to the expression for the skyrmion Hall angle for an isolated skyrmion We also perform numerical simulations based on the atomistic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation coupled ferrimagnet varies with temperature and vanishes at T . Combined with theoretical and numerical support, this observation demonstrates that the fictitious magnetic field for magnetic skyrmions is proportional to the net spin density, revealing the importance of the net spin density in topological soliton dynamics where it has been overlooked compared to the topological charge. Furthermore, this demonstration of the vanishing skyrmion Hall effect is of crucial importance for realizing an efficient skyrmion racetrack memory without information loss. The high tunability of the net spin density of ferrimagnets, which cannot be found in more conventional spintronic materials, will open up new possibilities for manipulating the dynamics of topological solitons and thereby facilitate the realization of soliton-based spintronic devices. 