Irrespective of the class they belong to, all the hole doped high-T c cuprate superconductors show an anti-correlation between the superconducting transition temperature and the characteristic pseudogap energy in the underdoped region. The doping dependent pseudogap in the quasiparticle spectral density is believed to remove low-energy electronic states and thereby reduce the superconducting condensate. Impurities within the CuO 2 plane, on the other hand, break Cooper pairs in the unitarity limit and diminish superfluid density. Both pseudogap in pure cuprates and impurity scattering in disordered cuprates reduces T c very effectively. In this study we have compared and contrasted the mechanisms of T c degradation due to pseudogap and impurity scattering in hole doped cuprates. We have suggested a framework where both these factors can be treated on somewhat equal footing. Beside impurity and pseudogap dependent superconducting transition temperature, the proposed scenario has been employed to investigate the disorder and hole content dependent isotope exponent in high-T c cuprates in this work. The emergence of superconductivity in hole doped cuprates has baffled the condensed matter physics community still after over three decades since its discovery Impurities in the CuO 2 plane degrade T c very effectively in cuprates In this brief report, we have attempted to investigate the effect of in-plane impurity on T c at a fixed hole content and that due to the p-dependent PG on T c in pure cuprate superconductors. The effects are contrasted and compared. The doping and impurity induced variation of the oxygen isotope effect has been used as a testing ground. We have found strong circumstantial evidence that, as far as T c degradation is concerned, both in-plane impurities and the PG play qualitatively similar role. Depletion of the superfluid density by both (impurity and the PG) is the common thread that links the experimental observations. Enhancing the SC transition temperature of cuprates has been a major goal of high-T c community. The highest T c achieved so far stands at 164 K in triple CuO 2 layer optimally doped Hg-based cuprate under high quasi-hydrostatic pressure Rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the framework which is used to analyze the experimental data. Section 3 consists of the discussion on the main findings and the conclusions. The reduction of superconducting transition temperature due to impurity scattering can be expressed via the Abrikosov-Gorkov (A-G) equation Here, T c0 is the SC transition temperature of the pure compound, T c is the transition temperature of the impurity substituted compound, Ψ denotes the di-gamma function, κ is a constant of the order of unity which depends on the symmetry of the SC gap function, γ = Γ/2πk B T c , with Γ being the impurity induced pair-breaking scattering rate. For strong (potential) pair-breaking scattering, Γ = x/π<N(ε F )>, where <N(ε F )> is the thermally averaged electronic energy density of states (EDOS) at the Fermi level (ε F ) and x is the impurity concentration in the CuO 2 plane. Interestingly, the Uemura relation implies that T c ~ βρ s , where β is a constant of proportionality (or a weakly varying parameter with hole doping). This indicates that Eq.1 can be expressed approximately in terms of superfluid density instead of the superconducting transition temperature. It also suggests that as long as the Uemura relation holds, the A-G equation can be used to estimate the fractional change in the superfluid density due to impurity scattering. The PG correlation in the normal state reduces the low-energy QP spectral weight around the Fermi energy Zn is nonmagnetic and isovalent to the in-plane Cu atom that it substitutes. Effect of Zn on T c has been studied extensively Next, we plot T c versus T * data in Fig. Thus far, we have seen that both in-plane impurities at a fixed hole content and the pseudogap as p is varied in impurity free compounds, have same qualitative effect on the superconductive transition temperature. Impurities reduce the superfluid density via pairbreaking and the PG reduces the superfluid density via the removal of low energy QP spectral density. The common Uemura relation for p-dependent T c and that due to Zn substitution lends strong support to the observations presented in this paper. The p and Zn dependent variation of the isotope exponent can also shed significant light on this matter. In high-T c cuprates, the isotope exponent (IE), α, depends strongly on the number of doped carriers in the CuO 2 plane. In general, α(p) rises sharply in the underdoped side and can exceed the canonical BCS value of 0.5 near the so-called 1/8 th anomaly The IE is defined as α(T c ) = -(dlnT c /dlnM), where M is the isotopic mass. Incorporating this expression for IE with the A-G pair-breaking equation, α can be expressed as a universal function on T c as follows Here,  / is the first derivative of . α(T c0 ) = -(dlnT c0 /dlnM), IE of the pure compound. Eq. 2 shows that IE of the disordered compound is a function of IE of the pure compound and T c . It also follows that a plot of T c /T c0 versus α(T c )/α(T c0 ) has a universal character, independent of the details of pair-breaking mechanism or equivalently the physical process that reduces the superfluid density. We have shown α(T c )/α(T c0 ) versus T c /T c0 for Zn doped and Zn free LSCO and YBCO It should be noted that isotope exponents are hard to determine with high degree of precision. It mainly arises from finite superconducting transition width and a subjective element involved in defining the mean-field T c . Both disorder and underdoping tend to increase the superconducting transition width In this short communications, we have compared the effect of isovalent in-plane impurity substitution and underdoping on the superconducting T c of hole doped cuprates. While the former breaks Cooper pairs via unitary scattering, the later removes low energy QP sates which otherwise would have been available for SC pairing condensate. It has been proposed here that the primary effect of both in-plane impurities and underdoping is the reduction of superfluid density. The experimental behavior of α(T c )/α(T c0 ) versus T c /T c0 plot for La 2-x Sr x Cu 1-y Zn y O 4 and YBa 2 (Cu 1-y Zn y ) 3 O 7- compounds and their reasonable agreement with the universal theoretical trend (Fig. It should be noted that the hole content in the CuO 2 plane(s) remains unaltered due to isovalent Zn substitution 