Naturally ventilated buildings harness freely-available resources such as internal buoyancy gains and wind forcing in achieving comfortable interior conditions. Although these resources are free, they are time-variable and can be difficult to control. As a result of this the nonlinear interplay between sometimes competing resources may lead to sub-optimal ventilation states. This problem has been explored by a number of previous researches e.g. Flynn & Caufield (Building and Environment, 44, 216-226, 2009) who, in studying these ventilations states, demonstrated complicated transitions characterized by hysteresis even for the simple case of a one-zone building. The objectives of this research are to extend the previous (theoretical) analysis by conducting complementary numerical experiments using sophisticated algorithms capable of describing turbulent, buoyancy driven flow. A further objective of this study is to specifically decouple the source, which was previously assumed to supply both heat and mass to the interior space. Rather, the flow dynamics in a case where heat and mass are supplied independently are examined. "Naturally-ventilated" buildings are a special class of net-zero energy buildings that seek to reduce the energy expense by harnessing freely-available resources (solar radiation, wind forcing, internal buoyancy generation) in forcing air into and out of the built environment. Although the previously mentioned resources are free, they are, with the possible exception of patterns of building occupation and the switching on and off of electrical and related equipment, unpredictable. Strictly regulating interior conditions to ensure that they fall within a range deemed comfortable is therefore no trivial task. In this sense, it is important to understand the flow dynamics within the buildings, in order that appropriate control schemes may be devised. Numerous studies have tried to propose practical equations, giving the architects/designers simple rules of thumb that nonetheless capture the essential physics governing architectural flows In parallel, researchers have used more sophisticated numerical simulations to predict the flow behavior of natural ventilation Finally this research will try to show that it is possible to perform good quality studies of complex flow phenomenon inside naturally ventilated buildings using commercial CFD softwares on standard workstations. In the long term, this could open the door to a popularization of naturally ventilated buildings since the design of such buildings was until not so far ago too complex to be applied to homes and commercial buildings, this due to time limitations and monetary constraints. Due to the complexity of the problem even for simplified geometries, natural ventilation needs to be modeled. In any case these models can roughly be divided in five different types, taking into account -or not -different parameters influencing the flow. These parameters and the associated models are summarized in the Table The emptying filling box model considers an empty box with a floor surface area S, height H and bottom and top openings area A b respectively A t . A plume rises from a source to the top of the box due to thermal differences and spreads out laterally to form a density interface between the plume outflow and the ambient fluid. Kaye and Hunt (1) On the other hand, the "draining time," i.e. the time taken to flush the box of the aforementioned fluid can also be predicted: Both of these times depend on the constant λ which is widely used in the modeling of plumes and is equal to where the coefficient α is the plume entrainment coefficient. It depends on the geometry of the plume and in this case (asymmetric plume with an assumed top-hat distribution for vertical velocity and density) is about ∼ 0.114. B represents the plume buoyancy flux created by the temperature difference. It is expressed in function of gravity, the heat source power P and the characteristic properties of the fluid: A * is a non-dimensional parameter called the effective area defined to facilitate the comparison for different sizes and geometries of openings. It is a function of A t and A b , and is expressed as where c t and c b denote the discharge loss coefficients associated with the flow through the bottom and top openings. Hunt and Holford Using the filling box model again, Linden et al. where the interface height is non-dimensionalized to ease comparison with different geometries (ξ = h/H). Fig. The transient behavior of this flow has also been studied by Kaye and Hunt Figure where τ represents the non-dimensional time, μ is the ratio of the draining and filling times (μ = t d /t f ) and η represents the dimensionless average reduced gravity of the buoyant layer: Here, the reduced gravity is defined by 5 1/3 To improve the realism of the previous model, the influence of the external atmosphere on the inner flows is added. The governing features of the previously mentioned flows have been studied by Linden The effect of the pressure difference is taken into account in the equation and weighted by the strength of the buoyancy flux B. Intuitively higher adverse wind forces will induce higher pressure differences and will tend to lower the height of the interface. On the other hand a strong buoyancy flux B will compensate the effect of the pressure drop and help to raise the interface height. New variables need to be introduced in order to describe this more complex flow. In the case of a single building the Froude number F r is equal to and can be recognized as a term of equ. Thereafter, the ventilation rate for the building can be computed in function of the parameters defined above, for the stratified state, respectively mixed state: The flux is considered positive if the buoyancy forces are dominant, i.e. the flow will go out through the upper (top) opening and negative when the wind dominates, where the air will escape through the lower opening. Hunt and Linden To explain the transition from mixing to stratified, two cases can be considered. On one hand a case with a constant wind and no heat source (B = 0). This case corresponds to a stable mixing flow with infinite Froude number where the normalized flow rate Q/Q W = -1. When B is increased from zero, F r decreases (equ. 12), and the steady state solution falls on the lower (stable) part of the solution. The buoyancy driven flux Q B increases in magnitude with B and hence |Q/Q w | decreases. At the critical Froude number corresponding to the left end of the mixed solution, the wind will be unable the maintain the flow in the room for any further increase in B, which will result in a transition from the mixed to the stratified regime. On the other hand, if the room contains a non-zero heat source (B¿0) and the wind speed is initially zero, the system will be located on the upper part of the solution, where Q/Q w is equal to infinity. Supposing now that the wind is progressively increased, F r will increase as Q w so that Q/Q w decreases and buoyancy accumulates in the upper part of the building. This behavior goes on until the wind is too strong and the flow, unable to maintain the stratified regime, moves to the unstable part of the equation. As explained above, since this state is unstable, the flow will move towards one or the other solution. Physically this corresponds to a hysteresical behavior of the flow at low values of Q/Q w . The critical state depicted in Fig. where Q s is the mass flux in [m 3 /s] and T in is the temperature of the air injected. In order to simplify the further mathematical relations, the source mass flux is non-dimensionalized as follows: Blocked ventilation and the effect of the non-ideal heat source were studied by Woods et al. Using the Boussinesq approximation, where positive and negative plumes are equivalent due to the symmetry of the driving forces, it is possible to show that the model studied by Woods et al. 1-ξ (ξ+ζs) 5/3 Finally, all the parameters ruling the flow are taken into account. In this scenario, the relation between the non-dimensional interface height, the pressure drop and the source mass flux can be obtained with a combination of equ. This equation has not yet been validated by experimental data in the literature. By way of validation, the limiting cases for ∆p = 0 (no wind) and ζ s = 0 (ideal source) have been solved analytically and equ. ( This time, the characteristic polynomials determining the relative importance of wind, the internal buoyancy respectively cannot be determined and expressed with one equation only, similarly to what was done for the case of an ideal source (equ. 15). Three equations must be used, taking into account the source volume flux. To keep all the parameters non-dimensional the characteristic volume flux is chosen differently and instead of using Q w (as was done in the derivation of equ.( s H 1/3 . Accordingly, the non-dimensional source volume flux and the non-dimensional flux through the top opening are defined as: The three equations are corresponding to the three different regimes appearing in that kind of flow are: The heat source which was previously assumed to supply both heat and mass to the interior space is this time considered to supply heat and mass independently. This kind of model has so far never been studied analytically. The main objective of decoupling the heat source is to see if it involves any changes in the prediction of the interface height that might be useful to improve the existing models. Therefore, a numerical investigation only will be carried out to study any relevant influence of that modification on the final prediction. Within the framework of this project the commercial software ANSYS Fluent was used to solve the flows. This software is based on the finite volume method, which solves the partial differential equations (cf. equ. 24-3) describing the behavior of the flow iteratively, until a solution reasonably (and arbitrarily) close to reality is found. Theses equations are solved numerically on a mesh, constituted of small jointed volumes (or surfaces in 2D). In fluid mechanics, the Navier-Stokes equations are a set of non-linear partial differential equations describing the Newtonian flows behavior. The resolution of these equations by modeling the fluid as a continuum is extremely complex and analytical solutions only exist for a few simplified cases. Those equations are derived from the conservation laws applied to mass and momentum. In this case, the conservation of energy is added to the Navier-Stokes equations in order to model thermal effects Conservation of momentum: Conservation of energy: where ρ is the density of the fluid, u i is the velocity component (u, v, w), p is the pressure, μ indicates kinematic viscosity, H the enthalpy and S H a source term. K and c p represent the thermal conductivity, respectively the specific heat of the fluid. The time is indicated with t, x i is the coordinate axis (x,y,z) and g i is the gravitational acceleration. The Direct Numerical Simulation of these equations (DNS) requires a very fine mesh since the whole range of spatial and temporal scales of turbulence are resolved and the smallest eddies in the flow need to be captured. According to Nieuwstadt The second type of simulations, called Large Eddy Simulations (LES) is mostly based on the work of Smagorinsky Nonetheless, in the case of this study a Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) model will be used both because of its computational efficiency and because of the broad application of RANS-based models in industry. To this end, the mean parameters are more useful than the instantaneous turbulent-flow parameters in the case of naturally ventilated buildings thus these models will give appreciable results with u and u being the mean and fluctuating components of the velocity field. The other variables (such as pressure and scalar quantities) are also decomposed same way. -ρu i u j and -ρu i H With the apparition of these new terms (Reynolds terms), the set of equations introduces a closure problem and more equations are necessary to solve it. Thus, the effect of turbulence is represented as an increased viscosity/diffusivity by its replacement with linear terms and scalar coefficients based on the hypothesis (Boussinesq Many researchers have been trying to assess different turbulent models for naturally ventilated buildings and the two most popular RANS models that have been successfully used for indoor ventilation flows are SST k -ω and RNG k - The standard k -model is based on model transport equations for the turbulent kinetic energy k and its dissipation rate . The derivation of the model is based on the assumption that the flow is fully turbulent and that the effects of molecular viscosity are negligible and (31) G k represents the generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to the mean velocity gradients, G b is the generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to buoyancy. Y M represents the contribution of the fluctuating dilatation in compressible turbulence to the overall dissipation rate. C 1 , C 2 are constant values determined analytically by the RNG theory, C 3 is also a constant whose determination will be explained below, σ k and σ are the turbulent Prandtl numbers for k and . S k and S are the source terms that account for the production of kinetic energy, respectively dissipation rate at the simulated sources. As it was already mentioned earlier, the effect of buoyancy is one of the major flow-driving aspects of naturally ventilated buildings and it is therefore important to understand the way its modeled. For k -the generation of turbulence models is given by where P r t is the turbulent Prandtl number for energy and g i the component of the gravity in the associated direction. For the standard k -model the Prandtl number is considered constant but in the case of the RNG model it is computed using a formula analytically derived by the renormalization group theory to give it more accuracy. In ANSYS Fluent the buoyancy effects on the generation of k are relatively well understood Since gravitational acceleration is activated in the solver in order to model the buoyant effects, the pressure field will include the hydrostatic head. Mathematically, this is accomplished by redefining the pressure in terms of a modified pressure that includes the hydrostatic head (denoted p') as follow : where r i is the position vector component. Noting that The substitution of equ. (35) in the momentum equation (equ. 25) gives a pressure gradient and gravitational body force terms of the form where ρ is the actual fluid density. Since the Boussinesq hypothesis is made, the body force term becomes The consequence of this treatment of the gravitational body force is that the report of static and total pressures will not show any influence of the hydrostatic pressure. It is important to note this is consistent with equ. Regarding the squareness of the domain, a mesh constituted of hexahedron was generated. It is the simplest and fastest way to mesh such a domain. For information purposes, the mesh used is pictured in Fig. The operating pressure is set to P 0 = 101325 Pa which is the default pressure in Fluent. Gravity is activated and the reference density and temperatures are set to ρ 0 = 1.225 kg/m 3 , respectively T 0 = 293 K. The boundary conditions were defined as follow: • bottom opening: pressure inlet with 0 Pa gauge pressure, backflow temperature of T 0 and with very low level of turbulence (k = 10 -5 and = 10 -6 ) • top opening: pressure outlet with 0 Pa gauge pressure, backflow temperature T 0 and very low level of turbulence (k = 10 -5 and = 10 -6 ) • heat source: the heat source is modeled as a heating plate producing a heat flux corresponding to the heat outputs P shown in Table • building walls, ceiling and floor: the walls and the floor are considered adiabatic with a standard no slip condition. All the discretization schemes (Pressure, momentum, turbulent kinetic energy, turbulent dissipation rate and energy) were chosen of the second order. A SIMPLE scheme was used for the pressure-velocity coupling. Two approaches are used for the modeling of boundary layers: near-wall treatment and wall functions. By nature, these two approaches require different types and sizes of cells. The first one consists of having a mesh that is fine enough in the boundary layer region to accurately model the physics happening there with the chosen turbulence model, as it is shown on the left of Fig. The management of the time-steps was inspired by the simulations carried out by Kaye et al. The velocity field inside the building is shown in Fig. Looking at the right part of Fig. The temperature field inside the domain is plotted in Fig. The interface height simulated with Fluent was compared to the theoretical (validated) value presented in section 2.2. The evaluation of the numerical interface height is explained in Appendix A. The results are displayed in Fig. The transient behavior of the numerical flow was compared with the theoretical model presented in section 2.2 since these results had also a validation. This was done to verify that the numerical parameters used were performing well enough in reproducing the development of the flow and not only its final state. The transient behavior of the interface height was plotted for case 3 (see Table This first set of simulations was carried out with the setup mentioned above since it was the closest (experimentally validated) study to the final objective of this project found in the literature. Since the further simulations where studying the influence of the external atmosphere and to account for the effect of the wind, it was not possible to put the openings of the building on the ceiling, respectively on the floor, but rather on the sides of the building (see Fig. The streamlines starting from the bottom opening of the building as well as the velocity field at the interface height are plotted in Fig. The temperature fields inside the domain are plotted in Fig. Similarly to what was said for the velocity field in the previous chapter, the interface is not as defined as for openings situated on the floor/ceiling of the building. Moreover, the more turbulent flow induces a mechanical diffusion of the heat through the interface. The precession of the plume can be seen on the left the part of Fig. The numerical model can be corrected by normalizing the interface height by the corrected height of the building H . The corrected height is taken as the height between the middle of the openings as shown in Fig. Regarding the analysis presented above, it would have been better to produce a correction model taking into account the vorticity of the flow and the turbulence level inside the room instead of only applying a correction based on the finite vertical extent of the upper and lower openings. These more complicated models are unfortunately time consuming to build and out of the boundaries of this project. Here wind is taken into account by including the external atmosphere in the numerical domain. The simulated external atmosphere was taken as a rectangle of 20m × 20m × 50m to avoid the influence of the wall boundary conditions on the internal flow (see Fig. The mesh used for the simulations taking into account the external atmosphere was based on tetrahedron cells. The reasons for this choice are the simplicity of generating such meshes since they provide easier meshing for complex geometries. To stay consistent with the convergence study performed for the building previously, the previous simulations where re-run with a tetrahedron mesh and proved to give the same results, though requiring a higher number of volumes. In this sense, the same mesh was used for the building inside the atmosphere. The tetrahedron-based mesh allowed the meshing of large cells in the simulated atmosphere whereas fine cells where used on the walls and inside the building, where finer flow phenomena occur. In this regard, if the use of this mesh works and succeeds in modeling the behavior of natural ventilation, it could be used in industry where results are needed quickly. Therefore, the mesh used is showed in Fig. The operating pressure was set to 101325 Pa. For the full domain, since the pressure will directly enter in the validation of the model, the reference The boundary conditions were defined as follow: • inlet: velocity inlet with 0 Pa gauge pressure, and the speed specified in Table • outlet: pressure outlet with 0 Pa gauge pressure, backflow temperature T 0 and very low level of turbulence (k = 10 -5 and = 10 -6 ). • heat source: the heat source is modeled as a heating plate producing a heat flux corresponding to a power P = 320 W. • building walls and floor: the walls and the floor are considered adiabatic with a standard no slip condition. • atmosphere walls: modeled as adiabatic walls with slip conditions to avoid the formation of boundary layers and reproduce the external atmosphere as well as possible. • ground: adiabatic wall with standard no slip condition. All the terms were discretized with a second order scheme except for pressure where a PRESTO! scheme was chosen. The advantage of the latter is that instead of interpolating the pressure at the center of the cells, the pressure is directly computed on the faces. This scheme is more expensive computationally speaking but allows better precision on pressure, which is a key parameter for naturally ventilated flows. In the case studied in this project the precise modeling of the boundary layer only makes sense on the inside of the building where the walls are meshed more finely. The external atmosphere does not need to be discretized extensively since this would increase the required computational power to simulate a flow, but not give exploitable results. Therefore scalable wall functions are used. It allows the solver to choose whether a wall function or a near wall treatment is more appropriate. The use of this method is justified by the fact that velocity will vary along the simulations, along with the Y + value, it is therefore important that the solver gives solutions as close as possible to reality for all the steps of the simulation. The consideration of the external atmosphere in the numerical domain and the addition of wind to the simulations sets aside the possibility of using progressive time steps as it was done for the smaller domain (room only). The reason is that the addition of wind induces higher flow speeds inside the domain and for large time steps numerical instabilities would be created in the simulated atmosphere, thus generating errors in the results. Due to this, the time step size is chosen constant according to the equation given in Fluent's user guide with L the characteristic length scale simulated (L ∼ 1m). The chosen time step is set to ∆t = 1 s in the case studied here, so that equ. ( The different fields in the external atmosphere are not so important in the framework of this study, since the main interests are the physics happening inside the building especially because the useful value can be taken and calculated independently from the outside. Moreover, it would have been too time-consuming to verify the external parameters quantitatively. For these reasons only a qualitative analysis is done here, and the external velocity profile is plotted in Fig. In the case where a whole neighborhood was simulated, the domain would need to be bigger at least on the upper direction to avoid the over-acceleration on the flow above the building due to the squeezing of the area where the air flows. In any event, in the current case, it will not have an impact on the compared results since the pressure is taken independently from the upstream wind speed and the external velocity field. The temperature field at steady state inside the building is presented in Fig. In the mixed case, the air inside the building is at an almost homogeneous temperature. The colder air in the top right corner corresponds to the cold external air entering the building. The numerical data obtained were added to the curves presented in the theory chapter (Fig. The numerical results were added to the analytical curves presented in the theory (Fig. For this set of simulations, the effect of a non-ideal heat source are studied but in the absence of an external wind or, for that matter, an explicitly modeled external atmosphere. To this end, the numerical domain of the first set of simulations is used since the only difference is that this time the source provides mass to the system. Therefore, the boundary conditions are the same as before, as well as the discretization schemes and the mesh. The different volume source flux and the associated ζ s values are summarized in the table below. The only change is the heat source, which now provides mass to the system: • heat source: the heat source is modeled as a mass flow inlet providing air at 300 K and for the values presented in Table Since the qualitative results were exhibiting the same tendencies as the ones presented in the section before (section 4.3.8), they are not detailed here. Only the quantitative results compared with the theoretical model will be discussed. Fig. Table Since the qualitative results such as the temperature and velocity fields are exhibiting the same behavior than what was presented in section 4.3.8 they are not detailed here. The discussion will rather focus on the quantitative aspect of the results. Fig. Fig. As mentioned no theoretical model nor experiments were made for decoupled sources. The advantage of studying numerically the decoupling of the heat source is that it provides a fast and relatively reliable way of assessing if decoupling has an influence on the flow inside the building. Fig. Temperature field Fig. Fig. The differences that can be seen on the figure above are likely due to the turbulent nature of the flow inside the domain and not a relevant discrepancy. To support this argument, it can be seen that the results are more stable for low wind speed, thus lower turbulence levels. Concretely, it means that it is unnecessary to conduct mathematical investigations where the source is decoupled at least while trying to improve the prediction of the interface height. The impact of the flow rate was not studied in the results since the previous results for a non-ideal heat source showed that the tendencies were not correctly modeled by the numerics. It is therefore not possible to extend the results and draw conclusions. The first thing that needs to be pointed out is the way the correction model for the density interface height prediction is built. Since the simulations with a non ideal heat source are fitting well the theory without applying a correction to the non-dimensional interface height emphasizes the fact that using a shorter building height to correct the results might not be the optimal way to do it. As it was already mentioned in the presentation of the results, a corrective model taking into account the inner vorticity of the flow and/or the turbulence level of the domain would certainly have led to a better fit of the model. Moreover, the model should also take into account the type of source since it seems to have an impact on the final prediction. To avoid the long process involved, an option would be to modify the type of openings used in the simulations. Even though square openings were easier to model and facilitated the comparisons, they are not optimal since, as explained above it might have an impact on the "real" height of the building. Considering different geometries for the openings for instance as presented in the figure below (Fig. The simulation of the external atmosphere was here done directly in the sense that the whole domain was simulated. The main reason for that was to be as close to reality as possible. For instance, putting a constant pressure drop over the building might have led to results with a better agreement with theory but further from reality. In this sense to improve the efficiency of the simulations without going too far from reality, one option could have been to run simulations of a wind flow around a closed building, for the different studied wind speeds and save the velocity (temperature and pressure) field as a User Defined Function. In a second time, another set of simulations would have been run, using the field computed before as inlets, this under the assumption that the pressure field is comparable between the closed and ventilated building. The problem is that it is hard to assess the numerical behavior of the interaction on the boundaries (e.g. when the air inside the building starts escaping the room through the top opening) if an unsteady boundary condition is fixed. For this reason mainly, the simulations were run as is. Specifically concerning the decoupling of the source, the relative importance of the heat source vs. the air jet should be studied. The simulations run above were clearly dominated by the heat source and therefore might have behaved differently if the air jet was stronger. Also, the inlets were specified to have very low levels of turbulence, but as it was mentioned a few times, some discrepancies between the results have certainly turbulence as origin, and it might be interesting to investigate in this direction. During this project, the feasibility of simulating naturally ventilated flows in buildings was assessed. The goal was not only to try to model these flows with numerical simulations but to show that all the different regimes that take place can be reproduced with computational fluid dynamics. To do so, existing analytical models were regrouped and standardized, particularly through the reorganization and re-writing of the existing equations incorporating the same parameters. Besides, numerical simulations corresponding to the different analytical models were run and then compared. The simulations showed good agreement with the theory for most cases. Since some of the theoretical work was previously validated, the results can be used to validate the numerical solutions and their ability to predict natural ventilation flows. In addition, the influence of a decoupled heat source was studied. The main objective was to assess if a decoupled heat source could improve the prediction of the flow parameters. The results show that at least for the prediction of the density interface height, this was a priori not the most promising way and the ceiling of the building (Fig. Figure Preprint submitted to arXiv.orgSeptember 18, 2018 