Transition metal dichalcogenides like MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 have attracted enormous interest during recent years. They are van-der-Waals crystals with highly anisotropic properties, which allows exfoliation of individual layers. Their remarkable physical properties make them promising for applications in optoelectronic, spintronic, and valleytronic devices. Phonons are fundamental to many of the underlying physical processes, like carrier and spin relaxation or exciton dynamics. However, experimental data of the complete phonon dispersion relations in these materials is missing. Here we present the phonon dispersion of bulk MoS2 in the high-symmetry directions of the Brillouin zone, determined by inelastic X-ray scattering. Our results underline the two-dimensional nature of MoS2. Supported by first-principles calculations, we determine the phonon displacement patterns, symmetry properties, and scattering intensities. The results will be the basis for future experimental and theoretical work regarding electron-phonon interactions, intervalley scattering, as well as phonons in related 2D materials. Lattice dynamics constitute one of the most fundamental properties of a crystal, being the basis for mechanical and elastic properties, thermal transport as well as charge-carrier dynamics, phonon-assisted optical excitations and many more. In this view, it is highly desired to have reliable data about the phonon dispersion relation of MoS 2 , a layered crystal that has boosted the new research field of two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond graphene during recent years In MoS 2 and other TMDCs, however, experimental data on the full phonon dispersion are missing. Only one high-symmetry direction of the Brillouin zone in MoS 2 has been accessed so far by inelastic neutron scattering (INS) Here we present the entire phonon dispersion relation of MoS 2 in the high-symmetry directions Γ -K, Γ -M , K -M , and Γ -A of the Brillouin zone as determined by inelastic X-ray scattering (IXS) experiments. We show the existence of almost degenerate Davydov pairs throughout the Brillouin zone, as well as nearly quadratic dispersion of the out-of-plane acoustic modes (flexural modes), underlining the two-dimensional nature of MoS 2 . Our results are further substantiated by density-functional theory calculations and simulations of the structure factor, which determines the scattering intensities. They are in excellent agreement with the experimental data and reveal the mixing of in-plane and out-of-plane phonon displacement directions inside the Brillouin zone. 2H-MoS 2 forms a hexagonal crystal with space group P6 3 /mmc (D 4 6h in Schönfließ notation) with six atoms in the unit cell, giving rise to 18 phonon branches. At the Γ point, the phonon modes decompose into the irreducible representations for the conventional definition of a 120 • angle between the in-plane lattice vectors In Fig. The IXS measurements allowed us to identify all acoustic and almost all optical phonon branches along the A-Γ-K-M -Γ directions as shown in Fig. We observe nine phonon branches. The calculations show that they are almost doubly degenerate, as expected from the weak interlayer forces. The energy resolution in the IXS experiment, however, does not allow to distinguish these so-called Davydov pairs: Each pair is formed by two phonon modes, where the two layers forming the bulk unit cell (i) have both the same displacement pattern as the single layer and (ii) the displacement of one of the layers is shifted in phase by π. At the Γ point, one of the bulk modes of such a pair is always even with respect to spatial inversion and the other one is odd Near the Γ point, the phonon modes have well defined displacement direction, i.e., in-plane longitudinal (L), in-plane transverse (T), and out-of-plane transverse (Z). This is seen by the color of the symbols representing the IXS data, which indicates the displacement direction preferentially detected in the given scattering geometry. Towards the K and M points, we observe data points with different colors (i.e., different preferred displacement directions) on the same branch, see for instance the longitudinal acoustic (LA) branch. We interpret this by an increased mixing of the displacement directions for increasing q. This is supported by our calculations of the phonon eigenvectors, see Fig. Furthermore, we observe a quadratic dispersion of the ZA branch (also called flexural mode) near the Γ point, which is typical for two-dimensional atomically thin sheets The phonon dispersion obtained from DFT simulations shows overall excellent agreement with the IXS data. As discussed in the following, the challenge for lattice-dynamics simulations in layered materials is the proper description of the effect of non-covalent interactions, which bind the individual layers together. This is particularly relevant for the rigid-layer, low-frequency shear and breathing-like modes in the vicinity of the Γpoint, where the force-constants are small and dominated by contributions from the non-covalent interlayer coupling. Therefore, we implemented the contributions from the popular DFT-D3 van-der-Waals corrections On the other hand, Molina-Sánchez et al. While we observed the phonon dispersion of eight of the nine Davydov pairs in the experiment, we were unable to access the almost degenerate branches derived from the two LO modes around 35 meV (E 2u and E 1g at the Γ point) in the Γ-K and Γ-M directions in our scattering geometries. In order to understand this, we simulated the dynamical structure factor Using a Bragg peak (h k l) with a suitable out-of-plane component l = 0 should lead to activation of the LO E 1g and E 2u branches, caused by symmetry breaking of the phase factors from the atomic positions, which lifts the destructive interference. The intensity can be enhanced through a wise choice of the Bragg peak such that it aligns the signs of the contributions from the atomic displacements and of the phase factors from the atomic positions. This is illustrated in Fig. An overview of the measured phonon frequencies, compared to Raman and IR spectroscopy data at the Γ point and to DFT calculation at the Γ, K and M points, is given in Tab. I. A detailed comparison of our IXS data with measurements performed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) In conclusion, the complete phonon dispersion relation of MoS 2 is determined experimentally in the highsymmetry directions of the Brillouin zone. In combination with DFT calculations, the data clearly show the 2D character of the lattice vibrations in this layered crystal. Therefore, the results can be immediately transferred to the monolayer form of MoS 2 and the vast family of related 2D materials, in particular isostructural TMDCs. The understanding and engineering of scattering processes involving phonons, such as in electron transport or optical transitions involving the indirect band gap or the two K valleys, will in future be based on the knowledge of the phonon dispersion relation.