In the present work, different synthesis procedures have been demonstrated to fill carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with Fe1-xNix alloy nanoparticles (x = 0.33, 0.5). CNTs act as templates for the encapsulation of magnetic nanoparticles, and provide a protective shield against oxidation as well as prevent nanoparticles agglomeration. By variation of the reaction parameters, the purity of the samples, degree of filling, the composition and size of filling nanoparticles have been tailored and therefore the magnetic properties. The samples were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Bright-field (BF) TEM tomography, X-ray powder diffraction, superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The Fe1-xNix-filled CNTs show a huge enhancement in the coercive fields compared to the corresponding bulk materials, which make them excellent candidates for several applications such as magnetic storage devices. The synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials are very exciting and emerging research fields which have received much attention in the scientific and technological fields Due to the enhancement of materials properties, when their size scaled down to the nanoregime, many studies have reported on the synthesis and properties of FeNi binary nanoparticles and nanowires. McNerny et al. reported the synthesis of a series of monodisperse FeNi magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) with tunable Curie temperature (Tc) for self-regulated hyperthermia Due to their high surface-to-volume (S/V) ratio, MNPs are more susceptible to harsh environments such as oxidation, agglomeration and aggregation Due to the attractive properties of FeNi alloys, this study was directed towards the synthesis of CNTs-based nanocomposites of FeNi magnetic nanoparticles based on post-synthesis method, in which pre-fabricated multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) were used as templates. Two facile filling approaches were applied for the filling of CNTs with two different stoichiometries of Fe1-xNix alloy nanoparticles (x = 0.33, 0.5). A study on the morphology, structure and magnetic properties for the resulting FeNi magnetic nanoparticles is presented. The promising effect of an additional heattreatment step for Fe1-xNix alloy nanoparticles (x = 0.33) on these properties was investigated. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) of the type PR-24-XT-HHT (Pyrograf products, Inc., Cedarville OH, USA) were used as templates or nano-containers for the preparation of intermetallic nanoparticles. This type of CNTs is distinguished by its high purity which results from the fact that the as-produced carbon nanotubes are heat treated to 3000 °C. This procedure reduces the iron content (i.e., the catalyst) to a very low level (< 100 ppm) The first approach is an extension of a reported solution filling approach for CNTs In the second approach of filling, the nitrate precursors were directly mixed with the specific amount of CNTs (50-100 mg) in a sealed round bottom flask. A few drops of distilled water were added to ensure good stirring. The mixture was placed in an oil bath and heated to a temperature of around T ≈ 65 °C for 4 h. The mixture was then naturally cooled down to room temperature and washed with acetone and distilled water (20-30 mL) of a volumetric ratio of 1:1. The samples were then dried, reduced and annealed in a manner similar to the solution filled samples. This approach differs from the solution one, in the way that the filling materials are provided with a higher concentration (due to the absence of water solvent), which increases the percentage of materials which fill the CNTs. All samples were routinely investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with a Nova 200 NanoSEM from FEI Company operated at 15 kV and combined with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer (AMETEK). The SEM samples were prepared by placing a thin film of the sample on a carbon tape. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) measurements and nanobeam electron diffraction patterns were performed using a Tecnai F30 (FEI) operated at 300 kV or a Tecnai G2 (FEI) operated at 200 kV. Both are equipped with EDX analyzer (AMETEK, Oxford). Bright-field (BF) TEM tomography was employed to reveal the 3D positions of the filling FeNi nanoparticles and the morphology of the CNTs. To this end, a tilt series of BFTEM micrographs within a tilt range from -70°to +62° and tilt steps of 3° were recorded and reconstructed. The TEM samples were prepared by adding a few droplets of the sample suspension in acetone on a copper grid with a carbon coating on one side. Crystal structure determinations for the magnetic nanoparticles inside CNTs were identified by X`Pert Pro MPD PW3040/60 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (PANALYTICAL) with Co Kα radiation (λ = 1.79278 Å) in reflection geometry at a scanning rate of 0.05° s -1 in the 2θ range from 10° to 80°. Thermogravimetric measurements (TGA) were performed with a SDT-Q600 (TA instruments). A few milligrams of the material (~5 mg) were heated to a temperature of 900 °C with a heating rate of 5 K/min followed by an isothermal of 15 min under air atmosphere with a flow rate of 100 mL/min. The magnetic field dependence of the magnetization at 5 K and 300 K for an external magnetic field up to ± 3 T was measured by means of superconducting quantum interference device (MPMS-XL SQUID) magnetometer from Quantum Design (San Diego, CA, USA). Samples were filled inside gelatin capsules. This section is divided into two parts: the first part summarizes all the data obtained for Fe50Ni50@CNT samples, while the second part includes all Fe67Ni33@CNT samples data. The morphology and geometry of the filling material and their location inside or outside CNTs were examined by SEM (Figure Figure TEM-based nanobeam electron diffraction measurements were carried out for several individual nanoparticles of Fe50Ni50@CNT prepared by the first (Figure In a sample prepared by the first filling approach (with nearly 68 investigated filling particles), 81% of the particles had ratios in the range of 1-1.2, whereas 18% of the particles had ratios in the range of 1.2-1.5. The remaining 1% exhibited ratios larger than 1.5. On the other hand, in a sample prepared by the second filling approach (with nearly 36 investigated filling particles), 58% of the particles had aspect ratios in the range of 1-1.2, whereas 22% had ratios in the range of 1.2-1.5. The remaining 20% exhibited ratios larger than 1.5. Hence, the majority of the filling particles have a spherical geometry. Figure The expected stoichiometry of 1:1 for the binary alloys of Fe50Ni50@CNT was confirmed by EDX measurements in SEM and TEM. In SEM-EDX, the stoichiometry was obtained by measuring the relative ratio of the individual elements over an analyzed area of about 60  50 μm 2 (see Figure The XRD diffraction pattern for Fe50Ni50@CNT prepared by both filling approaches is shown in Figure where dXRD is the mean size of the particles, λ is the X-ray wavelength (Co Kα, λ = 1.7927 Å) and Δ(2θ) is the line broadening at half the maximum intensity (FWHM) in radians. Using this model, the mean particle diameter dXRD for Fe50Ni50@CNT prepared by the first and second filling approaches equals to 8.9 ± 0.2 nm and 9.8 ± 0.2 nm, respectively. The discrepancy between the diameter measured by XRD and TEM can be explained by the possibility that some of the magnetic nanoparticles agglomerated, forming a larger polycrystalline structure, which appeared as a single larger particle in the TEM measurement. It is worth mentioning that the error bars in dXRD refer to the measurement error, while for dTEM it indicates the observed size distribution. TGA is mainly used as a measure of the sample purity (i.e., the absence of outside particles which exhibit an increase in mass prior to the combustion of the CNTs), and for the determination of the filling material inside CNTs by performing backward calculations based on the mass of the TGA residue Figure The magnetic field dependence of the magnetization M(H) was measured for samples of Fe50Ni50@CNT prepared by both filling approaches, as shown in Figure Further information on the magnetism of the materials is demonstrated by the observed difference in coercivity which is a size-dependent property already in the size range studied here. The data in Figure A robust enhancement in the coercivity of the nanoparticles is observed compared to the bulk material of the same composition reported by Bozorth, who found the coercive field Hc is less than 1 Oe for FeNi sample prepared by melting Armco iron and high-purity, commercial electrolytic nickel in a high-frequency induction furnace in air with a covering of borax The symmetry in the shape of the hysteresis loops gives a good indication on the stability of the prepared samples against oxidation. As known, these particles are subject to oxidation when they are exposed to air unless they are shielded by the carbon shell. To be specific, the presence of oxide layers would imply the presence of an antiferromagnetic shell around the ferromagnetic cores, i.e. the material would evolve the exchange bias effect where nanoparticles cooled under magnetic field show a significant shift between the coercive field values at the positive (Hc+) and the negative (Hc-) sides Based on the results obtained so far, the second filling approach has the advantage that, in comparison to the first one, a relatively higher degree of filling could be obtained. As a result, this approach (i.e., second filling approach) has been adopted for the preparation of Fe67Ni33@CNT samples. Therefore, all data presented in this section are related to Fe67Ni33@CNT samples prepared by the second filling approach. The filling behavior of Fe50Ni50@CNT has been also observed for the as-prepared sample of Fe67Ni33@CNT (Figure TEM-based nanobeam electron diffraction carried out for several individual nanoparticles for the annealed sample revealed that the filling particles are single crystalline. Similar to the FeNi alloys containing 30 at. % Ni or higher, the annealed sample showed the typical fcc structures of γ-FeNi indicated by the reflections correspond to the 111 (0.207 nm), 200 (0.179 nm), 220 (0.128 nm), 311 (0.109 nm) and 222 (0.104 nm) lattice planes (Figure Similar to Fe50Ni50@CNT, the spherical geometry of the Fe67Ni33 nanoparticles inside CNTs was confirmed by aspect-ratio studies. In an as-prepared sample (with nearly 87 investigated filling particles), 55% of the particles had aspect ratios of about 1-1.2, whereas 31% of the particles had ratios in the range of 1.2-1.5. The remaining 14% exhibited ratios larger than 1.5. However, in an annealed sample (with nearly 139 investigated filling particles), 72% of the particles had aspect ratios of about 1-1.2, whereas 25% had aspect ratios in the range of 1.2-1.5, and only 3% exhibited ratios larger than 1.5. This means that the majority of the particles became spherical, and, hence, the morphology became more homogenous after further heat treatment. We attribute the homogeneity in the morphology for the annealed samples to the non-wetting behavior between FeNi alloy nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes The expected stoichiometry of 2:1 for the binary alloys was confirmed by EDX measurements in a similar way to the equimolar FeNi binary alloys. Quantitative analysis indicates that the average atomic percentage of Fe is 67.0 ± 3.0 at. % and for Ni is 33.0 ± 3.0 at. % in Fe67Ni33@CNT samples. XRD measurements were performed for the as-prepared and annealed samples of Fe67Ni33@CNT (Figure TGA measurements showed a filling yield of about 2.70 ± 1 wt. % for the annealed Fe67Ni33@CNT samples prepared by the second filling approach (see Figure The magnetic field dependence of the magnetization M(H) has been measured for the asprepared and annealed samples of Fe67Ni33@CNT as shown in Figure Table In this study, two types of FeNi alloys nanoparticles were successfully encapsulated within the hollow cavity of CNTs using two facile routes. Our study demonstrates that both wet chemical methods offer simple ways to fill CNTs with these nanoparticles in a well-defined manner without the need of vigorous conditions. Depending on the chosen procedure, we were able to influence the filing yield, size, magnetic moment, coercivity, and the appearance of the sample in terms of particles inside CNTs to those on the outer surface. Tuning several parameters, such as mass of CNTs, precursor concentration, type and volume of washing agents, reduction/annealing time and temperature, etc., resulted in CNTs filled with FeNi nanoparticles in a well-defined manner. These facile approaches can be extended for the filling of CNTs with many other kinds of magnetic nanoparticles. However, it should be taken into consideration that, for some stoichiometries, additional heating steps are required in order to obtain the right phase. The crystallinity of the Fe-Ni nanoparticles in both types of binary alloys was verified by powder XRD and nanobeam electron diffraction. No indication of oxides or carbides phases were detected, which means that the synthesis approaches guarantee CNTs as protective shells for the MNPs. The additional annealing step for Fe67Ni33@CNT sample is mandatory for pure phase particles. The magnetic properties for the nanoparticles show preservation in the saturation magnetization at the nanoscale, whereas the hardness of the nanoparticles can be manipulated depending on the filling approach. The produced materials can be considered as excellent candidates for different applications. For example, industrial applications which require high coercivities (such as magnetic storage devices), and medical applications (where they are considered as good thermos-seed candidates for cancer therapy) could benefit from these enhanced materials. The following are available online at www.mdpi.com/.Figure Nanomaterials 2018, 8, 576; doi: 10.3390/nano8080576