In this paper, we will introduce a new designed direct conversion terahertz detector and we will compare its characteristics with a prefabricated design in order to obtain better performance of our new proposed design. Differences between our new work and prefabricated device are in both physical structure by introducing an exponentially graded base SiGe-HBT instead of linearly graded ones, and configuration of components by means of merging two transistor of the initial common base structure into a single transistor with two base contacts, which equivalent to two transistors in common emitter configuration. New proposed detector, at first will be analyzed with a compact circuit model and then for more accurate analysis, two dimensional carrier transport analysis will be performed with numerical methods. Comparison of new and prefabricated detector will be done by simulation of both new and prefabricated devices with the same simulator. Because of only a slight change in transistor physical structure, if our simulation results and previous empirical data have a good matching for prefabricated device then with a high degree of precision we can claim our comparison is verified, but of course, for better confirmation of our ideas, fabrication and experimental measurements should be done in the next steps. Responsivity and minimum noise equivalent power of new detector are about 4.9A/W and 6.5pW/Hz1/2 respectively, while these characteristics for prefabricated detector, are about 1A/W and 50pW/Hz1/2 respectively. Also about 231μW/pixel decrement in power consumption for the same responsivity, and a same bandwidth have been achieved. For many applications of terahertz waves, developing high precision, low noise, and low power compact detectors are seriously required. Some of these various applications are for example in medical imaging For this purpose, various methods and devices are used, where some of these methods can be found in [4, 5, 6, and 7]. In this paper silicongermanium hetero junction, bipolar transistors in a direct conversion detector system are used. Direct conversion detector systems in comparison with traditional heterodyne detectors have less electrical components (more compact and appropriate for very large arrays) and thus better noise performance and lower power consumption while having good responsivity performance. In our previous works, we started with analysis of optoelectronic mixers made from III-V HBT circuits in order to obtain higher frequency response [12], or higher conversion gain, using structural design alteration [11]. In addition, we focused on SiGe-HBT circuits [10, 13], to design Silicon compatible integrated circuits. In this study, in continuation of our recent works in SiGe-HBT, after explanations about detector design and implementation in section (2), in section(3), analysis of detector performance and theoretical viewpoints will be explained. Then in section(4), we'll introduce our ideas about the new detector design and in section (5), we are ready to compare our new proposed detector design (Refer to Figure.1 and Figure .7) with the initial detector implementation In direct conversion, detector systems the key element is a nonlinear device, which can generate second harmonic of, input terahertz signal in order to obtain square-law rectification. With a low-pass filter at the output, terahertz signal and its second and higher harmonics are filtered and as a result, output voltage and current will be proportional to terahertz input power. This nonlinear element is usually a diode, which also needs isolations between DC and RF signals. As a better implementation, two diodes in differential configuration are preferred because of creating an AC ground at the output that has an advantage for elimination of output RF isolation part. A possible implementation of a 3×5 array of detectors, as shown in Figure .3 will be covered by a silicon lens which is diameter about 3 mm and thickness about 1.88 mm which is constructed to converge the input THz wave into the chip with a Gaussian profile. Further details about detector implementation, transistor fabrication and experimental setup for empirical studies, can be found in [7, 10, and 15]. Performance of terahertz detectors can be compared in several aspects but responsivity, noise equivalent power, power consumption and bandwidth are the most important characteristics. Optical responsivity is a measure of the electrical output strength per optical input power, which can be measured in current mode (RI) or voltage mode (RV).An accurate measurement of the optical responsivity requires an accurate measurement of the available optical input power (Pin) to the detector. A terahertz source with a measured total output power (PTX) and a specified antenna gain (GTX) is used to illuminate the detector placed at a distance (r). The available input power to the detector according to Friis transmission equation [14] is then given by: [7] Where Aeff = DRX.λ 2 /(4π), where λ, is the wavelength and (DRX) is receiver antenna diversity. Noise equivalent power (NEP) can be calculated from ratio of the spot noise at the output in a specific modulation frequency and output responsivity: Power consumption is also measured from product of collector bias voltage and its current and finally bandwidth in this work is defined to be the point of 3dB decrement in responsivity from responsivity in 650GHz. At first, we will try to have an overview to the most effective parameters of device physical structure on detector performance by means of a simplified compact circuit modeling (Refer to Figure In order to have a better responsivity, ratio of voltage drop across base emitter diode to the input terahertz voltage should be larger and in ideal case should be one. From experimental measurements of transistor parasitic elements in zero bias condition Where SiO2 spacer capacitances are modeled in CBEox and junction capacitance and diffusion capacitance is also modeled in CBEi. Spacer capacitances are related to geometry of spacers, which is dependent to fabrication process and because of complex geometry, derivation of a compact equation, is not straightforward. However, because of being much smaller than the other components, spacer capacitances can be neglected in our overall analysis. Junction and diffusion capacitances are the most important parts of overall base-emitter capacitance as mentioned in ( Where NDE and NAB are average doping levels of emitter and base respectively and AE is emitter effective area. In addition, Va is applied base-emitter voltage and Vbi (BE) is junction built in voltage. Where "Is" is reverse saturation current and "τB" is base transit time and will be further explained later in this paper. As mentioned before decreasing capacitances with modification of device geometry and doping levels isn't our purpose, so we'll try to decrease base transit time which can effectively decreases diffusion capacitance also overall baseemitter capacitance. Also with smaller base transit time cut off frequency and bandwidth of detector can be effectively improved without increment in collector current and thus power consumption and shot noise levels. Now with knowledge about effective value of terahertz voltage drop across base emitter diode by means of solving matrix equations of ( Where ζ is included for effects of transistor parasitic effects on voltage drop across base emitter diode according to (3). Desired output current is caused by square component so we focus only on this component and thus we have: As can be seen from ( For precise analysis of detector performance, we will try to solve set of nonlinear differential equations of carrier transport in a twodimensional hetero structure system, using Newton numerical method. For this purpose, we should use current continuity equations for both holes and electrons, and Poisson equation like homogeneous case. In addition, changing dielectric constant should be taken into account and current density equations must be modified to take into account the non-uniform band structure. This procedure starts with current density expressions: Where φn and φp are quasi-Fermi potentials: 11 , Fermi energy levels are expressed in this form: Where γn and γp are coefficients to involve Fermi-Dirac statistics. The conduction and valence band edge energies can be written as: Where χ is position dependent electron affinity and Eg is position dependent bandgap and ψ0 is some reference potential, which can be selected in this form: Where "r" index indicates that parameters are taken from an arbitrary reference material. By combining equations, ( The above equations cannot describe carrier transport behavior completely because at the interface of two different semiconductors mainly in abrupt hetero-junctions thermionic emission and field emission transport (tunneling) equations should be taken into account as follows: (1 ) exp (1 ) exp Where Jn and Jp are electron and hole current densities from the "-"region to "+". vn and vp are electron and hole thermal velocities. ΔEC and ΔEV are conduction band and valence band energy changes going from the "-"region to "+" respectively. δ parameter represents the contribution of thermionic field emission (tunneling) which is defined in (16). Where Ex is energy component in x direction and XE is corresponds to EX and Emin=max {EC 0-, EC ∞ }. As mentioned before for improvement of detector performance we should decrease capacitive parasitic effects in base-emitter junction of the transistor. We will do this by means of deceasing base transit time and thus diffusion capacitance. To do so, we will introduce a new exponentially graded alloyed base. For explanation of our idea, we start with a one-dimensional simplified equation: Where IC is collector current and n(x) is minority electron concentration in the base region, AE is emitter area and μn and Dn are minority electron mobility and diffusion constant in the base region respectively and εB is internal field. We can derive minority electron concentration in the base region from ( Where εB is the base internal field due to electron affinity gradual changes in the base region. Although in reality, internal field isn't constant but in case of relatively large internal fields and with constant current in the base region, from (18) it can be seen at the emitter side of base, gradient of minority electrons are relatively small and main part of current is due to drift component and internal field and at the collector side because of nearly zero electron concentration diffusion current is dominant. Thus with constant current level assumption and large internal field we can assume a constant internal field equal to slope of bandgap changes at the emitter side in the whole base region and after some mathematical simplifications base transit time can be written as: Where XB is base thickness, Dn is minority carrier diffusion constant and κ is calculated from: Bandgap of SiGe alloys is related to Ge percentage by this equation: Fig. Extracted from [17] and [20] As mentioned in [15] initial transistor with a 15nm base has a linearly graded base from 15% at the emitter side to 28% at the collector side thus maximum internal field intensity is about 6×10 4 V/cm. With respect to Figure .6 internal field can be further increased before velocity saturation occurs, but for decreasing base transit time with increasing internal field, critical SiGe base thickness should also be considered. As mentioned in [21] for a 15nm base, maximum Ge percentage is about 30% and thus increasing internal field with increasing Ge percentage is not possible in our case. But in order to have a large internal field, with the same maximum Germanium percentage we can use an exponential grading profile as mentioned in (22) and shown in Figure .7. Comparison of new and prefabricated detector is done by simulating both of them with circuit modeling and carrier transport approaches. Although result of both methods have a good matching with each other but to be more accurate only results of carrier transport analysis is shown here. Because of only a slight change in transistor physical structure, if our simulation results and previous empirical data have a good matching for prefabricated device then with a high degree of precision we can claim our comparison is correct, but of course, for better confirmation of our ideas, fabrication and experimental measurements should be done in the next steps. As an example in Figure .9, there is a good matching between experiments and our simulations for prefabricated device. Detector of [7] (Experiments) Detector of [7] (simulation) New Detector (simulation) In this paper, we have designed a new direct conversion detector for terahertz frequencies by mean of analyzing performance of a prefabricated detector system and applying effective modifications in both physical structure of transistors and configuration of components. Using exponentially graded base transistors and a single transistor with two base contacts which works like two transistors in differential common emitter configuration, several major improvements in detector performance characteristics were achieved including Responsivity improvement about 490% with the same bandwidth and minimum noise equivalent power (NEP) at detector output is decreased about 87% and finally power consumption per pixel for the same responsivity is decreased about 70%. However, fabrication of transistor will be more complex. Next steps of this research can be implementation of the new designed device in order to confirm theoretical results of this paper by an empirical approach and use of this detector in larger arrays in one of the mentioned applications like a closed box terahertz scanning, similar to [7]. Also about performance optimization, working on Si lens, antenna and further transistor improvement by means of more scaling steps and higher internal field can be suggested.