Recent experiments and continuum modeling work on dopant diffusion and segregation, Si-Ge interdiffusion, and defect engineering in SiGe material systems are reviewed. Doping impact on Ge thin film quality and interdiffusion is also discussed. These are relevant to SiGe-based semiconductor devices including SiGe hetero-junction bipolar transistors, metal-oxidesemiconductor field-effect transistors, and Ge-on-Si based photonic devices. In the past three decades, due to the compatibility with Si processing and the capability of mobility, strain and energy bandgap engineering, SiGe, SiGe:C and Ge have been widely used in electronic and optoelectronic devices such as metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs) Although Si and Ge have lots of similar properties, SiGe, SiGe:C and Ge are still different material systems. During the growth and processing, high temperature steps, such as defect annealing, oxidation, deposition, dopant activation annealing are unavoidable. From mass transport point of view, when there is a change in the diffusion media such as a change in Ge and/or carbon (C) concentration or stress or defect concentrations, dopant diffusion and/or segregation changes. Dopants segregate at Si1-xGex/Si1-yGey interfaces or across a graded Ge concentration slope. Si-Ge interdiffusion should also be considered, as Ge distribution directly impacts dopant diffusion and segregation, bandgap and stress engineering and many electrical and optical properties associated with the xGe. Due to the scaling of semiconductor devices, typical diffusion lengths of Si-Ge interdiffusion after high temperature steps in current technologies are comparable to the thickness of SiGe thin films in the devices, which is in 1 to 100 nm range. Si-Ge interdiffusivity increase exponentially with compressive strain. From the Si end to the Ge end, the interdiffusivity increase by five orders of magnitude with the increase of xGe in typical thermal annealing temperatures. All these effects can make Si-Ge interdiffusivity comparable or faster than dopant diffusivity. Defect engineering using C incorporation, oxidation and nitridation can be used to change defect concentrations and engineer dopant profiles. Although those effects have been well studied in Si, oxidation and nitridation have not been well studied or applied in SiGe device fabrication. These three phenomena, namely dopant diffusion and dopant segregation, Si-Ge interdiffusion, and defect engineering, are important topics for SiGe device structure design and processing, as dopant and Ge distribution is one of the most important factors in determining device characteristics and performance. This abstract will focus on the three mass transport processes in SiGe epitaxial structures. Doping impact on Ge thin film quality and interdiffusion is also discussed. Complementary SiGe HBTs have many advantages over an NPN-only technology for numerous analog applications requiring high speed, low noise, and large voltage swing. PNP HBTs use P as the base layer dopant and strained SiGe as the base layer material. Our recent studies addressed three problems related to the mass transport phenomena of PNP HBTs Although C has been very effective in retarding B diffusion in NPN HBTs, there are limited studies available on the effectiveness of C in PNP SiGe HBTs. Our work quantitatively investigated the C impacts on P diffusion in Si0.82Ge0.18:C and Si:C under rapid thermal anneal conditions Compared to B, P is harder to control, as it segregates towards lower Ge content layers instead of staying inside SiGe base of higher Ge content. The segregation happens simultaneously with P diffusion. In Ref. Thermal nitridation is known to suppress B and P diffusion in Si via exposing bare Si surface in ammonia ambient, where vacancies are injected into Si and retard interstitial diffuser's motion Si-Ge interdiffusion happens whenever there is a Ge concentration gradient such as at Si1-xGex/Si1-yGey interfaces and across graded SiGe layers. The interdiffusivity is influenced by many factors such as temperature, Ge concentration, stress, doping, and defect density. Based on diffusion theories and self-diffusivity data, an interdiffusivity model was established for SiGe interdiffusion under tensile or relaxed strain over 0 ≤ xGe ≤ 1 range for undoped, unstrained or tensile SiGe with low defect densities The impact of strain and strain relaxation on Si-Ge interdiffusion in epitaxial SiGe heterostructures was systematically investigated in For SiGe with low Ge molar fractions for HBT applications, C, P and B were all shown to enhance Si-Ge interdiffusion After this study, Ge/Si structures with three different dopants (P, As and B) and those without intentional doping were investigated However, photoluminescence (PL) study shows that unannealed P and As-doped Ge samples have much higher PL intensities than those annealed samples due to much less interdiffusion 