Diamond, a wide band-gap semiconductor, can be engineered to exhibit superconductivity when doped heavily with boron. The phenomena has been demonstrated in samples grown by chemical vapour deposition where the boron concentration exceeds the critical concentration for the metal-to-insulator transition of nMIT 4 × 10 20 /cm 3 . While the threshold carrier concentration for superconductivity is generally well established in the literature, it is unclear how well correlated higher critical temperatures are with increased boron concentration. Previous studies have generally compared several samples grown under different plasma conditions, or on substrates having different crystallographic orientations, in order to vary the incorporation of boron into the lattice. Here, we present a study of a single sample with unchanging boron concentration, and instead modify the charge carrier concentration by introducing compensating defects via high energy ion irradiation. Superconductivity is completely suppressed when the number of defects is sufficient to compensate the hole concentration to below threshold. Furthermore, we show it is possible to recover the superconductivity by annealing the sample in vacuum to remove the compensating defects. Superconductivity in boron doped diamond has been a topic of great interest since its discovery in 2004 Initial theoretical estimates of the maximum critical temperature (T c ) of boron doped diamond were in the range of 140-160 K by virtue of the light atomic mass of the constituent atoms and strong covalent bonds Most experimental data is well described by a standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) model of superconductivity, with phonon-mediated Cooper pairing and a Fermi level shifted inside the valence band Recently, Bousquet et al. In order to gain further insight into the mechanism for superconductivity in boron doped diamond, and to determine its robustness to damage and the effect on critical temperature, an irradiation damage study of a superconducting sample was performed. A sample was grown homoepitaxially on a 3×3 mm Type-Ib 111 oriented substrate via microwave plasma assisted CVD using the method described in several previous pubications The choice of helium as the implant species was made in order to ensure the damage distribution was nominally uniform throughout the boron doped top layer, with the end-of-range of such light ions lying deep inside the substrate, well beyond the doped region. This was confirmed by modelling the Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) software (Figure After each irradiation, the sample underwent standard electrical and Hall measurements at room temperature and magnetic fields up to 0.7 T to determine resistivity, mobility, and charge carrier density. The sample was then mounted in a dilution refrigerator and cooled to approximately 50 mK while undergoing four-terminal resistance measurement using standard low noise lock-in amplifier techniques. All measurements were made in a four-terminal van der Pauw configuration using the same pair of contacts for driving current and measuring voltage each time. Figure 1. The bulk resistivity of the sample (measured cryogenically, above T c ) increased with increasing fluence, 2. The superconducting T c decreased, as well as the charge carrier (hole) concentration n H , 3. The width of the superconducting transition, i.e. the difference between the onset of superconductivity and the offset (zero resistance) was broadened. The width of the transition in particular suggests an increasingly inhomogeneous material, with the accumulated damage from the ion irradiation creating localised regions of differing defect density and nanoscale order, with a spectrum of critical temperatures. While the sample remained superconducting at 6 K after accumulating a vacancy concentration of 8 × 10 20 /cm 3 , the final irradiation at a fluence of 5 × 10 16 /cm 2 led to a large increase in the resistivity of the sample and complete quenching of superconductivity above our base temperature of 50 mK. Figure The efficiency of compensation up to a fluence of 1 × 10 16 /cm 2 , that is to say the ratio of the measured post-irradiation hole concentration to the expected concentration (pre-irradiation concentration minus the number of vacancies introduced), was very high at 97%. The final implant, with fluence 5 × 10 16 /cm 2 , resulted in lower hole compensation efficiency of only 36%, but the reason for this is unclear. In any case, we found that progressively reducing the hole concentration in this superconducting sample also led to a reduction in T c , with the apparent threshold hole concentration for superconductivity lying in the range 1.7 -3.1 × 10 21 /cm 3 . It has been shown previously that annealing diamond is an effective method of removing compensating point defects After electrical characterisation, the sample was annealed a second time using the same protocol but at a slightly higher temperature of 1250 • C. New contact pads were evaporated post-anneal and cryogenic measurement again revealed a seemingly polyphasic material, but with a lower critical temperature than after the first anneal (Figure Additional structure is apparent in the measurement of critical field in our sample after the second anneal (Figure Whereas previous work has compared CVD boron doped diamond layers of differing thickness, boron concentration, crystallographic orientation, and almost certainly differing local disorder at the nanoscale, the present work has studied a single sample of fixed boron concentration. Irradiation with high energy light ions was used to systematically compensate boron acceptors through the introduction of vacancies, with one single vacancy capable of compensating one single substitutional boron atom. Thus, the density of states at the Fermi level E F is reduced, and correspondingly the T c also de- Magnetic Field (T) Magnetic Field (T) FIG. creases. Our data shows good agreement with this simple picture, with the measured concentration of acceptors (holes from substitutional boron) reduced by the accumulated number of donors (vacancies as modelled by SRIM) with each iteration of the irradiation and measurement process. At the point where the hole concentration is compensated beyond the threshold for superconductivity near the metal-to-insulator transition, superconductivity is quenched as expected. The recovery of superconductivity in the sample after annealing, however, highlights that the relationship between active boron concentration and T c is not so straightforward. After annealing at 1150 • C, the mea-sured hole density at ambient temperature is the highest recorded for this sample, approximately 75% higher than the as-grown sample with T c = 8 K. Yet despite the increased hole concentration, the critical temperature after annealing is only 4 K, lower than that measured at any stage of irradiation. After annealing the sample a second time at 1250 • C, the hole density increases further, though not significantly, but the critical temperature drops again to 2.2 K. Now we must reconcile the increase in the measured hole concentration and the decrease in T c post-annealing, given that the amount of boron in the sample is fixed. The annealing process can have only either removed compensating defects in the sample or changed their location or bonding configuration. The increase in carrier concentration can potentially be attributed to the removal of existing compensating defects such as hydrogen in addition to the vacancies introduced during irradiation, effectively activating them electrically. However, if this was the case we would expect an increase in T c , up to a certain limit. Because the only inclusion which contributes carriers to superconductivity in diamond is substitutional boron, there exists a boron concentration where T c saturates due to boron clustering to form dimers. These dimers do not contribute to the density of states at the Fermi level, thereby reducing the value of T c 2 . There is however some evidence to suggest that boron dimers can act as acceptors when incorporated at boron concentrations greater than 3% (i.e. 5.2 × 10 21 /cm 3 ) 27 . Theoretical studies of boron-based defects in diamond have shown that all substitutional boron complexes act as acceptors, while complexes containing vacancies or interstitials typically act as donors which act to passivate holes in the valence band Because the annealing process has increased the hole density in our sample, we conclude that the anneal acts to increase the fraction of boron located in substitutional sites without being dimerized or compensated by hydrogen or vacancy defects. This may occur either by removing or reconfiguring the defects into non-boron containing defect complexes, or by enabling interstitial or dimerized boron to become single substitutional boron. Given that boron is not mobile in diamond at the annealing temperatures used, it is more likely that the anneal acts to effectively remove compensating defects. Boron, as a substitutional impurity, could however diffuse though vacancies. The activation energy for this process is as high as 8.9 eV (the sum of the formation and migration energy), however the presence of existing defects such as the large concentration of vacancies may allow an easy parallel diffusion channel Our results indicate a threshold carrier concentration for the onset superconductivity in boron doped diamond of between n H = 1.7 -3.1 × 10 21 /cm 3 . This result is consistent with the recent findings of Bousquet et al. The present result may explain the absence of superconductivity in diamond doped by high energy implantation of boron, which is likely to have a very large number of defects which passivate the boron and significant disorder due to implantation damage. Given the assertion that disorder must be high enough to open a gap in the valence states in order to quench superconductivity, future work should include angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements of samples irradiated with light ions, or samples fabricated via boron implantation. This direct probe of the band structure may provide further insight into how higher critical temperatures can be achieved in this promising material. In summary, our work demonstrates for the first time the ability to directly alter the superconducting properties of diamond through ion implantation, an advance which may lead to the ability to selectively write welldefined channels or regions of normal-conducting diamond into superconducting layers, or create the Josephson junction 'weak links' required for SQUID devices using a focused ion beam. Such devices engineered fully from diamond are of interest due to the fact that interface and surface state noise is a major source of decoherence for superconducting resonators and quantum devices 