Grain boundary engineering via dopant segregation can dramatically change the properties of a material. For metallic systems, most current studies concerning interfacial segregation and subsequent transitions of grain boundary structure are limited to binary alloys, yet many important alloy systems contain more than one type of dopant. In this work, hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics simulations are performed to investigate the behavior of dopants at interfaces in two model ternary alloy systems: Cu-Zr-Ag and Al-Zr-Cu. Trends in boundary segregation are studied, as well as the propensity for the grain boundary structure to become disordered at high temperature and doping concentration. For Al-Zr-Cu, we find that the two solutes prefer to occupy different sites at the grain boundary, leading to a synergistic doping effect. Alternatively, for Cu-Zr-Ag, there is site competition because the preferred segregation sites are the same. Finally, we find that thicker amorphous intergranular films can be formed in ternary systems by controlling the concentration ratio of different solute elements. Grain boundaries can influence a variety of material properties such as tensile strength, fracture toughness, fatigue resistance, ductility, formability, creep resistance, densification rate during sintering, and thermal stability In general, grain boundaries can have both positive and negative effects on material properties. Fortunately, some of these negative effects can be reduced by "grain boundary engineering" or the alteration of grain boundary character and/or the interconnecting grain boundary network. One possible method of grain boundary engineering is the use of solute segregation, which allows grain boundary structure and properties to be adjusted Besides the local chemistry change, another product of dopant segregation to grain boundary sites can be a concomitant alteration of boundary structure. One way to describe such changes is through the use of the terminology "grain boundary complexions," which describes an interfacial state that cannot exist without adjacent grains but is able to undergo phase-like transitions Activated sintering well below the bulk eutectic temperature has been observed in systems such as Bi2O3-doped ZnO The work of Pan and Rupert Enhanced twin stability and yield strength were found and correlated with Cu segregation. While progress has been made on understanding segregation and complexion transitions at the atomic scale, all of the studies mentioned above were limited to binary alloys. While such studies demonstrate the principle of segregation-induced grain boundary transitions, there are a number of cases where understanding ternary or higher element systems would be beneficial. First, "tramp elements" can often enter materials during processing and will complicate grain boundary segregation behavior. An example of this is high energy ball milling, where Fe atoms can be incorporated into the targeted alloy from the hardened steel milling media and vial In this paper, we perform hybrid MC/MD simulations of interfacial segregation and structural transitions to investigate these behaviors with atomic-level detail. Two ternary alloy systems, Cu-Zr-Ag and Al-Zr-Cu, are used as model material systems, with the hope of discovering general rules that are applicable to other multi-component alloy systems. We find that the dopants compete with each other during segregation if they have the same preferred segregation sites, while others can have a synergistic effect which enhances the extent of segregation. Beyond simple dopant segregation, we also explore whether thicker AIFs can be stabilized by the addition of a third element to the grain boundary region, with the ratio of dopant concentrations found to be very important. A hybrid MC/MD method was used to simulate interfacial segregation and structural transformations, using the implementation of Sadigh et al. An isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble with the Nose-Hoover thermostat/barostat was applied to relax samples at different temperatures (350 K and 600 K for the Al-based alloys, 600 K and 1000 K for the Cu-based alloys) and under zero pressure. 600 K and 1000 K are considered as high temperatures, based on a comparison with the melting temperatures (Tm) of pure Al and Cu obtained by the interatomic potentials (Tm = 1175 K for Cu and Tm = 785 K for Al, meaning 600 K is 0.76Tm for Al and 1000 K is 0.85 Tm for Cu). Dopant concentrations in the range of 0-10 at.% were explored in the various binary and ternary alloys of interest. While high temperature and high dopant boundary concentration should promote the formation of AIFs (if the alloy can sustain them at all), ordered grain boundaries have been reported at low temperatures and dopant concentrations The Σ5 (310) grain boundary can be thought of as a model of a high-angle and high-energy tilt grain boundary in face centered cubic (fcc) metals. This boundary has an energy that is similar to a general high-angle grain boundary The Cu-Zr-Ag and Al-Zr-Cu alloy systems were chosen for this study for a number of reasons. First, there is evidence that all of the added dopants should segregate to defects. Zr Similarly, Tsivoulas and Robson The behavior of the binary systems were first studied to provide a baseline for comparison. Doped grain boundaries in the Cu-Zr, Cu-Ag, Al-Cu, and Al-Zr systems are shown in Fig. In this figure, the chemical information is shown in the frames on the left of each figure part, while the structural information is presented in the frames on the right. Atomic snapshots of samples simulated at 350 K (Al-rich alloys) or 600 K (Cu-rich alloys) and with 0.4 at.% or 1 at.% dopant concentration are presented to display representative examples of ordered grain boundaries. Additional samples simulated at higher temperatures of 600 K (Al-rich alloys) or 1000 K (Cu-rich alloys) and with larger dopant concentrations are chosen to show representative examples of conditions that are conducive to AIF formation. Fig. For Al-Cu with ordered grain boundaries (Fig. 3e and 3g confirm that the doped Al boundaries at finite temperature have a symmetric structure. Two possible factors that could lead to such a shift are: (1) a thermal effect due to nonzero temperature and (2) atom redistribution that occurs when adding dopants. The fact that the same symmetric structure is found in the pure Al sample (Fig. To understand the details of segregation, it is useful to calculate the segregation energy, ΔHseg, of a single dopant at different sites in the grain boundary using molecular statics. The segregation energy is defined as the difference in energy between a simulation cell with dopants at the grain boundary and a simulation cell with the same amount of dopants in the grain interior. The equation used for calculating the segregation energy is showing that the calculated values here are reasonable enough to look for trends. The next most promising site for Zr and Ag segregation is site 3 (two identical locations at the outside of the kite-bottom). For Al-based alloys, the symmetric grain boundary simulated by the ternary potential is not stable at 0 K, as previously mentioned. This means that the symmetric structure will transform and be removed under the energy minimizations used for molecular statics calculations. Therefore, to calculate the segregation energy of dopants in the Al-rich alloys, a symmetric grain boundary obtained by a binary Al-Cu potential At low temperature and low dopant concentration, ordered grain boundaries were found in both Cu-Zr-Ag and Al-Zr-Cu. Chemical and structural snapshots of representative ordered grain boundaries, as well as their solute concentration profiles and the Gibbsian interfacial excesses are shown in Fig. Taken as a whole, these figures show that, although Zr and Ag would like to segregate to the same promising segregation sites, Zr wins out and fills them first. This observation is consistent with our calculation of a lower segregation energy in absolute terms for Zr in Cu, as compared to Ag in Cu. Although there is another potential segregation site for Zr and Ag at the two sides of the bottom of the kite (site 3 in Fig. In contrast, Zr and Cu occupy different sites at grain boundaries in Al-Zr-Cu, as shown in Fig. Unlike the competition for limited segregation sites in the ordered grain boundary which leads to the depletion of Ag, there are many more possible segregation sites generated after the formation of a disordered structure in the AIF. Because of this, Ag also has a chance to segregate to the grain boundaries. In the Al-5 at.% Zr-5 at.% Cu alloy shown in Fig. A more likely explanation is that there is simply an energetic penalty associated with Zr in an amorphous structure here, which was why AIFs did not form in the binary Al-Zr alloy. The curves in Fig. To understand the difference between segregation in binary and ternary systems, the Gibbsian interfacial excess is presented in Fig. Pan and Rupert reported that AIFs can improve ductility by delaying crack nucleation and slowing down crack propagation, with this effect increasing as film thickness increases Thus, a question of great practical importance is whether a ternary alloy can sustain thicker AIFs. Fig. The Cu-Zr and Al-Cu systems have the thickest AIFs for a given total dopant concentration. Cu-Ag forms AIFs but they are relatively thin, which can be explained by the clustering of Ag caused by the positive enthalpy of mixing. Note that we excluded the data points of Cu-Ag samples in which there are Ag-rich clusters formed rather than uniform AIFs. A second caveat exists for the Cu-Ag system. The prior work showing that AIFs can delay crack nucleation and propagation focused on amorphous films which were both structurally and chemically disordered (i.e., like the films in Cu-Zr and Al-Cu). It is not obvious whether structurally disordered but chemically ordered films such as those in Cu-Ag would be beneficial for mechanical properties. Finally, Al-Zr cannot sustain AIFs, so the grain boundary thickness remains small. Interestingly, the curve for Al-Zr in Fig. As a final test of the ability of these ternary alloys to form AIFs, we relax the restriction on the concentration ratio of the different dopants. It is possible that there is a promising concentration ratio that allows ternary systems to form thicker AIFs than the binaries for a given amount of total dopant, as the metallic glass literature is filled with examples of alloys where the best glass forming composition is not an even distribution between the constituent elements In this case, we do find that a ternary mixture can more efficiently produce AIFs, as the thickest AIFs are found in for Al-9.5 at.% Zr-0.5 at.% Cu. While the ternary AIFs only appear to be slightly thicker in absolute numbers, it is important to put this number in perspective, as they are a measurable4.5% thicker than the AIFs in Al-Cu. This observation proves that ternary compositions can in fact lead to thicker AIFs compared to binary alloys in certain situations. It is worth noting that we observe this behavior even though one of the two binaries was a relatively poor glass former, as Al-Zr did not amorphize at all. Future work should focus on combinations where all alloy combinations are good glass formers in their binary combinations. This paper reports on atomistic simulations that were performed to study interfacial segregation and amorphous complexion formation in ternary alloys, with Cu-Zr-Ag and Al-Zr-Cu used as example systems. A bicrystal sample with two Σ5 (310) grain boundaries is used as a model to represent a high-angle and high-energy tilt grain boundary. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work: • In Cu-Zr-Ag, the preferred segregation site for both Zr and Ag is the kite-tip site, leading to segregation competition. This leads to a local depletion of Ag at the grain boundary in the ternary alloys with ordered grain boundaries. In contrast, for Al-Zr-Cu, Zr and Cu have different preferred segregation sites and they therefore have a synergistic doping pattern. In the end, this leads to much higher grain boundary dopant concentrations in Al-Zr-Cu. The segregation patterns in the ordered grain boundaries for these alloy systems can be explained by mechanical effects, where the local hydrostatic stress and relative atomic size determine site preference. • By controlling the concentration ratio of different dopant elements, it is possible to form thicker AIFs in some ternary alloys systems. Alternatively, if only a limited amount of a given dopant species can be added, a ternary composition can be a way to enable further grain boundary segregation and thickening of AIFs. Ternary alloys exhibit more complicated segregation behavior than their binary counterparts, but this complexity brings additional opportunities as well. For example, one motivating factor of our study was the observation that AIFs can toughen nanocrystalline metals. Since we have found that ternaries can experience added grain boundary segregation and thicker AIFs, ternary nanocrystalline materials should be studied in more detail. , 143.37 [72] , 76.27 