Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) calls for the integration of computational tools into the materials and parts development cycle, while the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) calls for the acceleration of the materials development cycle through the combination of experiments, simulation, and data. As they stand, both ICME and MGI do not prescribe how to achieve the necessary tool integration or how to efficiently exploit the computational tools, in combination with experiments, to accelerate the development of new materials and materials systems. This paper addresses the first issue by putting forward a framework for the fusion of information that exploits correlations among sources/models and between the sources and 'ground truth'. The second issue is addressed through a multi-information source optimization framework that identifies, given current knowledge, the next best information source to query and where in the input space to query it via a novel valuegradient policy. The querying decision takes into account the ability to learn correlations between information sources, the resource cost of querying an information source, and what a query is expected to provide in terms of improvement over * Address all correspondence to this author. the current state. The framework is demonstrated on the optimization of a dual-phase steel to maximize its strengthnormalized strain hardening rate. The ground truth is represented by a microstructure-based finite element model while three low fidelity information sources-i.e. reduced order models-based on different homogenization assumptionsisostrain, isostress and isowork-are used to efficiently and optimally query the materials design space. Over the past two decades, there has been considerable interest in the development of frameworks to accelerate the materials development cycle. Back in the late 90s, Greg Olson popularized the concept of materialsas-hierarchical-systems On the integration front, it has long been recognized that in order to establish quantitative PSPP relationships it is necessary to integrate multiple (computational) tools across multiple scales Another strategy for the accelerated discovery of materials (most closely associated to the MGI) has been the use of high-throughput (HT) experimental Recently, notions of optimal experimental design, within the overall framework of Bayesian Optimization (BO), have been put forward as a strategy to overcome the limitations of traditional (costly) exploration of the design space. For example, Balachandran et al. Talapatra et al. It is clear from the brief discussion above that, while considerable progress has been made recently in the development of novel frameworks for accelerating materials development efforts, several important challenges remain to be solved. Model-based ICME-style frameworks tend to focus on integrating tools at multiple levels under the assumption that there is a single model/tool relevant at a specific scale of the problem. This precludes the use of multiple models that may be more/less effective in different regions of the performance space. Data-centric approaches, on the other hand, tend to focus (with some exceptions) on the brute-force exploration of the materials design space, without accounting for the considerable cost associated with such exploration. In this work, we present a framework that addresses the two outstanding issues listed above in the context of the optimal microstructural design of ductile multi-phase materials, such as advanced high strength steels. Specifically, we carry out the fusion of multiple information sources that connect microstructural descriptors to mechanical performance metrics. This fusion is done in a way that accounts for and exploits the correlations between each individual information source-reduced order model constructed under different simplifying assumptions regarding the partitioning of (total) strain, stress or deformation work among the phases constituting the microstructure-and between each information source and the ground truth-represented in this case by a full-field microstructure-based finite element model. We note here that while this finite element model is computational, and thus could be considered as a higher fidelity model as part of a multifidelity framework, our intention is create a framework for predicting ground truth. Specifically, we are not interested in matching the highest fidelity model, but in predicting material properties when created at ground truth. There is usually no common resource tradeoff in this scenario, which is in contrast to traditional computational multifidelity frameworks that trade computational expense and accuracy. Thus, the finite element model is used here as a proxy for a ground truth experiment, and is treated as such in the demonstrations provided. In our framework, we value the impact a new query to an information source has on the fused model. In particular, we perform the search over the input domain and the information source options concurrently to determine which next query will lead to the most improvement in our objective function. This concurrent approach, to our knowledge, has not been addressed in the literature. In addition, our exploitation of correlations between the discrepancies of the information sources in the fusion process differs significantly from previous work and enables the identification of ground truth optimal points that are not shared by any individual information sources in the analysis. The remainder of the paper is as follows: First, we proceed to motivate the work in the context of microstructuresensitive modeling and design of dual-phase ductile materials, e.g., advanced high strength steels. These advanced structural alloys are one of the most technologically sought after materials used in lightweight structural applications, such as automotive manufacturing. Next, we describe a microstructure-based finite element model-considered in this work as the 'ground truth'-for predicting the stressstrain response of ductile dual-phase materials as well as the reduced order models that predict the stress-strain response of multi-phase microstructures under different assumptions regarding the partitioning of stress, strain or work of deformation. We then present and demonstrate the proposed framework for correlation-exploiting information fusion through reification. This is followed by the description and demonstration of the proposed multi-information optimization framework. We close the paper by discussing further directions for the current research program. A class of one of the most technologically sought after structural materials, known as advanced high-strength steels, derive their exceptional properties from complex, heterogeneous microstructures. Of the various advanced high strength steels, dual-phase steels have experienced the fastest growth in the automotive industry The microstructure-property correlation of ductile dual-phase materials can be explored by high-fidelity microstructure-based finite element models. However, these come at considerable computational cost that precludes their use to carry out search in the microstructure space for regions of optimal performance. The response of composite microstructures consisting of more than one phase can be ap-proximated through the use of low-fidelity models based on different assumptions underlying the homogenized response of the multi-phase microstructure. As described below, here we will carry out the fusion of multiple reduced-order models based on isostrain In this work, we will exploit statistical correlations between the different information sources to arrive at a fused model with significantly better fidelity with respect to the ground truth (microstructure-based finite element model) than any individual source (reduced-order model). The fused model will then be integrated with a Bayesian sequential design optimization framework to arrive at optimal microstructures that maximize the strength normalized strain-hardening rate by identifying and exploiting optimal sequential queries of different information sources. The quantity of interest, strength normalized strain-hardening rate, is an important manufacturing-related attribute as it dictates the ductility and formability of the material. The details of the microstructurebased finite element modeling (ground truth) of dual-phase microstructures and the three lower fidelity reduced-order models (information sources) are described below. Microstructure-based finite element modeling is carried out to calculate the overall mechanical response of the ductile dual-phase microstructures. To this end, we generate 3D representative volume elements (RVEs) of the dual-phase microstructures following the procedure detailed in In the calculations, both phases are assumed to follow isotropic elastic-plastic stress-strain response. The Young's modulus of both phases is taken to be E = 200GPa and Poisson's ratio is taken to be ν = 0.3. The plastic response of both phases are modeled using the Ludwik power law constitutive relation, where τ is the flow stress, ε pl is the equivalent plastic strain, τ o is the yield strength, K is the strengthening coefficient, and n is the strain hardening exponent. The values of τ o , K, and n for the constituent phases are given in Tab. 1. The parameters are chosen to represent lower initial yield strength of the ferrite (soft) phase compared to the martensite (hard) phase, and higher strain hardenability of the ferrite phase compared to the martensite phase i. The Voigt/Taylor isostrain model, where the basic assumption is that the strain field is uniform among the constituent phases ii. The Reuss/Sachs isostress model, where the basic assumption is that the stresses among the phases are homogeneous iii. The isowork model, which is an approximation based on the principle that work of deformation is equally distributed in all the constituent phases in the dual-phase microstructure at any strain level. That is, In Eqs. 2, 3 and 4, ε T pl is the overall plastic strain, ε h pl is the plastic strain in the hard (martensite) phase, ε s pl is the plastic strain in the soft (ferrite) phase, τ T is the overall stress, τ h is the stress in the hard (martensite) phase, τ s is the stress in the soft (ferrite) phase, and f hard is the volume fraction of the hard phase in the microstructure. The stress-strain relations, τ = f (ε pl ), of both phases are assumed to follow, Eq. 1, with the values of the parameters given in Tab. 1. The predicted stress-strain response of dual-phase microstructures with varying volume fraction of the hard phase, f hard , using a high-fidelity microstructure-based finite element model is shown in Fig. In most materials design tasks, there are always multiple information sources at the disposal of the designer. For example, the forward connections between microstructures and properties/performance can in principle be developed through experiments as well as (computational) models at different levels of fidelity and resolution. Conventional approaches to ICME, on the other hand, often times make the implicit and unrealistic assumption that there is only one source available to query the design space-in this work, our framework uses three relatively simple models (under the isostrain, isostress and isowork approximations) as representative of multiple information sources, while considering a microstructure-sensitive RVE-based simulation as the ground truth. While information fusion on its own represents a considerable improvement upon the vast majority of ICME-based approaches to materials design currently under development, we posit that an even better approach would necessarily have to account for resource constraints on the exploration of the materials design space (MDS). Specifically, every source used to query the MDS carry a certain (time, monetary, opportunity) cost and thus there are hard limits to the number of queries and the sources used to carry out such queries. Unfortunately, such constraints rarely take a concrete form that can be dealt with using formal constrained optimization approaches. This is due to the often dynamic nature of the materials design and procurement process. As a materials design cycle progresses, the current state of the process may dictate if more resources will be allocated to the process or not. Thus, it is advantageous to tackle such problems in a myopic fashion. For single information sources and sequential querying, there are two traditional techniques for choosing what to query next in this myopic context Recent developments in A mathematical statement of the problem is formulated as finding the best design, x * , such that where f is the ground truth objective function, and x is a set of design variables in the vector space χ. This ground truth objective function is typically very expensive to query. We note that in this formulation, there is a tacit dynamic constraint on resources. While ground truth is impractical to query often in an optimization process, other forms of information are usually available and can be used to approximate the ground truth. These information sources differ in terms of fidelity with respect to the ground truth, as well as resource expenditures required per query. These information sources are also fundamentally related through the fact that they seek to estimate the same quantity of interest. Thus, there must exist statistical correlations between these information sources that can potentially be exploited if learned. In this context, the core issue to myopically addressing Eq. 5, is the decision of what information source to query and where in its input domain to execute that query. This decision must balance the cost of the query and what that query is expected to tell us about the solution to Eq. 5. To assign a value to each potential query option over the information source space and the domains of the respective information sources, we create intermediate Gaussian process surrogates for each information source learned from previous queries. We assume that we have S information sources, fi (x), where i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , S}, available to estimate the ground truth, f (x), at design point x. We further assume that we have N i previous query results available for information source i. These results are denoted by {X N i , y N i }, where X N i = (x 1,i , . . . , x N i ,i ) represents the N i input samples to information source i and y N i represents the corresponding outputs from information source i. Posterior Gaussian process distributions of each fi , denoted as f GP,i (x), at any point x in the input space, are then given as where and Here, k i is a real-valued kernel function associated with information source i over the input space, whose m th entry is k i (x m,i , x) for information source i, and the term σ 2 n,i can be used to model observation error for information sources or to guard against numerical ill-conditioning. For the kernel function, we use the commonly used squared exponential kernel function given as where d is the dimension of the input space, σ 2 s is the signal variance, and l h , where h = 1, 2, . . . , d, is the characteristic length-scale that indicates the correlation between the points within dimension h. The parameters of the Gaussian process (σ 2 s , l h and σ 2 n ) associated with each information source can be estimated via maximum likelihood or Bayesian techniques To these Gaussian process surrogates, we further quantify the discrepancy of each information source with respect to ground truth. These discrepancies can be estimated from, for example, expert opinion or available ground truth data, and can vary over the input space. We add the estimated uncertainty due to information source discrepancy, δ f ,i (x), to the uncertainty associated with the Gaussian process of information source i, denoted by δ GP,i (x). Specifically, each of the S available information sources for estimating the ground truth objective can be written as where Figure Available information sources for estimating a ground truth quantity of interest are necessarily correlated by virtue of their estimation task. If they were not correlated, then presumably they are irrelevant to the estimation task at hand. Working under the hypothesis that each information source brings to bear some useful information regarding a quantity of interest, we seek to systematically fuse available information from each source. Unlike traditional multifidelity methods There are many techniques in use for fusing information from multiple sources of information. Among these are approaches such as Bayesian modeling averaging As noted previously, we hypothesize that every information source contains useful information regarding the ground truth quantity of interest. Thus, as more information sources are incorporated into a fusion process, we expect the variance of quantity of interest estimates to decrease. This is not necessarily the case for techniques such as Bayesian model averaging and adjustment factors approaches. For the case of unknown correlations between information sources, recourse must be made to conservative methods, such as covariance intersection. This method fuses information by assuming the worst case correlation information. Thus, there is much to gain from estimating correlation between information sources and incorporating these learned correlations in the fusion process. Since our information sources are represented by intermediate Gaussian processes, their fusion follows that of normally distributed information. Under the case of known correlations between the discrepancies of information sources, the fused mean and variance are shown to be where e = [1, . . . , 1] T , μ μ μ(x) = [μ 1 (x), . . . , μ S (x)] T given S models, and Σ(x) -1 is the inverse of the covariance matrix between the information sources. We stress here that the mean as estimated by Eq. 12 is not necessarily a convex combination of the information source estimates. For example, in the case of two information sources, Eq. 12 is where the dependence on x has been omitted for notational clarity. If σ 1 < σ 2 , then μ 1 will receive a positive weight. If also, ρ > σ 1 /σ 2 , then μ 2 will receive a negative weight. Following Ref. The key to the proper use of fusion of normally distributed information is the estimation of the correlation coefficients over the domain. For this, we use the reification process defined in where μ i (x) and μ j (x) are the mean values of the Gaussian processes of information sources i and j respectively, at design point x, and σ 2 i (x) and σ 2 j (x) are the total variances at point x. Afterward, information source j is reified to estimate ρ ji (x). Then, the variance weighted average of the two estimated correlation coefficients is used as the estimate of the correlation between the errors as These average correlations are then used to estimate the fused mean and variance in Eqs. 12 and 13. By computing the fused means and variances in the input design space χ, we construct a fused Gaussian process over this space. This fused information source contains all of our current knowledge about the ground truth objective function. Our goal is to optimize ground truth by leveraging new queries to the less resource-expensive information sources. Once our resources for information source querying have been exhausted, the predicted ground truth optimal design can be synthesized or produced in an experiment. This information can of course then be fed back to the multiinformation source optimization framework and used to update information source discrepancy and correlation information. A flowchart of our proposed framework is presented in Fig. Fusion The task then, is to determine what information source to query and where to query it, concurrently, so as to produce the most value in terms of addressing Eq. 5, with the tacit resource constraint in mind. For this decision, we propose a utility, which we refer to as the value-gradient utility, which takes into account both the immediate improvement in one step and expected improvement in two steps. The idea here being that we seek to produce rapid improvement, with the knowledge that every resource expenditure could be the last, but we also seek to position ourselves best for the next resource expenditure. In this sense, we are equally weighting next step value with next step (knowledge) gradient information, hence the term value-gradient. The immediate improvement can be quantified by the maximum mean function value of the fused Gaussian process, μ * fused . Since the best estimate of the objective function is represented by the fused Gaussian process, which is the probabilistic representation of the ground truth objective function, there is uncertainty in the value of the predicted ground truth objective function upon querying the next sample. Thus, we compute the expected value of improvement using the posterior predictive distribution of the fused model. Letting (i 1:N , x 1:N , y 1:N ) be the information sources, design points, and the corresponding objective values used for the first N queries and f denote the posterior distribution of the fused model, the expected improvement (EI) at design point x is defined as where the last expression comes out of the expectation operator as it is a known value when conditioned on the first N queries. The KG policy of The knowledge gradient, which is a measure of expected improvement, is defined as The KG policy for sequentially choosing the next query is then given as Calculation of the knowledge gradient is discussed in detail in two algorithms presented in where the first term is the maximum value of the mean function of the current fused model and the second term is the maximum expected improvement that can be obtained with another query as measured by the knowledge gradient over the fused model. We can then define a value-gradient policy as the policy that selects the next query such that the value-gradient utility is maximized. By considering the immediate gain in the next step and the expected gain in the step that follows, the value-gradient is a two-step look-ahead policy. To determine the next design point and information source to query efficiently, we generate Latin hypercube samples in the input design space as alternatives denoted as X f . For low dimensional problems, a uniform grid of alternatives could also be considered. Among these alternatives, we seek to find the query that maximizes the value-gradient utility of Eq. 20. According to Eq. 6, an evaluation of information source i, at design point x, is distributed normally with mean μ i (x) and variance σ 2 GP,i (x). For a given alternative, x, we draw N q independent samples from the distribution at that point as GP,i (x) , i = 1, . . . , S and q = 1, . . . , N q . (21) In order to predict the impact of querying each alternative on the utility function, we temporarily augment the design point, x, and the sampled information source output value, f q i (x), one at a time, to the available samples of information source i. By adding this sample, the Gaussian process of information source i and as a result, the fused Gaussian process, are temporarily updated. Then, the maximum mean function value and the maximum knowledge gradient of the temporarily updated fused Gaussian process are evaluated. These quantities can then be used to compute the valuegradient utility that would result if the sample, x , f q i (x) , was realized from information source i. This is given as This process is repeated for all N q samples by removing the previously added sample and augmenting with the next new sample. The expected value-gradient utility obtained from adding alternative x to information source i is then computed as This expected utility is evaluated for all the alternatives and all the information sources. By denoting C x,i as the cost of querying information source i at design x, which is often computational expense for computational models, we find the query (i N+1 , x N+1 ) that maximizes the expected valuegradient utility per unit cost, given by After querying the design point x N+1 from the selected information source, i N+1 , the corresponding Gaussian process and afterward, the fused Gaussian process, are updated. This process repeats until a termination criterion, such as exhaustion of the querying budget, is met. Then, the optimum solution of Eq. 5 is found based on the mean function of the fused Gaussian process. This design is then to be created at ground truth. Information from this creation can then be fed back into the framework if more resources are allocated. We note here that the computational complexity of the knowledge gradient policy is O(M 2 log M), where M is the number of alternatives considered In this section, we demonstrate the use of our multiinformation source fusion approach to the dual phase steel application. For this demonstration, we fuse information from the three physics-based reduced-order materials information sources with potentially non-uniformly sampled inputs. We compare the results to ground truth data collected from the finite element RVE model. We consider three different cases. The first case involves uniformly sampled data for each information source. The second case involves non-uniformly sampled information from the information sources, with a large region where each information source is only sparsely sampled. The third case involves non-uniform sampling of the information sources where each information source is sampled well over a small region of the input space and sparsely elsewhere. In each case, the multi-information source fusion approach taken here performs well, and is far superior to using any of the information sources in isolation. We conclude this section with a novel analysis of the effective number of information sources used to make the fused estimate at each point in the domain. This analysis provides a clear indication of our ability to exploit correlation for fusion, since without correlation information, only a single information source can confidently be used at a given point in the domain. In this case, the ground truth is assumed to have been sampled previously at nine uniformly spaced points in the input domain. Each information source, that is, the isostrain, isostress, and isowork models has been evaluated at the points where ground truth information is known. The nine sampled points for each information source are used to construct Gaussian process surrogate models for each. These are shown as black lines through the nine black dots on the bottom three plots of Fig. From the isostrain, isowork, and isostress subplots, it is clear that no single information source performs well across the domain. Indeed, over much of the domain each source performs poorly. However, as can be seen in the upper left plot, our fused information source is an excellent match to ground truth. This is further evidenced by the data provided in Tab. 2, where the mean squared errors (MSE): and mean Kullback-Liebler divergences (MD KL ): between the ground truth and each information source are presented. Here, p represents the probability density function of the information source given by the subscript. From the table, we see that the fused source is a significant improvement over any of the individual sources and can be used to reliably predict the ground truth over the whole domain. For this particular example, a subtle but crucial aspect of the use of the reification approach to information source fusion is revealed. For the input region f hard ∈ (95, 100], each information source overpredicts the truth. However, as can be seen in the top plot of Fig. In this case, each information source has been sampled seven times, with all but one of the seven points being in the region [0, 50]. These seven points are not necessarily the same for each information source. We assume we have ground truth information at each of the seven points for each information source. This situation could occur if, for example, different groups have available different sets of ground truth but are unaware of other data or are unwilling to share this information with other groups. The key purpose of this demonstration case is to show the performance of our methodology over a poorly interrogated region of the domain when correlation information has been learned elsewhere over the domain. The results of this demonstration case are shown in Fig. Information Source In this case, each information source has been sampled a few times in a specific region of the domain. The isostrain model was sampled generally in the left half of the domain, the isowork model was sampled generally in the right half of the domain, and the isostress model was sampled generally in the middle of the domain. Ground truth was again used to quantify information source discrepancy but was not shared across information sources. The key purpose of this demonstration case is to show the performance of our methodology when the information sources are essentially disparate in their knowledge of the quantity of interest over the domain. The results of this demonstration case are shown in Fig. To complete the demonstration of our multi-information source fusion approach, we define and present a novel number of effective independent information sources index. The index measures the effective number of independent information sources partaking in the fused estimate at each point of the input domain. To define the index, we first consider the normalized change of variance that occurs when information sources are fused together at a given point. This change can be written as where ∆σ 2 (x) is the variance reduction at x from the current best information source's variance, σ 2 * (x), at that point. Then, for any number, S, of independent information sources, each with variance σ 2 * (x) at x, we can write Thus, the number of effective independent information sources with variance σ 2 * (x) at the point x is given as This index takes the value S when there are S independent sources with the same variance. If any sources have a larger variance, they will not contribute as much to the variance reduction at that point, and I eff will be less than S. Thus, effective independent information sources, as measured by this index, are relative to the best source at a given point. We note here also that for highly correlated information sources, Eq. 13 can result in variance decreases that are larger than would occur with independent information sources. This generally occurs as a result of very similar but biased in the same direction information sources. The ability to exploit this situation is a feature of the reification approach. The effective independent information source index for demonstration Case 1 is shown in Fig. For the fused approximation of Case 1, shown in the top plot of Fig. Though the effective independent information source analysis presented here relied only on the I eff , which was derived through the discrepancy quantification and reification process, the analysis is consistent with the fundamentals of mechanics for these information sources and this application. This provides evidence that such an analysis could be used to aid in the construction of a more sophisticated physics-based model from models using simplified assumptions. That is, this index provides information about when certain assumptions are valid and when they are not. The index also provides a means of valuing a new evaluation of an information source over the domain. For example, this analysis reveals that sampling the isostress model on the interval f hard ∈ [40, 100] will provide little value in terms of effective information sources when an isostrain and isostress model are also available. Such a valuation could prove useful in a resource constrained process for estimating a quantity of interest with many possible information sources available. In this section, we demonstrate the application of our framework to the optimization of the ground truth strength normalized strain hardening rate for the dual-phase steel application. We stress here that the purpose of our framework is the optimization of ground truth. That is, our motivation is the creation of a myopic multi-information source optimization framework for addressing Eq. 5 in the context of materials design. Thus, we seek to identify the best candidate for a ground truth experiment with whatever resources we have available. Once those resources are exhausted, a ground truth experiment takes place based on the recommendation of our framework. The result of that experiment can then be fed back into the framework. If more resources are then allocated, perhaps on the basis of promising results, then the framework can be employed again. The specific demonstration consists of the use of the three reduced-order models (isostrain, isostress, and isowork) to query the impact of quantifiable microstructural attributes on the mechanical response of a composite microstructure-in this case a dual-phase steel. The ground truth in this case is the finite element model of the dual-phase material. The objective is the maximization of the (ground truth) normalized strain hardening rate at ε pl = 1.5%. The design variable is the percentage of the hard phase, f hard , in the dual-phase material. We assume that our resources limit us to five total queries to (any of) the information sources before we must make a recommendation for a ground truth experiment. Given promising ground truth results, five more queries can be allocated to the information sources. The framework is initialized with one query from each information source and one query from the ground truth. This information is used to construct the initial intermediate Gaussian process surrogates. The value-gradient policy of our framework was used to select the next information source and the location of the query in the input space for each iteration of the process. For comparison purposes, the KG policy operating directly on the ground truth was also used to reveal the gains that can be had by considering all available information sources. For this, a Gaussian process representation was created and updated after each query to ground truth. The convergence results of our proposed approach using all information sources and the KG policy on the ground truth are shown in Fig. of the ground truth quantity of interest. It is clear from this figure that our approach outperformed the knowledge gradient applied to directly to ground truth, and in doing so, saved considerable expense by reducing the number of needed ground truth experiments. The superior performance of our approach can be attributed to its ability to efficiently utilize the information available from the three low fidelity information sources to better direct the querying at ground truth. We note that the original sample from ground truth used for initialization was taken at f hard = 95%, which is far away from the true optimal. This can be seen below in Fig. To conclude this demonstration we present the history of the queries to each information source and the ground truth. This information is provided in Fig. In this paper we first presented and demonstrated a correlation-exploiting multi-information source fusion approach. The method included new extensions to the fusion of any number of correlated information sources, as well as the creation of a novel effective independent information source index. The fusion methodology was demonstrated on microstructure-sensitive performance prediction for ductile dual-phase materials. In all cases, the proposed fusion approach performed exceptionally well, far exceeding the predictive capabilities of any individual information source. This provides evidence that our approach to information source fusion is highly applicable to the challenge of integration in ICME tools. We then presented and demonstrated a myopic multiinformation source optimization framework. The framework focused on determining the next information source to query and where in the input domain to query it by trading off resource expense and gains expected in ground truth objective function quality. To value each next potential query we presented a novel value-gradient policy, which seeks to maximize a two-step lookahead utility based on immediate value and the knowledge gradient for a potential next step. The framework was demonstrated on the optimization of ground truth strength normalized strain hardening rate for a dualphase material. The results of the demonstration revealed the promise of this framework as a suitable methodology for answering the MGI call for accelerating the materials development cycle. In the near-term, the information fusion framework developed here will be validated against larger sets of ground truth data and be demonstrated in higher dimensions. The framework will also be extended to handle information sources with misaligned input-output interfaces, which is a key challenge facing the ICME community. Moreover, the optimization framework will be extended to handle multiple objectives and studied for scalability to high dimensional input spaces. Additionally, we will explore the possibility of carrying out optimal sequential queries in which the sources of information are not input/output aligned. A specific scenario, for example, would be combining sources that establish relationships between processing parameters/conditions and microstructure with sources that connect microstructures to properties/performance. Much remains to be done, but this work presents a plausible research program towards the realization of the promise of ICME, which in the end rests on tool (or information source) integration. The mean squared errors (MSE) and the mean Kullback-Leibler divergences (MD KL ) between the true model (RVE) and the obtained models in Fig.