Many materials that are out of equilibrium can "learn" one or more inputs that are repeatedly applied. Yet, a common framework for understanding such memories is lacking. Here we construct minimal representations of cyclic memory behaviors as directed graphs, and we construct simple physically-motivated models that produce the same graph structures. We show how a model of worn grass between park benches can produce multiple transient memories-a behavior previously observed in dilute suspensions of particles and charge-density-wave conductors-and the Mullins effect. Isolating these behaviors in our simple model allows us to assess the necessary ingredients for these kinds of memory, and to quantify memory capacity. We contrast these behaviors with a simple Preisach model that produces return-point memory. Our analysis provides a unified method for comparing and diagnosing cyclic memory behaviors across different materials. Materials that are out of equilibrium can sometimes form memories of their past. Rubber and rocks may remember the largest loading applied to them One promising place to start building such a framework is in systems where the driving may be divided into cycles. Examples include a repeatedly sheared granular material or amorphous solid Some physical systems lend themselves naturally to a graph representation small set of discrete states. This behavior is observed in charge-density wave conductors' memory of electrical pulse duration (1) during the transient, multiple γ i may be encoded; Our approach is to consider small sets of discrete states that obey a given memory behavior. Figure Consider first the driving sequence: γ 0 = 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, . . .. Following the transitions shown in Fig. While this description is useful in demonstrating properties 1-3 of MTM in a minimal set of discrete states, it is somewhat artificial; we did not provide a physical reason for this arrangement of states or the transitions. Thus, in this paper we also describe a novel, simple, and physicallymotivated model proposed by Sidney Nagel called the "park bench model," which captures the distinctive aspects of multiple transient memory. We then show how noise may be introduced into the model to prolong the transient period indefinitely. Our analysis of noise in this model allows us to define a memory capacity-the number of distinct memories that can be retained simultaneously-which has been elusive in other systems with MTM. We also demonstrate that this model's behavior may reduce to a simpler type of memory (the Mullins effect) for some initial states. To show the versatility of our approach and highlight differences from MTM, we then construct minimal graphs of return-point memory (RPM) Consider a lawn with several benches arranged in a straight line. As visitors walk from the end of the park to any one of the benches, they gradually wear a path into the grass. As an observer, what can you deduce about previous visitors by looking at the grass? If the worn path ends at one of the benches, you may infer that many people stopped at that particular bench. On a finer scale, if the grass is somewhat worn leading up to the second bench but more worn up to the first bench, you might infer that some visitors walked to only the first bench and others continued on to the second bench. Thus, any spatial variation in the wear provides information about the past. Perhaps counter-intuitively, information may also be lost through wear. Suppose the interval from the entrance to the second bench is so thoroughly traveled that the grass is completely worn down to the soil. In that case, you lose any clue that the first bench was visited at all; there can be no change in the state of the grass along an interval if it is worn to its roots. Even more behaviors are possible if the grass is gradually growing back at all times; we consider this possibility in Section II B. To make these notions precise, we consider a one-dimensional model with N benches separating N + 1 patches of grass on a line, as drawn in Fig. Graph representation and behavior -To show all the possible ways a system may evolve, we enumerate the accessible states and draw a directed graph of the transitions between them, as shown in Fig. Figure Cyclic memory behaviors as properties of transition graphs -Properties 1-3 of MTM may be checked on an arbitrary transition graph to diagnose its memory behavior. Property 1 says there should be a state with multiple memories that may be reached from the initial state. Property 2 says this state should be reachable by applying the amplitudes in any order. Property 3 says that the fixed point of any repeated driving sequence should store just one memory. Importantly, these properties may be checked by examining the graph structure without any reference to the physics that produced the graph. We now consider Property 4 of MTM in the park bench model. Charge-density wave conductors where h i is the present height of the ith patch of grass and α controls the amount of noise. We apply the noise at the beginning of each cycle, before driving. Because the grass may grow anywhere, adding noise to the model leads to newly-accessible states where grass heights do not necessarily increase from left to right. The proliferation of new states and transitions leads us to distinguish this memory behavior as MTM with noise (MTMN). Focusing on a single patch of grass, we can predict its steady-state height, h i (t), in the case where there is almost always some grass to remove (h i (t) > 0 at long times) where D i has value 1 if the ith patch is visited on each cycle, 1 2 if it is visited on alternate cycles, etc. Thus, h i (t) = (1 -D i /α)h init . This is a stable fixed point; a positive (or negative) fluctuation leads to a slight decrease (or increase) in the growth rate, because of the sign of h i (t) in Eq. 2. The existence of an equilibrium height that depends on the local driving at each patch is what allows the system to store multiple memories in the steady state. Namely, when driving with multiple amplitudes, D i will vary from patch to patch, and the h i observed at each patch will encode that variation. Memories of the reversal points (i.e., the amplitudes of the driving cycles) are thus stored as the locations of jumps in the steady-state height h i (t) as a function of patch number, i. To demonstrate these behaviors, we simulate a system with N = 20 and h init = 30. Figure Height fluctuations and memory capacity -Equation 2 for the mean grass height provides a basic framework for storing multiple memories in the noisy park bench model. However, understanding fluctuations is also of crucial importance for retrieving multiple memories, since noise may mask a memory or create a spurious one. One approach to reduce such errors when reading out the memories is to perform many measurements and average them together. Nonetheless, in the absence of such averaging, one wants to know the inherent limitations on storing and retrieving multiple memories. Intuitively, the plateaus in Fig. To investigate these behaviors, we consider the behavior of a single patch of grass in the steady state. We measure the probability distribution of its height, P (h i ), in simulations as shown in Fig. Markov chain analysis -We can quantitatively capture the above behaviors using discrete-time Markov chains. We focus on the evolution of h i (t) over a repeated training pattern, which may consist of multiple cycles of driving. We denote the probability of transitioning from height a to height b by a transition matrix P ab . Each element of this matrix may be constructed by applying Eq. 1 to a unit probability starting in state a and following its evolution over the entire training pattern. We consider the steady-state probability distribution P (h) reached at long times, which we denote by a row vector π, with π a the probability of the grass having height a. This distribution is intimately related to the transition matrix: π is an eigenvector of P ab with eigenvalue 1. For h init = 10, α = 1, we find exactly one such eigenvector. We show this distribution in Fig. To gain insight into how the width of the distribution, σ, depends on h init and α, we consider the behavior near the most probable state, a = a * . Balancing the probability flow out of and into Dashed line: Asymptotic form, h init /8α, which differs only slightly from the solid line at small h init . Both curves capture the simulation results extremely well, for three values of the driving (symbols). a * , we have: We then model the entries of π as a Gaussian, so that π a = C exp(-1 2 (a * -a) 2 /σ 2 ). This reduces the number of degrees of freedom in modeling the vector π from O(h init ) to 1 (i.e., the value of σ). Plugging this form into Eq. 3 and supplying the values for the P ab yields an equation for σ. For the simplest case of a two-cycle training pattern with D i = 1/2, this equation may be solved exactly to give: Figure We now return to the case without noise to show that the park bench model can capture another distinct memory behavior. In particular, we note that a simpler form of memory occurs for h init = 1. Here there is no transient because a single cycle removes all the grass up to the visited bench; one might call this the "scorched earth" version of the model. Thus, the system remembers only the largest amplitude in its entire driving history. This is the same general behavior as the Mullins effect To further demonstrate the generality of our approach of describing memory behaviors as properties of graphs of memory-encoding macrostates, we now develop a simple description of return-point memory (RPM). For cyclic driving, the key property of return-point memory can be described as follows. Suppose a system is driven with an amplitude γ 0 , thereby putting it in a state s. The system is then subjected to further driving cycles, all having amplitude less than or equal to γ 0 . The system has return-point memory if a single cycle of amplitude γ 0 will then return the system to the exact same state, s; it remembers this previous state. This generic behavior is observed in ferromagnets Minimal graph of return-point memory -Figure In general, graphs with RPM have the following distinct properties: (1) the "maximal" state (e.g., {2} in Fig. These rules for strings are motivated by a physical system: they arise from a simplified version of the Preisach model of a ferromagnet In a real ferromagnet, memories are read out by observing a discontinuity in the slope of a graph of magnetization (the average state of the spins) versus H. Here this occurs wherever the substring "10" appears in the string-a gap in the sequence of spin flips as H is ramped up from 0. This method of readout requires that memories be separated, which is ensured by our restricting the driving to odd amplitudes that are less than N , so that all accessible states are sequences of the substrings "00" and "10". Figure with amplitude H 0 = 1 leads to 1000, which is a fixed point under repeated driving with H 0 = 1. Driving with H 0 = 3 leads to 0010. From this state, H 0 = 1 adds a memory to the first position. In contrast to MTM the two memories cannot be written in any order; H 0 = 1 must be written last. Figure To establish return point memory for arbitrary N , consider a cycle of amplitude H 0 that puts the system in state s. Suppose a sequence of {H i } with all H i < H 0 is then applied. We must show that applying H 0 again returns the system to the state s. This may be seen by noting that the state s starts with H 0 zeros. Each of the cycles of amplitude H i alters only the hysterons with indices j < H 0 (since H i < H 0 ). A cycle of amplitude H 0 thus resets the first H 0 hysterons back to 0. Although we have illustrated our approach using simple models, we expect it should be useful for experiments and dynamical simulations, by forming hypotheses and excluding possible memory behaviors. Dividing driving into cycles and reading out memories is a structured way to do this, and it lets us focus on memory-encoding macrostates, rather than the many microstates of a large system that occur within one cycle of driving, as in the work of Mungan and Terzi In systems with significant transients, our general approach becomes more cumbersome due to a possibly large number of states. In this case we may consider the effective transitions that result from either driving the system with a large number of cycles much greater than the known transient length, denoted as "1111. . . " or "2222. . . " in Fig. We note that developing a reliable readout is essential for these applications. An example of a readout protocol is to drive the system with a series of increasing amplitudes and monitor its response as a function of amplitude One may also construct even simpler tests that do not require a careful memory readout. For instance, if one can compare states of the system observed after each cycle of driving, e.g. by simple image subtraction, one can identify distinct states and map their transitions without knowing their memory content. In dilute suspensions, when many cycles of a given amplitude are applied, further driving at a smaller amplitude does not change the state (away from {2} * ) This work establishes a simple graph structure as a common language for comparing memories across multiple systems. This may help to sort through the growing body of work on cyclic memory formation and self-organization. This includes the recent findings that multiple transient memory may occur in seemingly disparate models and physical systems We also demonstrated the minimal set of states required for multiple transient memory, and we described a simple physically-motivated model that produces this behavior. The park bench model of MTM can store multiple pieces of information (i.e., locations of jumps in the grass height) in transient states, but it forgets all but the largest repeated excursion in the steady state. This is somewhat remarkable as the system has a dearth of complexity: there is only a small, enumerable set of states, no disorder, and the evolution is determined by the sequence of inputs with no stochastic element. When noise is added to the park bench model, all memories were stabilized at long times, consistent with other systems with MTM and noise (MTMN) The park bench model also demonstrates that criticality is not required for MTM. In some other forms of memory such as aging and rejuvenation in glasses Recent studies of memory formation in sheared non-Brownian suspensions Data accessibility. Data for Fig. Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests. Authors' contributions. J.D.P. and N.C.K. conceived the study and analyzed the models. N.C.K. performed simulations. J.D.P. and N.C.K. interpreted the results and wrote the paper. For simplicity, we neglect the memory of the smallest input, which here corresponds to a "trivial" memory written at γ = 0. One could add benches and patches to the left of patch 1 and denote also the memories of the smallest inputs in the transition graphs, but the basic memory behavior would be the same. In particular, this analysis requires α > Di, otherwise the assumption hi(t) > 0 is frequently violated at patch i.