We have constructed an analytic formula to treat the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy energy in ferromagnetic metals with low symmetry, such as C4V and C3V. We find that the anisotropy energy is proportional to a part of the expectation values of the orbital angular momentum and magnetic dipole operator. Although the result is similar to the model proposed by Laan [J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 10, 3239 (1998)], we have derived a concrete expression for the spin-flip virtual excitation process term, which can be dominant in atoms with small magnetic moments and/or small exchange splitting. Pt monatomic layer with proximity-induced spin polarization grown on Fe is an example of this. Other multilayer systems such as Co/Pd and Co/Ni and bilayer systems such as Fe(CoB)/MgO can be discussed similarly. Moreover, the relation between perpendicular magnetic anisotropy energy and measurable physical parameters is discussed based on X-ray magnetic circular 2 dichroism spectroscopy. The theory for perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) in ferromagnetic ultrathin metals In this paper, we treat only ferromagnetic metals made of a single type of atoms for simplicity. The system has uniaxial symmetry like C4V or C3V. For example, Pt monatomic layer in contact with bulk Fe and a pure ferromagnetic metal with distorted lattice can be treated with the model. The eigenstate is constructed from the atomic orbitals as ,, , Here, N is the number of atoms in the crystal and ,, n a  k is a coefficient of the development. We express the spin-orbit interaction Hamiltonian ( SOI Ĥ ) using the basis defined above. The spin-orbit interaction Hamiltonian is where  is the spin-orbit interaction coefficient. The matrix elements are evaluated at the same atomic site by integrating spherical coordinate angles θ and φ. The radial part of the integration is common and included in the normalization factor. The lowest order correction to the energy and the ground state vector are Using the orbital expression of the spin-orbit expression shown in Eq. ( Here, θ represents the set of indices . The generalized density of states Here, H  is Heaviside step function. In Eq. ( Next, we derive the relation between spin-orbit interaction energy and orbital angular momentum L . The expectation value of the orbital angular momentum for the perturbed ground state can be obtained as follows: gr exc exc gr c.c. , , It should be noted that L is diagonal for spin. Here, we consider the spin quantization axis (z-axis) parallel to the spin moment. We also assume that the induced orbital angular momentum is parallel to the spin angular momentum. Then, the following relation can be used (Eq. ( By substituting Eq. ( Next, we consider a relation between spin-orbit interaction energy and intra-atomic Here, x is the direction vector of unit length. Q is the dimensionless charge-quadrupole operator. For our basis, the matrix elements of Q are equal to that of the following operator constructed from the orbital angular momentum operator. The expectation value of the magnetic dipole operator under spin-orbit interaction can be obtained for the first order approximation. gr gr gr gr Here, gr gr T may possess a finite value while gr gr L is zero. In other words, when the ferromagnetic system possesses electric quadrupole, T has a finite value even if the spin-orbit interaction is absent. From Eqs. (   Because 0  L for the ground state without spin-orbit interaction, we may set From this property, the spin-conserved virtual excitation process of the magnetic dipole operator is zero. Besides this, the spin-flip term is non-zero. From Eq. (   Equation (15) shows the spin-orbit interaction energy from the spin-flip virtual excitation process. It is correlated with the magnetic dipole operator, as suggested by Eq. (28) are not essentially identical. Finally, the PMA energy, which is the difference between the spin-orbit interaction energies of perpendicular magnetization and in-plane magnetization, can be expressed as follows from Eqs. ( Here, are used. T T   . The orbital magnetic moment (mL) 7 When strong ferromagnetic materials such as Fe and Co are employed, the orbital angular momentum from the majority spin-band and spin-flip terms can be neglected. Therefore, the PMA energy has the following relation from Eqs. ( The relation is known as the Bruno model. However, Eq. ( , and , T     cannot be neglected. is negligibly small. 