We consider a Josephson contact mediated by 1D chiral modes on a surface of a 3D topological insulator with superimposed superconducting and magnetic layers. The system represents an interferometer in which 1D chiral Majorana modes on the boundaries of superconducting electrodes are linked by ballistic chiral Dirac channels. We investigate the noise of the Josephson current as a function of the dc phase bias and the Aharonov-Bohm flux. Starting from the scattering formalism, a Majorana representation of the Keldysh generating action for cumulants of the transmitted charge is found. At temperatures higher than the Thouless energy E Th , we obtain the usual Johnson-Nyquist noise, 4G0kBT , characteristic for a single-channel wire with G0 ≡ e 2 /(2π ). At lower temperatures the behavior is much richer. In particular, the equilibrium noise is strongly enhanced to a temperature-independent value ∼ G0E Th if the Aharonov-Bohm and superconducting phases are both close to 2πn, which are points of emergent degeneracy in the ground state of the junction. The equilibrium noise is related to the Josephson junction's impedance via the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. In a striking contrast to usual Josephson junctions (tunnel junctions between two s-wave superconductors), the real part of the impedance does not vanish, reflecting the gapless character of Majorana modes in the leads. Noise of current as well as higher cumulants of charge fluctuations provide full information about quantum transport in mesoscopic systems During the last decade, a considerable interest was generated by transport in topological superconductors hosting neutral Majorana edge modes Combining magnetic and superconducting interfaces on top of 3DTI allows implementing new quantum interferometers. The transport between normal metal terminals linked by the coherently propagating Majorana edge modes was studied in several papers. The Mach-Zehnder devices where Y-junction splits an electron into two Majorana fermions were addressed in Refs. In this work we study noise of the dc supercurrent carried through a single-channel link (normal part of the interferometer) which connects two 2D superconductors induced on the surface of a 3D topological insulator. The topological SNS junction under consideration is a quantum interferometer with chiral 1D Majorana liquids in the leads. The gapless nature of the leads provides an additional scattering channel along with the Andreev one. The Andreev states in the 1D normal wire can be viewed as scattering states The studied Josephson setup and its schematic presentation in terms of a chiral SNS junction on a 2D surface of a 3D topological insulator are shown in Figs. The equilibrium Josephson transport, the thermoelectric effect and the heat conductance controlled by the Aharonov-Bohm flux, enclosed by the chiral loop (see Fig. The central results of this paper are related to the quantum regime, T E Th , where the Thouless energy E Th is inversely proportional to the dwell time in the interferometer loop. We show that the zero-frequency noise in this limit (i) reveals periodic pattern as a function of superconducting and Aharonov-Bohm phases and (ii) is much larger (at the degeneracy points) than the thermal noise. From the technical point of view, we use the method of FCS in order to calculate the fluctuations of the charge transmitted in the Dirac wires, where the definition of the current operator is straightforward. Our consideration is based on the FCS theory of SNS junction The paper is organized as follows. In Sections II and III the chiral Josephson junction and scattering formalism are introduced. In Section IV the generating Keldysh action for cumulants is presented. In Section V the path integral is calculated and an expansion for the cumulant generating function is obtained. In Section VI the results for zero-frequency noise and current are derived with the use of the FCS. Specifically, in Sec. VI A the general expression for zero-frequency noise is presented, in Sec VI B the result of Ref. We assume the temperature to be much lower than the superconducting (∆) and magnetic (M ) gaps induced in the 2D surface, T < min{∆, M } (see Fig. The incident chiral Majorana mode emerges in the 2D surface at an interface between superconducting and Zeeman gaps The dispersion of this mode reads ε k = [signM ]vk where the direction depends on the sign of the Zeeman field and v is the Fermi velocity of the 2D Dirac surface. The chirality and gapless dispersion follows from the broken time reversal symmetry by the magnet. In contrast to Bogolyubov quasiparticles in conventional superconductors, the chiral Majorana excitation of a momentum k is composed of four components: electron-like states of k and -k with the opposite spin orientations and their hole-like counterparts. The neutrality follows from the fact that four components of the Nambu eigenfunction have equal magnitudes for all the subgap energies. The gapless dispersion means that the Majorana quasiparticles are excited at arbitrary low temperatures in contrast to the case of a conventional superconductor with a quasiparticle gap. The isolated Majorana edge mode transfers energy with the heat conductance which equals to 1/2 of that of the normal single channel because the particle and antiparticle are not independent excitations. The Majorana mode is electrically neutral and does not carry charge or possess charge fluctuations. Nevertheless, the superposition of two Majorana fermions mixed in tunnel or Y-junctions transports charge and, consequently, generates charge noise. In our setup (Fig. In order to formulate the scattering approach we introduce the Hamiltonians of the Majorana and Dirac chiral liquids, ĤM and ĤD . They describe coherent propagation of neutral and charged 1D fermions and are derived from the Gor'kov-Nambu Hamiltonian for the 2D Dirac surface in proximity with magnets and superconductors. For the chiral Majorana liquid one has where the real fermion operators obey the condition (1). The prefactor of 1/2 is the consequence of the excitations with momenta k and -k being non-independent. For the chiral Dirac mode we have a standard chiral Hamiltonian with complex fermions The Bogolyubov operators ψ(k) and χ(k) and the effective 1D Hamiltonians follow from the solution of the Bogolyubov-de Gennes equation (see Ref. Here we describe the scattering approach to the investigation of the interferometer. The detailed derivation can be found in Ref. where phase α n depends on the microscopic details of the junction. For the Y-junction #2 we get S out = S T in . The value of α n is left arbitrary and is assumed to be independent of the momentum k of the scattered particles. We eliminate the Majorana leg of length d, which connects between the Y-junction nodes #1 and #2 and in which the dynamic phase kd is acquired. As a result we obtain the S-matrix of the left combined chiral contact. This S-matrix describes the scattering of one incoming Dirac and one incoming Majorana modes into one outgoing Dirac and one outgoing Majorana modes. It acts on the vector of three amplitudes. The vector consists of the incident electron, Majorana fermion, and hole fields, ( ψin,k , χin,k , ψ+ in,-k ) T . The outgoing fields are thus ob-tained through the S-matrix as where the subscript l refers to the left contact. To account for the non-zero superconducting bias phase Φ dc of the left superconducting contact, we employ the transformation ψl → e iΦ dc /2 ψl . The left and right leads confine the Dirac channels and the electronic states in the normal region become enslaved to the incident Majorana modes in the left and right leads. Due to the partial Andreev reflection the electrons and holes of momenta k and -k are not independent. After some algebra we find a linear non-unitary which relates the fermionic fields in the middle of the lower and upper Dirac channels ψa and ψb to the fields χl and χr of the incident channels, as shown in the Fig. For the Aharonov-Bohm phase the shift reads see We obtain 1 + 2e iφ cos Φ + e 2iφ -4e i(φ-φ k ) , (10) where the dynamic phase and the Thouless energy are given by . At a first glance, relation The variety of the interference patterns, encoded by r 1 and r 2 , influence the transport of Cooper pairs. As shown previously In this section we use relation Here e is electron charge and v is the Fermi velocity of the surface Dirac states. Note that our method is distinct from that of The cumulants of the transported charge N during the counting time 0 < t < t 0 are given by the logarithmic derivatives of the corresponding partition function Z[ξ]. Namely, the CGF is given by with the cumulants are The partition function is given by the path integral with the time-ordered exponent The variable ξ is the amplitude of counting field ξ(t) which is fully quantum in terms of Keldysh formalism, i.e. we should take σ z = +1 for the forward and σ z = -1 for backward parts of the contour. Moreover i.e., the counting field is switched on and off at t = 0 and t = t 0 respectively. Upon transition to the physical time t, the quantum counting field ξ(t) is coupled to the classical component of the current defined as where t + and t -represent the physical time t at the upper and lower branches of the Keldysh contour respectively. For the averaging in ( The diagonal action S 0 for the incident Majorana fermions reads on the Keldysh contour with the Hamiltonians The factor of 1/2 in time derivative of S 0 is because we are dealing with real fermions. Thus we obtain where G -1 i,j (t, t , k) is the equilibrium inverse Green's function of usual charged fermions. For the partition (generation) function we obtain where the corresponding Grassmann fields after the Keldysh rotation are collected in the vector X k (t) Here the first index (1, 2) indicates the Keldysh component, whereas the channel index γ = l, r stands for free modes incoming from the left/right leads. The Keldysh rotation is defined as where +/-stand for direct/inverse branches of Ccontour. The Gaussian integration over the real (Majorana) Grassmann variables gives The action S ξ in This is a sum of the action S 0 [X] of the incident Majorana channels and the generating term ξ(t) Jp,k . The bold font stands for the matrix structure in channel space and "check"-symbol means the Keldysh space. The structure of the matrix Jp,k , which parametrizes the current in the center of normal channels via the fields X k , is to be derived with the help of R k -matrix. At this step we define the matrix Green function in ( The diagonal blocks Ǧl,r are the Keldysh Green's functions We remind that these Green functions describe free chiral fermions. Let us introduce a Fourier representation of X -k (t) and X k (t) in ( Then, the inverse Green function from the action ( In turn, the frequency representations of retarded (R), advanced (A) and Keldysh (K) components in The only constraint for the distribution function n L/R (k) follows from the fact that Majorana mode χ is real. It reads Next we calculate the current matrix Jp,k acting in the basis of X k . The definition for the current in terms of usual Grassmann variables reads The classical and quantum components of the charge densities read For the fermion variables we introduce the Keldysh indices 1 and 2 exactly as for χ: Using (33) we obtain which can be rewritten as Here σ = 1, 2 is the Keldysh index and where γ z is the Pauli matrix in the channel space (a/b) and σ 0 is the unity matrix in the Keldysh space. At this step we introduce the complex Dirac field Ψ k in the extended Gor'kov-Nambu τ -space Such an extension is necessary in order to take into account superconducting correlations of Dirac fermions. In terms of these fields the current now reads The relation between scattered Dirac and incoming Majorana modes is given by Eq. ( The Hermitian conjugation of the (39) reads Using Eq. ( where the kernel matrix Jp,k is obtained as follows This matrix provides the generating counting term in the Majorana representation. In this section we perform the integration over the Majorana field X k (t) in the path integral In the integral of (43) we introduced f (ω , ω) which is the Fourier transformation of ξ(t) Discretization assumes that dω and dω are replaced by ∆ω and the delta function transforms into Kronecker symbol as ∆ωδ(ω -ω) → δ ω ,ω and f (ω , ω) is considered as matrix. The generating action now reads as Calculation of the path integral with the discretized action from (45) and the definition The factor of 1/2 in (46) results from square root of the determinant in integration over real Grassman variables. The sign Tr assumes the trace taken over p, k, ω , ω and σ, γ indices. Calculation of the trace in a compact form is challenging due to the non-diagonal structure in momentum space of the generating term J in the new Majorana basis. The formula (46) allows us to obtain the cumulants C n through the logarithm expansion up to the n-th order in ξ and using the definition A. General expressions for the average current and the noise In this section we obtain the general expression for the zero frequency noise of the current, S, which is the quantity of central interest of this work. The spectral density of noise S ω (φ, Φ, T ) is related to the symmetrized correlator as (47) The zero frequency value S ≡ S ω=0 is given by the second cumulant introduced above as In order to calculate C 2 we expand CGF(ξ) up to the second order in ξ and transform sums into integrals over frequencies: Here tr denotes the trace over σ and γ indices only. In the integrand of the second term we took into account that For the first cumulant we obtain ) where tr γ denotes the trace over the channel indices only. The first term in (50) is responsible for the Josephson current while the second one gives the thermoelectric effect discussed in respectively. Note that Eq. ( For the second cumulant we have |f (ω, ω )| 2 in the integrand. Assuming the measurement time t 0 is long, i.e., t 0 E -1 Th , T -1 , we get the delta-function, i.e., Performing the integration over ω in the second line of (49) and summation over p in the continuous limit via p → dp 2π we obtain where the distribution functions n l (k) and n r (k) are arbitrary. The upper indices of J k,k are related to the channel space γ. For the particular case of identical distribution functions, n(k) = n l (k) = n r (k), we obtain We have also performed an alternative derivation and obtained the same result for C 2 from a direct calculation of the noise S ω using the operator approach. In this method we employ the relation ( where γ i = l, r for i = 1, 2, 3, 4. Comparing these two approaches we observe that all the terms given by the first trace in (52) are identical to the second line in (53). The last term of (52) with the minus prefactor is given by the third line in (53). In this subsection we calculate the cumulants C 1,2 in equilibrium, with the temperatures of the leads being equal to each other, T l = T r = T , so that the distribution function of the incident Majorana particles reads Replacing the sum over k by the integral over the energy, k → dε 2π v , we obtain where the dynamical phase is labeled by the index ε: Via the relation I(Φ, φ) = C 1 /t 0 we arrive at the currentphase relationship obtained previously in Ref. As shown in Ref. (57) This result exhibits an interesting singular behaviour near the points φ = 2πn, Φ = 2πm. In what follows we conclude that at these points the system shows large excess noise. Using Eqs. ( where G 0 is the conductance quantum, G 0 = e 2 2π . The kernel function is given by with A 0 (Φ, φ) = (14 cos φ + cos 3φ) cos Φ + 2(cos 2φ + 6) cos 2Φ + cos 3Φ cos φ -4 cos 2φ -26; A 1 (Φ, φ) = -2(cos 2Φ + 3 cos 2φ + 4) cos Φ + 5(5 -2 cos 2Φ) cos φ + cos 3φ; Despite the function Y(Φ, φ, φ ε ) being somewhat cumbersome, it can be simplified to a compact expression in the low, T E Th , and high, T E Th , temperature limits. Also, a certain simplification is possible for the degeneracy points Φ = 2πm, φ = 2πn, where an analytical calculation of (58) becomes possible for arbitrary temperatures. These three limits are discussed below. It is important to note that the function Y is essentially the spectral weight of fluctuations. Its integral over the period of the dynamical phase, -π < φ ε < π, is independent of Φ and φ: In the limit of zero phases Φ = φ = 0 (more precisely Φ = 2πm, φ = 2πp) the kernel is a sum of delta functions with singularities at φ ε = 2πn. This is the limit of the degenerate ground state where the otherwise continuous spectral weight turns into a sum of discrete contributions due to the Andreev states at the energies ε A = 2πnE Th . The invariance condition (61) provides the coefficient in front of the delta functions: D. Equilibrium noise: Low temperature limit Our central results follow from Eq. (58) in the low temperature limit, T E Th . The first result is the presence of the φ, Φ-dependent oscillations of the noise. The second one is the excess noise and, as a consequence, the large real part of the impedance of the system close to the degeneracy (as a representative point we take Φ = φ = 0). Namely, if the distance from the degeneracy point on the φ, Φ-plane is large, T /E Th , then we can expand the function Y given in (59) around φ ε = 0 and we obtain The oscillations in (63) show the usual 2π-periodic pattern as a function of the superconducting phase Φ as expected for a system where the charge parity is not conserved. The dependence on the Aharonov-Bohm phase φ is also 2π periodic, which corresponds to an unconventional for superconducting systems h/e period in terms of the Aharonov-Bohm flux. This is due to the split chiral channels in our system and has been discussed in detail in Ref. This delta-functional approximation is valid, however, only far enough from the singularity point, i.e. if In this case the distribution function constitutes a sharp peak of width T compared to the smooth dependence of Y on the energy. Indeed, the function Y is peaked around ε = 0 and the width of the peak is given by This follows from the expansion of the denominator of Y(Φ, φ, φ ε ), which, if φ 2 + Φ 2 π, reads A comparison of the width of Y with that of the distribution function, ∆ε ∼ T , leads to the criterion (65). The second order term in (63) as well as the higher ones are small as (T /E Th ) 2n . Once we approach the singularity, i.e., once we reach the distance Φ 2 + φ 2 ∼ T /E Th , then all the terms in the φ ε expansion of Y are of the same order and, as a result, all the terms in the expansion (63) are of the order ∼ G 0 E Th . The strong dependence on the direction from which the singularity is approached, i.e., on the angle θ ≡ arcsin φ √ φ 2 +Φ 2 , in particular the vanishing of the leading term for θ = 0, is washed out in the higher order terms. Close to the singularity point, i.e., for φ 2 + Φ 2 the kernel Y as a function of ε is more singular than the distribution function. This leads to our second main result: This expression follows from the n = 0 delta-function in (62) with the contributions of n = 0 being exponentially suppressed. As mentioned above, the strong dependence on the direction from which the singularity is approached, i.e., on the angle θ ≡ arcsin φ √ φ 2 +Φ 2 , which is so prominent in the leading term of (63), is washed out completely as we come close enough to the singularity, i.e., for Φ 2 + φ 2 T /E Th . The excess noise (67) does not vanish at T = 0. This may seem to be in conflict with the expected behavior of the equilibrium noise. The resolution of this apparent paradox is the fact that the area in the Φ, φ plane, where this value of the noise is obtained shrinks to zero with T → 0. Our main result is a strong enhancement of the noise near the singularity points Φ, φ = 0(mod2π) in the quantum limit of T E Th . We use the term "excess" here because the noise exceeds the value of the equilibrium Johnson-Nyquist noise in a single-channel normal conductor, S JN = 4G 0 T . In order to shed light on the origin of peculiar properties of the system (manifesting themselves in strong enhancement of the noise) at the singular points, we analyze the scattering states in this limit. Let us consider the first and the last lines of the left-contact scattering matrix, Eq. ( with e iφ/2 e iΦ/2 e -iΦ/2 e -iφ/2 , (70) √ 2 e iφ/4 -e -iφ/4 . (71) Excluding ψ b and ψ + b from these relations yields The determinant of the matrix in the square brackets is If the determinant is non-zero, the fermion modes are the linear combinations of the incident χ r and χ l , as described by the Eq. ( . These two vectors define Majorana modes η and ζ, which are eigenmodes of the junction at the degeneracy points. The vectors λ 0 and λ 1 correspond to the modes and respectively. Now we reformulate Eq. ( For φ k = 2πl we obtain the solution of (76) in the form At first glance, it may seem contradictory that the mode η is absent for these values of k, i.e., a part of degrees of freedom is absent. What actually happens is a redistribution of the continuous spectral weight of η into the singular points of φ k = 2πl. Oppositely, the mode ζ a has a constant spectral weight and does coincide with χ l (up to the dynamical phase) and flows out in the right Majorana edge channel without a backscattering. The same holds for wire b where ζ b (k) = e iφ k /4 χ r (k). Note, that from (77) one obtains for the Dirac field for a generic value of φ k = 2πl and thus ψ a (k) = -ψ + a (-k). Similarly, Hence, particles and holes in a particular Dirac channel are not independent but rather form Majorana particles. This correlation results in zero values of the cumulants of the form At the same time, the fermions in different wires are fully independent, ψ + a (k)ψ b (k) = 0, as follows from Eqs. (78) and (80). Consequently, there is no contribution to the noise from the off-resonant states. Let us discuss the redistribution of the spectral weight of the new modes η and ζ. To this end, we first calculate the spectral weight for arbitrary values of the phases and then consider a transition to the singular limit, Φ → 0 and φ → 0. Using the 2 × 2-matrix R k , Eq. ( The matrix elements in the above formula are related to r 1,2 from Eq.(10) as The scattering amplitudes x and z determine the density of states for the new modes in a and b wires: and Calculating the limit of Φ → 0 and φ → 0, keeping φ ε fixed and non-zero, one obtains that the mode ζ has constant density of states, while the mode η has a singular spectral weight located at the Andreev levels, It should be emphasized that both singular amplitudes are equal to each other, This means that the resonant mode η, which propagates in both of the Dirac wires, is an equal-amplitude superposition of χ l and χ r at the discrete energies ε n . Such a resonant correlation between the Dirac states in a and b wires-which should be contrasted to the case of ε = ε n -is responsible for the noise enhancement. In this Section we generalize our result for the noise at the degeneracy point Φ = φ = 0 for arbitrary temperatures. From (58) and (62) we obtain where S deg ≡ S(Φ = 0, φ = 0). As already mentioned, in the low temperature limit the only term with n = 0 survives and we obtain (67). In the opposite limit of high temperature, T E Th , we replace the summation by an integral over dx = 2πE Th /T and obtain the thermal noise S JN like in a normal channel: F. Equilibrium noise: High temperature regime Below we obtain the φ-dependent finite temperature correction to S JN at the regime T E Th and zero Josephson current (Φ = 0). For this case the zerofrequency noise is given by where Y (φ, φ ε ) = Y(Φ = 0, φ, φ ε ). At high temperatures the distribution function decays smoothly with the energy while Y (φ, φ ε ) rapidly oscillates. We, thus, expand the kernel into a cosine series This correction is exponentially suppressed for T E Th similar to the critical current in (56). In this case the thermal length is shorter than the normal region perimeter and the superconducting correlations and interference of Andreev pairs are destroyed by thermal fluctuations. In this work we have studied the equilibrium zerofrequency noise in a chiral link between two topological superconductors. This system can be realized on a surface of a 3D topological insulator covered with superconducting and magnetic films. Our system is a singlechannel ballistic Josephson junction where the Andreev pairs can be thought of as being the scattering states of the incident chiral Majorana fermions in the leads. We have derived the effective action for the full counting statistics of the charge transfer in the Majorana representation. We have shown that for temperatures lower than the Thouless energy k B T E Th the system is characterized in equilibrium by an excess zero-frequency noise with the maximum of S = 2πG 0 E Th , which is large compared to the thermal noise in a normal channel S JN = 4G 0 k B T . Here G 0 = e 2 /(2π ). Moreover, we have obtained oscillations of the noise power as a function of the superconducting phase bias and the Aharonov-Bohm flux. The dependence on the AB flux has a fractional h/e period because of the chiral nature of the split conducting channels. The large noise is a consequence of the emergent ground state degeneracy at even Aharonov-Bohm and superconducting phases of 2πn. The current-phase relation is also singular at these points. This is distinct from non-topological SNS contacts, where spikes are possible for odd phases of π(2n + 1). Hence, the singularities at even phases can be considered as a signature of the gapless Majorana leads. It is instructive to compare our result with that obtained for ordinary ballistic SNS junctions An important conclusion about the real part of the low frequency impedance of the junction considered in this work follows from the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, S = 4T Re[Z -1 ]. We observe that the inverse impedance of the junction must have a large real part at the low temperatures in addition to the usual inductive (imaginary) part describing the Josephson effect. Namely where Z J = -iωL J and L J = (2π/Φ 0 )(∂I(Φ, φ)/∂Φ) is the Josephson inductance. Our result means for the dissipative part that the following estimates hold at T E Th Thus, our Josephson contact can be thought of as a parallel connection of a Josephson element and a resistive shunt, whose conductance is strongly dependent on the phases Φ and φ.