The physical properties of the Zr5Pt3 compound with interstitial carbon in hexagonal D88structure was investigated. A set of macroscopic measurements reveal a bulk superconducting at approximately 7 K for Zr5Pt3C0.3 close to Zr5Pt3, also with a correlate anomalous resistivity behavior. However, both the signatures of strong electron-electron interaction, and the electronic contribution to specific heat, increase dramatically with the C doping. For the first time the x-ray photoelectron spectra compared with DFT/PWLO calculations of electronic structure show a complex Fermi surface with high density of states for Zr5Pt3. Also results show the signature of unconventional superconductivity. Indeed, was observed an unusual behavior for lower and upper critical field diagrams of Zr5Pt3C0.3. The temperature dependence of penetration length and electronic contribution to specific heat suggests that electronic pairing deviates of s-wave the BCS scenario. In the last years, discussion about the gap-structure in unconventional superconductors (SC) come from the unusual temperature dependence of critical fields, specific heat, field penetration length, and relaxation rate of magnetic resonance In the specific case of the D88-type compounds, the superconductivity mechanism never been explored, particularly for Zr5Pt3. The interesting of D88 or Mn5Si3-prototype [space group D 3 6h-P63/mcm] is a formation of octahedral chains with internal site able to accommodate C, B, O, and N interstitial elements (X) Specifically for Zr5Pt3 synthesized using Zr with 3% of Hf, i.e., Zr4.85Hf0.15Pt3, superconductivity with critical temperature (Tc) around 7.5 K was reported in 1990 by Waterstrat et al. Physical properties of single-phase samples were investigated by magnetization (M), resistivity (), and specific heat (Cp) measurements in a VSM-SQUID, 9T-PPMS (Quantum Design Inc.) and He 3 system (Triton-Oxford). Clear diamagnetic transitions were observed in the Zr5Pt3 samples with Tc-onset ≈ 6 K, and a consistent dependence on the C-content [Fig. A percolative superconducting path was confirmed with → at Tc ≈ 7 K, and with consistent displacement in the field range 0 ≤ H ≤ 7 T [Fig. The mid-point of the transition was used to construct  for residual resistivity (impurities/structural defects), T for usual phonon-electron scattering, and e /T for electron-electron interaction In order to obtain further insight about the apparent strong-correlation effects due to the anomalous , we provide results of the ground-state electronic structure of Zr5Pt3 from DFT calculations Both band diagram and Fermi surface showed the presence of 5 bands crossing the EF, leading to a high DOS [Fig. For Zr5Pt3, the electronic contribution (Cp(elec)) below Tc [extracted from Fig. In fact, nodal QPP signature was also observed for Zr5Pt3C0.3 where appears on the linearized temperaturedependence to penetration length (L) [extracted from Hc1 diagram -Fig. Borrowing this reasoning we speculate that with a complex Fermi surface and a high d-state contribution of DOS, can generate a anisotropy pairing lead to an unusual power-law dependence at low temperatures. This could be explained by (i) VF different on anisotropic Fermi surface and (ii) strong coupling in the gapped region (small-VF) and sizable coupling between the small-VF and large-VF regions (nodal points). The upward curvature in critical fields will increase as the difference between the Fermi velocities increases. Thus, together with the anomalous behavior of Hc1 and Hc2, this surprising result can suggest the existence of an unconventional superconductivity scenario In conclusion, a previously unappreciated set of physical properties is intrinsic to the Zr5Pt3Cy. Unprecedented results showed D88 compounds as a promising materials group with very interesting properties. Initial results showed unambiguously that Zr5Pt3C0. 