Recently, a new pairing state with the mixing between s-wave singlet channel and isotropic d-wave quintet channel induced by centrosymmetric spin-orbit coupling has been theoretically proposed in the superconducting materials with j = 3 2 electrons. 1 In this work, we derive the expressions of the zero-temperature spin susceptibility, the upper critical field close to the zero-field critical temperature Tc and the critical temperature with weak random non-magnetic disorders for the singlet-quintet mixed state based on the Luttinger model. Our study revealed the following features of the singlet-quintet mixing. (1) The zero-temperature spin susceptibility remains zero for the singlet-quintet mixed state if only the centrosymmetric spin-orbit coupling is taken into account, and will deviate from zero when the non-centrosymmetric spin-orbit coupling is introduced. (2) The singlet-quintet mixing can help enhance the upper critical field roughly because it can increase Tc. (3) Although the quintet channel is generally suppressed by the non-magnetic disorder scattering, we find the strong mixing between singlet and quintet channels can help to stabilize the quintet channel. As a result, we still find a sizable quintet component mixed into the singlet channel in the presence of weak random non-magnetic disorders. Our work provides the guidance for future experiments on spin susceptibility and upper critical field of the singlet-quintet mixed superconducting states, and illustrates the stability of the singlet-quintet mixing against the weak random non-magnetic disorder. Increasing research interests have recently been focused on the superconductivity in half-Heusler materials, including RPtBi(R=La, Y and Lu) and RPdBi(R = Er, Lu, Ho, Y, Sm, Tb, Dy and Tm) due to their possible unconventional mechanism indicated by the low carrier density The rest of the paper is organized as the following. We will describe the model for the mixing between the s-wave singlet and isotropic d-wave quintet channels in Sec.II, addresses spin susceptibility in Sec.III, study the upper critical field in Sec.IV, discuss the disorder effect in Sec.V, and eventually conclude our work with the discussion about experiments in Sec.VI. In this section, we will first review the model without magnetic fields proposed in Ref. [1] and then introduce the modification due to the external magnetic field. The effective non-interacting Hamiltonian that describes the low-energy j = where is the symmetric SOC(SSOC) which is invariant under inversion, is the anti-symmetric SOC(ASOC) which changes sign under inversion. Here the bases have total angular momentum 4 + ĝ2 5 and ĝi = g i /k 2 . We also assume μ < 0 for p-type carriers ) T , V 0 < 0 and V 1 < 0 stand for the attractive interaction in singlet and quintet channels, respectively. The above attractive interaction only ) creates a j = 3 2 fermion with wavevector k, V is the volume and a is the lattice constant. Compared to Ref. [1], we include a non-zero q in the interaction term (4), which is essential for the study of upper critical field. In this case, the mean-field gap function derived from Eq.4 reads where ∆ 0 (q) and ∆ 1 (q) are order parameters in the singlet and quintet channels, respectively. To study spin susceptibility and upper critical field, a uniform magnetic field B is required to couple to the electrons in the above model. We assume the magnetic field is small enough so that only the first order of B = |B| is kept. Such assumption is suitable for the calculation of spin susceptibility but restricts the study of the upper critical field to be at the temperature close to the zero-field critical temperature. The magnetic field has two effects: the Zeeman effect and the orbital effect. in the basis of the Γ 8 bands (Appendix.A), where J = (J x , J y , J z ) are angular momentum matrices for j = 3 2 (Appendix.A), μ B = e 2me is the Bohr magneton, e is the elementary charge and m e is the rest mass of the electron. Before including the orbital effect, we first project h(k)+ h Γ8 Z onto ξ ± bands and get the effective Hamiltonian where p ± ( k) • σ and M ± ( k) are the corresponding 2 × 2 blocks of the projected 2 σ y , σ z ) are Pauli matrices for the double degeneracy of each band, M ± (-k) = M ± ( k) and Tr[M ± ( k)] = 0. In Eq.7, we neglect the terms of order Ck 2Qck 2 . The reason is that the energy scale of SSOC near the Fermi surface is typically much larger than that of ASOC, e.g. 2Q c k 2 F ∼ 20meV and Ck F ∼ 4meV for YPtBi The spin susceptibility χ ij can be defined as where M spin i is the ith component of the magnetic moment generated by the spins of conduction electrons. We first analyze the symmetry properties of χ S and χ N . According to the definition of χ ij (9), the spin susceptibility satisfies χ ij = i ,j R ii R jj χ i j for any operation R in the point group of the material, where R ii represents the transformation of a pseudo-vector under R. The model considered here (1, 4) has T d symmetry, meaning that χ N satisfies T d symmetry. In the zero magnetic field limit Following Ref. [43], the spin susceptibilities in superconducting phase and normal metal phase read and respectively. Here , and the terms of order 1/(β c ), α λ / c , |d λ |/ c and c /|μ| are neglected. (See Appendix.B for more details.) In the case where only one of the λ = ± bands is cut by the Fermi energy, M λ ( k) = μ B σ and the system is isotropic, Eq.10 and Eq.11 would match the results in Ref. 43. In particular, we focus on the zero-temperature limit of Eq.10. One should be careful that T → 0 limit and d λ → 0 limit are not exchangeable, and d λ → 0 limit, if needed, should be performed before T → 0 limit since the later is not physically achievable. Although TNLS indicates d λ can be zero along some lines on the Fermi surface, such lines can be neglected in Eq.10 since they do not cause any divergence and have zero measure in the surface integration. After summing over ω n , Eq.10 at zero temperature reads where ). According to Eq.12, a non-vanishing χ S χ N T →0 comes from the ASOC term 43 . In the limit of zero ASOC, i.e. C → 0 or equivalently α λ → 0, we find χ S χ N T →0 = 0 using J (x → +∞) = 1. On the other hand, if ASOC is much larger than the superconducting gap on the Fermi surface α λ d λ , Eq.12 is simplified as (13) using J (x → 0) = 0. This expression is generally nonzero. Fig. drops to zero for zero ASOC and approaches to the limit set by Eq.13 (dashed lines in Fig. is not sensitive to SSOC, and Eq.13 gives a slightly smaller value in regime II than those in regime I and III. Based on this calculation, we arrive at the following conclusions. (1) Unlike the singlet-triplet mixing with a non-zero χ S χ N T →0 , zero-temperature spin susceptibility can be zero for singlet-quintet mixing. This is because the singlet-triplet mixing is from ASOC and the singlet-quintet mixing comes from SSOC, while χ S χ N T →0 is only sensitive to ASOC. This indicates that in some centrosymemtric SCs with j = 3/2 (e.g. anti-perovskite materials 15 ), even if one measures a vanishing zerotemperature spin susceptibility, the possibility of singletquintet mixing cannot be excluded. (2) In half-Heusler SCs, such as YPtBi, since the energy scale of ASOC near the Fermi surface (∼ 4meV ) is much larger than the gap function of the similar order as k B T c ∼ 0.06meV , a non- is expected for the singlet-quintet mixed pairing. We notice that the situation here is similar to the case of other non-centrosymmetric SCs with "spin-1/2" electrons 43 . In this section, we will study the upper critical field B c,2 , at which the superconductivity is destroyed by the external magnetic field 46 , in our model. The upper critical field can be obtained by solving linearized gap equation with a non-zero magnetic field. The effect of magnetic field is taken into account through the orbital term and the Zeeman term, as discussed in Eq. (8). (14) which is just Eq.8 with C = 0. As a result, the corresponding Green function G ± (r 1 , r 2 , ω n ) for each band reads It is clear that, the orbital effect only appears in the phase factor of G ± (r 1 , r 2 , ω) to the first order of B. (See Appendix.C for details.) As mentioned above, the upper critical field is solved via linearized gap equation 46 , which is derived from the superconducting Ginzburg-Landau free energy F SC to the second order of the order parameter: where 1 and c /|μ| 1 are assumed. F SC only contains the orbital effect because the Zeeman term only appears as the second order of B and thus is neglected in F SC . In addition, F SC does not depend on the direction of B since D 2 is isotropic, meaning that the upper critical field is isotropic near the critical temperature. (See Appendix.D for more details.) The resulted linearized gap equation reads where is the eigenvalue of D 2 with n ≥ 0 and k 3 being the component of the momentum in the direction of magnetic field. The upper critical field B c,2 can be obtained by solving the above equation with a fixing temperature T below T c and the solution gives where Tc ), and As a result, the slope -dB c,2 /dT at the zero-field critical temperature has the form Below we label for short. The temperature dependence of B c,2 for the pure singlet(quintet) channel can be obtained by setting λ 1 = 0(λ 0 = 0) in Eq. ( The blue line of Fig. The slope in the regime I and III is significantly larger than that in the regime II, which can be attributed to the behavior of the function Tc T0xc , as shown by the red line of Fig. In conclusion, the above results have shown that the upper critical field B c,2 close to the zero-field critical temperature T c is isotropic and can be enhanced by the singlet-quintet mixing. The slope dB c,2 /dT at the zerofield critical temperature is mainly determined by the zero-field critical temperature T c . The slope is much larger in regimes I and III than that in regime II mainly due to its T c dependence, and reaches its maximum around the boundary between I and III as a result of the interplay between the T c and α dependence in Eq.24. V. Effect of Random Non-magnetic Disorder In this section, we study the effect of weak random nonmagnetic disorder on the singlet-quintet mixed SC. The non-magnetic disorder is included in the Hamiltonian as where c † r is the Fourier transformation of c † k and V (r) is the random potential describing the disorder scattering. The probability measure of the disorder configuration is chosen as and thereby the spatial correlation of V (r) is just the delta function meaning stronger disorder. In order to carry out the disorder average, we use the Replica trick 48 which, in our case, is equivalent to eliminating all fermionic loops in Feynman diagrams, as elaborated in Appendix.F. We assume the disorder is weak: 1 with μ the chemical potential and N F = N 0 y 1 the density of state at the Fermi energy without spin index. In this case, we consider the self-energy correction (Fig. ) which is defined in Ref. [49], Ψ (0) (...) is the digamma function, and 1/τ d = γ 2 d πN F . The critical temperature T can be solved from Eq.27 in the presence of disorder for the mixed state as ln( (29) The critical temperature expression for the pure singlet(quintet) channel can be given by setting λ 1 (λ 0 ) to be zero, which gives ln( and ln( Eqs. ( In contrast, for a large y 2 term, due to its independence of disorder scattering, a significant quintet pairing channel can still be induced through the mixing effect even if the value of b 1 is small. Therefore, the mixing effect stabilizes the quintet pairing channel against the weak non-magnetic disorder scattering. We further plot the calculated critical temperature with disorder T dis c as a function of disorder scattering strength in Fig. 1 that is used in our theory. Beside the critical temperatures, the expression of the pairing ratio can also be solved from Eq.27 and reads Since x, which depends on the critical temperature, increases as 1/τ d increases, the pairing ratio ∆ 1 / ∆ 0 would generally decrease if the disorder strength 1/τ d increases, with the exception of the isotropic system in regime II. The decreasing pairing ratio ∆ 1 / ∆ 0 is shown in Fig. In this work, we studied the zero-temperature spin susceptibility, the upper critical field near the zero-field critical temperature T c and the non-magnetic disorder scat-tering of the SCs with j = where V is the total volume. The Fourier transformation of corresponding Grassmann field in the continuous limit reads where The j = 3 2 angular momentum matrices are 30 The five Gamma matrices are 52 Clearly, {Γ a , Γ b } = 2δ ab Γ 0 where Γ 0 is the 4 by 4 identity matrix. The three V i 's matrices are x -J 2 y }. The Luttinger Hamiltonian h(k) with C = 0 can be diagonalized by the unitary transformation 52 For C = 0, this leads to The expressions of |j, j z with j = 3/2 and j z = ±3/2, ±1/2 in terms of the electron spin and atomic p orbitals 30 are where |X , |Y and |Z are atomic p orbitals and real. The expressions of y 1,2,3,4,5 and z 1,2,3 in Eq.18 and Eq.19: where and θ(...) is the Heaviside step function. To include the momentum cutoff in those y's and z's, just do the following replacement where the extra factor in the second expression is given by the fact that the momentum cut-off requires 2m λ μ ≤ Λ 2 . As mentioned in the Sec.II, we neglect the momentum cut-off Λ in regime I and II, which is equivalent to taking Λ → ∞, and choose a finite value for Λ only in regime III. Appendix B Derivation of Eq.10 and Eq.11 In this section we derive Eq.10 and Eq.11 following Ref.43. The magnetic moment generated by the conduction electron spins has the following expression where Z = DcDce -S , c, c are Grassmann fields of the j = 3/2 fermion. The action S contains two parts S = S ni + S ∆ : the non-interacting part S ni and the pairing part S ∆ . Below, we talk about these two parts carefully. According to Eq.9, the derivation of χ S,N only requires terms up to the first order of the infinitesimal uniform magnetic field. Therefore, S ni contains three parts S ni = S 0 + S orb B + S Z B , where is the non-magnetic part, is the orbital part, is the Zeeman part, λ = ± and ψk,ωn,λ , ψ k,ωn,λ are Grassmann fields corresponding to eigen-wavefunctions of ξ λ band. Now we discuss the pairing part S ∆ . The reason of using the pairing instead of the interaction is that we consider infinitesimal magnetic field in the superconducting phase where the Cooper pairs are already formed. And we neglect the change of order parameter due to the magnetic field where ∆ λ (k) = ∆ 0 n 0 λ (k) + ∆ 1 n 1 λ (k) , and and are pairing matrices projected to ξ ± bands. Now, we have S = S 0 + S orb B + S Z B + S ∆ . Clearly, S have fermion parity symmetry for either of λ = ± subspace since they are decoupled. As a result, Eq.42 can be re-written as where we neglect inter-band terms given by μ B J because they are odd under the fermion parity for one λ subspace. By defining S M i = k,ωn,λ ψk,ωn,λ M λ i ( k)ψ k,ωn,λ , we have the expression of spin susceptibility 51) where X 0 = 1 Z0 D ψDψXe -S0-S∆ with Z 0 = D ψDψe -S0-S∆ . In the following, we neglect the orbital contribution to χ ij as done in Ref. [40, 43, and 44] and choose the i, j = z since χ ij is isotropic. Eventually, the expression of spin susceptibility become where Next, we will derive Eq.10 and Eq.11 from the expression presented above. In Nambu representation, S 0 + S ∆ is re-written as where Ψk,ωn,λ = ( ψk,ωn,λ , ψ T -k,-ωn,λ ), Ψ k,ωn,λ = (ψ T k,ωn,λ , ψ-k,-ωn,λ ) T , the " " on top of means only summing over half the region of (k, ω n ) with the other half obtained by (k, where , and Then, Z 0 can be expressed as (60) On the other hand, S M z is expressed in Nambu representation as where ). Now we can work out Eq.52. The spin susceptibility χ N in the normal state can also be obtained from Eq.64 by choosing zero value for the order parameters d λ (k) = 0. As a result, we can get Eq.11 by neglecting terms of order 1/(β c ), α λ / c and c /|μ|. If the temperature is below T c and the superconducting order parameters are not zero, the Eq.64 gives the superconducting spin susceptibility χ S . In this case, we can first subtract χ S by χ N in order to exchange the sum of ω n with the energy integration. Then, by neglecting terms of order 1/(β c ), α λ / c , |d λ |/ c and c /|μ|, we can get Eq.10. In this part, we derive Eq.16 following Ref. [39]. In the continuous limit, the corresponding effective Green function for each band satisfies the equation where K r = -i∇ r + e A(r), ω n = (2n + 1)π/β is the fermionic Matusbara frequency, λ = ± and 1/β = k B T . Clearly, the Green function resulting that G λ (r 1 -r 2 , ω n ) satisfying a translationally invariant equation: or equivalently To solve Eq.68 analytically, we make another assumption that B is sufficiently small so that we can treat the magnetic field dependence in the equation as a perturbation, as mentioned in the main text. It means Bμ B k B T and ω c k B T for each band, where the latter is for the field dependence in K and ω c = 2me |m λ | Bμ B is the cyclotron frequency of the band under the magnetic field. Finally, we solve Eq.68 to the first order of ω c /(k B T ) following Ref. [39]. Since ω c /(k B T ) is linear in B, we will directly use the order of B to indicate the order of ω c /(k B T ). If B = 0, the zero field Green function is easy to solve Since the Periels substitution is given by with E ± (i∇ r , B) obtained by replacing k in E ± (k, B) by i∇ r , E ± (K, B) to the first order of B has the following expression where v ± = ∇ k ξ ± (k) and the third equality uses the fact that r • k commutes with r • (B × ∇ k ). With the expression shown above, we get the first order correction to the Green function which is Note that we finally get solution to Eq.68 to the first order of B Appendix D Derivation of Eq.17 In this part, we derive Eq.17 following Ref. [39]. 1 General Expression of the Superconducting Free Energy FSC According to Eq.4, the interacting part of the action reads where τ is the imaginary time, ck,τ is the Grassman field, and Using Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, we have exp(-S I ) = D∆D∆ * exp[ where Vdτ -2πV a d∆ a (q, τ )d∆ * a (q, τ ) . (79) Assume that ∆ i (q, τ ) is uniform in τ , and thereby it can be re-labeled as ∆ i (q). Then the partition function becomes where S 0 is the non-interacting action , 82) and the Fourier transformation relation Eq.34 is used. We can express P i in eigen-wavefunctions of ξ ± bands where and To simplify n a (k, q), we would first neglect the q dependence, i.e. n a (k, q) ≈ n a (k, 0) re-labeled as n a (k). The reason is given below. Typically, the order parameter with large q is not the minimum of the Free energy, and thus |q| is small compared with the Fermi momentum k F . Then, we can expand U (k + q 2 ) in terms of |q|/k F : Since U (k) only depends on the direction of k, i.e U (k) = U ( k), we thereby have where 1 k ∇ k stands for the angular part of ∇ k operator. Then, we can conclude that, the q n term brought by the expression of U (k + q 2 ) on the Fermi surface is of order ( |q| k F ) n compared with the original term. The q n term in the Free energy can also be given by the Green function. To estimate that contribution, let us assume an isotropic form of Green function (iω -(k +q/2) 2 /(2m * )+μ) -1 . In this case, |q| n term of the Green function on the Fermi surface is of order ( |q| ) n compared with the original term. Here we replace 1/(iω) n by (k B T ) n because the other part of 1/(iω) n will just contribute to a convergent dimensionless expression after summing over ω. Since we assume |μ| k B T 1, the q dependence in the U (k + q 2 ) can be neglected. We further simplify n i (k) by making the approximation where the n a ± (k) are shown in Eq.48 and Eq.49. This approximation is legitimate since the inter-band contribution is of order c /(2Q c k 2 F ) 1, where c is the energy cut-off of the attractive interaction. Therefore, we have Since the Green function does not have translational invariance, it is better to deal with the problem in the position space. After the Fourier transformation, we have with where n a λ (r) = k n a λ (k)e ik•r and ∆ a (r) = q e iq•r ∆ a (q) . Then, we have where Using the expression of Green function Eq.15 and Eq.16, we can integrate out the fermionic field and get the effective action S ef f [∆] with the partition function being Under the mean-field approximation, we have with ∆ satisfying Then the mean-field free energy (Ginzburg-Landau free energy) reads which gives the superconducting Free energy where F N means the mean-field free energy with zero ∆. In order to get the critical temperature of this secondorder phase transition, we only need to derive F SC to the second order of ∆, which is Here with the summation over α 1 α 2 β 1 β 2 implied, and Clearly, as long as has no magnetic field dependence since n 0 λ (k) is k independent as shown in Eq.48. According to Eq.49, the contribution to [Λ(k)] 11 α1α2β1β2 of first order of B vanishes since it is proportional to the cross product of two same gradients. Therefore, we have to the first order of B. Using Eq.48, Eq.49 and Eq.103 and to the first order of B, we have where the summation over α 1 α 2 β 1 β 2 is implied in the first expression and the last equality uses the fact that B •M ± (k) are traceless. Therefore, the Zeeman coupling does not contribute to the first order term of magnetic fields in the free energy. Eventually, we have 2 Simplification of S a 1 a 2 (r1, r2) In this part, we further simplify S a1a2 (r 1 , r 2 ) following Ref. [39]. Einstein summation notation for repeated indexes is used in this part. First consider the expansion of the following expression to the second order of |q|: where Then, we have where and K a1a2 0 has been carried out in Ref. [1], which has the expression where x = ln(2e γ β c /π), γ is Euler's constant, u = diag(sgn(c 1 ), 2mμa 2 ), and expressions of y 1,2,3 are in Appendix.A. Now we simplify K a1a2 1,ij . Firstly we show that K a1a2 and where 116) holds for any operation R in O h group, which leads to Among K a1a2 1 , the term including S 1 reads ,the term including S 2 reads and where λ , ζ(...) is the Riemann ζ function and the result is to the leading order of 1/(β c ) 1 and c /|μ| 1. Before further derivation, let us first estimate the order of those two terms in the isotropic case. In that case, m λ , ξ λ , n a1 λ and N λ (0) are independent of the angle. Then we can get the magnitude dependence for the following quantities: . Finally, we have compared with Then, by defining ( v λ z ) 2 and z 1,2,3 as in Appendix.A, we have where the expressions of z 1,2,3 are shown in Appendix.A. As a result, we have Substituting the expression shown above into Eq.100, we can get Eq.17. temporarily abandon the previous defined x = 2e γ β c π and define x = (τ, r) instead. We start from discussing the disorder average of a certain observable for the disorder term Eq.25 and the probability measure Eq.26. Given a non-interacting partition function with the random disorder where c, c are Grassmann fields if appearing in the action, x = (τ, r) and τ is the imaginary time. Suppose we want to compute thermal average of certain observable O i (c † , c) in the presence of the random disorder: where (137) and X denotes the imaginary time and position dependence of O i . Now, one may take the disorder average of O i (c, c) . However, due to Z 0 [V ] in denominator of Eq.136, the disorder average is hard to carry out directly. One way to overcome it is the replica trick. Since ln(Z[V, J]) = lim R→0 (Z[V, J] R -1)/R, we have (140) The the disorder average becomes where Here the probability measure P [V ] is defined in Eq.26, and the limitation of R should be taken as the limitation of the analytic continuity of the function of integer R's. Although the failure of this trick is possible since the limit of the analytic continuity may not be the real limit, the trick works well for most of the times. Next, we discuss the Feymann rule. Recall the noninteracting action, where Based on the expression, if using the fermion line corresponds to -[G 0 (k, ω n )] α1α2 δ a1a2 , which conserves the replica index and momentum (k, ω n ). The Fourier transform of the four fermionic field interaction generated by integrating out the disorder potential in Eq.142 reads This is clear that this effective (cc) 2 vortex corresponds to The vortex can be noted as a dashed line (disorder line) connected with two fermionic lines at either end. It conserves replica index a, spin index α and frequency ω n only for the fermionic lines and conserves spacial momentum k for the entire vortex. For any disorder average of fermionic operators (must contain equal number of c and c due to global U (1) symmetry), say n pairs of c and c, the graph must contain n fermionic lines without forming fermionic loops. Each of the n lines would give δ aa = 1, which eventually leads to a factor of R after the summation of replica index in the definition of the observable with replica index. That R cancels the one in the denominator of Eq.141. If a graph contains at least one fermionic loop, each loop would give a factor of R. After the limitation R → 0, it is clear that all graphs with fermionic loops would give zero. Therefore, we only need to consider graphs without fermion loops. In this case, we can simplify the disorder average of fermionic fields O i (c, c) by neglecting the replica index and considering the all graphs without fermionic loops of the following expression: Appendix G Derivation of Linearized Gap Equation with Disorder Eq.27 In this section, we derive Eq.27. We first derive the disorder-averaged normal state green function, and then derive the superconducting free energy with disorders, and finally get Eq.27. 1 Disorder-averaged Normal State Green Function The disorder-averaged Green function is defined as It can be expressed as where Σ(k, ω) is called the self-energy. Since we adopted the Born approximation, Σ(k, ω) only depends on ω and satisfies the self-consistent Born approximation (SCBA) equation: (151) Define to be the projection operators to ξ ± bands respectively. The normal state Green function without disorder is given in Eq.145, which can be expressed in terms of projection operators Using the expression of P λ (k), we have Since the second term can be rewritten as which is proportional to identity matrix. Similarly, we have (156) Then, by induction, we get that Σ(ω) is proportional to the identity matrix. Thereby, Eq.151 can be re-written as Now estimate the order of G 2 0 (ω, k ) term. The term can be re-written as where and are density of states of ξ ± bands at ε without spin index and ... Ω is the average over the solid angle. Then, we have where we assume that |ω| is no larger than the energy cutoff c which is small compared with chemical potential μ. This means, when dealing with the disorder problem, we will integrate the energy band first and then sum up the frequency, which is the same as the other way to the leading order of 1/β c 1. Since we assume with 1/τ d = γ 2 d πN F . Moreover, if choosing the isotropic limit, we can estimate the order of 0 by choosing the range of integration to be (-|μ|, |μ|), which is 0 τ d ∼ 1. In terms of the projection operators, the disorderaveraged Green function reads 2 Disorder-averaged Superconducting Free Energy The mean-field free energy with disorder reads where S is shown in Eq.134, and the order parameter is assumed to be uniform with respect to the imaginary time. It is clear that -∆ T (-k, q) = ∆(k, q). Then the mean-field superconducting Free energy reads where exp and Z 0 [V ] is shown in Eq.133. Since exp[-S ∆ ] = e W with W contains all the connected graphs, we have the disorder-averaged F SC According to Eq.148, W dis to the second order of ∆ reads where the summation of α 1,2,3,4 is implied, the internal fermionic loops are abandoned, and it is not necessary to specifically rule out the disconnected graphs to this order since all non-zero contribution is given by connected graphs. We adopt Born approximation to abandon all graphs with crossed disorder lines and only include the cooperon modes 48 . In this case, we have Tr[ Ḡ(k + q 2 , ω)D(k, q, ω) ḠT (-k + q 2 , -ω)∆ † (k, q)] , where , ω)D(k , q, ω) ḠT (-k + q 2 , -ω) . If the order parameter is uniform, then we can choose ∆(k, q) = ∆(k)δ q,0 . In this case, combining Eq.172 and the two equations shown above, we can get where 3 Further Simplification of FSC with Disorder First, recall the property of projection operator in our case: where the first two are general, the third one is due to the inversion symmetry of our model, and the last one is for i = 0, ..., 5. In the following, we will use the four relations again and again, and we will not refer to them for convenience. The trace term in Eq.177 can be expressed by the projection operator using Eq.164 to the leading order of c /(2Q c k 2 F ) 1: where γ λ (k) = P λ (k)γP T λ (-k), P λ (k)∆(k)P T λ (-k) = d λ (k)γ λ (k), d λ (k) = ∆0 2 + λ ∆1 2 a 2 k 2 sgn(c 1 )f Q , and D λ (k, ω) = P λ (k)D(k, ω)P T λ (-k). Using Eq.178, the equation satisfied by D λ (k, ω) reads Ḡλ (k , ω n ) Ḡλ (-k , -ω n )P λ (k)D λ (k , ω n )P T λ (-k) , where we also neglect the interband contribution as before, i.e. only keep terms to the leading order of c /(2Q c k 2 F ) 1. Since γ T λ (k) = γ T λ (-k) = -γ λ (k), we can show that -D T λ (k, ω n ) satisfies the same equation as D λ (k, ω n ), meaning that -D T λ (k, ω n ) = D λ (k, ω n ). Thereby D λ (k, ω n ) can be expressed in terms of Γ i γ with i = 0, ..., 5. Further, we have where Dλ (k, ω n ) is a scalar function. Using Tr(γ λ (k)γ † λ (k)) = 2, Eq.181 and Eq.182, we have Using Eq.152, we have U R P λ (R -1 k)U † R = P λ (k) and thereby U R γ λ (R -1 k)U T R = γ λ (k). Using this relation and the fact that d λ (k) and Ḡλ (k, ω n ) are O h invariant, we can get that Dλ (R -1 k, ω n ) satisfies the same equation as Dλ (k, ω n ), meaning that Dλ (k, ω n ) is O h invariant: Dλ (R -1 k, ω n ) = Dλ (k, ω n ). Moreover, according to Schur's lemmas 45 , we have k f (k)g k,i = 0 and k f (k)g k,i g k,j = k f (k)g 2 k,i δ ij if f (k) is O h invariant and i, j = 1, .., 5. Combining the previous facts, we can get where Γ i γΓ T i = γ for i = 1, ..., 5 is used. Then Eq.184 becomes (188) Then Eq.186 relates L and L0 : where the second equality uses Eq.180 and Eq.183, the third equality uses Eq.186, Ḡλ (k, ω n ) Ḡλ (-k, -ω n ) is real and definitions of L(ω n ) and L0 (ω n ), and the last equality uses Eq.189. Combined with Eq.177, we eventually have 4 Derivation of Eq.27 First we derive a general expression that will be used repeatedly later: where the first equality uses two things: (i) 0 ∼ 1/τ d and we neglect terms of order 1/(τ d μ); (ii) 1/(ξ 2 + 2 ) has a peak at ξ = 0 and drops fast away from the peak when is small. The range of the integration of ξ λ is from -∞ to ∞ since the energy cut-off c is included in the limit of the summation of ω n as |ω n | + 1 2τ d ≤ c . Using the formula derived above, we have (196) 