Ferroelectrets are piezoelectrically-active polymer foams that can convert externally applied loads into electric charge. Existing processing routes used to create pores of the desired geometry and degree of alignment appropriate for ferroelectrets are based on complex mechanical stretching and chemical dissolution steps. As a simple, cost effective and environmentally friendly approach, freeze casting is able to produce aligned pores with almost all types of the materials, including polymers. In this work, we present the first demonstration of freeze casting to create polymeric ferroelectrets. The pore morphology, phase analysis, relative permittivity and direct piezoelectric charge coefficient (d33) of porous poly(vinylidene fluoride (PVDF) ferroelectrets with porosity volume fractions ranging from 24% to 78% were analysed. The long-range alignment of pore channels produced during directional freezing was shown to be beneficial in forming a highly polarised structure after breakdown of air in the pore channels via corona poling. This new method opens a way to create tailored pores and voids in ferroelectret materials for transducer applications related to sensors and vibration energy harvesting. Piezoelectric materials manifest themselves by the generation of a charge when subjected to mechanical loads. The direct piezoelectric effect can be used to sense dynamic pressure, acceleration, or change in force and there is also potential for scavenging energy from motion in the surrounding environment σ is the permittivity of the material at constant stress. These figures of merit indicate that a low permittivity, and high piezoelectric activity are beneficial for sensor and energy during harvesting applications. Ferroelectric ceramics often exhibit high figures of merit for high sensor sensitivity or high energy capability, but they are relatively high density and exhibit poor mechanical flexibility. Ferroelectric polymers exhibit a relatively low piezoelectric activity, but they have a low permittivity, are lightweight and exhibit flexibility which is important for flexible electronics, wearables and stretchable electronics As an alternative to ferroelectric materials, ferroelectrets are a class of piezoelectrically-active foam manufactured from a non-polar porous polymer whereby gas, such as air, within the pore space can be subjected to electrical breakdown when subjected to a high electric field during a poling process. This process results in opposing electric charges being deposited on the upper and lower surfaces of the pores To create ferroelectret materials with a high electro-mechanical response, a cellular geometry or lens-shaped pore structure is desirable with pores that are elongated in the lateral extension; this can be typically > 10 μm long and only a few μm in height and large electric fields are required in very small pores. As a result, the majority of existing processing routes have focused on creating cellular or lens-shaped microstructures for ferroelectrets. Current processing routes include biaxial stretching of polymers with embedded foreign particles followed by chemically dissolution of the embedded foreign particles Freeze casting, also termed the ice-templating method Freeze casting has potential to be a cost effective and environmentally friendly approach, and it is feasible to tailor pore characteristics and form aligned pores in almost all types of materials: ceramics, polymers, metals and their composites In this work we used freeze casting of PVDF to produce a porous ferroelectret material. PVDF is a classical ferroelectric polymer which is partially crystalline and has the dipole moment perpendicular to the polymer chain, especially when the polar all-trans β-phase is dominant PVDF has been selected since freeze casting has been previously employed to form a PVDF microporous membrane with pore sizes ˂ 10 μm whose Young's modulus and water flux ability were explored Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF, 6010) powders were used from Solef® (Belgium) and used in the as-received condition. A schematic of the freeze casting process applied to PVDF is shown in Fig. The microstructure of the samples was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM6480LV, Tokyo, Japan). The bulk density of the sintered specimens was measured using Archimedes' principle. The piezoelectric strain coefficient (d33) was measured using a Berlincourt Piezometer (PM25, Take Control, UK) 0.5-6 days after corona poling. To confirm that the measured d33 values originate from the piezoelectric effect, the sample orientation was reversed to ensure the piezoelectric coefficient changes from a positive to negative polarity. The relative permittivity (ε) and dielectric loss (tan δ) were measured in the frequency rage of 1 to 10 6 Hz with an oscillating voltage of 1 Vrms using an Agilent Technology 4192A impedance analyzer. Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR) of the materials were recorded using a Perkin Elmer Spectrum 100 with a diamond universal ATR attachment. The phase structure of the ceramics was examined by X-ray diffraction (BRUKER D8-Advance, USA) with Cu radiation with 2θ ranging from 10 ̊ to 60 ̊. Microstructural observations of the freeze cast porous PVDF materials, phase analysis, dielectric spectroscopy and piezoelectric properties of the poled freeze-cast materials are now described. Figure Compared to commercially available ferroelectrets In general, larger pores are formed from the PVDF/DMSO solution at low PVDF concentrations during directional freezing, since the porous structure is a replica of DMSO crystals. However, for a low PVDF content of 0.2/10, the capillary force Figure However, the representative peak at 1234 cm -1 can be exclusively used to identify the γ-phase characteristic band Figure It is known that among the five crystalline polymorphs in PVDF, namely α, β, γ, δ and ε, the α and ε phases are non-polar with no electroactive response Since the piezoelectric properties of the ferroelectret originate from charged pores, it is of interest to evaluate their surface potential decay with time. The piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of all samples decreased rapidly from 0.5 to 6 days followed by a slow reduction in d33 values from 5 to 6 days measured after corona poling, as shown in Fig. In contrast to conventional processing methods to prepare ferroelectret materials with a cellular pore morphology, we have developed a new strategy to fabricate PVDF ferroelectret materials using an icetemplating method. The ferroelectret polymers are foams with charged pores and have the potential to be used in flexible wearable electronics, sensors and energy harvesters. The generated internal quasi-permanent macro-dipoles in the pore void can be induced by Paschen breakdown by application of a high electric field, where leads to piezoelectric properties. The ice-templated porous PVDF polymers formed by this new processing route exhibited elongated pore channels which were beneficial to achieve a high ferroelectret response. A maximum piezoelectric d33 coefficient of ~264 pC/N was obtained for a porous ferroelectret PVDF with a pore size of 25 μm, which is significantly higher than a d33 of 30 pC/N for dense -phase ferroelectric PVDF films. In conclusion, this is the first demonstration of freeze casting in terms of its reliability and stability in the formation of ferroelectret polymers with highly aligned pore structures. Future avenues can include further optimisation of pore geometry or exploitation of the technique on polymer systems with longer charge and thermal stability, along with energy generation and sensor performance for practical flexible transducer applications.