Using light to manipulate materials into desired states is one of the goals in condensed matter physics, since light control can provide ultrafast and environmentally-friendly photonics devices. However, it is generally difficult to realise a photo-induced phase which is not merely a higher entropy phase corresponding to a high-temperature phase at equilibrium. Here, we report realization of photo-induced insulator-to-metal transitions in Ta2Ni(Se1-xSx)5 including the excitonic insulator phase using time-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. From the dynamic properties of the system, we determine that screening of excitonic correlations plays a key role in the timescale of the transition to the metallic phase, which supports the existence of an excitonicinsulator phase at equilibrium. The non-equilibrium metallic state observed unexpectedly in the direct-gap excitonic insulator opens up a new avenue to optical band engineering in electron-hole coupled systems. In semimetals or small-gap semiconductors, valence-band holes and conduction-band electrons may form bound states or excitons via weakly screened Coulomb interaction. The excitons condensate in a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) or Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) manner, depending on whether the electron-hole coupling is weak or strong, and such a ground state is theoretically predicted as an excitonic insulator One of the prototypical candidates of excitonic insulators is 1T-TiSe2, which shows a charge-density-wave (CDW) transition accompanying a 2×2×2 structural distortion at ~ 202 K On the other hand, Ta2NiSe5, which has been supposed to be a unique candidate of excitonic insulators in the strong coupling (BEC) regime, has a quasi-one-dimensional structure composed of layers of Ni single chains and Ta double chains along the a-axis (Fig. When the temperature decreases, Ta2NiSe5 undergoes a semiconductor-to-insulator transition at 328 K, accompanied by a structural distortion from orthorhombic to monoclinic symmetry For the present study, we have performed the measurements of time-and angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (TARPES) to obtain such evidence that Ta2NiSe5 is actually an excitonic insulator from its pump-fluence dependence of the photoexcitation dynamics. Whereas several time-resolved studies on Ta2NiSe5 have been reported so far First, we demonstrate that Ta2NiSe5 (hereafter, 3% S-substituted Ta2NiSe5 used in this study is simply referred as Ta2NiSe5, since the electronic structure is almost not affected by the substitution as shown in Supplementary Fig. The overall features of the spectra are confirmed to be consistent with those of the spectrum taken at equilibrium, especially for the gap of ~ 250 meV, and this certifies that distortion of the spectra due to space charge effects, which could often occur for TARPES measurements with a low repetition frequency such as 1 kHz, has been minimized. After the arrival of the pump pulse, the spectral weight of the flat band immediately decreases and is transferred to the originally gapped region at EF within 100 fs. This temporal evolution is shown in Fig. Next, we show more impressive temporal evolution of TARPES spectra of Ta2NiSe5. Figures After the arrival of pump pulse, the intensity above EF immediately increases and relaxes with a time constant of 620 fs, which was estimated from the fitting to a Gaussian-broadened exponential decay function. Figures To examine the photo-induced metallic phase in more detail, we compare the time-integrated spectra before and after pumping shown in Figs. After photo-excitation, both the electron and hole bands cross EF at the same Fermi momentum kF ~ 0.1 A -1 as schematically shown by the red and blue parabolas in Fig. To confirm that the observed non-equilibrium metallic phase of Ta2NiSe5 can be associated with the excitonic condensation, we have performed comparative TARPES measurements on Ta2NiS5 and the results are shown in Supplementary Fig. Actually, the drop time of Ta2NiS5 seems to be faster than the temporal resolution of our TARPES measurements. However, if the electronic configuration of nickel in Ta2NiS5 is close to d 9 L, this corresponds to that of tantalum close to 5d 1 , and mechanism for the insulating behaviour of Ta 5d electrons must be considered. One possibility is formation of singlet bonds between the localized Ni 3d spins and Ta 5d electrons as well as S 3p holes (a schematic energy diagram is shown in Supplementary Fig. Lastly, we discuss the mechanism of the photo-induced insulator-to-metal transitions realised in Ta2NiSe5 and Ta2NiS5. Whereas the dynamics of the gap collapse is governed by the interactions of the gap origin, the realization of the non-equilibrium metallic phase cannot be understood straightforward, because no high-temperature metallic phase exists at least for Ta2NiS5. Recently, coherent phonon excitations coupled to the electronic Higgs mode has been found by the pump-probe optical measurements with the similar pump fluence to our TARPES measurements for Ta2NiSe5 The electronic structure could be modulated by these lattice displacements. The observed metallic phase could be a result from this modulation of the electronic structure. If the coherent phonons of the 3.7 and/or 4 THz mode found by Mor et al. were related to the observed photo-induced phase transitions, these modes give a time scale of ~ 130 fs from the half-cycle time of the oscillation. This time scale could be faster for Ta2NiS5, because these modes are expected to include oscillations of Se atoms High-quality single crystals of Ta2Ni(Se0.97S0.03)5 and Ta2NiS5 were grown by the chemical vapour transport method. Whereas the relatively large cleaved surface is necessary for TARPES measurements compared to static ARPES, since Ta2NiSe5 has a one-dimensional crystal structure, the large cleaved surface of the pristine Ta2NiSe5 enough for TARPES measurements was difficult to obtain. However, sufficiently large cleaved surfaces of 3% S-substituted Ta2NiSe5 and Ta2NiS5 could be obtained. This is why we used 3% S-substituted Ta2NiSe5 rather than the pristine Ta2NiSe5 for this study. The results of resistivity measurements by commercial physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) for the sample characterization is shown in Supplementary Fig. Photoemission measurements. In order to characterise the cleaved surfaces and compare with the previous results, temperature-dependent static ARPES measurements were performed with a He discharge lamp and a hemispherical electron analyser (Omicron-Scienta R4000) with the energy resolution of ~12.5 meV. The results were shown in Supplementary Fig. Data availability. The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on request. 