When a high electron mobility transistor is illuminated, the absorbed photons excite electron-hole pairs. The generated pairs are separated by the built in field in such a way that the electrons end up in the quantum well generating a photocurrent, while together with the holes that are swept towards the gate they generate a surface photovoltage. Here, we define photon-induced transconductance as the ratio between the surface photovoltage and the 2DEG photocurrent under identical illumination conditions. We show that this ratio directly yields the channel mobility and the 2DEG sheet charge density. The photocurrent and photovoltage may vary with the wavelength of the exciting photons. We examine and analyze optical spectra of this photon-induced transconductance obtained from an AlGaN/GaN heterostructure for a range of photon energies showing that the mobility is obtained only for excitation at photon energies above the wide bandgap energy. The method offers an optical alternative to Hall effect and to field effect mobility. Unlike Hall effect, it may be measured in the transistor itself. The only alternative that can measure mobility in the transistor itself measures field effect mobility, while the proposed method mesures the same conductivity mobility as measured by Hall effect. The main application of the high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) today is radio frequency (RF) and power switching. To describe the method, we will refer to the AlGaN/GaN structure, but the same applies to any other heterojunction. Figure Where q is the electron charge, and W and L are the width and length of the channel, respectively. Note that since the resistor is a quantum well, its resistivity is defined using sheet charge density rather than the common 3D charge density: where d, the thickness of the well, cancels out. Equation 1 has two unknowns, the mobility, and the optically generated 2DEG charge, which come as a product. To separate this product to its constituents, one has to know the value of one of them. In the commonly used Hall effect method, the charge density is obtained from the Hall voltage. The AlGaN layer may be viewed as a parallel-plate capacitor, to which plates two equal sheet charges of opposite signs were added (the 2DEG on the one side and the surface states on the other). The induced change in the sheet charge should be equal to the change in the electrical displacement across the AlGaN capacitor: Where ε AlGaN is the dielectric constant of the AlGaN, t AlGaN is the thickness of the AlGaN layer, and ∆Φ BB is the surface photovoltage, or the illumination-induced change in the AlGaN band-bending. Since ∆Φ BB is the illumination-induced change in the voltage between the gate and the source, and ∆I D is the illumination-induced change in the drain current, their ratio is an illumination-induced transconductance: In Eq. 3, all the parameters are known constants except for the mobility. Once we obtain the mobility, we use Eq. 1 replacing ∆I D and ∆n s with the dark current, I D , and the dark sheet charge density, n s , respectively, to obtain n s : To excite electron-hole pairs in the AlGaN layer, one has to illuminate with photons of energy exceeding the AlGaN bandgap. If the AlGaN layer were thick, all photons would be absorbed in the AlGaN and none would reach the GaN. However in the typical GaN HEMT, the AlGaN is ~ 20 nm, which is over an order of magnitude smaller than the reciprocal of the absorption coefficient. To use the method, only two photon energies are actually required. However, for an appropriate selection of the energies, we scanned the photon energies over the range between 3.7 and 4.4 eV to obtain spectra of the channel photocurrent and the surface photovoltage. In both the photocurrent and photovoltage spectra, the photo-response of the AlGaN was observed to start about 0.2 eV below the bandgap due to electro-absorption (the Franz-Keldysh effect) The Al 0.25 Ga 0.75 N(20nm)/Fe-doped GaN(2μm) structure was grown on SiC (CREE Inc.). Mesas were dry etched in chlorine-based plasma. After removal of the GaN cap layer, 100 nm of Si 3 N 4 was deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Contact pads and 3 μm wide gate trenches were dry etched in Si 3 N 4 . All the metal contacts were deposited using e-beam thermal evaporation. The source and drain Ohmic contact layer sequence was Ti(30nm)\Al(70nm)\Ni(30nm)\Au(100nm) annealed at 900 °C for 1 min in nitrogen ambient. The gate contact was a Ni(30nm)/Au(100nm) Schottky barrier. Spectral illumination and electrical measurement were carried out inside a dark Faraday box at atmospheric room temperature conditions. For illumination, we used a 300 Watt Xe light source. The light was monochromitized using a Newport Corporation double MS257 monochromator followed by order-sorting long-pass filters. During spectral acquisition, a constant voltage of 0.1 V was applied between the source and drain contacts. Current measurements were carried out using two Keithley 2400 source-meters. Surface photovoltage was measured using a Kelvin probe (Besocke Delta Phi GmbH). Details of the method have been given elsewhere.7 Photovoltage and photocurrent were obtained in the same setup under identical illumination conditions. Figure In the case of the more common Hall effect method, Hall voltage is used to obtain the carrier concentration, and then the carrier concentration is used to obtain the mobility from a conductivity measurement. In the proposed method as well, we measure conductivity (channel current) but decompose it using surface photovoltage instead of the Hall voltage. The results demonstrate that the method affords a reliable alternative to Hall effect that allows to measure many transistors on a wafer to obtain statistics and wafer mapping. September 2018