We have studied the properties of Si, Ge shallow donors and Fe, Mg deep acceptors in β-Ga2O3 through temperature dependent van der Pauw and Hall effect measurements of samples grown by a variety of methods, including edge-defined film-fed (EFG), Czochralski (CZ), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). Through simultaneous, self-consistent fitting of the temperature dependent carrier density and mobility, we are able to accurately estimate the donor energy of Si and Ge to be 30 meV in β-Ga2O3. Additionally, we show that our measured Hall effect data are consistent with Si and Ge acting as typical shallow donors, rather than shallow DX centers. High temperature Hall effect measurement of Fe doped β-Ga2O3 indicates that the material remains weakly n-type even with the Fe doping, with an acceptor energy of 860 meV relative to the conduction band for the Fe deep acceptor. Van der Pauw measurements of Mg doped Ga2O3 indicate an activation energy of 1.1 eV, as determined from the temperature dependent conductivity. Excellent performance improvements in Ga2O3 power electronics transistors have been made since the first demonstrations of Ga2O3 MESFETs 1 and MOSFETs. Finally, we report that the conductivity of CZ grown Ga2O3 pulled from a melt with 0.1 mole percent MgO shows an activation energy of 1.1 eV, consistent with the previous report. where Nc is the conduction band effective density of states, Nac the compensating acceptor concentration, Ndn the donor concentration, Edn the donor energy, F1/2 the normalized Fermi-Dirac integral of order one half, Ef the Fermi level, and U the interaction energy for two electrons on a single donor. The interaction energy, U, is the energy difference between two electrons on a single donor (DX -state) and two non-interacting electrons on two different donors (neutral state). U is negative, which indicates that the DX -state is the lower energy state, usually due to lattice distortion. For a normal shallow donor, U is a large positive number due to coulomb repulsion of the electrons, and the conventional charge neutrality equation is recovered. Using Equation 1 and the parameters listed in the first two entries of Table Considering the remarkable consistency in experimental results across a wide variety of growth methods, including EFG, CZ, MBE, and LPCVD, along with the fact that Si and Ge are both group IV elements on the periodic table, we can conclude that Si and Ge act as typical shallow donors in all of the samples presented here. In addition to measurements on Si and Ge donor doped samples, we have characterized Fe and Mg acceptor doped samples as well using the same four terminal van der Pauw and Hall effect measurement techniques. Due to the semi-insulating nature of these samples, high temperature Hall effect measurements were necessary to thermally activate carriers to enable Hall effect measurement. Measurements were performed under N2 gas flow in a tube furnace with an external silicon carbide heater and electromagnet. Figure Additionally, comparsion of our Hall effect data to appropriate models indicates that Si and Ge act as typical shallow donors in the β-Ga2O3 samples presented here, as opposed to shallow DX centers. Finally, Fe doped β-Ga2O3 is shown to remain weakly n-type by high temperature Hall effect measurements, with an acceptor energy of 860 meV relative to the Ga2O3 conduction band. See supplementary material for a summary of the relevant equations from the cited references used to fit the temperature dependent carrier density and mobility data. To fit the Hall data, first the temperature dependent carrier density is fit using the charge neutrality equation to make an initial guess at the concentrations and energies of the donors and acceptors in the material: Nc is the conduction band effective density of states, Nac the acceptor concentration, Ndn the donor concentration, Eac the acceptor energy, Edn the donor energy, and F1/2 the normalized Fermi-Dirac integral of order one half. Nc is calculated analytically 1 using an electron effective mass of 0.3mo. a *