We present a study of deep levels in CdZnTeSe radiation-detection materials. The approach relies on electrical methods that combine time and temperature evolution of the electric field and electric current after switching on the bias voltage. We also applied two optical methods to study the deep levels. The first method utilizes the temperature and temporal analysis of the electric-field evolution after switching off an additional light illuminating the sample at a wavelength of 940 nm. The second method involved measuring of the electric-field spectral dependence during near infrared illumination. We compare the results with those obtained with high-quality CdZnTe detectorgrade material. We conclude that the introduction of Se into the lattice leads to a shift of the second ionization level of the Cd vacancy towards the conduction band, as predicted recently by first-principles calculations based on screened hybrid functionals. T HE CdTe and CdZnTe materials have been effectively used for the production of X-ray and gamma-ray detectors operating at room temperature for applications in medical imaging, security and astrophysics The sub-grain boundaries are formed during the post-growth ingot cooling process due to the poor thermo-physical properties of the melt and the solidified material. These boundaries act as trapping centres and affect the electrical and transport properties of the material The Te inclusions/precipitates originate from the growth process under a Te-rich atmosphere. These secondary phases affect the quality and performance of the CdTe and CdZnTe (CZT) depending on their concentration and size Recently it has been shown that the addition of Se in the matrix results in an effective lattice hardening and a decreased Te inclusion/precipitate concentration with increased Se content. It was observed that CdZnTeSe (CZTS) crystals exhibit better crystallinity than CZT, which can lead to a larger yield of highquality material with comparable electrical and spectroscopic properties as for CdTe and CZT materials In the current study, we seek to determine the deep levels that participate in space-charge formation and determine the internal electric-field profile and its dynamics after application of a bias and incident radiation flux. We compare the results with our previous study of high-quality CdZnTe detector material to access the impact of Se on the defect structure. We applied two optical methods to study the deep levels. The first method was the temperature and temporal analysis of the electric-field evolution after bias application and after switching off an additional light illuminating the sample at a wavelength at 940 nm. The light source with this photon energy forms a positive space charge in the sample, which causes the optically induced polarization. The second method was the scanning of the electric-field response to incident infrared (NIR) illumination in the range of 900 -1800 nm. For this study we have chosen a CZTS sample with 10% Zn and 4% Se content. The material was doped with In and grown by the travelling heater method. The sample dimensions are 6.50 × 5.30 × 2.68 mm 3 . The sample surfaces were mechanically polished with Al 2 O 3 abrasive (surface RMS 2 nm) without any further chemical treatment. Gold and indium contacts were deposited on the large opposite sides by evaporation. The gold contact was equipped with a guard ring to separate the effects of the bulk and surface leakage currents during electrical measurements. The sample's energy band-gap was evaluated by a spectroscopic ellipsometry measurement using a commercial JA Woollam Co. RC2 ellipsometer. The ellipsometry was measured in reflection mode with three incident angles of 55 • , 60 • and 65 • , respectively. The range of spectral photon energies was between 0.80 and 6.42 eV. The dependence of a steady-state electric field on the photon energy for NIR illumination was measured using the Pockels effect. A standard setup consisted of a test light, two polarizers and an InGaAs camera. The sample was placed between two crossed polarizers, and the test light operating at a wavelength of 1550 nm was passed through the sample. The transmitted light I(x, y) was detected by an InGaAs camera. The distribution of the internal electric field is E(x, y) ≈ I(x, y). More details about the measurement setup are provided in our previous articles The light from the monochromator in the range 900 -1800 nm was used to scan the spectral dependence of the internal electric field in the sample with a step size of 25 nm. The monochromatic incident light had a constant photon flux of 1.0 × 10 15 photons cm -2 s -1 , and the measurements were carried out at room temperature (300 K). This technique allows one to determine the deep levels in the detector due to the measurement of the change of the internal space charge We measured the temporal and temperature evolutions of the electric field after application of the bias and switching off the LED at 940 nm and a photon flux of 5.5 × 10 15 photons cm -2 s -1 . The electric field was measured using the same standard setup as for the previous experiment. The incident light at the wavelength of 940 nm forms a positive space charge in the CdTe and CZT detectors, which induced polarization of the detectors The sample was mounted in a cryostat, and the temperature was varied between 280-330 K using a thermoelectric cooler with a temperature step of 5 K. The measurements were made in an argon atmosphere (1000 mbar). The spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements performed on the CZTS sample allows determination of the energy band.gap. We also measured the energy band-gap of the CZT material to determine the energy shift of the band-gap caused by the addition of Se. We fitted the experimental ellipsometry data by a theoretical model describing the CZTS/CZT materials. The CZTS/CZT materials were parametrized by a sum of Lorentz oscillators The time evolution of the electric field in the sample after bias application was measured in the temperature range between 280 -330 K. The selected profiles of the electric field are shown in figure Here, ε is the absolute permittivity, S is the sample area, and E cathode,anode is the electric field at the cathode and the anode, respectively. In our previous study of CZT The activation energies of the levels E i were evaluated from the temperature dependence of the time constants τ i describing the time evolution of the electric field under the cathode and space charge evolution by an Arrhenius equation where T is the absolute temperature, k B is the Boltzmann, h is the Planck constant, m * e(h) is the effective mass of electrons (holes) and σ i is the capture cross-section of the level. We determined an activation energy of 0.82 ± 0.04 eV from the temperature dependence of τ 1 describing the increase of the electric field under the cathode (black squares in figure The time constant τ 2 describes the decrease of the electric field under the cathode, which correlates with the electron transition from the valence band to the deep level. The data are plotted as black circles in figure level is E 2 = E v + 0.85 ± 0.03 eV with hole capture cross section σ p = 2.0 × 10 -13 cm 2 . The Arrhenius analysis was performed on time constants describing the space-charge evolution. The time constant τ 1 related to the increase of positive space charge leads to the deep level E 1 = E c -0.84 ± 0.03 eV with electron capture cross section σ n = 9.0 × 10 -12 cm 2 (red squares in figure Figures In summary, within the first two seconds after application of the bias, the positive space charge is built up by electron transitions from this level to conduction band. At the same time free holes are trapped at the level decreasing the electric current, which therefore seems to be composed mainly from holes. After the initial decrease the electric current starts to increase with time constant τ 2 = 3.74 sec at 300 K. An Arrhenius analysis of this time constant gives an activation energy of 0.92 eV. With a similar time activation energy and time constant, the electric field below the cathode decreases (positive space charge decreases -figure Additional analysis of time and temperature evolution of the electric current fully confirmed the conclusions obtained from evaluation of the electric-field dependences. Furthermore, the capture cross-section for holes at the electron trap E 1 = E c -0.83 eV could be evaluated from the data. The dependence of the selected electric-field profiles on the NIR illumination from the monochromator is shown in figure We monitored the time evolution of the electric field after switching off the LED at the wavelength of 940 nm. The illumination by 940-nm light causes an increase of the positive space charge in the sample. The electric field returns to the dark condition (steady state) after switching off the 940-nm LED. It means that the generated positive space charge is reduced due to the thermally activated electron transitions from the valence band to the deep level or due to the non-thermally activated electron capture from the conduction band to the deep level. The selected electric-field profiles at 0, 1, 5, 10 and 30 seconds after switching off the LED operating at 940 nm are shown in figure The corresponding time evolution of the electric field under the cathode is depicted in figure The activation energy of thermally activated transitions is identified using an Arrhenius plot (figure The main deep level in the CZTS sample responsible for the optically induced polarization is at E 2 = E v + 0.83 eV. The incident light at 940 nm caused the electron transitions from this level to the conduction band. It increased the positive space charge, which leads to the polarization of the detector. After switching off the illumination at 940 nm, the electron returns to this deep level from the valence band. It causes the decrease of the induced positive space charge. We conclude that both the energy and capture cross-section of this deep level are the same as those evaluated after bias application. The observed deep levels in CZTS material are shown in the energy scheme (figure The CZT material demonstrates the deep level at E c -1.10 eV determined by the same method It is apparent that the activation energies of electrons from electron traps E 3 and E 4 to the conduction band are higher in CZTS by 30 -80 eV when compared to CZT. The activation energy of electrons to the valence band of the hole trap E 2 is also higher by approximately 50 meV in case of CZTS. At the same time the energy band of CZTS is smaller by 70 meV compared to CZT (figure The deep level E 2 = E v + 0.83 eV in CZTS has probably the same origin as the level E v + 0.77 eV in CZT The deep level E 1 = E c -0.83 eV observed from temporal and temperature analysis is responsible for setting the electric field after the application of the bias in CZTS. Also, it is responsible for the positive space charge at steady state. The deep level E 3 = E c -0.73 eV in CZTS could have the same origin as the deep level E c -0.70 eV in CZT material. These levels exhibit weak optically induced electron transitions from these deep levels to the conduction band. We analyzed the deep levels in CZTS material responsible for the dynamics of the electric-field profile and electric current by a complex approach involving the optical and temporal and temperature measurements of the electrical field using the electro-optic Pockels effect. We identified three electron deep levels at E 1 = E c -0.83 eV, E 3 = E c -0.73 eV and E 4 = E c -1.18 eV and one hole deep level at E 2 = E v + 0.83 eV. The electron deep level E 1 = E c -0.83 eV is responsible for the positive space charge in the sample. We show that the sample can be depolarized using the hole trap at E 2 = E v +0.83 eV. The electron deep level E 4 = E c -1.18 eV is responsible for the strong optically induced polarization of the sample due to the trapping of photo-generated holes, which form a positive space charge. The deep levels in CZTS are compared to those measured in CZT by the same methods. We observed the theoretically predicted an energy shift of the second ionization level of the cadmium vacancy towards the conduction band in CZTS relative to CZT.