An advanced transmutation method is suggested that the long-lived Minor Actinides (MAs) in the spent fuel can be efficiently transmuted in the candidate Accident Tolerant Fuel (ATF). The transmutation of MAs is investigated through the Monte Carlo simulations in two potential fuel-claddings of ATF, U3Si2-FeCrAl and U3Si2-SiC. The critical loadings of MAs are determined through the Linear Reactivity Model (LRM) in order to keep the same reactivity as the current UO2-zircaloy system at the End of Cycle (EOC). In all cases, excellent transmutation efficiencies are found for the most important three MAs, 237 Np, 241 Am, and 243 Am, of which the total transmutation rates are around 60%, 90%, and 60%, respectively. If only the longest-lived isotope 237 Np is considered, one U3Si2-SiC assembly can transmute 237 Np from six normal assemblies. The loading of MAs has little influences on the neutronic properties, such as the power distributions inside an assembly and inside a fuel rod. The transmutation of MAs in the ATF assembly is shown to be more efficient and safe comparing with the normal assembly, while other important properties are kept, such as the cycle length and the power distribution. The Accident Tolerant Fuel (ATF) has been developed for the advanced nuclear fuel and cladding options after the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011. The US DOE NE Advanced Fuels Campaign has proposed many candidate ATFs and claddings SiC is another excellent candidate ATF cladding material due to its exceptional oxidation resistance in high temperature steam environment The management of long-lived radioactive products in the spent nuclear fuel is one of the most difficult issues in nuclear engineering. Actinides have the most important contribution on radioactivity in the spent fuel. The closed nuclear fuel cycle and the transmutation of some long-lived radioactive nuclides have been proposed as an alternative concept for solving the problem. Uranium and plutonium isotopes are extracted from the spent fuel in the closed fuel cycle. The extracted plutonium can be used to fabricate uranium-plutonium Mixed Oxide (MOX) nuclear fuel. The treatment of long-lived Minor Actinides (MAs) becomes one of the most urgent issues to reduce the long-lived radiotoxic isotopes in the spent fuel. Accordingly, the study of the transmutation of MAs is a significant work for the post-processing of the spent fuel. The transmutation of MAs has been largely studied in different types of reactors, such as typical uranium fueled Due to the high uranium density in the candidate ATF U3Si2, the previous study shows that As explained previously, SiC is also a potential accident tolerant cladding. Contrary to FeCrAl, the thermal neutron absorption cross section of SiC is much smaller than that of zircaloy. The present work performs on the transmutation of MAs in Candidate ATF U3Si2 combined with SiC cladding. Due to the spatial self-shielding in Pressurized Power Reactors (PWR), the periphery phenomenon in a fuel rod is evident The beginning of Section 2 gives a brief presentation of the fuel characters and the simulation method. The method to determine the percentage of MAs in the U3Si2 fuel and the methods to evaluate the transmutation efficiency of MAs are explained in this section. At the end of this section, the empirical formula obtained in the previous study is used to describe the radial distribution of power and isotopic concentration. Section 3 shows the results and corresponding discussions, including the percentage of MA in each fuel-cladding combination based on the cycle length analysis, the efficiencies of transmutation, and the radial distribution of power and isotopic concentration. The last section is summary and conclusions. A typical 17×17 PWR fuel assembly is used in the present study. Figure In general, the decay half-life of MA is very long. The half-lives of the five MAs considered in the present work are shown in Table In general, the Monte Carlo method is reliable for the neutronic calculations of new fuelcladding combinations. One important reason is that the nuclear data libraries with point-wise cross sections are essentially suitable for various neutron spectrums and self-shielding effects. The deterministic method is also available and maybe more suitable for the sub-layer power calculations if it is well benchmarked for the neutron spectrum and the self-shielding effect of a new system. In the present work, the main purpose is the comparison of the transmutation efficiencies among various fuel-cladding combinations loading different types and amounts of MAs. It is better to use Monte Carlo based code to have general comparisons among different schemes. All the neutronic simulations in the present study are performed with the Monte Carlo based code RMC The criterion to determine the percentage of MAs is the equivalent reactivity at the End of Cycle (EOC). The formula to calculate the average eigenvalue difference is where ∆k inf,b is the difference of infinity multiplication factor kinf between the investigated fuel-cladding combination and the reference case for batch b as a function of exposure eb. The fuel exposure (in EFPD) at the EOC from Table where C0 stands for the initial concentration of the MA added in the fuel, C1 and C2 are concentrations of the MA after depletion in the none MA loaded case and MAs loaded cases, respectively. We remark that no MA loading fuel has longer cycle length than transmutation fuel if all conditions are the same except the percentage of MAs. The concentration C1 is thus an approximation, which is calculated in no MA loading fuel assembly. Ref. With the above transmutation fuel-cladding combinations, the present work investigates their radial distributions of the power and the isotopic concentration in a fuel pellet. The geometry of the fuel rod is shown in Figure To describe the relative power distribution as a function of burnup, the previous work Taking the current UO2-Zircaloy fuel-cladding system as the reference, the differences on the reactivity induced by the different MA loading percentages (lp) can be obtained by using the Linear Reactivity Model (LRM). The infinity multiplication factor kinf for each lp is calculated with the Monte Carlo simulation. We note ∆k core for the difference of the multiplication factor in the core at EOC. ∆k core values are given in Table In order to determine the relationship between ∆k core and lp, the linear function is supposed: The coefficients and the coefficient of determination are shown in Table As expected, the percentage of loaded MAs in the SiC cladding case is larger than that in the FeCrAl cladding case because of the much lower thermal neutron absorption cross section of SiC. The good neutron economy of the SiC cladding is evident. The mixed MAs loading and 237 Np loading have different influence on ∆k core due to the different behaviors between 237 Np and other MAs. However, the difference on ∆k core is not obvious in the FeCrAl cladding combinations and in the SiC-2 cladding cases. For SiC-1 cladding assemblies, the difference is more evident than the FeCrAl and SiC-2 cases. This should come from the higher concentrations of MAs, which enhances the difference of neutronic behavior between 237 Np and other MAs. Anyway, this difference is generally very small, which is less than 4% among different loadings. The transmutation fuel assemblies have lower reactivity than the current assembly at the low burnup level. One of the most important reasons is the neutron absorption reaction of MAs. The opposite effect is observed at the high burnup level because the neutron capture reaction of fertile MAs produces the fissile isotopes, such as 242 Am, 242m Am and 244 Am with huge fission cross sections, especially at thermal region The transmutation efficiency of each MA in each case is calculated at the End of Life (EOL, equivalent to 1420 EFPDs) of the fuel assemblies. Table By using Eq. ( The above uncertainties are based on the rough comparison with the 4.58% enriched fuel. If the 4.9% enriched fuel with thicker cladding (to keep the same cycle length) is used as the normal case, the deviation of the total transmutation rate would be even less. By consequent, the C1 used in the present work has a very limited influence on the calculations of the total transmutation rate. For 237 Np, the total transmutation efficiency (given in Table A1 is the total radioactivity of the above discussed five MAs. It describes the radiation dose induced by the five MAs. The column about A1 in Table The transmutation is shown efficient to reduce the quantity of MAs. One of the drawbacks of transmutation is the production of heavier nuclei through several radiative capture reactions and potential β decays. An inventory of other residual MAs is performed to show their influence on the transmutation. The present work investigates the transmutation of long-lived MAs, the short-lived MAs, such as 242 Am and 241,242 Cm, are not of interest in this kind of studies. Table The atomic concentrations at the EOL of MAs, of which the half-lives are longer than 1 year, are given in Table The above subsections discussed the critical loadings of MA and the corresponding transmutation efficiencies in candidate ATF combinations. If the same percentages of 237 Np are loaded in the normal UO2-Zircaloy combination, the decrement of the reactivity of the core at EOC is shown in the last column of Table Due to the reduction of the cycle length when MAs are added in the normal UO2-Zircaloy case, the transmutation efficiencies at the same EOL burnup level as the candidate ATF combinations (42.5 GWd/t and 46.8 GWd/t for the cladding thickness of 350 μm and 571.5 μm, respectively) are shown in Table Except for the direct competition of neutrons between MAs and fissile nuclei, the hardening of neutron spectrum plays a role in transmutation because of more fast neutrons in the reactor. The (n,γ) cross sections of MAs generally decrease with the incident neutron energy, while some fission cross sections have sudden increase at fast region, such as those of 237 Np, 241 Am, and 243 Am The relative distribution of power in a fuel assembly is heterogenous because of the different local moderator-to-fuel ratios. Figure As new fuel-cladding combinations, investigations on their radial distribution of power are of importance because the radial power distribution can give feedback to neutronic calculations and multi-physics coupling study. The Monte Carlo simulations performed with the geometry shown in Figure On the other hand, an empirical analytical formula is shown to nicely describe the radial power distribution for the UO2-zircaloy system, three ATF U3Si2-FeCrAl cases, and the UO2/U3Si2-FeCrAl candidate ATF The investigations on the radial distribution of the isotopic concentrations of the major actinides, such as uranium and plutonium, provide information to neutronic calculation. For example, the radial power distribution is based on both the neutron spectrum and the isotopic concentration of the fissile isotopes. In the present studies, it is assumed that there is no mass transfer in the fuel. The principal fissile isotopes in a reactor are 235 U, 239 Pu, and 241 Pu in the uranium fuels. The radial concentration distributions of the major actinides for the above six transmutation cases are similar. The ratios of the relative concentrations of the major actinides in the transmutation fuels to the five normal cases (the current fuel-cladding system and four candidate ATF combinations) are shown in Figure The U3Si2 fuel is an excellent candidate ATF due to its high thermal conductivity and high uranium density. The stainless steel FeCrAl and the ceramic material SiC are treated as the potential ATF cladding materials due to their excellent oxidation resistance. Previous investigations showed the satisfactory neutron economy of U3Si2 based candidate ATF-Cladding combinations Based on the cycle length analysis by using LRM, the critical loading concentrations of 237 Np and the five mixed MAs loadings in the U3Si2 fuel are determined for 350 μm thickness FeCrAl cladding and 350 μm and 571.5 μm thickness SiC claddings. The Monte Carlo simulations show the excellent transmutation efficiency for MAs. For example, the total transmutation rates of the longest-lived MA 237 Np in the above six cases are equivalent to 3×10 6 years of natural decay time. If only 237 Np is considered, one U3Si2-SiC assembly can transmute 237 Np produced from six normal assemblies. In the mixed MAs transmutation cases, the net (total) transmutation rates are about (more than) 90% for 241 Am, which is the richest MA in the spent fuel considered in this study. The results show that the transmutation can be also an efficient method to reduce the quantity of 243 Am. The loadings of pure 237 Np lead to more production of plutonium, which can be recycled to fabricate MOX fuel. The negative contribution of pure 237 Np loading on other MAs is an advantage of this kind of design. The mixed MAs loading induces higher concentration of MAs. According to the analyses on total transmutation rate of MAs with half-lives longer than 1 year, the transmutation is efficient to globally reduce the MAs. Quite similar distribution of the power and burnup in a fuel assembly is observed for the six transmutation cases proposed in the present work. The loading MAs have small influence on the power distribution in an assembly. Further investigations are required to calculate the peak value of power in a core because it is the product of three peak factors, including the peak factor in an assembly investigated in the present work. Nevertheless, the transmutation cases almost do not change the efficiency of the fuel utilization from the point of view of the relative minimum burnup at EOL. The loading of MAs may have impact on core safety parameters, including the Doppler coefficient, the boron efficiency, and the effective delay neutron. More detailed investigations on these properties should be further studied before application. The loadings of MAs proposed in the present work have slight influence on the radial distribution of the power and isotopic concentrations of the major actinides. Therefore, the additional MAs do not change the distribution of the local power and burnup in the fuel. The competition of the reactions with the neutron between MAs and major actinides has less than 3% (1%) influence on the radial distributions of power and concentration(s) of 239 Pu ( 235 U, 238 U, and 241 Pu) during the serving life of the fuel assemblies. It should be noted that in general simulation results have certain uncertainties from the numerical methods, simulation model, nuclear data libraries, and so on. Many methods can be used to investigate the theoretical uncertainties. For example, the recent suggested uncertainty decomposition method is used to decompose the systematic and statistical uncertainties of a simple nuclear mass model 249 Cf 7.39E-14 2.48E-14 1.56E-11 2.08E-14 1.74E-14 3.38E-11 1.89E-14 3.05E-14 3.05E-11 3.28E-14 250 Cf 1.82E-13 4.16E-14 1.85E-11 3.06E-14 2.72E-14 3.83E-11 2.69E-14 5.75E-14 4.22E-11 5.63E-14 251 Cf 7.73E-14 1.88E-14 1.13E-11 1.42E-14 1.22E-14 2.36E-11 1.25E-14 2.51E-14 2.46E-11 2.56E-14