All-optical switching (AOS) of magnetic materials describes the reversal of the magnetization using short (femtosecond) laser pulses, and has been observed in a variety of materials. In the past decade it received extensive attention due to its high potential for fast and energy-efficient data writing in future spintronic memory applications. Unfortunately, the AOS mechanism in the ferromagnetic multilayers commonly used in spintronics needs multiple pulses for the magnetization reversal, losing its speed and energy efficiency. Here, we experimentally demonstrate 'on-the-fly' single-pulse AOS in combination with spin Hall effect (SHE) driven motion of magnetic domains in Pt/Co/Gd synthetic-ferrimagnetic racetracks. Moreover, using field-driven-SHE-assisted domain wall (DW) motion measurements, both the SHE efficiency in the racetrack is determined and the chirality of the optically written DW's is verified. Our experiments demonstrate that Pt/Co/Gd racetracks facilitate both single-pulse AOS as well as efficient SHE induced domain wall motion, which might ultimately pave the way towards integrated photonic memory devices. The high potential of all-optical switching for fast and energy-efficient memory devices was quickly recognized after it was first discovered in GdFeCo alloys about a decade ago 1 . With spintronic integration in prospect, the discovery initiated a rapidly developing field of research, initially aimed at unraveling the mechanism of this ultrafast switch. Soon it was discovered that the AOS in rare earth-transition metal (RE-TM) alloys is a purely thermal single-pulse process In this Letter, we experimentally demonstrate that the Pt/Co/Gd stack is indeed an ideal candidate to facilitate the integration of AOS with spintronics, and more specifically with the racetrack memory. We do this by demon- * Corresponding author: m.l.m.lalieu@tue.nl strating clear and robust single-pulse AOS in Pt/Co/Gd racetracks, and verifying that the DW's of the optically written domain are chiral Neél walls that can be moved coherently along the racetrack by means of the SHE. Moreover, the SHE efficiency in the Pt/Co/Gd racetrack is determined, predicting high DW velocities, and a proof-of-concept measurement is presented demonstrating on-the-fly data writing in the racetrack, i.e. showing single-pulse AOS while simultaneously sending an electrical current through the racetrack that transports the written magnetic domains by means of the SHE. The measurements were performed on Ta(4) / Pt(4) / Co(1) / Gd(3) / Pt(2) stacks (thickness in nm), which were deposited on a Si/SiO 2 (100 nm) substrate using DC magnetron sputtering (see Methods). The samples were patterned into 5 μm wide and 90 μm long wires using electron beam lithography and argon ion milling. Each wire contains typically two sets of lateral legs (2 μm wide) forming a Hall cross, used to measure the outof-plane magnetization by means of the anomalous Hall effect (AHE). All structures showed perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with square out-of-plane hysteresis loops and 100% remanence. First, the AOS in the magnetic wires was investigated by measuring the magnetization in one of the Hall crosses while at the same time it was exposed to a train of linearly polarized laser pulses (≈ 100 fs). The magnetization in the cross was measured using the AHE (see Methods), as illustrated in Fig. The result presented in Fig. With the AOS in the wires verified, transport measurements on the optically written domains were performed. The DW's in the Pt/Co/Gd wire are expected to be chiral Neél walls due to the iDMI Combining the SHE-driven transport of the optically written domains with the single-pulse AOS in the racetrack, we have been able to establish on-the-fly data writing. In such measurement, illustrated in Fig. As indicated in Fig. The result of the measurement with a laser-pulse repetition rate of 0.1 Hz and a DC current of +5.5 mA is shown in Fig. Additionally, the SHE induced DW motion was verified using a Kerr microscope, shown in the inset of Fig. A quantitative analysis of the SHE efficiency and DW chirality in the optically written domains was obtained by performing field-driven-SHE-assisted DW velocity measurements, as illustrated in Fig. The DW chirality of the optically written domains was investigated by measuring the effect of the SHE on the DW velocity for both up-down and down-up DW polarities, which were obtained by reversing the saturation and propagation fields. Figure Similar DW velocity measurements, now as a function of the current sent through the wire and for different driving fields H ext , were used to determine the SHE efficiency. The results of these measurements are presented in Fig. in which SHE represents the SHE efficiency, defined as the current density to effective (out-of-plane) field conversion factor, J DC the current density, v 0 the characteristic velocity and χ a scaling factor including the pinning potential and thermal energy. By doing field-driven DW motion measurements, the used current densities could be kept low enough to prevent a significant change in temperature by Joule heating, which was verified by fourpoint resistance measurements (not shown). As a result, the values of v 0 and χ can be assumed to be independent of the current density, and should be constant in the measurements presented in Fig. In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated that both single-pulse AOS as well as SHE induced domain wall motion can be combined in a Pt/Co/Gd racetrack with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, exploiting the chiral Neél structure of the DW's for coherent and efficient motion of the optically written domains. Ultimately, these results might pave the way towards integrated photonic memory devices, in which all-optical control of magnetism and spintronics meet. The samples used in this work were deposited on Si substrates coated with 100 nm of SiO 2 . The deposition was done using DC magnetron sputtering at room temperature. The base pressure in the deposition chamber was 10 -9 mbar. After deposition, Ti/Au contacts were deposited on top of the full sheet sample by a lift-off procedure using UV lithography (ma-N 415 photoresist). Lastly, 5 μm wide and 90 μm long wires were created using electron beam lithography to create a hard mask (ma-N 2410 photoresist) in combination with argon ion milling. The AOS was achieved using linearly polarized laser pulses with a central wavelength of 700 nm and a pulse duration of ≈ 100 fs. The pulse energy used throughout the work presented in the Letter was ≈ 12 nJ, while the laser spot had a radius (1/e Gaussian pulse) of ≈ 20 μm. The out-of-plane magnetization in the Hall crosses was measured using the AHE. To measure the AHE signal a small AC current (150 μA) is sent through the wire, and the resulting anomalous Hall voltage across the lateral legs is measured using a lock-in amplifier. In case of the Kerr microscope images a differential technique was used. In this technique first an image of the magnetic wire with the magnetization saturated in either the up or down direction was captured. This (background) image was then subtracted from the subsequent images in order to enhance the magnetic contrast. The result presented in Fig. In order to check that a homogeneous domain is written by the laser pulse, the measurement performed in Fig. Figure For |x| , |y| < 5 μm the AHE step size is constant and equal to saturation. The presence of these plateaus in both x and y scans demonstrates that for the full area of the laser spot where F (x, y) ≥ F 0 there is full AOS. In other words, this means that indeed a homogeneous domain was written in the Pt/Co/Gd wire by the laser pulse. As a side note, the full width at half maximum of the curves are equal to the size of the written magnetic domain along the x and y directions, showing a domain size of ≈ 20 μm and a slightly elliptically shaped laser spot, which was verified using wide field Kerr microscopy on a full-sheet sample. Lastly, it is known that when the pulse energy is sufficiently increased, the fluence at the center of the laser spot can be increased to a value above a second threshold fluence. At this fluence the lattice temperature is heated above the Curie temperature, resulting in the formation of a multidomain state on cool down. Such a multidomain state at the center of the written domain would show up as a dip in the AHE step size around (x, y) = (0, 0) in the measurement presented in Fig. In the main Letter it was mentioned that the legs of some of the Hall crosses were irradiated with Ga + ions in order to prevent pinning at the entrance of the cross. The pinning of the DW at the entrance of a non-irradiated Hall cross in a typical on-the-fly AOS measurement as performed in the main Letter is demonstrated in the measurement discussed in Supplementary Note 3 (Fig. The pinning of the DW at the entrance of the Hall cross happens due to the fact that the DW length has to increase in order to pass through the cross The effect of the Ga + ion irradiation on the DW propagation through the Hall cross is verified in the bottom row of Fig. First, a test measurement is performed without a DC current being sent through the wire, and using a repetition rate of 0.1 Hz to clearly see the effect of the single laser pulses. The result is presented in Fig. Figure Coming back to the AHE signal measured in the first Hall cross (top graph Fig. It can be seen that the very first laser pulse switches the magnetization from the initial saturated up (+1) direction to the down (-1) direction. In contrast to the case without the DC current, the AHE signal immediately rises again towards ≈ +0.5. This corresponds to the DW written to the left of the first Hall cross being transported along the wire by the SHE and getting pinned at the entrance of the cross (Fig. Taking a closer look at the AHE signal in the first Hall cross just before the third pulse arrives, it can be seen that the signal is not back to the saturation value of +1, but is close to +0.9 which corresponds to 95% of the first Hall cross having its magnetization up. Looking back at Fig. Lastly, the same on-the-fly AOS measurement is performed, but now with the laser spot aligned completely in between the two Hall crosses, as shown in Fig. C. D. Stanciu, F. Hansteen, A.V. Kimel, A. Kirilyuk, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh, and Th. Rasing, "All-optical mag-netic recording with circularly polarized light," Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 047601 (2007).