Computational modeling of titanium dioxide nanoparticles of realistic size is extremely relevant for the direct comparison with experiments but it is also a rather demanding task. We have recently worked on a multistep/scale procedure to obtain global optimized minimum structures for chemically stable spherical titania nanoparticles of increasing size, with diameter from 1.5 nm (~300 atoms) to 4.4 nm (~4000 atoms). We use first self-consistent-charge density functional tight-binding (SCC-DFTB) methodology to perform thermal annealing simulations to obtain globally optimized structures and then hybrid density functional theory (DFT) to refine them and to achieve high accuracy in the description of structural and electronic properties. This allows also to assess SCC-DFTB performance in comparison with DFT(B3LYP) results. As a further step, we investigate photoexcitation and photoemission processes involving electron/hole pair formation, separation, trapping and recombination in the nanosphere of medium size by hybrid DFT. Finally, we show how a recently defined new set of parameters for SCC-DFTB allows for a proper description of titania/water multilayers interface, which paves the way for modeling large realistic nanoparticles in aqueous environment. TiO2 nanoparticles are fundamental building blocks in photocatalysis TiO2 nanoparticles are most typically obtained from sol-gel synthesis. Several studies have proven that shape and size can be successfully tailored by controlling the conditions of preparation and by using ad-hoc surface chemistry The majority of the computational first-principles studies are devoted to bulk or surface slabs of anatase TiO2 Ours is a multistep/scale approach Furthermore, we would like to describe the interaction of such nanoparticles with light and their photoactivation producing energy carriers (excitons) and charge carriers (electrons and holes). The aim is to improve the general understanding of the processes at the basis of light energy conversion into chemical species with intrinsic redox potential that are those triggering the redox reaction at the oxide surface It is generally accepted that water, as the surrounding environment where titania nanoparticle work in photocatalytic processes, plays an active role In the following, we will present a critical review of our work, relative to the topics highlighted and discussed above: in Section 2, we present the Computational methodology; in Section 3, we describe how to obtain realistic spherical nanoparticles models; in Section 4, we discuss the description of the photoexcitation processes; and, in Section 5, we analyze how the water environment can be modeled with sufficient accuracy. To tackle the surface complexity of the TiO2 spherical nanoparticles and maintain a high degree of accuracy, different levels of theory are necessary. Nowadays, density functional theory (DFT) is the most used method to properly describe equilibrium geometries and electronic structures. However, many interesting features of the system are accessible only at certain size and time scale. For example, to explore the potential energy surface related to the different configurations of the TiO2 spherical nanoparticles through molecular dynamics and simulated annealing processes, an approximated method has to be used. The self-consistent-charge density functional tight-binding (SCC-DFTB) approach is a DFT-based quantum mechanical method, which retains a quantum description of the system at a considerably reduced computational cost. Thus, in addition to geometry optimizations and electronic structure calculations, SCC-DFTB also enables molecular dynamic simulations for large systems with a reasonable time length. The choice of a specific density functional is based on the aim of the study. Standard generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) functionals may be sufficient to describe equilibrium geometries or adsorption energies, however a correct description of the electronic structure of semiconducting oxides requires the inclusion of a certain portion of exact exchange. The use of such hybrid functionals in a plane-wave code is extremely cumbersome, thus localized basis function codes are preferred. The CRYSTAL14 code The optimized lattice parameters for bulk TiO2 anatase are 3.789 Å and 3.766 Å for a and 9.777 Å and 9.663 Å for c, respectively, for B3LYP and HSE06, which are in good agreement with the experimental values A 6√2 × 6√2 × 1 TiO2 anatase bulk supercell with 864 atoms was employed to model the exciton and the related distortions in the bulk. The (101) anatase surface has been taken as a reference for: (i) surface energies; and (ii) interaction with water. (i) We employed the CRYSTAL14 code and a minimal cell slab of ten triatomic layers with 60 atoms, where the periodicity was set along the [ The total densities of states (DOS) of the nanoparticles have been simulated with the convolution of Gaussian functions (σ = 0.005 eV) peaked at the value of the Kohn-Sham energies of each orbital. Projected densities of states (PDOS) are built using the following procedure, based on the molecular orbitals coefficients in the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO): summing the squares of the coefficients of all the atomic orbitals centered on a certain atom type results, after normalization, in the relative contribution of each atom type to a specific eigenstate. Then, the various projections are obtained from the convolution of Gaussian peaks with heights that are proportional to the relative contribution. The zero energy for all the DOS is set to the vacuum level, i.e., the energy of an electron at an infinite distance from the surface of the system. The self-consistent-charge density functional tight-binding method (SCC-DFTB) is based on the approximation of the Kohn-Sham (KS) DFT formalism. Assuming a second-order expansion of the KS-DFT total energy with respect to the electron density fluctuations, the SCC-DFTB total energy is defined as: where the first term contains the one-electron energies ! ! from the diagonalization of an approximated Hamiltonian matrix and represents the attractive part of the energy, whereas the second term approximates the short-range repulsive energy, given by the sum of the pairwise distance-dependent potential ! !"# !" (! !" ) between the pair of atoms α and β, and ∆! ! and ∆! ! are the charges induced on the atoms α and β, which interact through a Coulombic-like potential ! !" . For more information on the details of the SCC-DFTB method, see Refs. To perform the simulated annealing procedure, we carried out Born-Oppenheimer DFTB molecular dynamics (MD) within the canonical ensemble (NVT). The integration of the Newton's equations of motion has been done with the Velocity Verlet algorithm, using a relative small time step of 0.5 fs to ensure reversibility. A Nosé-Hoover chain thermostat with a time constant of 0.03 ps was applied to reach the desired temperature during the temperature-annealing simulations. The simulation time length of the annealing processes was made commensurate to the size of the nanosphere. Thus, we used a simulation time up to 45 ps for the 1.5 nm, 24 ps for the 2.2 nm, 14 ps for the 3.0 nm and 11 ps for the 4.4 nm nanosphere. In the case of the titania/water interface, each MD simulation has been performed for 25 ps. For the molecular dynamics of the titania/water interface, a 1 × 3 supercell anatase (101) slab (108 atoms) with a monolayer (ML), a bilayer (BL) and a trilayer (TL) of water, composed of 6, 12 and 18 water molecules, respectively, was used. The desired temperature of the thermostat was set to a constant low value (160 K) to avoid the desorption of surface water molecules. The extended X-ray adsorption fine structure (EXAFS) simulated spectra has been simulated via a Gaussian convolution of peaks (σ = 0.0005 Å) centered at the length of the distance between each Ti atom and other atoms (O or Ti) in the first, second, and third coordination shells. Projections have been computed considering only the distances centered on specific Ti atoms with a certain coordination sphere. In the text, we also report the surface-to-bulk ratio, defined as the ratio between the number of Ti and O atoms at the surface of the nanosphere and the number of Ti and O atoms in the bulk. We carved TiO2 spherical nanoparticles from large bulk anatase supercells. The radius of the sphere is set to a desired value and only atoms within that sphere are considered, whereas those outside the sphere are removed. Some very low coordinated Ti sites are found to be left at the surface of the model that must be removed or saturated with OH groups; analogously monocoordinated O must be removed or saturated with H atoms. Therefore, we use a number of water molecules to achieve the chemical stability of the nanoparticle. We try to keep the number of water molecules as low as possible. Since we aim at modelling nanoparticles of realistic size, we range from spheres with diameter of 1.5 nm up to 4.4 nm. These contain from 300 up to almost 4000 atoms. The exact stoichiometry of the prepared nanoparticles [(TiO2)101•6H2O, (TiO2)223•10H2O, (TiO2)399•12H2O, and (TiO2)1265•26H2O] is reported in Figure Structural relaxation by geometry optimization from the "as-carved" and chemically stabilized models is not an efficient approach because we found that it leads to local minimum structures, which are far from the global minimum one. For this reason, we have drastically changed our approach and decided to use a less computationally expensive, but still rather accurate, DFT-based method (DFTB) and to run some molecular dynamics simulations starting from the "as-carved" structures at increasing temperature (up to 700 K in some cases). This approach allows moving from the local minimum structure basin, close to the "as-carved" structure, and to further sample the configuration space. The thermally equilibrated structures obtained with this approach, and then fully relaxed, are much more stable to any surface modification (i.e., addition of a molecular adsorbate) because those are true global minima on the potential energy surface of the TiO2 nanospheres. This multi-step procedure can be rather easily and reasonably applied to nanospheres of increasing size, and certainly up to the one with a 4.4 nm diameter (~4000 atoms). Once the fully relaxed nanospheres are prepared, we can investigate structural and electronic properties at the DFTB level of theory. However, to assess the accuracy of DFTB in this specific context, we must perform a benchmark study against hybrid DFT model calculations. Those were obtained by full atomic relaxation starting from the DFTB thermally annealed and optimized spheres. Note that we performed this further DFT(B3LYP) optimization for all four nanospheres. For the very large one (~4000 atoms) it was an extremely expensive procedure, but we consider it worth because a successful benchmark against DFT will assess DFTB reliability for the investigation of structural and electronic properties of spherical TiO2 nanoparticles, as the basis for future developments. Our study is not only meant to validate the DFTB methodology with respect to an accurate hybrid DFT method, but also to highlight how the enhanced curvature present in small TiO2 nanospheres, in analogy to that in nanotubes and nanorods, affects both the coordination of the surface atoms and their geometrical environment. The different coordination types are illustrated in Figure The electronic properties of a semiconducting oxide with a relatively large band gap as TiO2 are not simply described by any quantum mechanical method. Standard DFT methods severely underestimate the band gap value, whereas hybrid DFT, as a consequence of the contribution of exact exchange in the exchange functional, provide values in closer agreement with experiments In the following, we present a comparison of the density of states (DOS) for the nanospheres of different size, as shown in Figure We may conclude this section devoted to the preparation and description of models for TiO2 spherical nanoparticles with the following summarizing remarks: spherical models carved from bulk supercells must be made chemically stable by the introduction of some hydroxyl groups that saturate highly undercoordinated sites; such rough models must then undergo a simulated thermal annealing (with DFTB method) that allows to achieve global minimum stable structures; those must be then further optimized either with DFTB or, to reach even higher accuracy, with a hybrid DFT method (here B3LYP). Although some fine details are different, the general picture we obtain with DFTB is rather similar to that from DFT(B3LYP), which assesses DFTB as a reliable method to investigate nanoparticles of large realistic size (up to 4000 atoms, corresponding to a diameter of 4.4 nm). This will allow for further future development and for the study of nanoparticles' surface functionalization. Titanium dioxide is still considered the reference system in the research fields of photocatalysis and photovoltaics for its ability to convert light photons into chemical energy. In the very beginning of the photocatalytic process in a semiconductor, when the material is irradiated with light, an electron/hole pair or "exciton", is initially formed In this regard, the quantum confinement of an exciton in a nanoparticle with a dimension of few nanometers may significantly influence its size and localization The study of photoexcited charge carriers in nanoparticles, although very demanding, must be performed by using a hybrid functional method (here B3LYP), since any other local or semilocal functional, and therefore also DFTB, would not properly describe the degree of electron/hole localization as a consequence of the self-interaction problem inherent in those methods We first recall the nature of the self-trapped exciton (STE) in bulk anatase, as shown in Figure Table Ti 3+ -Oax -ΔEtrap -0.59 -0.65 PL 1.99 1.96 Ti 3+ -Oeq -ΔEtrap -0.49 PL 2.35 In the spherical anatase nanoparticle model, the vertical excitation does not lead to a fully delocalized solution as for bulk (Figure When the charge carriers are far apart in different regions of the nanosphere, as in Figure Within an anatase spherical nanoparticle, we observed that the excess electron, when added to the system in its ground state geometry, fully delocalizes on all the Ti centers (see Figure We also investigated the electron localization at "deep traps", i.e., single atomic Ti sites in the nanosphere. The trapping energy and the electron localization are shown in Table On the contrary, the best electron trap is the fully coordinated Ti6c site on the subsurface (Ti6c subsurf in Table If we allow the hole to reach the curved surface of the nanosphere, several types of O sites are available for trapping. Among them, the most stable one is a two-fold O atom bridging a Ti5c and a Ti6c atom (O2c 5c-6c Table Finally, one should note that on the surface of a spherical nanoparticle there are several hydroxyl groups that may be stable hole trapping sites. However, as reported in Table Experimental data on trapped charges in anatase TiO2 are available in literature and they can be compared with calculations performed with the spherical nanoparticle models shown above. First, the calculated values of the trapping energy relative to a free electron in the conduction band are in good agreement with the experimental observations for both shallow (delocalized) Moreover, the degree of electron localization can be probed through the hyperfine coupling constant (aiso) with the next-neighboring 17 O in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrum. High values of aiso are expected for localized electrons, low values for delocalized ones. Indeed, the computed aiso is 6.7 MHz for an electron localized on the innermost Ti atom of the NP (see Ti6c core Table Finally, we employed the transition level approach To conclude this section devoted to the study of the life path of energy carriers (excitons) and charge carriers (electron and holes) in spherical TiO2 nanoparticles by hybrid DFT(B3LYP), we can summarize as follows: the photoexcited exciton self-trapping is a favorable process but electron and hole can then separate to migrate towards the surface where they can be highly stabilized. In particular, for electrons, we observed that deep trapping at subsurface fully coordinated Ti sites is favored with respect to shallow trapping in the core. In the case of holes, only deep traps were observed with a surface O2c (Ti5c-O-Ti6c) being the preferential hole trapping site. Computed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) parameters and optical transitions for those electron/hole traps are in good agreement with experimental data. Understanding the interaction of water with TiO2 anatase surface However, the study of the dynamical behavior of real size TiO2 nanoparticles (i.e., with diameter in the range 2-8 nm) As regards DFTB, from a technical point of view, its performance in the description of a certain system critically depends on the parameterization of the element-pairs interaction of the atoms involved. In the case of Ti-containing compounds, two different sets of parameters are available: "mio-1-1/tiorg-0-1" Recently, we have shown The correct description of the titania/water-multilayers interface is tightly related to the method ability of properly describing the two components separately. Bulk TiO2 lattice parameters have been calculated with DFTB and compared, in Table The molecular (undissociated, H2O) and dissociated (OH, H) adsorption of water on the anatase TiO2 (101) surface has been investigated at different water coverages (low, θ = 0.25 and full, θ = 1). The adsorption energy per molecule (∆! !"# !"# ) has been calculated with MATORG and MATORG+HBD and compared with DFT(PBE) results and experimental measurements in Table The study of complex and realistic TiO2 (nano)systems in aqueous environment is strongly related to the ability of the method used to describe the titania/water-multilayers dynamic behavior. To assess the performance of the MATORG+HBD set of parameters, first-principles simulations must be used as reference. We will use Car-Parrinello molecular dynamics (CPMD) DFT(PBE) simulations In Figure In the BL configuration, the water molecules of the first layer are bound to Ti5c atoms of the surface and form two H-bonds with two molecules of the second layer. The water molecules of the second layer (in blue in Figure The TL case is more complicated, since the third water layer (in green in Figure In the case of the ML (Figure Regarding the BL molecular dynamics simulation (Figure For the water TL (Figure In the sections above, we have presented an overview of current possibilities, as explored by our group with state-of-the-art DFT and DFT-based (DFTB) methodologies, for the description of realistic nanoparticles in water solution for photoapplications. It is evident that, when the size of the nanoparticle becomes relatively large (about 4000 atoms), to achieve a diameter size close to the smallest TiO2 nanoparticles used in practical applications (4.4 nm), the feasible limit for hybrid DFT calculations is almost reached. We showed that DFTB method can be used to obtain global minimum structures and to provide a reasonable description of both structural and electronic properties of these complex systems. Additionally, DFTB method is found to also yield a satisfactory accuracy for the description of the water layers on top of TiO2 surfaces, which allows introducing the water environment explicitly into the calculations. However, we have shown that the DFT level of theory is still mandatory when one wants to describe photoexcitation processes taking place in the nanoparticles or on its surface, such as exciton formation, charge carrier trapping or electron transfer to adsorbates. The following are available online at www.mdpi.com/link, Figure 