A novel symplectic integrator for Hamiltonian equations on S n 2 × When a differential equation inhibits geometrical properties, it is considered advantageous that numerical approximations to the equation inhibits the same properties. One such geometrical property is the symplecticity inhibited by Hamiltonian systems. In general, a symplectic space is a manifold M , equipped with a closed two-form ω. A differential equation where X is a vector field over M , is symplectic if the Lie derivative of ω, L X ω = dı X ω = 0 Numerical approximations preserving symplecticity are known as symplectic integrators. Symplectic integrators for ordinary differential equations evolving on vector spaces have been studied by many authors, see for instance The situation for non-flat geometries is more complicated, and usually relies on the particular geometry. This paper studies a special case of non-flat symplectic space, the product of copies of S 2 and the canonical symplectic space T * R M . This space is of special interest in spin-lattice dynamics. 2 × T * R m Hamiltonian systems evolving on M = S n 2 × T * R m arise in e.g. spin-latticeelectron (SLE) equations. See, e.g. The Hamiltonian for SLE-systems is (1) where m i is the mass of each individual particle, U L (q) is a potential depending on the positions q, and J ij determines the strength of the spin couplings, depending on the positions q. Typically, J ij (q) = J( q iq j ), but other functions are possible. The resulting Hamiltonian equations are (2) For the following, we define the matrix Symplectic integration of (2) has previously been obtained by splitting methods, see e.g. An alternative to the method in the present paper is the method used by Hellsvik et. al. in The novel integrator is implicit, as opposed to splitting-based methods. The integrators derived in this approach can in principle handle any Hamiltonian on S n 2 × T * R m . We will, however, focus on the case where the dependence on the momentum p can be split of as a quadratic kinetic term T L . The geometry needed for these integrators is as follows: (1) The symplectic manifold M is embedded into a Poisson manifold P , such that the image of M is a symplectic leaf. (2) P has a full realization as a canonical symplectic manifold N T * R d , i.e. there exists an onto Poisson map ψ : N → P . For the integrators to be well-defined, it is necessary to extend the Hamiltonian H into a function H : P → R. This extension is not-unique, however we will fix it to a "canonical" choice, following To proceed, we need to define the various symplectic and Poisson structures involved. 3.1. Symplectic structure on M . Let M = S×T * V , where S = S n 2 and V = R m . (In SLD m = dn, where d is the dimension of the lattice.) Both (S, ω S ) and (T * V, ω V ) are symplectic manifolds with ω V the canonical two-form and where A i is the standard area form on the ith sphere. Let ω be the product symplectic form Let where (ω V ) -1 is the two-vector obtained by inverting the symplectic form. ) ∂w i . On P , we obtain a Poisson bracket by taking the sum of the brackets on each component, In the above equation, d y and d w denote the partial differentials, e.g. Using canonical coordinates y = (p, q), the full form of the Poisson bracket is Proof. S is a symplectic leaf in R and T * V is a symplectic manifold. Having embedded M into P , we also need to extend vector fields on M to vector fields on P . Taking a leaf from We define a projection map ρ 1 : R → S by and a projection map ρ : It is a simple exercise to show that if H : M → R is a Hamiltonian with associated vector field, X H , then H = H • ρ : P → R is a Hamiltonian on P with associated Poisson vector field X H (y, w) = X H (ρ(y, w)). We call this vector field the extension of X H to P . Notice that X H is tangent to every symplectic leaf, not only to M . In particular, for the Hamiltonian of interest (1), the extended Hamiltonian takes the form where H 1 (w, q) = U L (q) + H m (ρ 1 (w), q). A realization of P = (R 3 ) n × T * V is obtained by using the Hopf fibration map for each copy of R 3 . equipped with the canonical symplectic structure. We write a point in N as (z 1 , z 2 , p, q) where Let a map ψ : N → P be defined by (N, ψ) is a full, canonical realization of P . Proof. Direct products of Poisson maps are Poisson. ψ is the product of n copies of the Hopf fibration and the identity map on T * V . Finally, the Hopf fibration is Poisson The pull-back of the Hamiltonian (3) has the form McLachlan, Modin and Verdier introduced Collective symplectic integrators for integration of Poisson systems. The main idea is to utilize a realization (N, ψ) of the Poisson manifold P and integrate the vector field of the pulled-back Hamiltonian H • ψ on N , with a symplectic method. We will denote this vector field by X H•ψ . To obtain a symplectic integrator on P (i.e. Poisson and preserves leaves), it is necessary that the update maps of the integrator maps fibers (of ψ) to fibers, and that the preimages of leaves are preserved. In our case We use coordinates (z, p, q) on N and assume we use a PRK method partitioned into these coordinates (i.e. each of the components z, p, q are integrated with (possibly different) RK methods.) Lemma 4.1. A PRK method, when applied to a lifted vector field X H•ψ , maps fibers to fibers. Proof. The group U (1) ×n acts on N with the following action. Write an element in U (1) ×n as e iθ = (e iθ1 , e iθ2 , . . . , e iθn ) where θ k ∈ [0, 2π]. The action is given by e iθ • (z 1 , z 2 , p, q) = (e iθ z 1 , e iθ z 2 , p, q). This action is linear and symplectic. Furthermore, it preserves fibers and is transitive on each fiber. As the action is symplectic and preserves fibers, it is a symmetry of the lifted vector field. Since the action is also linear, and only affects one of the components, the z-component, this symmetry is preserved by the partitioned Runge-Kutta method, and is also a symmetry of the update map. Since the action is transitive on each fiber, we can conclude that the update map maps fibers to fibers. Lemma 4.2. A PRK method, where the z-component is integrated with a symplectic RK-method, preserves the preimages of leaves. Proof. The symplectic leaves in P are given by w j = r j , for each j. By properties of the Hopf map (4), the preimages in N are given by for each j, and are invariant under the flow of the lifted vector field. As quadratic invariants, depending only on z, these are preserved by the PRK methods if the z-method is symplectic. We are almost ready to state the main theorem, except that we need a result on the symplecticity of Partitioned Runge Kutta methods with three components, where one component, z, corresponds to a symplectic space, and the two remaining components, p, q, correspond to Darboux coordinates of another symplectic space. The symplecticity of such partitioned methods is interesting in its own right, and the proof of this is presented in Section 5. Theorem 4.3. Assume the system on N is integrated with a partitioned Runge-Kutta method, where • z is integrated with a symplectic Runge-Kutta method. • (p, q) is integrated with a symplectic partitioned Runge-Kutta method and • The b-coefficients of the two methods above coincide. Then the resulting integrator is symplectic. Furthermore, it descends to a symplectic method on P , and the descended method restricts to a symplectic method on M . Proof. Sufficient conditions are that the "upstairs" integrator on M [MMV17] (i) is symplectic. (ii) maps fibers to fibers. (iii) preserves preimages of leaves in P . The method used for the numerical tests is a partitioned method where the z-variable is integrated with the implicit midpoint method and the (p, q)-variable are integrated with the Störmer-Verlet Scheme. As the midpoint method is a one-stage method, and the Störmer-Verlet method has two stages, it is necessary to use the reducible two stage method with Butcher tableau for the z-coordinate. In the following equations describing the integrators, we will use p, q,etc. for the values before a step of the integrator, and p, q,etc. for the values after a step of the integrator. The partitioned integrator, applied to the Hamiltonian (5) on N can, after identifications, be written: The z-variable is integrated with the midpoint method. As shown in We can thus write the scheme as For the collective integrators proposed, we integrate a Hamiltonian system where the space is partitioned into a product of two symplectic spaces. We therefore need to establish when a partitioned Runge-Kutta method is symplectic for this partitioning. 1 . The conditions are not specific to our application and are here presented in a more general setting. We first consider the case when a symplectic manifold is partitioned into N symplectic spaces, and each component is integrated with a (nonpartitioned) Runge-Kutta method. Consider an ordinary differential equation of the form (6) for the stage values. ( We are interested in which of these schemes preserve symplectic forms of the type where each J k is a n k × n k skew-symmetric, nonsingular matrix A standard application of the variational equation (see e.g. [HLW06, Chapter VI.4]) shows that for preserving symplectic forms of the above type it is sufficient that the integrator preserves all first integrals of the form where each B k is a symmetric bilinear function. Theorem 5.1. If the coefficients satisfy that then the scheme preserves all invariants of the form I(y) = N k=1 B k (y k , y k ). Another way of stating the assumption in the theorem is that each of the Runge-Kutta methods is symplectic in their own right, and their b-values all have to agree. Proof. Since I is a first integral, it holds that k B k (y k , f k (y)) = 0 for all y. Specifically, (8 Inserting (7) into we get The trick now is to substitute y k = Y k ih j a k ij F k j to get matching terms. We see that under the assumption b Now, let equation (6) be a Hamiltonian system given by H(y, z) of the form where J k are non-singular, skew-symmetric matrices. Applying the above Theorem to the variational equation yields the following corollary Corollary 5.2. If the coefficients satisfy that Then the scheme is symplectic when applied to the system (9) We now turn to the result actually needed in this paper, where each component is integrated with a partitioned Runge-Kutta method. Consider a Hamiltonian system (10) We integrate the system with an integrator of the form Theorem 5.3. Assume we apply the scheme (7) to the Hamiltonian system (10). If the coefficients satisfy for all i. then the integrator is symplectic. The proof of the theorem is analogous to the proof of 5.1, and is omitted. Numerical tests were done on a simplified version of the spin-lattice-electron equations. In this system, the position and velocity of each particle is confined to a one-dimensional space. Furthermore, we use periodic boundaries in space and only consider forces between neighbouring particles. The total Hamiltonian is where To effectuate the periodic boundary, we define z N +1 = z 1 and q N +1 = q 1 + L, where L is the period. where r m is the "rest distance" i.e. the distance at which U is minimal, and U 0 is a positive scalar which controls the strength of the interaction. The magnetic force strength is a cubic function, of the same type as given by Ma, Woo and Dudarev [MWD08] where Θ is the Heaviside step function, and r c is a cut-off distance. J 0 is a scalar which controls the strength of the magnetic interaction. In the numerical tests performed, the values were set to, L = N = 30 For initial data, we set where a k is chosen so that w k = 1. Figure The integrator was also tested with various stepsizes h from h = 1 16 down to h = 2 -19 over the time interval [0, 1] and the final values were compared with the 10 -6 10 -5 10 -4 10 -3 10 -2 10 -1 10 -12 