Recently, the crystal symmetry-protected topological semimetals have aroused extensive interests, especially for the nonsymmorphic symmetry-protected one. We list the possible nonmagnetic topological semimetals and develop their k•p Hamiltonian in all layer groups with multiple screw axes in the absence of spin-orbital coupling. We find a novel cat's cradle-like topological semimetal phase, which looks like multiple hourglass-like band structures staggered together. Furthermore, we propose the monolayer borophene and borophane with pmmn layer group as the first material class to realize such novel semimetal phase. A pair of tilted anisotropic Dirac cones at the Fermi level is revealed in the two-dimensional boron-based materials and the low-energy effective models are given. Moreover, akin to three-dimensional Weyl semimetal, the topological property of these cat's cradle-like Dirac semimetals can be verified by the calculation of quantized Berry phase and the demonstration of flat Fermi-arc edge state connecting two Dirac points as well. Our finding that borophene and borophane are cat's cradle-like Dirac semimetals is of great interest for experiment and possible applications in the future. The existence of massless Dirac fermion in graphene has brought about novel properties Recently, nonsymmorphic symmetries, including slide mirror or screw axes operations, are discovered to guarantee the so-called symmetry-enforced semimetal with certain integer electron filling, which is unavoidably formed because of the unique band connectivity In this paper, we generalize the nonsymmorphic semimetals due to band inversion mechanism from one screw axis to two or more screw axes for centrosymmetric and non-centrosymmetric systems, respectively. Both hourglass-like and cat's cradle-like Dirac semimetals, as well as nodal line semimetals are obtained. Those topological semimetal phases are clearly exemplified in 2D borophene (B 8 ) There are twelve layer groups with equal to or more than two screw axes in all the 80 layer groups. ) own four screw axes. However, in such three layer groups two of the four screw axes are along the diagonal direction, which does not result in the double degeneracy on the BZ boundary discussed below. Therefore, the number of the effective screw axes is still two. In fact, the two screw axes is also along the diagonal direction in the layer group (No. 60), which is thus ignored below. Depending on the presence or absence of inversion symmetry, the left eleven layer groups fall into two categories. The category I includes the layer groups (Nos. 44-48, 63, 64) with inversion symmetry, while the category II includes Nos. 21, 22, 54, 58. Without loss of generality, we take the simplest representative cases from each of the two categories, i.e., p2 1 2 1 2 (No. 21) and pmmn (No. 46), which only include two generators C 2x and C 2y , and three generators C 2x , C 2y and P , respectively. Here we first focus on the centrosymmetric layer group pmmn. The generators of pmmn contain two screw operations ( C 2x = {C 2x |a/2}, C 2y = {C 2y |b/2}) and an inversion operation P . Other symmetry operations of pmmn can been created as follow: Taking advantages of two screws axes and time reversal symmetry T , we first demonstrate the symmetryenforced double-degeneracy of Bloch states along the BZ boundaries which in fact forms a nodal line. Then we consider band inversion around Γ point and acquire an hourglass-like and cat's cradle-like Dirac semimetal states. Defining joint symmetry operations T x = C 2x T and T y = C 2y T respectively, and taking T x as example, it has the relation: When k x = 0 or π, T x communicates with H(k). On the other hand, we have T 2 x = e ikx . Thus, along MX path (k x = π), T 2 x = -1 will result in Kramers-like degeneracy. Similarly, T y can protect the two-fold degeneracy along MY path. Therefore, as shown in Fig. Based on the eigenvalues of three independent operations ( C 2x , C 2y , P ), we are going to give all possible symmetry-protected semimetal phases for the pmmn layer group. The eigenvalues of a symmetry operation for two inverted bands can either be the same or opposite. With three operations, we can get eight different cases in principle. By discarding two equivalent cases because of equivalence of x and y directions and one case that can not support semimetal state, we actually discover five distinctive topological semimetal states listed in Table Moreover, we are going to give two-band k•p models centered on Γ point for the five topological semimetal states. Generally, an effective k•p Hamiltonian can be expressed as: where τ 0 is the identity matrix and τ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices. The time reversal operation can be taken as a complex conjugation operator for the SU(2) symmetry, and a crystal symmetry operation can be written as τ z (τ 0 ) if its eigenvalues have the opposite (same) signs for two bands at Γ point. The constrains from those symmetries require the following conditions: Combing Eqs. ( The band structures for five topological semimetal states are exhibited in Fig. where the t i , m i and n i in Eqs.( In Fig. We can see its Z 2 = 0 in the Table which gives one pair of Dirac cones at (k x0 = ± m 0 /m 1 , k y0 = 0) and the other pair of Dirac cones at (k x0 = 0, For type-III, IV, V cases, a Dirac Nodal line (DNL) state emerges as shown in Figs. which can give a loop of band crossing points centered at Γ point, namely a nodal line, in the BZ. Although, those three DNL phases share the same k•p model, they response differently to external perturbations. For example, imposing a vertical electric field will break M z , P , C 2x and C 2y , but leave M x and M y . As a consequence, a general mass term δH is introduced and the DNL structure is destroyed. For type-III case, the mass term δH III = ∆ 3 k x k y τ x is introduced to Eq. ( For the non-centrosymmetric layer groups p2 1 2 1 2 in category II, two screw axes C 2x and C 2y can only protect Dirac points along ΓX and ΓY paths, respectively when the band inversion happens. Based on the eigenvalues of those two operations, it also gives type-I and type-II semimetal phases as listed in Table Recently, an atomically thin crystalline, 2D boron sheets named as borophene with different forms Meanwhile, several 2D Dirac materials with Dirac cones have been proposed in boron-based materials The geometric structures of B 8 and B 2 H 2 are displayed in Fig. Both crystal structures have two screw axes: C 2x = {C 2x |a/2} and C 2y = {C 2y |b/2} as displayed in Fig. The band structures of monolayer B 8 and B 2 H 2 are shown in Fig. For two Dirac points around the Fermi level, utilizing the k•p model given in Eq. ( The κ = ±1 is the valley index, u x,y are Fermi velocities near the Dirac points. The w y k y σ 0 describes the tilt term, which can give type-II Dirac cone if w y is larger than u y as what happens in monolayer WTe 2 . By fitting k•p model with DFT result, we get these velocities as u x =5.2×10 5 m/s, u y =8.0×10 5 m/s, w y =3.4×10 5 m/s for B 8 , and u x =7.7×10 5 m/s, u y =13.9×10 5 m/s, w y =3.5×10 5 m/s for B 2 H 2 . Obviously, a remarkable anisotropy effect can be realized in both of this system, which provides a platform to study the intriguing physical properties related to the anisotropy. Above we have shown the nonsymmorphic symmetry protected cat's cradle-like Dirac semimetal in B 8 and B 2 H 2 . Here we further reveal its topology nature by defining a k-dependent Berry phase and demonstrating corresponding nontrivial edge states. The Berry phase is defined as: where u n (k) is the periodic component of Bloch wave functions and the integral takes for all the occupied bands. With symmetry constraint, the Berry phase must be quantized to 0 or π modulo 2π To test the symmetry protected nature of Dirac cone in cat's cradle-like Dirac semimetal, we impose both biaxial strain and uniaxial strains along a and b directions for B 8 and B 2 H 2 . Under 10% strains, we can see the Dirac cone at Fermi level and band degeneracy along the BZ boundary are nearly unchanged. Thus, the strains can not change the cat's cradle-like bandstructure. However, we find that the position of Dirac point slightly moves toward Y (Γ) when the extensive strain is applying extensive uniaxial strain along a (b) axis. On the other hand, by applying a vertical electric field, the inversion symmetry (P ) and screw symmetries ( C 2x , C 2y ) are broken while the mirror symmetries ( M x , M y ) are remained. Thus, the degenerate bands at the BZ boundary are splitting as shown in Fig. In the end, we consider the impact of SOC effect, and find there is almost no visible difference between the band structures with and without SOC except at Dirac point where a extremely tiny gap is induced by SOC effects that make the systems to be topological insulators. The nontrivial gaps opened by SOC are 0.03 meV and 2.25 meV for B 8 and B 2 H 2 , respectively, which is negligible in experiment. Recent experimental discovery of Dirac semimetals in 2D materials beyond graphene, such as few-layer black phosphorus 