Eliashberg -McMillan theory of superconductivity is essentially based on the adiabatic approximation. Small parameter of perturbation theory is given by λ Ω 0 E F ≪ 1, where λ is the dimensionless electron -phonon coupling constant, Ω0 is characteristic phonon frequency, while EF is Fermi energy of electrons. Here we present an attempt to describe electron -phonon interaction within Eliashberg -McMillan approach in situation, when characteristic phonon frequency Ω0 becomes large enough (comparable or exceeding the Fermi energy EF ). We consider the general definition of electronphonon pairing coupling constant λ, taking into account the finite value of phonon frequency. Also we obtain the simple expression for the generalized coupling constant λ, which determines the mass renormalization, with the account of finite width of conduction band, and describing the smooth transition from the adiabatic regime to the region of strong nonadiabaticity. In the case of strong nonadiabaticity, when Ω0 ≫ EF , the new small parameter appears λ E F Ω 0 ∼ λ D Ω 0 ≪ 1 (D is conduction band half -width), and corrections to electronic spectrum become irrelevant. At the same time, the temperature of superconducting transition Tc in antiadiabatic limit is still determined by Eliashberg -McMillan coupling constant λ, while the preexponential factor in the expression for Tc, conserving the form typical of weak -coupling theory, is determined by the bandwidth (Fermi energy). For the case of interaction with a single optical phonon we derive the single expression for Tc, valid both in adiabatic and antiadiabatic regimes and describing the continuous transition between these two limiting cases. The results obtained are discussed in the context of superconductivity in FeSe/STO. Eliashberg -McMillan superconductivity theory is the most successful approach to microscopic description of the properties of conventional superconductors with electron -phonon mechanism of Cooper pairing It is widely known that Eliashberg -Mc Millan theory is essentially based on the applicability of adiabatic approximation and Migdal's theorem The discreteness of the lattice leads to the breaking of Migdal's theorem for λ ∼ 1 due to polaronic effects Recently a number of superconductors was discovered, where the adiabatic approximation can not be considered valid, and characteristic frequencies of phonons are of the order or even greater than Fermi energy. We bear in mind mainly superconductors based on FeSe monolayers, mostly the systems like single -atomic layer of FeSe on the SrTiO 3 substrate (FeSe/STO) We can perform our analysis either in Matsubara technique (T = 0) or in T = 0 technique. In particular, making all calculations in finite temperature technique, after the analytic continuation from Matsubara to real frequencies iω n → ε ± iδ and in the limit of T = 0, the contribution of diagram Fig. where in notations of Fig. In particular, for the imaginary part of self -energy at positive frequencies we have: In these expressions index α enumerates the branches of phonon spectrum. In the following we just drop it for brevity. Eq. ( In Eliashberg -McMillan approach we usually get rid of explicit momentum dependence here by averaging the matrix element of electron -phonon interaction over surfaces of constant energies, corresponding to initial and final momenta p and p ′ , which usually reduces to the averaging over corresponding Fermi surfaces, as phonon scattering takes place only within the narrow energy interval close to the Fermi level, with effective width of the order of double Debye frequency 2Ω D , and in typical metals we always have Ω D ≪ E F . This is achieved by the following replacement: where in the last expression we have introduced the definition of Eliashberg function α 2 (ω) and F (ω) = q δ(ω -Ω q ) is the phonon density of states. In the case, when phonon energy becomes comparable with or even exceeds the Fermi energy, electron scattering is effective not in the narrow energy layer around the Fermi surface, but in a wider energy interval of the order of Ω 0 ∼ E F , where Ω 0 is a characteristic phonon frequency (e.g. of an optical phonon). Then, for the case of initial |p| ∼ p F the averaging over p ′ in expression like (4) should be done over the surface of constant energy, corresponding to E F + Ω p-p ′ , as is shown in Fig. which in the last δ-function simply corresponds to transition from chemical potential μ to μ + Ω p-p ′ . We remind that, as usual, the energy zero is taken at μ = 0. After the replacement like (4) or (5) the explicit momentum dependence of the self -energy disappears and in fact in the following we are dealing with Fermi surface average Σ(ε) ≡ 1 N (0) p δ(ε p )Σ(ε, p), which is now written as: This expression forms the basis of Eliashberg -McMillan theory and determines the structure of Eliashberg equations for the description of superconductivity. For the case of self -energy dependent only on frequency (and not on momentum) we have the following simple expressions, relating mass renormalization of an electron to the residue a the pole of the Green's function Then from Eq. ( so that introducing the dimensionless Eliashberg -McMillan electron -phonon coupling constant as: we immediately obtain the standard expression for electron mass renormalization due to electron -phonon interaction: The function α 2 (ω)F (ω) in the expression for Eliashberg -McMillan electron -phonon coupling constant which gives the most general expression to calculate the electron -phonon constant λ, determining Cooper pairing in Eliashberg -McMillan theory. The discovery of high -temperature superconductivity in single -atomic layers of FeSe on SrTiO 3 (FeSe/STO) and similar substrates, with record -breaking, for ironbased superconductors, critical temperature T c , nearly an order of magnitude higher than in the bulk FeSe (see review in Ref. One of the major circumstances, which was not payed much attention in Refs. Consider a particular example of electrons interacting with a single optical (Einstein -like) phonon mode with high -enough frequency Ω 0 , which scatters essentially "forward". The general qualitative picture of such scattering is shown in Fig. where the typical value of q 0 ∼ 0.1 π a ≪ p F (where a is the lattice constant and p F is the Fermi momentum), leading to nearly "forward" scattering of electrons by optical phonons. Then the dimensionless pairing constant of electronphonon interaction in Eliashberg theory is written as: As in FeSe/STO we have in fact Ω 0 > E F the finite value in the second δ-function here should be taken into account. For simple estimates let us assume the linearized form of electronic spectrum (v F is Fermi velocity): ε p ≈ v F (|p| -p F ), which allows to perform all calculations analytically. Then, substituting (13) into ( where K 1 (x) is Bessel function of imaginary argument (McDonald function). Using the well -known asymptotic form of K 1 (x) and dropping a number of irrelevant constants, we have: for Ω0 vF q0 ≪ 1, and for Ω0 vF q0 ≫ 1. Here we introduced the standard dimensionless electron -phonon coupling constant: where N (0) is the density of electronic states at the Fermi level per single spin projection. The result ( Certainly, the results obtained above in the asymptotic of high frequencies Ω 0 depend on the form of momentum dependence in Eq. for typical p F ∼ 1/2a. In general case there always remain the dependence on the value of Fermi momentum and cutoff parameter (cf. similar analysis in Ref. In the limit of ( which simply signifies the effective interaction cutoff for Ω 0 > E F in antiadiabatic limit. This fact was stressed by Gor'kov in Refs. As was already noted above, the usual Migdal -Eliashberg approach is totally justified in adiabatic approximation, related for usual electron -phonon systems (metals) with the presence of a small parameter Ω D /E F ≪ 1 (or Ω 0 /E F ≪ 1 for the case of a single optical phonon with frequency Ω 0 ). The true parameter of perturbation theory in this case is given by λ(Ω 0 /E F ), which is small even for λ ∼ 1. The presence of this small parameter allows us to limit ourselves to calculations of a simple diagram of the second order over electron -phonon interaction considered above, and neglect all vertex corrections (Migdal's theorem) Our discussion up to now implicitly assumed the conduction band of an infinite width. It is clear that in case of large enough characteristic phonon frequency it may be comparable not only with Fermi energy, but also with conduction band width. Below we shall show that in the limit of strong nonadiabaticity, when Ω 0 ≫ E F ∼ D (where D is the conduction band half-width), in fact, we are dealing with the situation, when a new small parameter of perturbation theory λD/Ω 0 ∼ λE F /Ω 0 appears in the theory. Let us consider the case of conduction band of the finite width 2D with constant density of states (which formally corresponds formally to two -dimensional case). The Fermi level as above is considered as an origin of energy scale and we assume the typical case of half -filled band. Then (6) reduces to: For the model of a single optical phonon F (ω) = δ(ω -Ω 0 ) and we immediately obtain: Correspondingly, form and we can define the the generalized coupling constant as: which for D → ∞ reduces to the usual Eliashberg -McMillan constant Eq. ( In strong antiadiabatic limit of D ≪ Ω 0 , after elementary calculations we obtain from and from ( For the model of a single optical phonon with frequency Ω 0 we have: where Eliashberg -McMillan constant is: and λ D reduces to: where in the last expression we have introduced the new small parameter D/Ω 0 ≪ 1, appearing in strong antiadiabatic limit. Correspondingly, in this limit we always have: so that for reasonable values of λ (even up to a strong coupling region of λ ∼ 1) "antiadiabatic" coupling constant remains small. Obviously, all vertex corrections are also small in this limit, as was shown by direct calculations in Ref. which in a single phonon model reduces to: From these expressions it is clear that this imaginary part is not particularly important in this limit (being non zero only for ε = Ω 0 ), and equation for the real part of electronic dispersion: is now: Correspondingly, for ε ∼ ε p we can write: which for ε p → 0 gives a small correction to the spectrum: obviously reducing to a small (λ D ≪ 1) renormalization of the effective mass (26). Physically, the weakness of electron -phonon coupling in strong nonadiabatic limit is pretty clear -when ions move much faster than electrons, these have no time to "fit" the rapidly changing configuration of ions and, in these sense, only weakly react on their movement. All analysis above was performed for the normal state of a metal. The problem arises, to which extent the results obtained can be generalized for the case of a metal in superconducting state? In particular, what coupling constant (λ, λ or λ D ) determines the temperature of superconducting transition T c an antiadiabatic limit? Let us analyze the situation within appropriate generalization of Eliashberg equations. Taking into account that in antiadiabatic approximation vertex corrections are irrelevant and neglecting the direct Coulomb interaction, Eliashberg equations can be derived by calculating the diagram of Fig. which corresponds to the matrix of self -energy: where τ i are standard Pauli matrices, while functions of mass renormalization Z(ε) and energy gap ∆(ε) are determined from solution of integral Eliashberg equations, which in representation of real frequencies are written as where integral equation kernel has the following form: The only difference here from the similar equations of Ref. To determine the temperature of superconducting transition it is sufficient, as usual, to analyze the linearized Eliashberg equations, which are written as: For us it is sufficient to consider in these equations the limit of ε → 0 and look for the solutions Z(0) = Z and ∆(0) = ∆. Then from (44) we obtain: or where the constant λ was defined above in Eq. ( In antiadiabatic limit, when characteristic frequencies of phonons exceed the width of the conduction band, we can neglect ε ′ as compared to ω in the denominator of the integrand in (48), so that the equation for T c is rewritten as: where λ is Eliashberg -McMillan coupling constant as defined above in Eq. We have seen above, that in antiadiabatic limit we always have λ → λ D ≪ λ, so that in the exponent in (50) we can neglect it, so that the expression for T c is reduced simply to to BCS weak coupling formula, with preexponential factor determined by the half -width of the band (Fermi energy), while the pairing coupling constant in the exponential is determined the the general Eliashberg -McMillan expression (taking account the discussion above). In the model with single optical phonon of frequency Ω 0 Eq. ( Eq. ( where for λ is naturally defined by Eq. (30). We see, that in antiadiabatic regime, for D Ω0 ≪ 1 this expression reduces to (50), while in adiabatic limit D Ω0 ≫ 1 we obtain the usual expression for T c of Eliashberg theory for the case of intermediate coupling: Thus, Eq. (51) gives the unified expression for T c , which is valid both in adiabatic and antiadiabatic limits, smoothly interpolating between these two limits. Finally, we come to rather unexpected conclusionsin the limit of strong nonadiabaticity T c is determined by an expression like BCS weak coupling theory, with preexponential determined not by a characteristic phonon frequency, but by Fermi energy (the same conclusion was reached in a recent paper by Gor'kov In this work we have considered the electron -phonon coupling in Eliashberg -McMillan theory outside the limits of the standard adiabatic approximation. We have obtained some simple expressions for interaction parameters of electrons and phonons in the situation, when the characteristic frequency of phonons Ω 0 becomes large enough (comparable or even exceeding the Fermi energy E F ). In particular, we have analyzed the general definition of the pairing constant λ, taking into account the finite value of phonon frequency. It was shown, that in a popular model with dominating "forward" scattering it leads to to exponential suppression of the coupling constant for the frequencies Ω 0 ≫ v F q 0 , where q 0 defines the characteristic size of the region of transferred momenta, where electrons interact with phonons. Similar situation appears also in the usual case, when q 0 is of the order of inverse lattice vector, and phonon frequency exceeds the Fermi energy E F . We have obtained a simple expression for electron -phonon coupling constant, λ, determining the mass renormalization in Eliashberg -McMillan theory, taking into account the finite width of conduction band, which describes the smooth transition from adiabatic regime to the region of strong nonadiabaticity. It was shown, that under the conditions of strong nonadiabaticity, when Ω 0 ≫ E F , a new small parameter λ EF Ω0 ∼ λ D Ω0 ≪ 1 (D is the half -width of conduction band) appears in the theory, and corrections to electron spectrum become, in fact, irrelevant, as well as all vertex corrections. In fact, this allows us to apply the general Eliashberg equations outside the limits of adiabatic approximation in strong antiadiabatic limit. Our results show, that outside the limits of adiabatic approximation, in the limit of strong nonadiabaticity, for superconductivity we have a weak coupling regime. Mass renormalization is small and determined by effective coupling constant λ D , while the strength of the pairing interaction is determined by the standard Eliashberg -McMillan coupling constant λ ≫ λ D , appropriately generalized with the account of finiteness of phonon frequency (comparable or exceeding the Fermi energy). The cutoff of pairing interaction in Cooper channel in antiadiabatic limit, as we have seen above (cf. also Gor'kov's paper separate question, which remained outside our discussion, is the account of direst Coulomb repulsion. In standard Eliashberg -McMillan theory, in adiabatic approximation, when the frequency of phonons is orders of magnitude smaller, than Fermi energy, this repulsion enters via Coulomb pseudopotential μ ⋆ , which is significantly suppressed by Tolmachev logarithm This work was partially supported by RFBR grant No. 17-02-00015 and the Program of Fundamental Research of the Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences No. 12 "Fundamental problems of high -temperature superconductivity".