We investigated the bond, electronic and magnetic behavior of adsorption Yttrium(Y) atoms on Lithium (Li)(110) surface using a combination of Bond-order-length-strength(BOLS) correlation and density-functional theory(DFT). We found that adsorption Y atoms on Li(110) surfaces form two-dimensional (2D) geometric structures of hexagon, nonagon, solid hexagonal, quadrangle and triangle. The consistent with the magnetic moment are 6.66μB, 5.54μB, 0.28μB, 1.04μB, 2.81μB, respectively. In addition, this work could pave the way for design new 2D metals electronic and magnetic properties. The ultrathin metallic materials have received extensive research because of their attractive, and applications in superconductor The Li and Y metal are both the less electronegative. Due to Li metal is the proximity of its valence electron close to nucleus, which the remaining two electrons are in the 1s orbital, much lower in energy, and do not participate in chemical bonds Therefore, we have performed BOLS notation We calculate the electronic and magnetic distribution of an atomic layer Y metal on Li(110) surface using first principles. The optimal geometric configurations are shown in the Fig. According to the BOLS correlation, XPS experiment is using the determinations between surface and bulk atoms by energies shifts difference. It was realized that the energy shift depend on the atomic coordination number (CN) z. For a given DFT calculation of the energy shifts, we have the relation of energy level v of the energy shifts ΔE v (i) and the atomic CN z as follows is represents the energy shift of an atom in an ideal bulk. We achieve the quantitative information of bulk shifts ΔE v (12) = 3.661 eV which are from the Ru Using the parameters of the bond nature m, the atomic coordination z, the bond length d and the bond energy E, we can predict the bond energy ratio  , the local bond strain ε z , the bond energy density δE d and the atomic cohesive energy δE c : is an atomic coordination ratio with z b = 12 being the bulk standard. The bond energy ratio  is represents the bond energy strength. If the bond energy ratio  > 1, the bond energy is become stronger and electronic quantum entrapment; otherwise,  < 1, the bond energy is become weaker and electronic polarization. The local bond strain ε z is represents contract ratio of the bond length. The bond energy density δE d is represents strong and weak localization of electrons. The atomic cohesive energy δE c is atomic binding strength, and the product of atomic coordination z and bond energy E i . Before studying the adsorption Y atoms on Li(110) surfaces, we optimize geometric structures. We found the 2D structures of Y metal formation over Li metal substrates, as is shown in the Fig. In the XPS experimental measure, the atomic CN is using for determinations between surface and bulk atoms DFT calculations and BOLS notion were not only enables reproduction of the energies shifts and atomic CN z but also quantitative information on the bonding identities of the bond energy ratio  , the local bond strain ε, the bond energy density δE d and the atomic cohesive energy δE c . A more detailed understanding of the atomic bonding identities can be obtained from energies shifts of 4p energy level. Using Eq. (3), we can predict bonding identities of , ε i , δE c and δE d for structures hexagon, nonagon, solid hexagonal, quadrangle and triangle of adsorption Y atoms on Li(110) surfaces, as is shown in the Table On the basis of the stable structures of hexagon, nonagon, solid hexagonal, quadrangle and triangle, we systematically investigate their magnetic and electronic properties. To understand the magnetism of adsorption Y atoms on Li(110) surfaces, partial DOS are shown in the Fig. A more detailed understanding of the electrons and bonds dynamic process can be obtained from the charge transfer of Li and Y atoms. We using the Mulliken population analysis structures of the Y metal on the Li(110) surface; the blue charge density is negative, meaning that electrons are lost from those parts, and the red charge density is positive, meaning that electrons are gathered into those parts of the structures. As the reference of triangle structure, strong and weak localization of electrons is consistent with change of bond energy density of hexagon > solid hexagonal > nonagon > quadrangle, as shown in the Table In summary, we have performed BOLS notation and DFT calculations on the magnetic and electronic properties of adsorption Y atoms on Li(110) surfaces. The consistency between BOLS notation and DFT calculations clarified that: We find that the adsorption Y atoms on Li(110) surfaces form 2D geometric structures of hexagon, nonagon, solid hexagonal, quadrangle, triangle structure. Energy shifts of Y 4p level due to the under-coordination atoms enhance the bond energy. Furthermore, atomic bond energy may be attributed to the local bond strain, atomic cohesive energy and bond energy density. (ii) DFT calculated total magnetic moment M for geometric structures hexagon, nonagon, solid hexagonal, quadrangle, triangle are 0.28μ B , 1.04μ B , 2.81μ B , 5.54μ B , 6.66μ B , respectively. In accordance with magnetic moment, the energy difference of 4p level spin ΔE 4p (s) are 0.01 eV, 0.05 eV, 0.16 eV, 0.19 eV and 0.33 eV, respectively. We find that core band is equally important of the spin state. These findings may provide a new avenue for 2D metal nanomaterials in-depth theoretical and experimental investigations. a Negative sign indicates charge gain, otherwise, a charge loss occurs.