Short pitch deformed helix ferroelectric liquid crystals have numerous applications as active materials in displays, optical telemetry and biomedical devices. In this paper, we derive convenient analytical formulas to calculate the effective dielectric tensor of these materials beyond the space average approximation. By comparison with exact numerical calculations, we show that our formulas are remarkably accurate in predicting optical properties in virtually all practical situations, including the important case of large tilt angles, where the space average approximation breaks down. We also present a comparison between the two complementary approaches of expanding the mesoscopic dielectric tensor vs. the mesoscopic transfer matrix, by deriving an expression for the effective transfer matrix as an infinite expansion and explicitly calculating the corresponding effective dielectric tensor for the first time. Our results demonstrate that both methods give accurate predictions when two-photon scattering terms are taken into account. Liquid crystals (LCs) are extensively used as active elements in displays In this paper we present a comparison between the two complementary approaches of expanding the mesoscopic dielectric tensor vs. the mesoscopic transfer matrix, filling the gaps in the literature and using the same conceptual framework for both methods. In particular, we derive the following results: (i) an explicit expansion for the effective transfer matrix, (ii) two explicit expansions for the effective dielectric tensor, obtained with the two above mentioned approaches, (iii) simple analytical formulas for the effective dielectric tensor of short pitch, electrically driven, homogeneously aligned DHFLCs, which are extremely accurate within the whole range of practical material parameters. We then compare our analytical expressions to the exact numerical treatment. We anticipate that the two methods give similar accuracy and that just a few terms of the infinite expansions are generally sufficient to describe even LCs with large tilt angles in the whole range of realistic parameters. We also find that, while the transfer matrix approach method is more similar, in spirit, to the exact numerical approach we adopted, the Bloch wave method yields more convenient formulas, which will certainly be useful to the many researchers working in the area of DHFLCs. We point out that optical activity is not discussed, as we focus on the zeroth order of the short pitch expansion, where spatial dispersion is neglected. The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we describe in detail the transfer matrix approach for a generic dielectric grating consisting of a slab with its dielectric tensor periodic along a direction parallel to the slab surface. In Section III, we present the analytical results for the same geometry, derived using the Bloch wave approach. In Section IV, the previous results are used to derive explicit formulas for the effective dielectric tensor of DHFLCs. Finally in Section V, we compare the analytical results with an exact numerical approach. The last section is devoted to the conclusions. We consider the problem of a dielectric grating in a slab geometry oriented as in Figure where {E, H} is the electric and magnetic field-strength vector pair, k 0 = 2π/λ 0 is the wavenumber of light of wavelength λ 0 in free space, μ is the magnetic tensor and the dielectric tensor, both of rank 2. The wave vector in an isotropic ambient medium (denoted by subscript m) can be written in terms of a unit wave vector as k = k m k, where For uniform plane waves we neglect time-dependence, so that {E, H} = {E( k), H( k)} exp(ik • r). A wave thus defined propagates in an ambient medium for z < 0 and impinges on a dielectric slab of thickness D at the interface z = 0 at an angle of incidence θ i to the normal in the plane of incidence, which is spanned by k = (sin θ i cos φ i , sin θ i sin φ i , cos θ i ) and e p ( k) = (cos θ i cos φ i , cos θ i sin φ i , -sin θ i ). The azimuthal angle φ i is the angle formed between the plane of incidence and the xz plane (the grating plane). Hence, with e s ( k) = (-sin φ i , cos φ i , 0), In the case considered here, the magnetic tensor is assumed to be isotropic, while the dielectric tensor is assumed to be symmetric and periodic along x with period λ g . In formulas FIG. The quantity λ g is called the grating pitch and the corresponding grating wavenumber is defined as k g = 2π/λ g . We assume further the formalism of Kiselev et al. or equivalently, , where superscript T denotes the matrix transpose. The wave vector may be decomposed in similar fashion as is the lateral wave-vector component of the incident wave, which remains constant for all propagation by the appropriate boundary conditions for continuity of E p , H p M(ij) αβ are the differential operators with α, β ∈ {x, y}, and (x, y interchangeably 1, 2) where ε αβ is the two-dimensional Levi-Civita symbol, and the Einstein summation convention applies to β in the second expression. The in-plane periodicity of the dielectric tensor allows its expansion as a Fourier series The M(ij) αβ are thus periodic, so that ( where r p = (x, y, 0), and k n = k p + nk g = k 0 q n , with the dimensionless wave index vector x , q (n) y , 0), and q n = |q n |. From the definitions introduced, we note so that the rotation angle φ n diminishes with increasing order n. We will also make use of the vector p n = ẑ × q n . Substituting ( where nm ] αβ are the nth order Fourier coefficients of the 2×2 matrices M(ij) αβ exp(ik m • r), given explicitly by [M (11) nm [M (12) nm [M (21) nm ] αβ = ξ [M (22) nm in terms of the nth order Fourier coefficients It is straightforward to verify that, due to the dielectric tensor symmetry, we have the following relations for the transfer matrix terms In the ambient medium, Floquet harmonics are decoupled and represent forward and backward-propagating eigenwaves with wave vector z-components k ± z = ±k 0 n 2 m -q 2 n , respectively. From the inequality it follows that in the limit of gratings with very short pitch, i.e. as λ g /λ 0 → 0, all diffraction orders with n ≥ 1 correspond to evanescent waves, more strongly attenuated with increasing order. This also applies to Floquet harmonics inside the slab and it creates the possibility of defining an effective tensor to describe the optical properties of the grating, valid in the limit λ g /λ 0 → 0. However, it is important to recognize the fact that in the slab all Floquet harmonics are coupled by the presence of the grating. In this section we derive the analytical expression of an effective transfer matrix, M (eff) , that correctly describes the optical properties of the polarization grating in the limit λ g /λ 0 → 0. We use a procedure analogous to time-independent perturbation theory in quantum mechanics, where the transfer matrix M plays the role of the Hamiltonian. We split M into a unperturbed part, M0 , describing an average transfer matrix, and a perturbation, ∆ M(x), due to the grating and depending on the spatial coordinate x. Once expressed in terms of Floquet harmonics, we have Note that M, M 0 and ∆M are non-Hermitian and that the Floquet harmonics basis consists of 4-dimensional vectors, so that the elements of the above matrices are non-Hermitian, non-commuting 4x4 matrices. Keeping it in mind, we can still adopt a procedure similar to time-independent quantum mechanics perturbation theory. The "eigenvalues" of the unperturbed transfer matrix M 0 are the 4×4 transfer matrices M nn , describing the evolution of waves in the absence of any spatial modulation of the dielectric tensor. Our goal is to find the perturbed "eigenvalue" of the 0 th order Floquet harmonic, corresponding to the evolution of the four propagating waves. After a tedious derivation, we obtain, up to the third order in the perturbation, which can be explicitly calculated from equations ( which is finite and describes a homogeneous medium. The effective dielectric tensor is then defined by the relations [M (eff,11) ] αβ = -q (0) [M (eff,12) ] αβ = μδ αβ -q [M (eff,22) ] αβ = - linking the effective transfer matrix to the effective dielectric tensor. Some comments about equation ( Regarding the short pitch limit, we do not show explicitly the dependence on the grating's pitch and we only present the limit λ g → 0. We report explicit expressions for the effective dielectric tensor including the 2-photon scattering terms, and neglecting terms corresponding to scattering multiplicities N > 2. They have been obtained by calculating M (eff) analytically from ( (eff) zz can be found from (21b), zz from (21a), so that then αβ follows from (21c). Recalling that q n = q (0) x + nλ 0 /λ g , q (0) y , 0 , we finally find where the superscript TM indicates that the dielectric tensor has been obtained by a transfer matrix approach and α, β ∈ {x, y}. We point out that retaining only the first term in the r.h.s. of each of the equations above corresponds to the space average approximation (labeled TM00 in section V), while the summations correspond to the 2-photon scattering correction expressed as a Fourier expansion and are included in the approximations labeled TM21 and TM22 in section V, where the former includes only Fourier terms with n = 1 and the latter terms with n ≤ 2. The above formulas allow the calculation of an effective macroscopic tensor when the explicit form of the periodic mesoscopic dielectric tensor is specified. Equations ( In this section, we adopt the Bloch wave method described by Galatola where the superscript BW indicates that the above formula has been derived using a Bloch wave approach, and G (0) is the short pitch limit of the matrix defined in equation ( We note that (0) is simply the space average of the dielectric tensor, while the other terms represent corrections due to the coupling with evanescent waves mediated by the grating. We will show in section V that for our purposes the 3-photon scattering terms can be neglected. Using the above definitions and including only 0-and 2-photon scattering terms (as done in the previous section), we can calculate the components of the effective dielectric tensor explicitly as (eff,BW) αz (eff,BW) zz where the superscript BW indicates that the dielectric tensor has been obtained by a Bloch wave approach and, again, α, β ∈ {x, y}. We note that the series expansion ( In this section, we explicitly calculate the effective dielectric tensor of deformed helix ferroelectric liquid crystals, assuming the same slab geometry of Figure Under these assumptions the mesoscopic dielectric tensor takes the form where i, j ∈ {x, y, z}, δ ij is the Kronecker delta, ⊥ ( ) is the relative permittivity corresponding to the ordinary (extraordinary) refractive index, and δ = -⊥ . The director, d, is a unit vector giving the orientation of all molecules in each layer. Choosing the helix axis along x we have, where θ t is the tilt angle defining the director cone, and Φ is the azimuthal angle made by the director on the cone about the helix axis in a given smectic layer. We now consider small electric fields applied perpendicular to the helix axis and to the slab surface, i.e. E = Eẑ, This geometry is illustrated in Figure where φ(x) = k g x = 2πx/λ g . We can now explicitly calculate the Fourier coefficients presented in the previous sections. Since the above formula is only valid for small electric fields, we expand the analytical formulas in this section up to the second order in the Taylor expansion of the small parameter α E . We report here the results obtained with the Bloch wave method, while analytical formulas for the transfer matrix approach are presented in the Appendix. The effective dielectric tensor can be readily obtained from equations ( 2: Geometry of a DHFLC. In each smectic layer (delimited by dashed lines) the direction of the director is shown by an arrow. The resulting helical structure, with pitch λ g , has its axis along x. The tilt angle, θ t , and the azimuthal angle, Φ, are also indicated. The electric field, E, is perpendicular to the helix axis. Including terms up to the Fourier coefficient n = 2, we get corresponding to the BW22 approximation of section V. It is also useful to derive explicit expressions for the eigenvalues of the effective dielectric tensor, the rotation of the principal axes and the birefringence. The three eigenvalues are zz , with and the rotation of the principal axes around z, Ω, induced by the electric field is defined by From the above expression we can explicitly find where we defined Finally, the birefringence is given by ∆n ≡ + - The formulas in this section can be used to describe DHFLCs using an effective dielectric tensor approach and we will show in the next section that they are remarkably accurate within a wide range of parameters. We notice that in the absence of any electric field, i.e. when α E =0, equations (30) agree with the results in ref. In this section we benchmark the effective dielectric tensor approximations derived in the previous sections against exact numerical calculations for a DHFLC slab in the presence of an external electric field. In particular, we compute the birefringence, ∆n, the rotation of the optic axes induced by the electric field, Ω, and the transmission at crossed polarizers, adopting an approach similar to the one used in In Figures For ∆n, we see that at long wavelengths the exact results tend to the values calculated with the 2-photon scattering approximations, namely TM21, TM22, BW21, BW22. The various approximations predict the short pitch limit with different relative accuracies, all below 0.3%, with the Bloch wave method giving the best results. It is interesting to note that the exact birefringence is within 0.3% of its short pitch limit already for λ 0 =0.35 μm, corresponding to λ g /λ 0 =0.57. For the optic axes rotation the results are similar, except that the TM22 approximation gives much better results than in the birefringence case, as opposed to the TM21 which performs poorly. For the optic axes rotation, the exact results are within within 1% of the short pitch limit for λ 0 =0.55 μm (corresponding to λ g /λ 0 =0.36) and within 0.3% of the same limit for λ 0 > 0.9 μm. We conclude that the effective medium approximation is appropriate for our parameters and it is an excellent approximation even at much shorter wavelengths. In Figures exact results is noticeable at tilt angles between 30 • and 60 • , while the correct behavior is recovered in the limit of cholesteric LCs. We conclude that, for tilt angles > 15 • , 2-photon scattering terms should be included. The actual error committed in calculating the optical transmission (or reflection) of a DHFLC cell depends on the cell's thickness. In order to further prove this point, we show in Figure In general, we conclude that, while space average approximations are appropriate for small tilt angles, 2-photon scattering terms must be taken into account for DHFLCs with large tilt angles. We have also found that first order Fourier components are often enough to get good results across a wide range of parameters, but we recommend including second order Fourier terms, which make the agreement with the exact calculations almost perfect. Our results also confirm that 3-photon scattering terms can be neglected for most practical purposes. Another interesting conclusion is that both the transfer matrix and the Bloch wave method have the same when similar terms are taken into account in the effective dielectric tensor expansion. Finally, and most importantly, we have proven that the effective dielectric tensor description is remarkably accurate over a huge range of parameters, covering virtually all practical situations. Based on the results of this section, we recommend researchers to use formulas (30), which are extremely convenient and remarkably accurate. We have presented analytical formulas to calculate the effective dielectric tensor of short pitch DHFLCs with homogeneous alignment in the presence of an external electric field. This effective medium approximation is shown to be extremely accurate in the whole range of practically relevant parameters. We also compared two complementary approaches to the effective medium approximation, relying on an expansion of the mesoscopic transfer matrix and the mesoscopic dielectric tensor, respectively. In order to do that, we have derived for the first time an explicit expansion for the effective transfer matrix and calculated the corresponding effective dielectric tensor. Our results show that the two methods give similar results when terms describing similar physical processes are taken into account. In this Appendix, we present analytical expressions to calculate the effective dielectric tensor with the transfer matrix method, using equations 