The interaction between edge dislocations and Guinier-Preston zones in an Al-Cu alloy was analyzed by means of atomistic simulations. The different thermodynamic functions that determine the features of these obstacles for the dislocation glide were computed using molecular statics, molecular dynamics and the nudged elastic band method. It was found that Guinier-Preston zones are sheared by dislocations and the rate at which dislocations overcome the precipitate is controlled by the activation energy, ∆U , in agreement with the postulates of the harmonic transition state theory. Moreover, the entropic contribution to the Helmholtz activation free energy was in the range 1.3-1.8k b , which can be associated with the typical vibrational entropy of solids. Finally, an estimation of the initial shear flow stress as a function of temperature was carried out from the thermodynamic data provided by the atomistic simulations. Comparison with experimental results showed that the effect of the random precipitate distribution and of the dislocation character and dislocation/precipitation orientation has to be taken into account in the simulations to better reproduce experiments. Dislocations are the main carriers of plastic deformation in metallic materials. Since the critical shear stress to promote dislocation glide in the most suitable crystallographic planes in most metals is very low, one of the main goals of physical metallurgy has been to increase the strength of metals. One strategy to achieve this objective is to insert different types of obstacles in the dislocation glide plane to hinder dislocation glide. Grain boundaries can act as such obstacles in polycrystalline samples while forest dislocations that develop during deformation as a result of dislocation multiplication also impede dislocation glide. The presence of alloying elements in a solid solution and of precipitates also lead to strengthening, termed as solution hardening and precipitation hardening, respectively. Precipitation hardening is more efficient than solute hardening to increase the yield strength of metallic alloys The dislocation-precipitate interaction mechanism depends on the morphological details of matrix and precipitate. Large precipitates, normally incoherent with respect to the matrix, are usually considered impenetrable such that dislocations overcome the obstacle by the formation of an Orowan loop Continuum models can still be used to simulate precipitate strengthening in the case of shearable precipitates from a phenomenological perspective by increasing the lattice resistance or decreasing the dislocation mobility within the precipitate The limitation of these approaches is that they only provide the CRSS at 0K (MS) or at finite temperatures and very high strain rates (MD) but cannot directly address the finite temperature/quasi-static strain rate regime. Moreover, the dislocation-precipitate interaction is a thermally activated process The free energy barrier has to be evaluated to compute the activation rate using TST. This can be achieved by means of direct MD simulations or thermodynamic integration It is worth mentioning that the number of degrees of freedom in a system containing dislocations and precipitates is large, leading to very rough energy landscapes with many local minima. Hence, it is not guaranteed that the initial and final configurations used in multireplica simulations (which are usually obtained with MS) are representative of the actual physical mechanisms. For instance, MS simulations of the interaction of dislocations with Guinier-Preston (GP) zones in Al-Cu alloys predict the formation of Orowan loops around the precipitate The paper is organized as follows. Transition state theory and its harmonic approximation is presented in section 2. The framework of the atomistic simulations (including MS, MD as well as the NEB method) is given in section 3, while the simulation results, the identification of the thermodynamic parameters and the discussion can be found in section 4. A prediction of the flow stress based on the atomistic results is presented in section 5 and the main conclusions of this investigation are summarized in section 6. TST establishes that the rate Γ at which an ergodic system crosses a dividing surface is given by where ν is the fundamental attempt frequency, k b the Boltzmann constant, T the absolute temperature and ∆G the activation Gibbs free energy that has to be supplied by thermal fluctuations to cross the dividing surface In the case of a dislocation that tries to overcome an obstacle under the action of an applied stress τ , work is performed by applied stress to assist the transition by reducing the energy barrier. The activation Gibbs free energy necessary to overcome the obstacle can be expressed as where ∆H(τ ) is the activation enthalpy, which is a function of the applied stress, and ∆S τ (τ, T ) the activation entropy If the dislocation tries to overcome the obstacle at constant applied strain γ, the rate Γ can be expressed as where ∆F (γ) is the Helmholtz activation free energy. ∆F (γ) stands for the energy barrier imposed by the obstacle in absence of external work and it is given by where ∆U (γ) stands for the activation energy, which depends on the applied strain, and ∆S γ (γ, T ) is the activation entropy at constant strain, which may depend on the applied strain and temperature. It has been shown that ∆G(τ ) ≈ ∆F (γ) when the volume of the crystal is much larger than the activation volume of the thermally activated process and τ and γ are conjugate variables A consequence of this result is that activation entropy at constant strain (∆S γ ) and at constant stress (∆S τ ) are not the same, and they are related according to This expression can be simplified if the harmonic transition state theory (HTST) approximation is applicable to the particular phenomenon under study where ν ef f is the effective attempt frequency, which depends on the fundamental attempt frequency, ν, and on the entropic factor exp (∆S γ /k b ) The activation Helmholtz free energy ∆F (γ) can be computed as a function of the applied strain, as well as the fundamental attempt frequency (ν), calculating the rate to overcome an obstacle using MD simulations. In addition, the activation energy ∆U (γ) can be evaluated using the NEB method. This information can be used to estimate the entropic contribution as a function of the applied strain and temperature and to establish the applicability of HTST to this particular case. Atomistic simulations of dislocation-precipitate interaction were carried out in a parallelepipedic domain that contains a single dislocation and a GP zone. GP zones are monolayer disks of Cu atoms parallel to the cube faces of the FCC α Al lattice The edge dislocation was introduced in the domain by applying the corresponding Volterra's displacement field in the case of an isotropic elastic medium All atomistic simulations outline in the article have been carried out using LAMMPS Three different types of atomistic simulations were carried out to obtain the parameters needed to determine the rate according to the TST. The first one aimed at exploring the energy landscape of the dislocation-precipitate interaction as a function of the applied strain so the atomic arrangements before and after the dislocation has overcome the GP zone do correspond to minimum energy configurations. This is critical to accurately determine the energy barriers in the following steps but -due to the presence of many local energy minima in phase space -it cannot be achieved using standard energy minimization strategies. The second type of simulations use the equilibrium configurations at each strain level to determine the activation enthalpy using a multi-replica optimization procedure The energy landscape of the edge dislocation-GP zone interaction presents many local minima. Standard energy minimization procedures based on the application of the conjugate gradient algorithm does not ensure that global minima are attained before and after the dislocation has overcome the precipitate. This limitation was partially mitigated by the application of an iterative strategy that combines MS simulations with thermal annealing using MD. The procedure is detailed in Fig. The activation energy ∆U (γ) was computed as a function of the applied shear stress using the NEB method The initial configuration for each value of the applied strain (R 0 (γ)) was given by the minimum energy configuration at each stress obtained with the thermal annealing procedure detailed above. The final atomic configuration at each strain (R N (γ)), was obtained using MD simulations. To this end, the initial atomic configuration R 0 (γ) was held at 600 K until the dislocation overcomes the obstacle using the NVT ensemble and the atomic configuration after this event was taken as R N (γ) after minimization. The temperature of 600K was selected so the dislocation bypasses the GP zone in a reasonable time, affordable for MD simulations. It should be noted that the bypass mechanism (shearing of the GP zone by the dislocation) was identical to the one determined in the MS simulations combined with thermal annealing which were detailed above. The fast inertial relaxation engine (FIRE) The rate at which dislocations overcome the GP zone was determined through MD simulations as a function of the applied strain and temperature. The minimum energy configurations for a given strain obtained as indicated in section 3.1 were used as the starting point. MD simulations at constant shear strain were carried out using an NVT ensemble at 400, 450, 500, 550 and 600 K and the time needed for the dislocation to overcome the precipitate, t s , was determined for each case. Hydrostatic stresses were present in the NVT ensembles at finite temperatures due to thermal expansion but their influence on the rate at which the edge dislocation overcomes the precipitate is negligible because it is the shear stress that controls the driving force. To validate this hypothesis, MD simulations were carried out using a slightly different strategy. The temperature was initially increased from 0 K using an NPT ensemble and the volume was changed to reach the simulation temperature with negligible pressure. Afterwards, simulations were run during 100 ps within the NPT ensemble. Then, an NVT ensemble was used to perform the MD simulation at a given value of the applied strain until the dislocation overcame the GP zone to determine the rate. The rates obtained with this procedure were equivalent to those found using just the NVT ensemble. Eight independent simulations were carried out for each strain and temperature to account for the stochastic nature of the process and the average rate, Γ, was given by 8/ t s i . The strategy based on MS simulations at different strains followed by thermal annealing, detailed in section 3.1, provides the shear stress -shear strain behavior of the domain until the dislocation overcomes the GP zone, and it is presented in Fig. MS simulations without thermal annealing showed that the applied stress had always to increase to move the dislocation closer to the GP zone from the initial equilibrium condition, which is associated with a repulsion between the dislocation and the GP zone. The outward bowing of the dislocation observed in Fig. The MS simulations followed by thermal annealing after each strain increment showed subtle differences with the MS results in the initial stages of deformation. The stress initially increased with the applied strain as the dislocation approached the GP zone but then the dislocation was attracted by the GP zone. There was a slight reduction in the shear stress, indicating that the system was slightly overdriven, and the leading partial touched the GP zone, as shown in Fig. Similarly, the maximum energy stored in the system just before the dislocation shears the GP zone and after shearing are smaller than that predicted by MS. These results indicate that the energy minima resulting from MS alone probably comes from metastable states due to the rough energy landscape. As a result, the CRSS is overestimated by 20% by the MS simulations and more important the initial and final atomic configurations to compute the free energy barrier are different from the ones obtained after a careful search of the energy minima through thermal annealing. This effect leads to different physical mechanisms (Orowan looping vs. shearing) and to errors to determine the activation energy through the NEB method It should be noticed that the MS simulations in Fig. The activation energy ∆U (γ) was evaluated using the standard NEB and the basin hopping global optimization methodology (NEB-BH). The results of the calculations obtained with the standard NEB method are shown in Fig. In the case of the basin hopping global optimization, the four random perturbation applied led to different transition paths, which are plotted in Figs. The activation Helmholtz free energy ∆F (γ) was obtained using direct MD simulations. These calculations, as explained in section 3, provide the average rate, Γ, for the dislocation-GP interaction as a function of the temperature and the applied strain and the results are plotted in Fig. The activation energies obtained with the different atomistic techniques (molecular dynamics, standard NEB and basin hopping NEB) are plotted in Fig. where ∆F 0 denotes the obstacle energy barrier at zero stress (or strain), τ 0 is the CRSS to overcome the obstacle at 0K, and p (0 < p < 1) and q (1 < q < 2) are two parameters which depend on the randomness of the obstacle distribution in the glide plane and on the potential energy landscape of the interaction, respectively. For a perfect array of aligned precipitates the force exerted by the obstacle against the dislocation is constant and equal to τ bL, where L is the distance between obstacles along the dislocation line. Under these conditions, and taking into account that the precipitates form a regular array in our atomistic simulations, it is easy to show that p = 1 Similarly, the dependence of the activation energy, ∆U , with the applied shear strain γ obtained from MD simulations could be approximated by a linear function of γ in the same form as eq. ( where ∆U 0 and γ 0 stand for the activation energy at zero strain and the critical strain to overcome the obstacle at 0K, which are depicted in Table Table ∆U 0 (eV) γ 0 (%) 0.45 0.80 The activation entropy ∆S γ was obtained for the different values to the applied strain from a effective attempt frequency ν ef f , which was determined from the MD simulations (eq. ( The activation volume is defined as but the MD simulations presented above were carried out at constant strain γ and provided the value of ∆F (γ) instead of ∆G(τ ). Nevertheless, the relationship between both magnitudes can be obtained following Ryu et al. where τ m is the applied stress at the local minimum, which corresponds to point (ii) in Fig. leading to V 0 ∼ 12b 3 . This magnitude is in good agreement with previously reported values An estimation of the flow stress of Al alloys containing GP zones as a function of temperature can be obtained relying on the TST. The HTST rate can be related to the plastic strain rate, γp , through the well-stablished model proposed by Kocks where γp,eff stands for the reference plastic strain rate, that can be expressed as γp,eff = ρbLν ef f where ∆H 0 is the total barrier to overcome in absence of stress and temperature where τ 0 is the stress to overcome the barrier without any thermal contribution. As explained above, in the limit V >> V 0 and τ = f (γ), it can be assumed that ∆G(τ ) ≈ ∆F (γ), which also implies ∆H 0 ≈ ∆U 0 . Thus, eq. ( where τ 0 = 186 MPa is the CRSS to overcome the GP at 0K, according to Fig. The influence of the temperature on the shear flow stress, τ y of an Al -4 wt. % Cu alloy containing GP zones was measured by The differences between eq (18) and the experimental results in the low temperature regime can be attributed to different factors. Firstly, the precipitates in the experimental samples are randomly distributed and recent findings suggest that the Helmholtz activation free energy varies with the distribution of the precipitates in the material and it is smaller in the case of a random distribution as compared with a regular distribution Figure The effect of the random distribution of the precipitates can be partially overcome based on the results of Leyson and Curtin if τy(T ) τ 0 ≥ 0.55 The predictions obtained with eq.( The interaction of edge dislocations with Gunier-Preston zones in Al-Cu alloys has been studied by means of atomistic simulations within the framework of the transition state theory. The different thermodynamic functions that determine the features of the Guinier-Preston barrier were computed. A strategy based on molecular statics in combination with thermal annealing was used to simulate the mechanism of shearing of the Guinier-Preston zones as well as the initial and final configurations to determine the activation enthalpy through the nudged elastic band method. The activation Helmholtz free energy was determined by means of direct molecular dynamics simulations. It was found that the rate at which dislocations overcome the precipitate is controlled by the activation energy, ∆U , in agreement with the postulates of harmonic transition state theory. The entropic contribution to the free energy was in the range ∆S γ ≈ 1.3 -1.8k b and did not depend on temperature. Moreover, these values of ∆S γ are in agreement with the entropic contribution associated with the typical vibrational entropy of solids. The activation volume, V 0 = 12b 3 was determined from the activation Helmholtz free energy and was in good agreement with previously reported values Finally, an estimation of the initial shear flow stress as a function of temperature was carried out based on the Kocks' model 