A topological superconductor is characterized by having a pairing gap in the bulk and gapless self-hermitian Majorana modes at its boundary. In one dimension, these are zero-energy modes bound to the ends, while in two dimensions these are chiral gapless modes traveling along the edge. Majorana modes have attracted a lot of interest due to their exotic properties, which include non-abelian exchange statistics. Progress in realizing topological superconductivity has been made by combining spin-orbit coupling, conventional superconductivity, and magnetism. The existence of protected Majorana modes, however, does not inherently require the breaking of time-reversal symmetry by magnetic fields. Indeed, pairs of Majorana modes can reside at the boundary of a time-reversal-invariant topological superconductor (TRITOPS). It is the time-reversal symmetry which then protects this so-called Majorana Kramers' pair from gapping out. This is analogous to the case of the two-dimensional topological insulator, with its pair of helical gapless boundary modes, protected by time-reversal symmetry. Realizing the TRITOPS phase will be a major step in the study of topological phases of matter. In this paper we describe the physical properties of the TRITOPS phase, and review recent proposals for engineering and detecting them in condensed matter systems, in one and two spatial dimensions. We mostly focus on extrinsic superconductors, where superconductivity is introduced through the proximity effect. We emphasize the role of interplay between attractive and repulsive electronelectron interaction as an underlying mechanism. When discussing the detection of the TRITOPS phase, we focus on the physical imprint of Majorana Kramers' pairs, and review proposals of transport measurement which can reveal their existence. Topological phases in condensed matter are generally characterized by having unique surface properties which are dictated by the topological properties of the bulk. Probably the best known example of such a topological phase is the quantum Hall effect (QHE) Upon considering the presence of various symmetries, a rich variety of topological phases can emerge In the case of quadratic Hamiltonians of fermions The topological superconductor (TSC) phase of class D have attracted a lot of attention Systems belonging to class D lack TRS, and have a PHS which squares to 1. This PHS symmetry is special as it exists in all superconducting systems; it is an immediate consequence of the mean-field description of the Hamiltonian (see Sec. A natural question to ask is then: what is the superconducting analog of the topological insulator? This would be the time-reversal-invariant topological superconductor (TRITOPS) Experimentally realizing the TRITOPS phase in condensed matter systems is a major outstanding challenge in the study of topological phases. To date, however, attempts have been focused on realizing the TSC of class D. An important breakthrough in this context was the understanding that one can engineer this phase by combining relatively well-understood building block, such as magnetism, spin-orbit coupling and conventional s-wave superconductivity In this paper, we describe in detail the properties of the TRITOPS phase and review the various theoretical proposals for its realization and detection in one-and two-dimensional condensed matter systems. Borrowing from the experience of the class-D (TRS-broken) TSC, these proposals will follow the concept of engineering the TRITOPS phase. While magnetism breaks TRS, and should therefore be avoided The structure of this review is as follows. In the remaining part of this section we describe the general properties of the TRITOPS phase. In particular, we present simple models to describe the TRITOPS phase and use them to obtain and analyze the Majorana boundary modes. In Sec. 2, we construct the general Z 2 topological invariant for 1d and 2d systems in class DIII, which determines whether a given system is in the topological phase. In Sec. 3 we review various proposals for realizing the TRITOPS phase, by analyzing their microscopic models. We put emphasis on the role of repulsive electron-electron interactions in these proposals. In Sec. 4 we describe possible experimental signatures of the TRITOPS phase. Specifically, we examine different ways in which probing the Majorana boundary modes can distinguish the system from a topologically-trivial one. We then go on to analyze the braiding properties of Kramers pairs of Majorana bound states (the topological boundary modes of 1d TRITOPS) in Sec. 5. While the exchange of MKPs generally affects the ground-state manifold in a nontrivial way, the resulting unitary operation is nonuniversal unless additional symmetries are present. Finally we conclude and discuss future prospects in Sec 6. In Sec. 3, we shall be concerned with various microscopic models for systems in the TRITOPS phase. These models would attempt to capture correctly the microscopic properties of these system, such as spinorbit coupling, electron-electron interactions, and proximity effect. It is instructive, however, to start by introducing the most simple low-energy model which can describe the TRITOPS phase. First, such a model can serve as a convenient platform for examining the most generic properties of the phase; for example, its boundary modes. Second, as we will see, the low-energy degrees of freedom of all the above-mentioned microscopic models will be described by this much more simple model. This minimal low-energy model for the TRITOPS phase is given by where ψ R,s (ψ L,s ) is an annihilation operator of a right-(left-) moving fermionic mode of spin s. Here, ∆ + and ∆ -are two induced pairing potentials We are interested in systems obeying time-reversal symmetry. We define this symmetry operation, T, by its form when acting on the annihilation operators and on c-numbers where {σ i } i=x,y,z is the set of Pauli matrices. Namely, TRS reverse the propagation of the particle as well as its spin. The last part of Eq. ( In the absence of inversion symmetry, H is the most general low-energy quadratic Hamiltonian which describes a single-channel 1d system with TRS. If the system also had inversion symmetry, namely symmetry under x → -x, the Fermi momenta would necessarily be equal, k + F = k - F , which would allow for additional terms. For example, the term (V ψ † R↑ ψ R↓ + V * ψ † L↑ ψ L↓ + h.c.) is allowed by TRS, but as long as k + F = k - F , this term is suppressed at low energies due to momentum mismatch. Since the TRS obeyed by H squares to -1, the system belongs to symmetry class DIII of the Altland-Zirnbauer classification As we now show, the topologically trivial phases of H corresponds to the cases sgn(∆ + ) = sgn(∆ -), while the topologically non-trivial phase corresponds to the case sgn(∆ + ) = -sgn(∆ -) To calculate the overall phase, we begin by considering a spin-↑ electron moving to the right and being Andreev reflected at the NS interface into a spin-↓ left-moving hole. The Andreev-reflection amplitude for this process is given by e iφI = sgn(∆ + )e -i cos -1 (ε/|∆+|) In reaching this criterion for a zero-energy bound state, we have chosen to track the path of a rightmoving spin-↑. Exactly the same criterion is obtained by considering the time-reversed process, starting with a spin-↓ electron moving to the left. Namely, In the topological phase there are actually two zero energy MBSs at the system's boundary, in accordance with Kramers' degeneracy theorem. These are the so-called Majorana Kramers pair. Notice that, since ∆ + and ∆ -are real numbers, their sign can only change if they go through zero, namely if the energy gap closes. We can thus define a topological invariant for the Hamiltonian at hand which takes the value 1 when the system is trivial, and -1 when the system is topological. It might seemed that the obtained result depends on specific details in our construction. For example, we have implicitly assumed that the NS interface is smooth, and that the normal-metal stub is clean etc. As we demonstrate in Secs. 1.3 and 1.4, however, once we have established the existence of the zero-energy Majorana Kramers pair, it cannot be removed without closing the bulk gap or breaking the TRS. This means, in particular, that our conclusions do not depend on the specific microscopic details of the system's boundary. Some insight into the topological invariant, Eq. ( where ∆ s,t = (∆ + ±∆ -)/2 are the singlet and triplet pairing potentials respectively. Inserting this in Eq. ( Namely, the topological phase (ν = -1) is obtained when the triplet pairing term exceeds in magnitude the singlet pairing term. This formulation will help us understand the role played by short-range electronelectron interactions, when we discuss realizations of TRITOPS in Sec. 3. Before moving on, let us generalize the low-energy minimal model of Eq. ( This Hamiltonian describes two Fermi surfaces (contours), denoted by ν = ±, which are gapped by superconductivity. The modes belonging to each Fermi surface are parameterized by the angle θ, as depicted in Fig. , it is implied in Eq. ( To obtain the criterion for the system to be in the topological phase, we can use the result of the onedimensional Hamiltonian. We consider the system with open boundary conditions in the x direction and periodic boundary conditions in the y direction, while keeping the system infinite. In the topological phase, there should be helical counter-propagating modes along the edge [see also The low-energy continuum model of Eq. ( In constructing the lattice model, we are assisted by the conclusions drawn from the low-energy model of Eq. ( where ) is a vector of electron creation operators. Here, μ is the chemical potential, t is the hopping parameter, u is a spin-orbit coupling term, ∆ 0 is the on-site pairing potential, ∆ 1 is the nearest neighbor singlet pairing potential, and ∆ 1 is a nearest neighbor triplet-component pairing potential. Under time-reversal symmetry, the electron annihilation operators transform as Tc n T -1 = iσ y c n . One can then check that this model is time-reversal symmetric, TH Latt T -1 = H Latt , so long as the coefficients t, u, ∆ 0 , ∆ 1 , and ∆ 1 are real. We note that, for the sake of simplicity, we chose to consider a model having a U (1) spin-rotation symmetry. Indeed, the Hamiltonian is invariant under c n → exp(iθσ z )c n , namely this model conserves σ z . This, however, is not an essential property for a model describing TRITOPS. One can, for example, add a SOC term, iu c † n σ x,y c n+1 + h.c. (or alternatively an additional triplet-component pairing term, ∆ c † n σ x,y iσ y c †T n+1 +h.c.), thereby breaking spin-rotation symmetry completely, while still keeping TRS intact. As long as such a change does not close the superconducting gap, the topological properties of the model are not affected. While in most cases a σ z -conserving model will suffice to describe the relevant physics, there are some cases where breaking this symmetry will introduces new features to the phenomenology. An example of this will be the Josephson junctions between two superconductors in the TRITOPS phase (see Sec. We can make a connection with the low-energy model of Eq. ( where ξ s (k) = -μ -2t cos(ka) + 2u sin(ka)σ z ss and ∆(k) = ∆ 0 + ∆ 1 cos(ka) + ∆ 1 sin(ka). Here, c ks = L -1 2 k e ina c ns , with L being the number of sites in the system, and a the lattice constant. The four Fermi points, defined by ξ ↑ (∓k ± F ) = 0 and ξ ↓ (±k ∓ F ) = 0 [see also Fig. , where tan λ = u/t. Assuming the pairing potential is small compared with the bandwidth, 4 √ t 2 + u 2 (weak pairing limit), we can linearize the Hamiltonian by where the pairing potentials are given by ∆ + = ∆(k + F ) and ∆ -= ∆(-k - F ), and the Fermi velocity is given by This Hamiltonian is indeed the momentum representation of the low-energy model, Eq. ( We can thus use the topological invariant, Eq. ( It was mentioned earlier that the TRITOPS phase can be thought of as composed of two copies of the spinless p-wave superconductor. To see this connection, let us go back to the real-space representation, Eq. ( which is indeed two copies (denoted by s = ↑, ↓) of the Kitaev chain model To access the zero-energy Majorana Kramers pair (which are present when the system is in the topological phase), we consider the system with open boundary conditions. Following Kitaev where we have defined the Majorana operators α n,s = cn,s + c † n,s and β n,s = (c n,s -c † n,s )/i, which obey the commutation relations, {α n,s , β m,s } = 0 and {α n,s , α m,s } = {β n,s , β m,s } = 2δ mn . Importantly, the Majorana operators at left end of the chain, α 1↑ , α 1↓ , and at the right end of the chain, β L↑ , β L↓ , do not appear in the Hamiltonian. They therefore commute with the Hamiltonian and constitute zero-energy modes of the Hamiltonian. In terms of the original electron creation and annihilation operators these modes are given by Notice that under time-reversal symmetry, γ L,R → γL,R , γL,R → -γ L,R , namely the zero modes γ L and γL are in fact a Kramers pair (and similarly γ R and γR ). Finally, the lattice model of Eq. ( where n = (n x , n y ) runs over the sites of a square lattice, and where êα=x,y are unit vectors in the Cartesian directions. The spin-orbit coupling term, u αβ , and the triplet pairing term, ∆ 1,αβ , are now 2×2 matrices. For example, the case u αβ = uε αβ corresponds to a Rashba spin-orbit coupling term, with ε αβ the antisymmetric tensor, and the case ∆ 1,αβ = ∆ 1 δ αβ corresponds to a p x ± ip y superconducting term. We have mentioned above that once the system is in its topological phase, local perturbations to the Hamiltonian do not affect its topological properties, and in particular, do not split the zero-energy Majorana Kramers pairs. For quadratic Hamiltonians [such as those considered in Eqs. (1) and Consider a general quadratic Hamiltonian of fermions, written in the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) form, where a i is a fermionic annihilation operator for a single-particle states denoted by the index i (which generally includes spin), h is a hermitian matrix, and ∆ is a matrix which can be chosen antisymmetric, without loss of generality, thanks to the anticommutation relations of the fermions. As a result, the so-called BdG Hamiltonian, H, automatically obeys where τ α=x,y,z is the set of Pauli matrices operating in the space connecting particles and holes, and where K stands for the complex conjugation operator (namely KHK = H * and K w = w * ). The operator Ξ constitute a particle-hole symmetry of H, that is an anti-unitary transformation which anticommutes with the Hamiltonian. This particle-hole symmetry has consequences regarding the spectrum of H. It dictates that the eigenstates of H come in pairs having opposite energies, as follows from Eq. ( , where w T = ( u T , v T ). Now let us assume that, in addition to the above PHS, the system also obey a TRS. In terms of secondquantized operators, this means that the Hamiltonian is invariant under THT -1 = H, where T is an anti unitary symmetry defined by Ta i T -1 = U ij a j , TiT -1 = -i, with U being an N × N unitary matrix. Let us further assume that the TRS squares to -1, namely that applying it twice takes a i → -a i . This translates to U U * = -1. Together with the unitarity of U , this means that U is antisymmetric (In the case examined in Sec. 1.2, for example, one had U = iσ y ). Demanding that H is invariant under this TRS yields the following condition on the first-quantized BdG Hamiltonian, where U is a 2N × 2N unitary antisymmetric matrix given by U = diag{U, U * }. From Eq. ( To show that w and U w * are linearly independent, we use the fact that the TRS squares to -1 (and therefore U is antisymmetric) to arrive at namely w † (U w * ) = 0, which means that w and U w * are not only linearly independent, but in fact orthogonal. This two-fold degeneracy of the excitation spectrum is known as Kramers degeneracy, and we shall refer to such a degenerate pair of states as a Kramers pair. The combination of PHS and TRS dictates that a single isolated Kramers pair of zero-energy states cannot be gapped. To see this, consider a semi-infinite one-dimensional system with a gapped bulk, and having the above-mentioned symmetries. Two types of spectra are possible for such a system, shown in Fig. One might wonder what happens to the spectrum when the system nevertheless goes through a phase transition from the topological to the trivial phase. To answer that, we must consider the system with both ends having open boundary conditions (keeping the system infinite). In the topological phase, there necessarily exists another Majorana Kramers pair at the other end of the system. The spectrum then has (a) a system in the trivial phase. The spectrum is completely gapped. (b) a system in the topological phase. While the system is gapped in its bulk, at the end of the system there is a (Kramers) pair of zero-energy Majorana states. The two spectra cannot be adiabatically connected to each other without breaking either PHS or TRS. (c,d) Two types of spectra for a semi-infinite 2d system with PHS and TRS. The system has open boundary conditions in the x direction and periodic boundary conditions in the y direction. The gray regions represent the bulk states. In the trivial phase (c) the spectrum is completely gap, with no states crossing zero, while in the topological phase there are two counter-propagating states crossing zero energy. TRS relates states with opposite momenta and equal energy, and PHS relates states with opposite momenta and opposite energy. The combination of these symmetries -the chiral symmetry -relates states at the same momenta and opposite energies. The crossing cannot be moved or gapped without breaking either TRS or PHS. overall two pairs of zero-energy states. For an infinite system, the bulk energy gap which imposes a finite correlation length, prevents any local perturbation from connecting these pairs of states, which are located infinitely apart. When the system goes through a topological phase transition, on the other hand, the bulk gap closes, allowing for hybridization of the Majorana Kramers pairs at both ends, and consequently splitting of them to finite energy. When the bulk gap reopens in the trivial phase, the spectrum resembles that of Fig. More insight into the Majorana Kramers pair and its topological protection can be gained from the socalled time-reversal anomaly Consider a system in the TRITOPS phase. In order to focus on a single MKP, let us consider the system in a semi-infinite geometry, such that it has open boundary conditions at its left end. The MKP is described by the Majorana operators γ L and γL . Under TRS, these transform as Tγ L T -1 = γL and Tγ L T -1 = -γ L . We can construct the following regular fermion, Under TRS, this fermion transforms in a very special way, namely, TRS changes the occupation of the fermion, Since both γ L and γL are zero modes of the Hamiltonian, the ground state is doubly degenerate with the two states related by While in our description of the system the total fermion number N F is not conserved, the fermion-number parity, (-1) NF , is conserved. We can therefore choose the (many-body) eigenstates of the Hamiltonian to be states of definite fermion-number parity. Let |G 1 have, without loss of generality, even fermion parity, then |G 2 necessarily has odd fermion parity. Therefore, at low energies the fermion-number parity of the system is determined by the occupation of the f L fermion 10 , namely (-1) NF = 2f † L f L -1 = iγ L γL . From the transformation of f L under time-reversal, it then follows that the fermion parity and the TRS anticommute which is refereed to as the time-reversal anomaly where P L ≡ iγ L γL and P R ≡ iγ R γR determine the fermion parity at the left and right ends of the system, respectively. Notice that since the system is assumed to be gapped to fermionic excitations in the bulk, this distinction is well defined. While TRS locally anticommutes with fermion parity on the left and on the right, {T, P L } = {T, P R } = 0, it commutes with the total fermion parity. Finally, for systems which conserve one component of the total spin (e.g. S z ), an additional interesting phenomenon exist, which is related to the time-reversal anomaly. In the TRITOPS phase of such systems, the ground states exhibit a non-zero spin expectation value near the two ends of the systems, such that each end accumulates a spin ±1/4 To understand this phenomenon, let us again consider a semi-infinite system with a single boundary. The zero-energy fermion, f † L , either creates or destroys a spin 1/2 11 , namely the ground states |G 1 and |G 2 = f † L |G 1 differ by a spin ±1/2. On the other hand, these states are related by TRS (which flips the occupation of f L ), and therefore they must have opposite spin. The expectation value of the total spin, S z , in the two ground states is thus ±1/4. Since f † L has support only near the boundary, this spin is localized at the system's boundary. For a system with two boundaries, there are altogether four ground states, corresponding to the different possibilities of having spin ±1/4 at each end. Above, in Sec. 1.1, we introduced a minimal low-energy model, Eq. (1), and obtained the condition for this model to be in the TRITOPS phase. This condition is expressed as a Z 2 topological invariant whose value can only change during a topological phase transition, accompanied by a closing of the gap. In this section, we go beyond the low-energy model, and derive such an expression for a more general quadratic Hamiltonian. In Sec. 2.1 we obtain the topological invariant for a 1d system. We follow the derivation presented in Refs. 11 For a quadratic system conserving S z = 1 2 i a † i↑ a i↑ -a † i↓ a i↓ , the operator f † L must have one of the following forms: , which correspond to creating and destroying a spin 1/2, respectively. For non-quadratic systems, f † L will be dressed by particle-hole and Cooper-pair excitations, however these would not change the property, [S z , f † L ] = ± 1 2 f † L , so long as f † L has a nonzero single-particle weight. Notice the difference in notation with respect to Sec. 1.4; there the index i included the spin, while here we have separated the spin from the rest of the degrees of freedom. Consider a general translationally-invariant quadratic Hamiltonian in 1d. Written in momentum space, this is given by where for every k, ψ † k is a 2M -dimensional vector of fermionic creation operators which includes all degrees of freedom within a unit cell, including spin, transverse modes, sublattice sites, atomic orbitals etc. (the dimension of the vector ψ † k has to be even due to the spin degree of freedom). Here, h k and ∆ k are 2M × 2M matrices operate on these degrees of freedom, describing the normal and pairing parts of the Hamiltonian, respectively 12 . Due to the anticommutativity of the fermionic operators, ψ † k , one can choose the pairing matrix to obey ∆ T -k = -∆ k 13 , where the superscript stands for the transpose of a matrix. We are interested in Hamiltonians belonging to class DIII, that is obeying a PHS that squares to +1, and a TRS that squares to -1. Let us start by constructing the TRS. As in Sec. 1, we define it by its operation on the second-quantized annihilation operators, and on c numbers, where T is a unitary 2M × 2M matrix. Namely, this transformation reverse the momentum, as well as operating on the degrees of freedom of the unit cell (such as on the spin). The requirement that T squares to -1 means that operating with it twice should take ψ k → -ψ k , which results in the condition T T * = -1. Enforcing this TRS on the Hamiltonian, THT -1 = H, translates to conditions on h k and ∆ k , To obtain the PHS, we first need to construct the BdG form of the Hamiltonian. Defining the Nambu spinor as where we have made use of the relations given in Eq. Notice that our choice of the Nambu spinor makes the chiral symmetry of H k particularly very apparent, In the next step, we write the Hamiltonian in the basis which diagonalizes the chiral symmetry, where it has the following block off-diagonal form: To make progress in analyzing the matrix Q k , we consider its singular value decomposition, are unitary matrices and D k is a square diagonal matrix with non-negative elements on its 12 Namely, the expression , then the first term cancels upon summing over k in Eq. 14 Notice the construction of the BdG Hamiltonian here is somewhat different than in Eq. ( We are allowed to make a smooth deformation to H k , as long as this does not cause its gap to close and keep its symmetries intact, since such a deformation cannot affect the topological invariant. We do that by smoothly deforming D k to the identity matrix without closing the gap (which is possible due to all its diagonal elements being positive). This in turn deforms the Hamiltonian, H k → Hk , such that Hk has two flat bands at energies ±1 (in the appropriate units), but the same eigenstates as H k (and therefore the same symmetries). The deformed Hamiltonian, Hk , is given by Eq. ( The spectrum of Qk is constraint by the TRS of the Hamiltonian, T † H * -k T = Hk , which implies Together with the unitarity of Qk , Eq. ( This means, in particular, that at the timereversal-invariant momenta, k = 0, π, the eigenvalues of Qk come in Kramers' degenerate pairs. Consider now the spectrum of Qk as a function of k ∈ [-π, π]. From the TRS of the spectrum it follows that the number of pairs of degenerate states at a given value θ cannot change by an odd number during an adiabatic change which leaves the gap of H k open. The parity of the number of degenerate pairs is therefore a topological invariant. Alternatively stated, the topological invariant is given by namely, the parity of the sum of windings of {θ I n,k } M n=1 (A similar results is guaranteed if one considers {θ II n,k } M n=1 instead). Figure Having obtained an expression for the class DIII topological invariant in 1d, we now show how it can be used for obtaining the invariant for the 2d case as well. Consider the two-dimensional BdG Hamiltonian, H kx,ky , defined by Eqs. ( where ν[H kx,ky=0 ] is the topological invariant of the 1d Hamiltonian obtained by setting k y = 0 in H kx,ky=0 (and similarly for H kx,ky=π ). Notice that, since we are only concerned with the time-reversal-invariant momenta, k y = 0, π, the Hamiltonians H kx,ky=0,π obey the TRS and PHS described below Eq. ( To derive Eq. ( At k y = 0, the number of Kramers' pairs is equal to the Z 2 invariant of the corresponding DIII onedimensional Hamiltonian H kx,ky=0 . The same is true at the other time-reversal-invariant momentum, k y = π. At momenta away from k y = 0, π, the number of zero-energy Kramers' pairs must be even due to timereversal and chiral-symmetries Examining Eq. ( The latter scenario is rather interesting, since it implies that the edge spectrum (still assuming periodic boundary conditions in the y direction) of the system contains two pairs of helical gapless modes crossing the gap, one pair at k y = 0 and one pair at k y = π. In the absence of perturbations connecting states at k y = 0 with states at k y = π, these helical modes are protected by the topological invariants ν y,0 ≡ ν[H kx,ky=0 ] and ν y,π ≡ ν[H kx=,kyπ ]. Accordingly, ν y,0 and ν y,π are called "weak" topological indices, as they only predict the existence of gapless edge modes in the presence of translation invariance The procedure for obtaining the topological invariant can be greatly simplified in the so-called weakpairing limit, where ∆ k is small. Consider again the 1d Hamiltonian H k of Eq. ( where we have used the label σ = I, II to divide all states into two sectors related by TRS, namely |n, k, II = T |n, -k, I * , and accordingly ε n,k,I = ε n,-k,II [similar to the way we divided the spectrum of Qk , in Fig. Next we write the superconducting block, ∆ k T , in the same basis, In the weak-pairing limit, we keep only the diagonal elements in Eq. ( where we define δ n,k,σ ≡ n, k, σ|∆ k T |n, k, σ . According to Eq. ( Finally, since TRS dictates that δ n,k,I = δ n,-k,II , we can include both sectors I and II, and instead restrict ourselves only to the Fermi momenta between k = 0 and k = π. We then obtain where s labels all the Fermi points in k ∈ [0, π], and it includes all bands {n, σ}. The expression for the topological invariant of the minimal model, Eq. ( In the 2d case, we take s to labels the Fermi contours, as opposed to Fermi points. Notice also that sgn(δ s ) cannot change along a given Fermi contour as long as the system is gapped, and it is therefore well defined. We next make the observation that sgn(δ s ) belonging to a Fermi contour encircling an even number of TRIM [k = (0, 0), (0, π), (π, 0) and (π, π)] necessarily appears an even number of times in the expression for ν 2d , and therefore does not contribute. We can therefore write where m s is the number of TRIM enclosed by the s'th Fermi contour. In Sec. 1.1 we introduced a minimal model for the TRITOPS phase. In this section we study specific microscopic models which can be realized in currently-available experimental setups, and which are described by the minimal model at low energies. As we saw, the TRITOPS phase is obtained when the pairing potential of the positive-helicity modes, ∆ + , is opposite to that of the negative-helicity modes, ∆ -[see Eqs. ( We focus here on three general mechanisms where this occurs. In Sec. 3.1 we show how coupling a normal system to two SCs having a π phase difference In this section we examine systems in 1d and 2d, coupled to two SCs with a π phase difference. As we will see, the combination of the superconducting π phase difference, together with the spin-orbit interaction in the system, can cause a sign difference inside the Brillouin zone between the pairing potentials ∆ + and ∆ -, of the low-energy model, Eq. ( We are looking for a system that will be described at low energies by the model of Eq. ( The 2DTI phase is characterized by a pair of counter-propagating helical modes on each edge. Importantly, modes on the lower edge have positive helicity (a right-moving spin-↑ mode and a left-moving spin-↓ mode), while modes on the upper edge have negative helicity (a right-moving spin-↓ mode and a left-moving spin-↑ mode). If we couple each edge to a SC, with a π phase difference between them, one immediately has sgn(∆ + ) = -sgn(∆ -), thereby realizing the TRITOPS phase. The same conclusion can be reached by focusing on the boundary of this quasi-1d system where ∆ 0 is the pair potential of the superconductors, and φ is their phase difference. Indeed, when the phase difference between the superconductors is φ = π, there is a pair of zero energy states in the junction (the Majorana Kramers pair), indicating that the system is in the TRITOPS phase. Notice that once a MKP is present in the junction, it cannot be removed by any local perturbation, as long as TRS is preserved A similar effect to that described above can take place when a semiconductor nanowire is coupled to a superconducting π junction difference between the induced pairing potentials of the positive-and negative-helicity modes, ∆ ± . This happens due to the difference in the spatial profile of the wave functions of these modes, which is a result of spin-orbit interaction. To understand this effect better, let us consider the following simplified model for describing the nanowire The eigenfunctions of the lowest-energy transverse band are given by up to normalization, where s = ±1 corresponds here to spin ↑ and spin ↓, respectively. It is now apparent that states with ks > 0 are shifted towards y < 0, while states with negative ks < 0 are shifted towards y > 0 The π junctions considered above provide a very intuitive platform for realizing the TRITOPS phase. They nevertheless require fine-tuning of superconducting phases. Indeed, any deviation from a phase difference of φ = π would break time-reversal symmetry, and thereby lift the protection of the topological boundary modes -the Majorana Kramers pair. Moreover, creating a superconducting phase difference experimentally usually involves applying a magnetic field, or forcing a current in the system, both of which break TRS. Below we show how repulsive e-e interactions can stabilize the TRITOPS phase in a normal system coupled to a single conventional s-wave SC Consider an interface between a conventional superconductor and a normal metal, as depicted in Fig. One can easily understand the origin of this result. First, the attractive interactions in the SC generate a non-zero mean-field pairing potential, ∆ sc = g sc F sc , where F sc = ψ ↓ (r)ψ ↑ (r) | y<0 is the pair correlation function. Then, the superconductor induces by proximity a non-zero pairing correlation, F N = ψ ↓ (r)ψ ↑ (r) | y>0 , of the same phase as F sc . Finally, this gives rise to a pairing potential, ∆ N = g N F N . Since g N and g sc have opposite signs, ∆ sc and ∆ N also differ by a π phase We can now reconsider the systems discussed in Sec. 3.1 -the finite-width 2dTI and the Rashba wirebut now coupled only to a single SC, as shown in Fig. Another way in which interactions can drive a system into the TRITOPS phase is by affecting the competition between two superconducting proximity mechanisms: local Andreev reflection and crossed Andreev reflection Figure with opposite topological indices, as depicted in Fig. We label the samples by j = 1, 2, such that ψ R,j (ψ L,j ) denote the right-(left)-moving mode on the edge belonging to sample j. We couple the two edges through a single conventional s-wave SC (see Fig. where ∆ 1,2 are the induced pairing potentials on the edge of sample '1' and '2', respectively, and ∆ c is the induced crossed pairing potential term involving both edges simultaneously. While ∆ 1 (∆ 2 ) arise as a result of a local AR process, where a Cooper pair tunnels to the edge of sample '1' ('2'), the term ∆ c arise as a result of a crossed AR process, where a Cooper pair is split between sample '1' and sample '2' + h.c. ; When we now compare the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( For simplicity, we can make the reasonable assumption that ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 ≡ ∆ loc , in which case we realize that the system is topological whenever |∆ c | > |∆ loc |, namely when the crossed Andreev reflection dominates over local Andreev reflection. In the absence of e-e interactions in the proximitized system (here the 2dTIs), this will never be the case, as shown in Appendix A. In contrast, if short-range repulsive e-e interactions exist, they are expected to suppress the local Andreev reflection process responsible for ∆ loc , as it requires paring of electrons on the same edge. If the later are strong enough [such that ν = -1 in Eq. ( In 2d, a related effect can occur in coupled semiconducting layers (or one layer with two orbitals), even without proximity to an external superconductor. In these cases, superconductivity is intrinsically generated as a result of interactions, and the competition is now between the inter-layer and intra-layer interaction terms We now move on to study the effect of interactions more formally. This is done by considering the minimal model of Eq. ( This will be understood in terms of the competition between singlet and triplet pairing. Due to spin-orbit coupling, proximity-induced superconductivity is generally described by both a singlet and a triplet pairing potential, ∆ s and ∆ t , respectively. For a noninteracting system in proximity to a conventional s-wave SC the system will always be in the topologically trivial phase, with |∆ s | ≥ |∆ t | (see Appendix A). However, short-range repulsive interactions effectively suppress the singlet pairing term in comparison with the triplet term, and can therefore drive the system into the TRITOPS phase. The Hamiltonian we consider is given by H 0 + H ∆ + H int , with where Here H ∆ describes induced pairing in the normal system due to proximity to a superconductor, and H int describes e-e interactions inside the normal system, where g ⊥ 1 is a backscattering interaction term, and g + 2 , g - 2 , and g 2 are forward scattering interaction terms. In the absence of symmetry under inversion (x → -x), H int is the most general low-energy timereversal symmetric Hamiltonian describing interaction between modes of opposite chirality. Interaction terms between modes of the same chirality can exist, however, they would not affect the RG flow, nor would they contribute to our mean-field solution, and therefore we do not include them here Mean-field theory. In this analysis we replace the low-energy interacting Hamiltonian by the quadratic part of the Hamiltonian, but with new effective pairing potentials, ∆+ and ∆-. Upon determining ∆± from self-consistent equations, one can then extract the topological invariant using Eq. ( We therefore expand the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where Since H MF is a quadratic Hamiltonian, one can easily calculate the above pair correlation functions and arrive at the following self-consistent equations for ∆+ and ∆- These coupled equations can be solved numerically for ∆± , after which the topological invariant of H MF is obtained by ν = sgn( ∆+ )sgn( ∆-). One can, however, make further analytical progress by searching for the phase boundary between ν = 1 and ν = -1. This occurs when either ∆-= 0, or ∆+ = 0. By plugging ∆± = 0 in Eq. ( where the two options correspond to the phase boundary occurring at ∆± = 0, respectively. As a relevant example we can consider a Hubbard-type interaction, g 1 = g + 2 = g - 2 = U , and furthermore v + = v -= v. Let us assume without loss of generality that |∆ + | > |∆ -|. This means that the phase boundary will occur when ∆-= 0, namely when Figure Renormalization-group analysis. We now move on to study the interacting Hamiltonian of Eq. ( The white solid line corresponds to the separatrix of the Kosterlitz-Thouless flow, above which y 1 and y 2 flow to strong coupling. In obtaining this phase diagram, we have used v -= v + = v, y + 2 = y - 2 = y 2 , and the initial singlet and triplet pairing potentials were taken to be ∆ 0 t = 0.01vΛ and ∆ 0 s = 0.02vΛ, respectively. The flow equations of the various terms in H ∆ and H int can be obtained, for example, using perturbative momentum shell Wilsonian RG for Fermions where we have defined v = (v + + v -)/2, and the dimensionless couplings πv -, and y 2 = g + 2 /2πv + + g - 2 /2πv --g 2 /πv. The above equations have been derived using a perturbative treatment and they are valid when y 1 , y 2 , y ± 2 and ∆ ± /v ± Λ are all smaller than 1. Equations (50a,50b) give rise to a Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) type of flow for y ⊥ 1 and y 2 . It is described by the constant of motion A 2 = y 2 2 -y 2 1 , where Of greatest interest for us is the region y 2 > y 1 ≥ 0; this corresponds to an interaction which is repulsive on all length scales. In this case, the flow of y 1 and y 2 is given by Both y 1 and y 2 flow down, saturating after an RG time sat ∼ A -1 , at 0 and A, respectively. One can insert these solutions into Eqs. (50c) and (50d), and integrate to obtain y + 2 and y - 2 , respectively. The interaction couplings y ⊥ 1 , y + 2 , and y - 2 can then be inserted into Eqs. (50f,50e) which generally require a numerical solution for ∆ ± . We wish to determine the topological phase diagram of the system as a function of its initial couplings. We solve the above flow equations up to an RG time * , at which one of the pairing potential flows to strong coupling, namely |∆ ± ( * )|/v ± Λ = 1. Beyond this point the perturbative RG treatment is not valid anymore. Let us assume, without loss of generality, that ∆ + flows to strong coupling first. This in particular means that the interaction couplings (which have flown down) are small in comparison to it, namely y ⊥ 1 , y 2 , y If at this point ∆ -( * )/v -Λ happens also to be large in comparison to y ⊥ 1 , y 2 , y ± 2 , then we can neglect the interaction couplings. One can then use the topological invariant of a noninteracting system [see Eq. ( To this end we note that since ∆ + ( * ) is large, the positive-helicity degrees of freedom [ψ R↑ (x) and ψ L↓ (x)] are gapped, and one can safely integrate them out. Upon doing so, one is left with an action containing only the negative-helicity fields [R ↓ (x) and L ↑ (x)], with a pairing potential ∆ -= ∆ -( * ) + δ∆ -. To leading order in the interaction couplings, the correction is then given by At this point we can continue the RG procedure, applied only to the negative-helicity degrees of freedom, ẏ- namely ∆ -flows to strong coupling (without changing sign), while y - 2 remains perturbative. We can therefore use the topological invariant of noninteracting systems, only with ∆ -( * ) substituted by ∆ -, ν = sgn[∆ + ( * )]sgn[∆ -]. Finally, accounting also for the possibility that ∆ -flows to strong coupling before ∆ + , one can write where * is the RG time when the first of ∆ + and ∆ -reaches strong coupling. Let us consider again the case of a Hubbard-type interaction, g ⊥ 1 = g + 2 = g - 2 = U , and g 2 = 0. Note that for v + = v -this mean y 2 = y 1 , while for v + = v -, this means y 2 ≥ y 1 [see the definitions below Eq. ( The effect of forward scattering and of backscattering on the pairing potentials is now apparent. The forward scattering term y + 2 equally suppresses the singlet and triplet pairing terms. The backscattering term y 1 , on the other hand, suppresses ∆ s , while strengthening ∆ t , causing the latter to flow faster to strong coupling. From Eq. ( If the time it takes y 1 to flow to zero, sat , is much shorter than * , we can approximate the ratio ∆ t ( * )/∆ s ( * ) by taking the upper limit of the above integral to infinity. Using Eq. ( Furthermore, since by our assumption y 1 ( * ) 0 (follows from sat * ), Eq. ( In Fig. In this section we concentrate on a given microscopic model -a proximity-coupled interacting nanowire [see Fig. We construct a lattice model for the nanowire, which is composed of two chains, as depicted in Fig. The Hamiltonian for the proximity-coupled nanowire in the presence of short-range interactions is then given by where Ψ † k = (ψ † k , -iσ y ψ -k ). The two spatially distinct chains are labeled, a and b, such that ). As before, τ x,y,z and σ x,y,z are Pauli matrices in spin and PH basis, respectively. The Pauli matrices, λ x,y,z , operate on the chain degree of freedom, ν = a, b. Here, ξk , δξ k , ᾱ and δα are defined as (ξ k,a ± ξ k,b )/2 and α a ± α b , respectively, and ξ k,ν = 2t ν (1 -cos k) -μ ν . The parameters t ν , α ν , μ ν and U ν represent the hopping, SOC, chemical potential and on-site repulsion on chain ν = a, b, while t ab is the hopping between the chains. The operator ni,ν,s describes the number of electrons with spin s on site i of chain ν. Hartree-Fock. In the Hartree-Fock analysis we consider a set of trial wave-functions which are ground states of the following quadratic Hamiltonian: where H0 k has the same form as H 0 k , with effective parameters μa , μb and ∆a , where ∆b are effective pairing potentials on chains a and b, respectively. Upon determining the four effective parameters, the value of the topological invariant can be obtained by applying the results of Sec. 2 to Eq. We determine the effective parameters by numerically minimizing the expectation value of the full Hamil-tonian in the ground state of H HF with where L is the number of sites in each chain, and we have used Wick's theorem, noting the exchange term vanishes due to the σ z conservation of H HF k . Given the effective parameters, we are interested in the conditions under which H HF k is in the topological phase. This Hamiltonian obeys the TRS Θ = iσ y K and PH symmetry Ξ = τ y σ y K, confirming it is in symmetry class DIII The fact that σ z is a good quantum number allows us to easily obtain the topological invariant of, Eq. ( where εν,k = 2t ν (1 -cos k) -2α ν sin k -μν . In Fig. Density matrix renormalization group. One can further verify the appearance of the topological phase using DMRG. We do this by studying the many-body spectrum of the system as a function of the system's length. As was explained in Sec. 1, the TRITOPS phase is characterized by a four-fold degenerated ground states, separated by an energy gap from the rest of the spectrum. Two of the states are of even fermion parity and two are of odd fermion parity. In a finite-size system, this degeneracy becomes an approximate one, with a splitting of the ground states which is exponentially small with the system size. However, the two odd-fermion-parity states will remain exactly degenerate for any system size due to Kramers' theorem. In contrast to the TRITOPS phase, in the trivial phase the spectrum is gapped with a single ground state. A phase diagram obtained using DMRG is shown in Fig. Figures. Above we considered two mechanisms for realizing the TRITOPS phase, which included proximity to conventional superconductors. In the first, the π phase difference between two SCs resulted in a π phase difference in momentum space, between the positive-helicity and the negative-helicity modes, sgn(∆ + ∆ -) = -1. In the second mechanism, it were repulsive interactions which stabilized such a sign difference. In this section we explore the possibility of achieving the same effect by coupling the system to a single unconventional SC Consider a bulk three-dimensional s ± -wave SC in proximity to a normal 1d wire, as depicted in Fig. where a † k,s (b † k,s ) creates an electron in band 'a' ('b') with momentum k = (k x , k y , k z ) and spin s. The dispersion relations for the two bands are ξ a (k) and ξ b (k), and their respective pairing potentials, ∆ a and ∆ b , are assumed to have opposite signs, ∆ a > 0, ∆ b < 0. The Hamiltonian for the combined system of the SC and the normal wire is H = H sc + H w + H t , with where c † kx,s creates an electron in the wire with momentum k x and spin s, h(k x ) is the single-particle Hamiltonian (which we do not specify at the moment) describing the 1d system, and t a (t b ) is the coupling between the 1d system and the first (second) band of the superconductor. Due to the proximity effect, superconductivity is induced in the wire. This is captured by the self-energy, Σ(ω, k x ), which results upon integrating out the SC's degrees of freedom (see for example Refs. where the self-energy is given by where G sc a (ω, k) and G sc b (ω, k) are the Green functions for the first and second bands of the bare SC. One therefore has Σ(0, k x ) = ∆ ind τ x , with the induced pairing potential given by where the two terms correspond to the contribution of the two bands. Notice that the contribution of ∆ a mainly comes from the momenta near the Fermi surface, ξ 2 a (k) = 0, and similarly the contribution of ∆ b mainly comes from the momenta near the Fermi surface, ξ 2 b (k). The exact form of ∆ ind (k x ) obviously depends on the exact values of ∆ a,b , and the exact form of ξ a,b (k). Nevertheless, since, as depicted in Fig. Having ∆ ind (k x ) switching sign as a function of k x is by itself not a sufficient condition for being in the TRITOPS phase. In particular, notice that ∆ ind (k x ) does not break inversion symmetry, which is a necessary condition (see Secs. 1.1 and 1.2). In order to be in the TRITOPS phase, the wire must therefore break inversion symmetry, for example due to an appreciable Rashba spin-orbit coupling. In Fig. Zhang et al. For ), has the desired property of changing sign, when going from small |k x | to large and large. As noted above, however, this is not a sufficient condition. The pairing potential has to have different sign for the different Fermi momenta. This happens when Namely, it is beneficial to have as large spin-orbit coupling and a large ∆ 1 . The challenge in realizing a TRITOPS in this manner is in matching the Fermi momenta in the wire (typically a semiconductor), with the momentum at which ∆ ind (k x ) changes sign, which is of the order of the Fermi momentum of the SC in its normal state. The latter is typically much larger than the former. Another type of unconventional superconductor which can be used in proximity to the wire is a d x 2 -y 2wave superconductor. In this kind of SC, the pairing potential changes sign (four times) when going along the Fermi contour in the (k x , k y ) plane. When placing the wire along the x direction, small and large momenta then experience an induced superconductivity with opposite signs. An important thing to note is that, since the d x 2 -y 2 -wave SC has gapless nodes in its spectrum, the zero-energy MKPs can hybridize with the gapless modes in the bulk SC. Namely they are no longer completely localized. Nevertheless, numerical simulations (in a clean system) show that this effect does not cause a strong coupling between the MKPs at the two ends of the wire Experimentally realizing the TRITOPS phase would of course be meaningless in the absence of a way to detect its physical properties. Since an obvious property distinguishing the TRITOPS phase from its topologically-trivial counterparts is the existence of protected boundary modes, one is encouraged to probe these modes when looking for distinct signatures of TRITOPS. In 1d systems these would be the (zerodimensional) Kramers pairs of MBSs, while in 2d these would be the (one-dimensional) counter-propagating helical Majorana modes. We focus in this review on three types of signatures. The first involves electronic transport from a metallic lead to the topological superconductor through the MKP which it hosts. The second kind of signature has to do with the unique way in which the Majorana boundary modes (either in 1d or 2d) behave under a Magnetic field. Finally, we consider Josephson junctions, either between two topological superconductors or between a trivial and a topological superconductor. As we will see, the existence of MKPs in the junction modifies the spectrum and current-phase relation compared with a Josephson junction of trivial superconductors. The Majorana Kramers pair (MKP), as discussed, is a zero-energy mode inside a superconductor. As such, one can expect to see a resonance in the differential conductance spectrum when tunneling from a metallic lead into the SC through the MKP. So much is true for any zero-energy mode which is a superposition of an electron and a hole. However, as we shall see below, the resonance due to a MKP is both robust and has a quantized amplitude, in a similar way to the case of a single MBS in a TRS-broken phase We will begin with the case of a normal spinful lead, in which both spin species have right-moving and left-moving modes [see Fig. We then move on to examine a helical lead, in which there is a right-moving spin-↑ mode and a leftmoving spin-↓ mode (or vice versa). This situation correspond corresponds to a MKP coupled to the edge of a 2d topological insulator (2dTI) We consider a normal-metal spinful lead coupled to a Kramers pair of Majorana bound states. The Hamiltonian describing the lead in the wide-band limit is given by where ψ † R,s and ψ † L,s are creation operators in the lead for an electron with spin s = ↑, ↓, moving in the right and left directions, respectively, as depicted in Fig. Before writing the Hamiltonian describing the coupling to the MKP, let us rewrite H Lead in a more convenient form. We can "unfold" the modes in the lead by defining two chiral fields, and which extend from x → -∞ to x → ∞, such that the Hamiltonian for the lead reads Time-reversal symmetry relates the two chiral fields to each other through We now turn to write the Hamiltonian describing coupling of the lead to the MKP. Using the new fields, the most general low-energy time-reversal-symmetric coupling Hamiltonian one can write is where γ and γ are the Majorana operators creating the two MBSs of the Kramers pair. Notice that the form of H Coupling (namely the relation between the coupling to γ and the coupling to γ) is constrained by TRS, whose operation on the Kramers pair is given by γ -→ γ and γ -→ -γ. The form of the overall Hamiltonian, H = H Lead + H Coupling , allows one to write it as two copies, related by TRS, each describing a spinless lead coupled to a single MBS. To see this, one defines two new chiral fields, Notice that U is a unitary matrix, making ψ(x) and ψ(x) obey fermionic commutation relations, and that under TRS, ψ(x) → ψ(x) ; ψ(x) → -ψ(x). Setting the transformation, Eq. ( where . Indeed, Eq. ( With the help of the decompositions of the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( More explicitly, we can obtain all transport quantities from the scattering matrix, relating the incoming and outgoing modes in the lead, where ψ ε (x) ≡ dtψ(x, t) exp(-iεt), with a similar expression for ψε (x), and where time evolution is according to H. The scattering matrix can be calculated in a straight-forward way from Eq. ( where Notice that for ε = 0 there's perfect Andreev reflection in both channels, |S he 11 (0)| 2 = |S he 22 (0)| 2 = 1. From the scattering matrix, one can obtain the differential conductance with the help of the generalized Landauer-Büttiker formalism where is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, and T is the temperature. Inserting the expression for S he (ε) from Eq. ( which exhibits a resonance at V = 0, with a peak quantized to 4e 2 /h at small bias voltage. Notice it decays to zero slower than linearly at small V , which is generally different than the case of an accidental low-energy (topologically trivial) Andreev bound state. This has to do with the perfect Andreev reflection at zero energy; shot noise is the result of the probabilistic nature of the scattering process. Related to this effect is the behavior of cross correlation of currents in two leads [each described by the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where here Γ 1 , Γ 2 , stand for the coupling of each lead to the MKP, and Γ T = Γ 1 + Γ 2 . The negative cross correlation which goes to zero at eV Γ T is again different than a trivial Andreev bound state, in which the cross correlation generally goes to a positive constant The above results were a straight-forward generalization of the case of a single MBS in a TRS-broken TSC. This was possible because, as we saw, the setup of Fig. To obtain the scattering matrix for this setup, we first notice that the number of modes entering and exiting the junction (x = 0) is the same as in the setup depicted in Fig. Using the relation between ψ R,↑,ε (x), ψ L,↓,ε (x) and ψ(x), ψ(x), as given in Eqs. ( The perfect Andreev scattering at zero energy is manifested by as can be inferred immediately by noting that She (0) = -U † U * is a unitary matrix. Namely, a spin-↑ electron approaching the MKP from the left can either be reflected as a spin-↓ hole (Andreev reflection) or transmitted as a spin-↑ hole (Andreev transmission), but overall the probability of electron-to-all conversion is 1. The two processes correspond to a Cooper pair being formed, either by two electrons which tunnel into the SC from the same contact, or from different contacts. The probabilities for Andreev reflection and transmission depend, in general, on the microscopic details of the system (which in turn determine the couplings, t 1 and t 2 , appearing in U .) Since at zero energy we have only Andreev processes, See (0) = 0, one obtains that (at zero temperature) the diagonal conductance, dI is determined by the Andreev reflection amplitude, and the off-diagonal conductance, is determined by the Andreev transmission amplitude. Interestingly, the total current going into the SC, I S = I 1 + I 2 , still carries the information regarding the perfect Andreev scattering; the differential conductance of the current through SC (with respect to the voltage in either lead) is in fact quantized This is essentially because both processes (Andreev reflection and Andreev transmission) inject two electrons into the SC. One can wonder about the effect of electron-electron interaction on the scattering amplitudes One of the advantages of using the edge of a 2dTI as a lead is that it can quite naturally embed the MKP in it ). The change of sign of dI 2 /dV 1 as a function of φ can serve as a signature of the MKP. The zero-bias conductance peak discussed above probes the existence the MKP, which is protected against splitting from zero energy as long as TRS in maintained. In this subsection we examine the behavior of the MKP under breaking of TRS by a magnetic field This anomalous Zeeman splitting can be used to distinguish between a trivial low-energy resonance and the topologically nontrivial MKP. An advantage of this signature is that it is not expected to be sensitive to finite temperatures. This should be contrasted with the zero bias peak, which is only quantized to 4e 2 /h at zero temperature. The anomalous Zeeman splitting, on the other hand, while could be smeared by temperature, its dependence on B should not change. The behavior of the MKP under the application of magnetic field is understood based on symmetry considerations. Consider a system in the TRITOPS phase with a MKP at each end of the system, and let us focus for the moment only on one end. The addition of a TRS-breaking perturbation, in this case a magnetic field, allows for a coupling between the two MBSs composing the pair. At low-energies, this is described by where λ is a coupling coefficient which depends on the magnetic field, B, in a way that we wish to determine. While the Hamiltonian is not time-reversal symmetric, it should be invariant under a TRS which is followed by reversal of the magnetic field, namely TH (-B)T -1 = H (B). Applying this condition to Eq. ( While the first term in the expansion is linear, there is always a plane, defined by B ⊥ λ (1) , in which the linear term vanishes. When the magnetic field is directed in this plane, the energy splitting of the MBSs is of order |B| 3 or higher We attach a normal-metal lead to the end of the wire, by introducing a coupling between the modes in the lead and the first sites of the double chain [see also Fig. In the specific system considered here, we can understand the lack of splitting from another point of view One of the ways to study the properties of a superconductor is by creating a Josephson junction, and examining the current-phase relation. In this subsection we shall consider and compare three types of Josephson junctions: (i) a junction between two trivial superconductors, (ii) a junction between two topological superconductors One can study these three types of junctions within a single framework, using the linearized low-energy model introduced in Sec. 1.1. The Hamiltonian in this case is given by where the pairing potentials are taken to have the following spatial dependence with ∆ 0 ± > 0. The parameters, s L and s R , which can take the values ±1, determine the type of the junction being studied: (i) the trivial-trivial junction corresponds to s R = s L = 1, (ii) the topological-topological junction corresponds to s R = s L = -1, and (iii) the topological-trivial junction corresponds to s L = -1, s R = 1 (or vice versa). The model described by H 0 for the Josephson junction is somewhat oversimplified. First it assumes a very short junction (there is no normal metallic region between the SCs). More importantly, the model does not include a backscattering term, and it has a spin-rotation symmetry about the z direction (namely s z is a good quantum number). Indeed one can consider a more general model for the JJ by adding the following symmetry-allowed perturbation where the first term describes backscattering at the junction, and the second term accounts for spin-orbit coupling which breaks the spin-rotation symmetry about the z axis of H 0 . Nevertheless, as we shall see below, the topological properties of the junction can be inferred already from H 0 , without accounting for H . In particular, the way in which the spectrum of the junction is affected by such a perturbation, such as H , will turn out to be determined by these properties. For a full non-perturbative analytical treatment of the three types of junctions see Ref. To analyze the junction we look for the single-particle excitations of the system. To this end we write H 0 in a BdG form where the Nambu spinor is defined as ). Here, τ i=x,y,z is a set Pauli matrices operating on the particle-hole degree of freedom, σ i=x,y,z are Pauli matrices operating on the spin degree of freedom, and η i=x,y,z are Pauli matrices operating on the rightmoving/left-moving degree of freedom. In this basis, time-reversal symmetry is given by Θ = η x σ y K, which commutes with the Hamiltonian, and particle-hole symmetry is given by Ξ = τ y σ y η x K, which anticommutes with the Hamiltonian. It is then immediately implied that H anticommutes with C = ΘΞ = τ y , which is referred to as the chiral symmetry. To solve the eigenvalue problem, H 0 (x)u(x) = εu(x), we first notice that η z = ±1 and σ z = ±1 are both good quantum numbers. The problem then reduces to solving 2 × 2 Hamiltonians. A straight-forward solution of the resulting differential equation yields the following excitation energies with corresponding eigenvectors where , and where we focus on subgap excitation energies The single-particle excitation spectrum of the Josephson junction between two trivial SCs, as described by H 0 (x), is presented in Fig. To understand the difference between the two, one has to examine the wave functions of the four degenerate states, and how each of them behaves under the chiral symmetry, C = τ y . Setting φ = π in Eq. ( namely the eigenstates of H 0 (x) are eigenstates of the chiral symmetry with eigenvalues ±1. The crucial point is that any perturbation to H 0 (x) which respects the chiral symmetry [such as H in Eq. ( perturbation can only couple u + with ũ-, and u -with ũ+ The spectrum of the many-body states can be constructed from the single-particle excitation spectrum by summing over the excitation energies, for all possible occupations. The result is shown in Fig. States having an even fermion-number parity are shown in black, while states having an odd fermion-number parity are shown in orange. Since the excitation spectrum is gapped for all φ, the ground state is unique and the system returns to the same state upon a cycle, φ : 0 → 2π. As a result, the current, which is related to the energy of the system through I(φ) = 2e dE(φ)/dφ, is 2π-periodic in φ, as is expected from a Josephson junction between two trivial SCs We now move on to the case of a junction between two topological SCs Now these are u + and ũ-which have eigenvalue +1 under C, while u -and ũ+ have eigenvalue -1. As a result, any symmetry-allowed perturbation can only couple u + with u -and ũ+ with ũ-. Since the energies of u + and u -both increase as a function of φ [solid purple and green lines in Fig. As before, the many-body states can be constructed from the single-particle excitation spectrum, and is shown in Fig. In practice, there are processes which can effectively change the Fermion parity. For example, at finite temperature, thermally-excited quasiparticles can be present in the system, and these can relax by switching the Fermion-number parity in the junction. The behavior of the junction therefore depends on the characteristic time scale for these parity-switching processes, τ ps . If the rate at which φ is varied, ω J , is fast compared with τ -1 ps (but still adiabatic as defined by the system's bulk energy gap), then the current is 4π periodic. If on the other hand ω J τ -1 ps , then the system stays in its true (thermodynamic) ground state, and the current is 2π periodic Another signature of the topological-topological junction can be obtained by incorporating an interacting quantum dot (QD) into the junction and examining the dependence of the current-phase relation on the coupling strength between the dot and the SCs Finally, we discuss the Josephson junction between a topological and a trivial SC Notice the zero-energy crossings at the TR-invariant points, φ = 0, and φ = π. These crossings are due to the MKP at the junction, and are protected by both particle-hole and time-reversal symmetry. In contrast, the other crossing points in the spectrum are not protected. Upon adding a symmetry-allowed perturbation, such as H in Eq. ( The many-body spectrum, constructed by summing over the excitation energies for all possible occupations, is presented in Fig. The second manifestation of the TR anomaly is the remarkable fact that the current through the junction, I(φ) = 2e dE(φ)/dφ, is nonzero even at the TR-invariant points φ = 0, π The behavior of current-phase relation is again dependent on the rate at which φ is varied, ω J , relative to the rate at which fermion-parity switches, τ -1 ps . For ω J τ -1 ps , the system remains in a state of given parity, and returns to the same state upon varying φ from 0 to 2π, as can be seen from Fig. One of the interesting questions one can ask about the TRITOPS phase is concerned with the braiding of two Kramers pairs of MBSs. Indeed, since the two MBSs in a Kramers pair overlap in space It is established that single MBSs (in a TRS-broken system) obey non-abelian exchange statistics An exception to this is the case where an additional symmetry exists in the system (in addition to TRS). For example, if the system obeys a U (1) spin-rotation symmetry such that one spin component (say s z ) is a good quantum number, then the system can be decomposed into two spin-opposite copies (s z = ↑.↓) which are completely decoupled from each other throughout the braiding process. Each copy describes a TRS-broken TSC, such that the braiding of MKPs can be described as the two braiding processes of single isolated MBSs, performed separately in each sector We start by briefly reviewing the subject of non-abelian berry phase in the adiabatic theory of degenerate states. We then consider the case of braiding single MBSs in a TRS-broken systems, showing the existence of a path-independent non-abelian berry phase. Finally, we examine braiding of MKPs in TRS systems, and show that local mixing of the MBSs composing a pair produces a path-dependent contribution, rendering the resulting unitary operation non universal. Consider a Hamiltonian, H[R(t)], which depends on time through a set of parameters, R(t). At any time, t, the Hamiltonian H[R(t)] has a set of instantaneous eigenstates. We concentrate on situations where there is a subset of instantaneous eigenstates, { | η i [R(t)] } g i=1 , which are degenerate for all t, and are separated from the rest of the states by energy gaps with the matrix U (t) defined by where we have artificially separated the dynamical phase, exp{-i t 0 dt E[R(t )]}, from the rest of the timeevolution operator as it simply contributes an abelian phase which will be of no interest to us here. By plugging | ψ(t) into the Schrödinger equation, we arrive at which is formally solved by where C denotes the path taken in parameter space and P is the path-ordering operator. This result generalizes Berry's geometric phase the matrix U C transforms as which can be inferred from Eq. ( We consider a system in class D with two spatially-separated MBSs, described by γ 1 and γ 2 . The Hamiltonian, H(R), is varied adiabatically along a path in parameter space in a way that makes γ 1 and γ 2 switch places, as depicted in Fig. We choose the basis for the instantaneous ground-states manifold to be the two states having a given occupancy of the fermion f Now we are in the position to calculate A ij (R), with i, j ∈ {0, 1}. First, since the Hamiltonian conserves fermion parity, and since | 0 and | 1 have different parity, one has namely A 01 (R) = A 10 (R) = 0. The diagonal elements, 0|∇ R |0 and 1|∇ R |1 can be related through where in the last step we have used the fact that {χ 1 ) = 0, and similarly for χ 2 . Ignoring the part of A(R) which is proportional to the identity matrix (as it only gives rise to an overall abelian phase), we are left with We now notice that since χ 1 and χ 2 are spatially separated at all instances during the braiding procedure, one necessarily has {χ 1 (R), ∇ R χ 2 (R)} = 0, namely A(R) = 0 for all R When applied to the many-body states, these two options imply that the basis transformation is given by |0 → |0 ; |1 → ∓i|1 , namely Overall, Eq. ( To summarize, the operator describing the braiding can be thought of as composed of two parts; a local part described by Eq. ( We now consider a system in class DIII with two separated MKPs At any instance during the braiding process, there are two pairs of zero-energy Majorana bound states, namely When considering the operation of braiding on the ground-state manifold, we can use the fact the total parity of the system is conserved and therefore examine separately the even-and odd-parity sectors, namely { | 00 , | 11 } and { | 10 , | 01 }, respectively. Focusing, for example, on the odd-parity sector, one arrives at As in before, since χ 1 (R) and χ 2 (R) are kept spatially separated (and similarly χ1 (R) and χ2 (R)), we have {χ A similar calculation for the even-parity subspace yields Importantly, unlike in the TRS-broken case where A(R) vanished due to the two MBSs being spatially separated, here the commutator {χ n (R), ∇ R χn (R)} involves two spatially-overlapping MBSs and is therefore generally nonzero. Moreover, it depends on the microscopic local properties of the Hamiltonian during the braiding process An exception to this is the case where the system has an additional symmetry namely it is equivalent to two separate exchanges of isolated MBSs. Recently it was suggested that local mixing between MBSs in a Kramers' pair can also be somewhat suppressed by charging energy Time-reversal-invariant topological superconductivity (or TRITOPS) has been discussed in many (mostly theoretical) studies in recent years. In this article we pedagogically reviewed the progress made towards realizing the TRITOPS phase in one and two dimensions. The main emerging feature of this phase is the Kramers pair of Majorana boundary modes; in 1d this is a pair of Majorana bound states at each end, while in 2d it is a pair of counter-propagating gapless helical Majorana modes at each edge. The properties of the Majorana Kramers pair (MKP) were discusses, and in particular their symmetry and topological protection (see Sec. 1 and Sec. 2). We have discussed possible mechanisms for experimentally realizing this phase. We focused on three main routs: (i) proximity to a pair of superconductors with an externally-tuned π phase difference (Sec. 3.1), (ii) proximity-coupled interacting semiconductors (Sec. 3.2), and (iii) proximity to unconventional superconductors (Sec. 3.3). The key for understanding these mechanisms lies in the sign change they induce in the pairing potential as a function of momentum. We emphasized the role of the interplay between, spin-orbit coupling, superconducting proximity and repulsive interactions, in the stabilization of the TRITOPS phase. We then reviewed, in Sec. 4, various ways to experimentally detect the TRITOPS phase. Specifically, we discussed how the presence of the Majorana Kramers pair should effect various transport properties. These include, in particular, the anomalous Zeeman splitting of the zero-bias conductance peak, and a unique current-phase relation in Josephson junctions. In brief, the conductance into the system's end from a normal-metal lead should exhibit a zero bias conductance peak, quantized to 4e 2 /h, which splits in a non-linear way as a function of magnetic field in certain directions (Sec. 4.2). Signatures in Josephson junctions include 4π periodicity of the Josephson current in a junction between a TRITOPS and a trivial SC (Sec. 4.3.3), and a finite current at a phase difference of π in a junction between two TRITOPSs (Sec. 4.3.2). The latter property is a consequence of the time-reversal anomaly (Sec. The behavior of MKPs under exchange was discussed in Sec. 5. While exchanging two MKPs results in a non-trivial operation on the ground-state manifold, since each MKP comprises of two overlapping Majorana bound states, this operation is rendered non-universal; it depends on the particular adiabatic path taken in parameter space. Nevertheless, if additional symmetries are present, for example a U (1) spin-rotation symmetry, the exchange process becomes universal. Protected quantum-information processing is then possible using non-abelian Braiding of MKPs, similar to the time-reversal-broken case. While they have been by now a large body of theoretical works proposing realizations of the TRITOPS phase, only a few experimental attempts have been made in this direction (see for example Ref. From the theory point of view, it would be interesting to explore phases related to TRITOPS which cannot be described by quadratic Hamiltonians, analogous to the generalization of the integer quantum Hall effect to the fractional one. What are the possible fractional TRITOPS phases and what are the systems most likely to realize them? Some progress in this direction was made As usual, we define the TR operation by its form when acting on the fermionic operators, where T w and T sc are unitary matrices operating in the spaces of states in the wire and the superconductor, respectively. For the TR operation to square to -1, we further require T w(sc) T * w(sc) = -1. Enforcing TRS on the system, THT -1 = H, amounts to the following conditions The last equality, together with the property ∆ T -k = -∆ k , guarantee that ∆ k T sc is a Hermitian matrix. We are now in a position to define more precisely the statement we wish to prove: The system will always be in the topologically-trivial phase if ∆ k T sc is a positive semi-definite (PSD) matrix Integrating out the superconductor. We wish to obtain the Green's function describing the wire, from which one can then extract the topological invariant of the system. To this end we first write the Hamiltonian in a BdG form using the Nambu spinor , where and where as usual {τ α } α=x,y,z are Pauli matrices in particle-hole space. In writing Eqs. where Σ k (ω) is the self energy, and g sc k (ω) is the Green's function of the parent SC in the absence of coupling to the wire. In the next step, we wish to relate the properties of ∆ k to the properties of Σ k (0). Using Eqs. (125b) and (126c), one can check that g sc k (0) is Hermitian and obeys τ y g sc k (0)τ y = -g sc k (0). It therefore has the following structure: where g N k and g A k are Hermitian matrices. This also means that the zero-frequency self energy has the same structure, Σ k (0) = τ z ⊗Σ N k +τ x ⊗Σ A k , with Σ N k = t † k g N k t k and Σ A k = -t † k g A k t k being the normal and anomalous parts, respectively. Upon rotating g sc k (0) in Eq. (126c) by the unitary transformation exp(iπτ x /4), and using Eqs. (125b) and One then arrives at where |u is an arbitrary vector, |v ≡ (g A k + ig N k )t k |u , and we have used the fact that g N k , g A k , and h sc k are Hermitian. Namely, we have proved that Σ A k is PSD. We now use this property of Σ A k to prove the topological invariant is trivial. This can be obtained from the Green function by defining Indeed, this Hamiltonian obeys a time-reversal symmetry, T † w H eff * -k T w = H eff k , as well as a chiral symmetry, τ y H eff k τ y = -H eff k , and is therefore in class DIII. It was shown in Sec. 2.1 how the invariant can be obtained from the matrix Q k = U † k D k V k , defined in Eq. ( where as define in Sec. 2.1, |α n,k are the eigenvectors of Qk with corresponding eigenvalues exp(iθ n,k ). Since D k is positive definite (see Sec. 2.1), we conclude that cos θ n,k ≥ 0 for all n and k. Namely none of the phases θ n,k can have a non-zero winding number as k changes from -π to π, which in particular means that the topological invariant, Eq. ( The Hamiltonians H eff kx=0,ky and H eff kx=π,ky both belong to class DIII in 1d, and are of the form of Eq. ( Extension to non-translationally-invariant systems. So far, we assumed that the system is translationally invariant along the direction of the wire in the 1d case, or in the plane of the system in the 2d case. However, our results holds even without translational symmetry, e.g., in the presence of disorder. We refer to the boundary of a system in one, two, and three dimensions as an end, edge, and surface, respectively, and use the word boundary when not restricting to a certain dimensionality. That is Hamiltonians of free fermions or of systems which are described within mean-field theory, such as Bardeen Cooper Schrieffer (BCS) superconductors. Nevertheless, in some cases magnetism can exist in the system while still having an emergent time-reversal symmetry (squaring to -1) within the low-energy description of the system We refer to these pairing potentials as induced since to have a gapped superconducting phase in 1d, one has to rely on proximity to a higher-dimensional superconductor for inducing superconductivity. The possibility of a gapless TRITOPS phase has also been proposed It should be noted that the identification of the index s = ↑, ↓ as the spin is not crucial. One can instead consider a model with modes ψ R,1 (x), ψ R,2 (x) and their time-reversal partners ψ L,2 (x), ψ L,1 (x), respectively. While in this case the physical meaning of helicity is absent, one can still refer to ψ R,1 and ψ L,2 as having "positive helicity", and to ψ R,2 and ψ L,1 as having "negative helicity", or the other way around. We distinguish between the TRS operator, T, which acts on the second-quantized states, and the operator Θ, which acts on first-quantized states (see Sec. 1.3 below). Alternatively, the pairing potentials ∆ + and ∆ -can be complex numbers having the same phase, ∆ ± = |∆ ± |e iφ , in which case H would be symmetric under a slightly modified TRS, given by T ψ R,s T -1 = ie iφ σ y ss ψ L,s , T ψ L,s T -1 = ie iφ σ y ss ψ R,s . Alternatively stated, if one splits ∆ν (θ) to a part which is periodic in π and a part which is antiperiodic, ∆ν (θ) = [∆ν (θ) + ∆ν (θ + π)]/2 + [∆ν (θ) -∆ν (θ + π)]/2, then the antiperiodic part cancels under the integration over θ in Eq. (6). The indices I and J run over 2N states, which include both particle states and hole states, to be distinguished from i and j, which run only over the N particle states. Note that most generally kx and ky should be considered as coordinates along the reciprocal primitive vectors, G 1,2 , in units of |G 1,2 |/2π, respectively. While an even number of pairs of helical edge modes can generally be completely gapped by a symmetry-allowed perturbation, an odd number of pairs dictates the survival of at least one pair. ky. When making this statement we assume the spectrum of h k is nondegenerate at the Fermi level. If it is, one has to first diagonalize ∆ k T in that degenerate subspace. In contrast, in a trivial SNS junction (where the normal part is not described by a pair of helical modes), a similarly-looking excitation spectrum is obtained, however, importantly the number of states there is doubled compared to Eq. For more details on the behavior of the pair correlations vs. the pair potential see the supplemental material of Ref. Notice that the form of the crossed pairing term is dictated by TRS, which takes ψ R,j → ψ L,j and ψ L,j → -ψ R,j . TRS also dictates that ∆ j = ∆ * j for j = 1, 2. The g 2 term in Eq. This estimation is obtained upon neglecting the second order terms in Eqs. (50e,50f) and integrating them up to ∆ ± ( * ) = v ± Λ. Notice, however, that if the system has a U (1) spin-rotation symmetry, such that spin in the z direction is conserved, then the scattering from a spin-↑ electron to a spin-↑ hole is forbidden and one necessarily has Andreev reflection rather than Andreev transmission. Excitations with energies below the bulk gap are the ones which correspond to bound states whose wave function decays away from the junction, x = 0. Let |u 1 and |u 2 be eigenvectors of C with the same eigenvalues (either +1 or -1), and let H anticommutes with C. Thenu 1 |H |u 2 = u 1 |C † H C|u 2 = -u 1 |H |u 2 , namely u 1 |H |u 2 = 0. Notice that even though u + and ũ+ = Ξu + have opposite eigenvalues under C, they cannot be coupled because they are related by particle-hole symmetry (and similarly for u -and ũ-= Ξu -). This can be inferred from Ξu+ |H |u + = Ξ 2 u + |ΞH |u + * = u + | -H Ξ|u + * = -Ξu + |H |u + = 0, where in the first step we have used the fact that operating with an anti-unitary transformations on both vectors in an inner product amounts to complex conjugation, and in the second step we used the fact that H anticommutes with Ξ. For our purposes, { | η i [R(t)] } g i=1 will be the degenerate ground-state manifold, and the degeneracy, g, will be either 2 or 4, depending on whether there are two isolated MBSs or two Kramers' pairs of MBSs. Importantly, this will not be the case when we deal below with a Kramers' pair of MBSs, since there the two Majorana operators overlap in space. For an example of a model yielding a nonzero {χn(R), ∇ R χn(R)} see Ref. More generally, ∆ k Tsc can be a PSD matrix times some complex number that does not depend on k. The phase of this complex number can always be absorbed in the definition of Tsc, rendering ∆ k Tsc PSD. Note also that this condition excludes the case considered in Sec. 3.1, in which case ∆ k describes two superconducting leads in a π junction An interesting example is the system considered in Ref. We note that since both H eff kx=0,ky and H eff kx=π,ky (and similarly H eff kx,ky =0 and H eff kx,ky =π ) are trivial, the weak topological indices are trivial as well.