By employing unbiased numerical methods, we show that pulse irradiation can induce unconventional superconductivity even in the Mott insulator of the Hubbard model. The superconductivity found here in the photoexcited state is due to the η-pairing mechanism, characterized by staggered pair-density-wave oscillations in the off-diagonal long-range correlation, and is absent in the ground-state phase diagram; i.e., it is induced neither by a change of the effective interaction of the Hubbard model nor by simple photocarrier doping. Because of the selection rule, we show that the nonlinear optical response is essential to increase the number of η pairs and thus enhance the superconducting correlation in the photoexcited state. Our finding demonstrates that nonequilibrium many-body dynamics is an alternative pathway to access a new exotic quantum state that is absent in the ground-state phase diagram, and also provides an alternative mechanism for enhancing superconductivity. Recent experiments have clearly demonstrated that nonequilibrium dynamics can induce many intriguing phenomena in condensed-matter materials In this Letter, we show that pulse irradiation can induce superconductivity even in the celebrated MI of the Hubbard model. The photoinduced superconductivity is due to the η-pairing mechanism, forming on-site singlet pairs that exhibit, unlike conventional s-wave superconductivity, the staggered off-diagonal long-range correlation with a phase of π. Because of the selection rule, the nonlinear optical response is essential to increasing the number of η pairs, and thus enhancing the superconducting correlation. Therefore, our finding is distinct from the previous studies To demonstrate that superconductivity can be photoinduced in a MI, here we consider the half-filled onedimensional (1D) Hubbard model at zero temperature. However, our finding does not depend on spatial dimen-sionality where ĉi,σ (ĉ † i,σ ) is the annihilation (creation) operator for an electron at site i with spin σ (=↑, ↓) and ni,σ = ĉ † i,σ ĉi,σ . t h is the hopping integral between the nearest-neighboring sites, while U (> 0) is the on-site repulsive interaction. At half-filling, the ground state (GS) of the repulsive 1D Hubbard model is the MI with strong antiferromagnetic correlations. A time-dependent external field is introduced via the Peierls phase in Eq. ( Enhancement of the double occupancy n d (t) = has been already reported in photoexcited states of the MIs . Notice that P (j, t) at j = 0 corresponds to the double occupancy, i.e., P (j = 0, t) = 2n d (t). We thus confirm the enhancement of n d (t) by the pulse irradiation. Surprisingly, P (j = 0, t) is also enhanced significantly by the pulse irradiation and oscillates with the opposite phases between odd and even sites. As shown in Fig. , is also calculated at q = π in Fig. In order to identify the optimal control parameters for the enhancement of P (q = π, t), Fig. Instead, the behavior of the on-site pairs in the photoinduced state shown in Fig. Yang originally proposed the η-pairing state |φ Nη ∝ (η + ) Nη |0 , where |0 is a vacuum with no electrons and N η is the number of η pairs Following them, we can construct the eigenstate having N η η pairs from the LWS with As an example, we construct |ψ Nη from the ground state |ψ To elucidate the nature of the photoinduced state |Ψ(t) in terms of the η pairs, we calculate the eigenenergies ε m and the structure factors P (q = π) for all the eigenstates |ψ m of Ĥ at half-filling. As shown in Fig. 2 , corresponding to the number of η pairs. These quantized values are exactly the same as P (q = π) calculated for |ψ Nη in Fig. In Fig. The process of the enhancement of P (π, t) is explained as follows: Before the pulse irradiation, the initial state is the GS of Ĥ with |η = 0, η z = 0 , i.e., the η singlet state More precisely, in the small-A 0 limit, the external perturbation is expressed as A(t) Ĵ. We can show that the current operator Ĵ is a rank-one tensor operator with the zeroth component in terms of the η operators Exactly the same argument can be applied to the two-dimensional Hubbard model on the square lattice, and indeed we have found the large enhancement of the onsite pairing correlation in the photoinduced state, similar to the 1D case In conclusion, we have found that density-wave-like staggered superconducting correlations are induced by photoexciting the MI ground state of the half-filled Hubbard model. The superconductivity is due to the ηpairing mechanism where the on-site singlet pairs display off-diagonal long-range correlation with phase π, the fingerprint of the η-pairing state. We have shown that the nonlinear optical response is essential to increase the number of η pairs and hence enhance the superconducting correlation. The η-pairing states were originally introduced purely for the mathematical purpose to solve the Hubbard model analytically, and here we have demonstrated that the pulse irradiation can bring this object into the real world to be observed experimentally. Finally, we note that a more realistic treatment of materials should include a coupling with other degrees of freedom such as phonons, which introduces slow timescale dynamics in the thermalization process. Therefore, the η-pairing may be realized experimentally in a transient or prethermal regime. The most ideal system to explore the η-pairing experimentally is a cold fermionic atom system, for which the antiferromagnetic order has been recently observed To evaluate the state |Ψ(t) under the time-dependent Hamiltonian Ĥ(t), we numerically solve the timedependent Schrödinger equation, with the initial condition that |Ψ(t = 0) = |ψ 0 , where |ψ 0 is the ground state of the Hamiltonian Ĥ(t = 0). For this purpose, we employ the time-dependent exact diagonalization (ED) method based on the Lanczos algorithm In order to confirm the enhancement of the pair correlation in larger systems, we also perform the timedependent matrix-product state (MPS) As an example, Fig. for L = 10 simply because of the correspondence to Fig. In the main text, we focus on the 1D Hubbard model to demonstrate that the strong superconducting correlation can be induced in the Mott insulator (MI) by the pulse irradiation, and show that the origin of this superconductivity is due to the η-pairing mechanism. Here, we show that exactly the same conclusion can be reached for the two-dimensional (2D) Hubbard model on the square lattice with only nearest neighbor hoppings. The 2D Hubbard model is described by the following Hamiltonian: where the sum i, j runs over all pairs of nearest neighbor sites i and j on the square lattice. Similarly to the 1D case, the total η operators η± = The real-space on-site pair correlation function for the time-evolved state |Ψ(t) is defined as ) where ∆Ri = ĉi,↑ ĉi,↓ and the pair structure factor in the momentum space is given as Noticing that ∆Rj = (-1) jx+jy ηj , P (q, t) at q = π = (π, π) is The pair structure factor P (q = π) for |η, η z is thus 2 [η(η + 1) -η z (η z -1)] /L. Any eigenstate |η, η z can be constructed from the LWS |η, -η by repeatedly applying η+ because Since η-|η, -η = 0 by definition, the LWS contains no η pairs and P (q = π) = 0. Each time that η+ is applied from the LWS, the number of η pairs increases by one, and the maximum number of η pairs is obtained when η z = 0 (i.e., half-filling) for a given η, where η, η z = 0| η+ η-|η, η z = 0 = η(η + 1) and the number of η pairs is η. The time-dependent external field is introduced in Eq. (S5) by t h ĉ † i,σ ĉj,σ → t h e -iA(t)•(Ri-Rj ) ĉ † i,σ ĉj,σ with the time-dependent vector potential A(t) = A(t)(e x +e y ) pointing along the diagonal direction and A(t) given in the main text. The current operator Ĵ(0) α along a direction α (α = x, y) is defined as where ĉ † j+eα,σ is the creation operator of an electron at the site located at R j + e α with spin σ. We can now show that η± , Ĵ(0 where α with q = 0, ±1 is a rank-one tensor operator in terms of η operators. In particular, the current operator Ĵ(0) α is a rank-one tensor operator with q = 0 and hence there is the following selection rule: . is a rank-one tensor operator with q = 0, while . is a rank-zero tensor operator, i.e., a scalar operator. Although here we consider the 2D case, the extension to other spatial dimensions is straightforward. As shown above, any eigenstate of Ĥ can be chosen to be an eigenstate of η2 and ηz . Figure S.3(a) shows all the eigenenergies ε m of Ĥ and the corresponding pair structure factors P (q) at q = π = (π, π) on a √ 10 × √ 10 cluster with PBC at half-filling. Indeed, as in the 1D case, P (π) is quantized as P (π) = 2η(η + 1)/L, where η (= 0, 1, • • • , L/2) corresponds to the number of η pairs. We also examine the behavior of the photoinduced states in the 1D Hubbard model Ĥ away from half-filling. Figure S.4 shows the time evolution of the pair correlation function P (j, t) calculated by the ED method for L = 12 with N ↑ = N ↓ = 5 (10 electrons in total) under PBC. Although the magnitude of P (j, t) is smaller than that for the case of half-filling, P (j, t) clearly shows a pair density wave like oscillation with the correlation extended up to the longest distance of the cluster. Therefore, the η-pairing correlation is induced in the photoexcited state in the Hubbard model even away from halffilling. To elucidate the nature of the photoinduced state |Ψ(t) in terms of the η pairs, we calculate the eigenen- In the large pulse width limit, i.e., σ p → ∞, the time-dependent vector potential is given as suggesting that the excitations are allowed only to states with the excitation energy that is an integer multiple of ω p . This nicely explains the energy dependence found in Fig. m10 should involve the odd number of excitations induced by the current operator Ĵ. In the case of half-filling, combining this with the selection rule in Eq. (S17) yields that the η odd excitations are possible if and only if ε m -ε 0 = (2ν + 1)ω p . Similarly, the η even excitations are possible if and only if the ε m -ε 0 = 2νω p at half-filling. These are in accordance with the "tower of states" structure shown schematically in Fig. Although the η commutation relations are broken when t h is finite in ĤNNN , we find the enhancement of the pair correlation functions, specially during the transient period, with the η-pairing like sign-alternating oscillation [see Fig. S.6(b)]. Note that, unlike in the case of t h = 0, P (q = π, t) is no longer conserved after the pulse irradiation because of [ Ĥt h , η+ η-] = 0. With increasing t h , P (j, t) at j > 0 becomes suppressed and eventually show no longer range correlation after the pulse irradiation [see Fig. S.6(c)]. Therefore, we conclude that the photoinduced states still show the robust η-pairing correlations transiently as long as the NNN hopping t h is small, although the large NNN hopping t h is unfavorable for the photoinduced η-pairing. Coulomb interaction In addition, we examine the influence of the nearestneighbor Coulomb interaction V on the pair correlation in the photoinduced state. The model considered here is the 1D extended Hubbard model described by ĤEH = Ĥ + ĤV , where the intersite Coulomb interaction term is given as ĤV = V j,σ,σ nj,σ nj+1,σ . (S31) Because [ ĤV , η+ ] = 2V j,σ (-1) j ĉ † j,↓ ĉ † j,↑ (n j-1,σ + nj+1,σ ), the Hamiltonian ĤEH breaks the η commutation relations. Figure S.7 shows the time dependence of the pair correlation functions for the photoexcited state |Ψ(t) with different values of V calculated by the ED method for L = 14 under PBC. The time-dependent external field is introduced exactly in the same form described in the main text. Although the η commutation relations are broken when V is finite in ĤEH , we find the enhancement of In nonequilibrium contexts, possible realization of the η-paring state has also been proposed in the repulsive Hubbard systems with the harmonic trapping potential In the attractive Hubbard model, Kitamura and Aoki have investigated the η-pairing state induced by the periodically driven field 