We present a new method for measuring low concentrations and simultaneously small volumes of fluorescent molecules based on the use of the Ebbesen effect of the extraordinary transmission (EOT) of light through an array of nano-holes. In the method the EOT effect is realized at the fluorescence wavelength of the detected molecules with a low transmission of light at the absorption wavelength. The approach allows realizing high level of the sensor sensitivity due to suppression of the inevitable parasitic luminescence of the sensor substrate. The method was demonstrated by detecting an ultra low concentration (at a level of 20 pg/ml (3 p.p.t.)) and an ultra-small volume (about 5 μl) of Cy-5 fluorescent markers in a dimethyl sulfoxide solution. Small concentration detection is extremely important both in fundamental research and in various applications. The ability to detect a single atom or molecule is a key aspect of studying the single quantum object properties and QED effects The most developed methods of single molecule detection are based on their fluorescent measurements In this work we present a method based on the use of the EOT light transmission through an array of nano-holes perforated in a metal film (plasmonic crystal, PC) that allows suppressing the various types of parasitic luminescence and having sensitivity approaching sensitivity of the SMC sensors. We develop a new type of sensor based on (1) optical excitation of molecules, (2) their subsequent fluorescence detection and (3) the use of the Ebbesen effect of the extraordinary transmission of light (EOT). The EOT effect is already used in sensorics In this work, we utilize the EOT effect in a completely new way to perform effective fluorescence measurements: to create an optical filter, which allows a significant increase in the signal-tonoise ratio, due to a significant decrease in parasitic substrate luminescence. The spectral transmission of the PC (nanoholes array) is chosen in such a way: (1) to achieve high transmission of light (the EOT effect) at the wavelength of the molecule fluorescence and, (2) to achieve low light transmission at the laser wavelength. In such approach one can significantly suppress parasitic luminescence of the substrate caused by the exciting laser light, which is usually the main limitation factor of sensor sensitivity based on the fluorescence measurements of arbitrary large volumes of analyte, namely more than 1 nl. Note that the sensitive fluorescence measurements of such arbitrary large volumes are a key factor in reaching fast measurements of SMC sensors We note as well that such sensor allows further increasing the sensitivity through another effect. Fabrication of high quality PC helps to substantially reduce large background signal accompanying sensing through a transparent dielectric substrate. The large background signal is formed by a laser scattering on the quartz surface and the particles luminescence on the surface. These surface imperfections have different origins: surface polishing defects, adsorption of particles from air, etc. The detection of molecules fluorescence through a high quality PC has two main advantages. First, luminescence from such particles does not enter the detection zone of fluorescence, since the microparticles block the passage of light through the nanohole. Second, most of the particles are located between nano-holes, and their luminescence does not reach the detection zone. The EOT transmission through a PC formed by nanoholes perforated in metal film consists in the energy transfer of the incident light wave through the PC to its other side via surface plasmons At normal illumination of a PC, the wave vector of the excited plasmon wave is determined by the following expression Here  is the pitch of nano-holes array, nx and ny are integers. Thus, spectral regions of the EOT effect and low light transmittance of a PC are realized at the wavelengths determined by the period of the nano-hole array Fig. The volume of the plasmonic sensor which is filled by analyte is equal to 5 μL. A drop of analyte solution is introduced into the sensor using a pipetator through one of the holes made in the YAG substrate. Further, by the forces of surface tension, this drop itself is dragged into the sensor, and it is spread evenly without bubbles over the entire surface of the PC. We note that a detailed theoretical analysis of the plasmonic sensor under investigation is a rather difficult problem, requiring consideration of a number of effects: (1) the excited spatial hybrid "photon + plasmon" modes (3) the adsorption of Cy-5 molecules on the surface The plasmonic sensor was located in the object plane of the Nikon Eclipse/Ti-U microscope. The sensor is illuminated by laser radiation at wavelength  = 628 nm and a power of 10 mW from a diode laser. The laser radiation illuminates the surface of the PC normally to the Ag film. The size of the laser spot on the sample equals to 20 μm. The fluorescence of Cy-5 molecules excited by laser radiation is passed through the nanohole array and collected with a ×10 microscope objective on the EM CCD camera (Princeton Instruments). The CCD camera is installed next to a bandpass filter with a bandwidth of 100 nm, corresponding to the center of the fluorescence wavelength of the Cy-5 dye (see Fig. Fig. The smallest transmission at the wavelength  = 628 nm is realized through a PC with a nanoholes array pitch  = 565 nm. The measured transmittance equals to Texc = 0.03% (PC transmittance at the wavelength of laser light). Such a strong attenuation of laser radiation by a PC makes it possible to significantly weaken the luminescence of the quartz substrate excited by laser radiation. The highest transmission of a PC with  = 565 nm is realized at wavelength of the Cy-5 molecules and is equal to TCy-5 = 5% (PC transmittance at the wavelength of Cy-5 molecules luminescence). Thereby, the sensitivity increase realized by the PC is characterized by the figure of merit FOM = TCy-5 / Texc  166. Note that such a high FOM value is a consequence of the high quality of the PC formed by: (i) silver film having minimal losses for plasmon waves, (ii) identical size and shape of nanoholes, (iii) identity of the distance between nanoholes on the entire area of the PC. When a solution of Cy-5 dye molecules with a concentration of 40 pg/ml is introduced into the sensor, a noticeable increase in the recorded signal occurs in the image on the CCD camera (Fig. Fig. The minimum recorded concentration of dye molecules is 20 pg/ml (3 p.p.t.). This is the concentration at which the detected fluorescence signal from the molecules is twice as high as the level of parasitic luminescence. At such a low concentration of Cy-5 the distance between molecules is about 3.5 μm. With the chosen laser beam sizes, this concentration corresponds to detection of only about 10 3 Cy-5 molecules in the entire volume of the plasmonic sensor (compared to about 10 8 molecules for RI sensors), which corresponds to detection of the total dye molecules mass less than 1 atto gram which is a new record in plasmonic sensor sensitivity In the investigated range of concentrations of dye molecules, the detected fluorescence signal should be proportional to the number of molecules. However, as can be seen from Fig. The Cy-5 dye molecules used in the plasmonic sensor are known as fluorescent biomarkers Summarizing, we have developed plasmonic sensor of fluorescent biomarkers Cy-5, based on the use of Cy-5 fluorescence measurements through a PC having high level of spectral selectivity realized by the EOT effect. A record level of sensitivity is shown with the use of plasmonic structures pawing a way to new types of ultrasensitive plasmonic sensors. Funding. Russian Foundation for Basic Research (17-02-01093); Advanced Research Foundation (contract number 7/004/2013-2018 on 23.12.2013).