The design of time-independent effective Hamiltonians that describe periodically modulated systems, provides a promising approach to realize new forms of matter. This, so-called, Floquet engineering approach is currently limited to the description of wavepacket dynamics. Here, we utilize the notion of effective Hamiltonians and develop a Floquet engineering scattering formalism that relies on a systematic high-frequency expansion of the scattering matrix. The method unveils the critical role of micromotion. An application to the case of non-reciprocal transport is presented. Introduction -The design of periodically driven schemes and their implementation to various physical systems has attracted the attention of the research community during the last decade The cornerstone concept in the Floquet engineering approach is associated with the notion of effective (Floquet) Hamiltonian ĤF . The latter is time-independent and allows us to describe the evolution of the original periodically driven system Ĥ0 (t + T ) = Ĥ0 (t) in a stroboscopic manner. In other words, the evolution of the driven system is given by Û (t 2 , t 1 ) = ÛF (t 2 ) e -ı(t2-t1) ĤF Û † F (t 1 ) where ÛF (t) = ÛF (t + T ) encodes the dynamics taking place within each period T of the drive, the so-called micromotion. The prerequisite for Floquet engineering is that ĤF can be designed by suitably tailoring the driving protocol relevant circumstances where ĤF (and also ÛF (t)) can be computed in the form of an inverse-frequency expansion Besides all this activity, however, not much has been done for the implementation of the effective (Floquet) Hamiltonian notion within the scattering framework. This is quite surprising since the latter is the appropriate formalism for the analysis of the transport properties of a system. In this paper, we undertake this task and develop a Floquet engineering scattering theory based on effective Hamiltonians of periodically driven systems. Specifically we develop a systematic high-frequency expansion of the Floquet scattering matrix, which unveils the important role of micromotion in modifying the coupling of the system to the leads. We demonstrate the efficiency of our scheme, by utilizing it for the design of periodic driving protocols that aim to enhanced (optimized) non-reciprocal transport (NRT). Theoretical Formalism-We consider a Floquet system described by a finite-dimensional N s × N s time-periodic Hamiltonian Ĥ (t) = Ĥ (t + T ) (T ≡ 2π/ω is the period of the drive and ω is its frequency), where Ĥ0 (t) is a N s ×N s hermitian matrix, -ı Γ describes the uniform losses in the system and I N (with an arbitrary subscript N ) denotes the N × N identity matrix. For example, in the context of the coupled mode theory, the Hamiltonian Ĥ (t) could describe a network of coupled single-mode resonators (sites) with uniform losses γ, whose resonant frequencies and couplings are modulated periodically in time, see Fig. For periodic driving, the Floquet theorem assures that when an incident wave with frequency E 0 = E(k 0 ) is approaching the time-periodic modulated target, it will scatter to infinite number of outgoing channels (including evanescent channels) with frequencies E n (k n ) = E 0 + nω where n is an integer. We are interested in the scattering matrix S, which connects only the propagating incoming and outgoing channels. Following the derivation in Ref. where is the quasi-energy operator in the extended Floquet-Hilbert space, with the matrix component H 0 The subindex s = 1, • • • , N s indicates the s-site of the time-periodic system. The notation [X n ] denotes an infinite block diagonal matrix with each diagonal block being a submatrix X n (the integer n runs from -∞ to +∞). The hermitian operator Λ H = W T c [Λ n I 2 ] W c describes the channel-coupling induced renormalization for the "Hamiltonian" H Q in the extended Floquet-Hilbert space. Here the matrix elements Λ n distinguish between propagating and evanescent channels. Furthermore the operator (W c ) nα,n s = c α δ nn δ α↔s describes the coupling between the channels and the sites of the driven system in the Floquet-Hilbert space, where c α is the bare coupling between the lead α and the sites of the system, and we define δ α↔s = 1 when the lead α is directly coupled with the site s and δ α↔s = 0 otherwise. Finally (W ) n P α,n s = √ v g,n P c α δ n P n δ α↔s describes the coupling of the propagating channels with the driven system in the extended space. The integer n P labels only the propagating channels and v g,n P = ∂E/∂k| kn P represents the group velocity in each of these channels. We proceed with the high-frequency analysis of the scattering matrix Eq. ( where the sub-blocks ûn-n ≡ (U F ) n,n of the unitary matrix U F are related to the one-point micromotion operator ÛF (t) as ûn = 1 T T 0 dt ÛF (t) e ınωt . Therefore, U F encodes the micromotion generated by Ĥ0 (t) or equivalently Ĥ (t) in the uniform-loss case. Note that in general, both the effective Hamiltonian ĤF and the matrix U F are not uniquely defined. However, under the canonical van Vleck form of degenerate perturbation theory, they can be uniquely determined order by order with respect to 1/ω in terms of the Fourier components Ĥ(n) of the Ĥ0 (t), see Ref. In the large driving-frequency limit, the number of the propagating channels in each lead reduce to one, i.e., N p = 1. Using Eqs. ( where The difficulty of the analysis of the scattering matrix S mainly comes from the presence of the full matrix The above matrix can be formally separated into a block-diagonal part dn and a block-off-diagonal matrix V , i.e., where V n1,n2 = dn1,n2 when n 1 = n 2 and dn = dn,n . The above decomposition Eq. ( where g F = ĝF n and the "locator" is identified as ĝF . Notice that for n = 0 the locator is of order g F n =0 ∼ O (1/ω). Our final step involves the expansion of W F = W U F (specifically of U F ) in powers of 1/ω and its substitution, together with Eq. ( Next, let us consider a scenario for which Λ n =0 ∼ O(1/ω). This is a typical situation due to the diminishing coupling between the driving system and the evanescent channels E n =0 . Up to order O 1/ω 2 , we can write the scattering matrix S in Eq. ( where (ĉ) αs = c α δ α↔s , ĤF = Ĥ † F ≈ F0 + 1 ω F1 + 1 ω 2 F2 and û0 ≈ I 2 + 1 ω 2 b2 . The operators Fn appearing above are Ĥ(-m) Ĥ(m) with m 1 +m 2 +• • • m p = 0. Generally, the leading correction of the micromotion to the Floquet scattering problem is O(1/ω 2 ). This is the same order where novel topological properties of ĤF of the closed system typically manifest themselves. The correct implementation of ĤF in the scattering framework (where the micromotion is taken into account) is crucial in order to avoid any misinterpretations. For example, in the case of a tight-binding lead with dispersion relation E (k) = -2 cos(k) (in units of coupling), Eq. ( ĉ † e ıkn ĉû n-n2 (see Eq. ( We proceed with the evaluation of the left/right transmittance difference ∆ ≡ T L→R -T R→L , where 2 represents the transmittance from left to right lead for the propagating channel E 0 (and similarly for Equation ( Let us consider, for demonstration purposes, the example case of a simple two-mode Floquet system corresponding to N s = 2. We will further assume that the Floquet system is coupled to two tight-binding leads. In this situation the bare coupling matrix takes the form ĉ = c L 0 0 c R . For simplicity, we assume that c L = c R = -1 and the static part of Ĥ0 (t) is F0 = 0 h 0 h 0 0 , h 0 ∈ R. Under this simplification, the parametrization b2 = b † together with Eqs. ( From Eq. ( We proceed with the Floquet engineering design of NRT, under the constraint that the driving scheme involves only a first-harmonic i.e. where . Without loss of generality, we set φ L = 0 (we can always choose the driving phase properly to eliminate φ L without affecting NRT). In this respect, our goal is to maximize the transmittance difference ∆ by choosing the proper relative driving phases, i.e., φ R , φ 1 and 2 when φ L = 0. Therefore the problem boils down to the study of β i appearing in Eq. From Eqs. , thus resulting in an optimized NRT. In Fig. The analysis of transport properties of the specific two-mode Floquet system defined in Eq. ( for T L→R and T R→L which are based on Eq. ( Conclusions -We have developed a scattering Floquet engineering approach which is applicable in the high driving-frequency limit. The method utilizes the notion of the effective (Floquet) Hamiltonian which have been recently developed in the framework of wavepacket dynamics of Floquet systems. The approach highlights the importance of micromotion in the scattering framework and allows us to design driving schemes with predefined transport characteristics. We have demonstrated the validity of our scheme by applying it to the case of nonreciprocal transport associated with a two-site periodically modulated target with uniform losses and a firstharmonic time-periodic modulation. We furthermore find that the transmittance asymmetry is proportional to O(1/ω 2 ) for any two-site Floquet-system with uniform loss. It will be interesting to utilize the scattering Floquet engineering approach in order to identify periodically modulated scattering geometries for which the nonreciprocity will be of order O (1/ω). A promising direction along this lines is the investigation of modulated targets with spatio-temporal symmetries (like parity-time symmetry) 