Vertically aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) forests are a particularly interesting class of nanomaterials, because they combine multifunctional properties, such as high energy absorption, compressive strength, recoverability and super-hydrophobicity with light weight. These characteristics make them suitable for application as coating, protective layers and antifouling substrates for metallic pipelines and blades. Direct growth of CNT forests on metals offers the possibility to transfer the tunable CNT functionalities directly onto the desired substrates. Here, we focus on characterizing the structure and mechanical properties, as well as wettability and adhesion of CNT forests grown on different types of stainless steel. We investigate the correlations between composition and morphology of the steel substrates with the micro-structure of the CNTs, and reveal how the latter ultimately controls the mechanical and wetting properties of the CNT forest. Additionally, we study the influence of substrate morphology on the adhesion of CNTs to their substrate. We highlight that the same structure-property relationships govern the mechanical performance of CNT forests grown on steels and on Si. The unique properties of carbon nanotube (CNT) forests have been documented extensively in the past decade Floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition combines high CNT yield, vertical alignment and conformal substrate coverage. This method is commonly used for CNT forest growth on metal substrates The remarkable compressive behavior of CNT forests grown on silicon has been documented in literature and it includes energy dissipation in the order of MJ/m Considering the fact that the CNT forests combine light-weight, super-hydrophobicity, high energy absorption, similar to that of rigid polymer foams, with reusability, due to the large strain recoverability, a wide area of steel coating applications can be reached. The compositions of the used steels are summarized in Table The steels' surface energy was determined through contact angle measurements using a Drop Shape Analyzer from Krüss Optronic GmbH, model DSA25 Fowkes' theory predicts the surface energy of a solid, assuming it is a summation of individual and independent components (polar, dispersive, acidic etc.): where the superscripts "d", "p" and "ab" correspond to the dispersive, polar and acid-base interactions respectively. We used water and diiodomethane to probe the polar and dispersive forces of the substrates and a harmonic-mean approach to sum their contribution following Wu's equation where the subscript "L" is for each liquid used in the measurement CNT forests were synthesized on thermally oxidized silicon (Si) wafers and/or on the different stainless steel substrates, using vapor phase or "floating catalyst" thermal CVD. The furnace tube had an external diameter of 5 cm and a 15 cm heating zone To characterize the CNT structure and purity we used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman spectroscopy. SEM images were obtained using a HITACHI, SU8200 SEM, operating at 2-5 kV and 11nA (Fig. The micromechanical testing of the samples was performed using a FT-MTA02 module from FEMTO TOOLS. The obtained data of this experiment include also contributions from the sensor and system configuration as well as from the supporting steel material underneath the CNT forest. In order to remove these contributions and allow further calculations on the response of the CNT forests, we tested also a polished uncoated SS substrate Here, ε max is the maximum displacement at the end of compression cycle, and ε unload is the displacement after unloading to 10% of the maximum load in each cycle. The loss coefficient, η, measures energy dissipation and is calculated as follows where U1 is the elastic energy stored in the material when it is loaded elastically to a stress σmax during the first cycle and ΔUi is the energy dissipated in the i th cycle. Several methods have been reported to study the CNT adhesion to metal substrates including peel tests, scotch tape tests, scratch tests, indentation and combinations of those The custom setup consists of a 3-axis linear stage holding a razor blade (VWR International, No. 9) adjusted at a 45 o angle above the substrate. The substrate is stabilized with four screws. A strain gauge is placed in the x-direction (scratching direction), to detect the force on the substrate while the razor blade scratches off the CNTs forest. After positioning the sample on the stage using the adjustment screws, the razor blade is moved manually, to get in contact with the edge of CNT forests. The samples are scratched with five different scratching speeds, namely 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 5.0 mm/s. The output voltage of the strain gauge is recorded as a function of time with an oscilloscope (Tektronix, DP0314, Digital Phosphor Oscilloscope). After calibration (Kc=0.045 V/N), the scratching force can be obtained. From the force, the energy release per unit area (E/A, in J/m 2 ) can be calculated as follows: Here, w is the width of the CNT forest, P is the power in J/s, L is the length of the forest and u is the velocity in m/s. In Fig. Here, A is the specific surface area of a single nanotube sheet (equivalent to the one side of a rolled graphene sheet regardless of its diameter, A=1315 m 2 /g), L is the CNT length, n is the number of walls of the CNT, dout is the outer diameter, ds-s is the inter-tube distance (ds-s = 0.34 nm). Then from the SEM-observed areal density (7.9x10 Differences on surface properties and composition of the steel substrates can explain the differences in CNT diameters and density for the various substrates. As can be seen from Table To analyze the quality of the produced CNTs, we perform Raman spectroscopy measurements (Fig. Raman spectra obtained from the CNT forests grown on the different substrates. The IG/D ratio is indicated for every substrate type. We study the mechanical performance of the CNT forests subjected to quasi-static compressions for five consecutive cycles at a stain rate of 0.02 s -1 . Results indicate that after the third compression cycle, the forests reach a steady-state response (data for the first five compression cycles for S4 presented in the inset of Fig. At the first compression cycle, samples S1, S2 and S3 have similar dissipated energy values, which range between 1.7-1.9 MJ/m 3 . The CNT forest on S4 dissipates distinctly less energy, with an average value of 1.3 MJ/m 3 . CNTs grown on Si dissipate 1.9 MJ/m 3 , confirming that the energy dissipation is at the same order of magnitude for all CNT forests grown on Si and on steel. For the subsequent cycles, we note a decrease in the amount of dissipated energy, which levels off at about at 20-30% of the original value on all substrates. Same behavior is observed for the CNTs grown on Si wafer. The peak stress remains almost constant through all the consecutive compressions on all samples, with variations less than ±10%. Specifically, the CNTs on the S1 steel present the highest strength value, peaking at 24.4 MPa, while for S2 the maximum reached stress is 21.2 MPa. For S4 and S3 steels, lower stress levels are observed for the first compression cycle reaching 15.7 and 12.3 MPa, respectively. The peak stress values for the CNTs grown on Si are also constant, with an average at 10 MPa. The unloading moduli obtained for all samples range between 75 MPa and 100 MPa, with S4 presenting the highest stiffness, followed by S2, S1 and S3. In all steel samples, the unloading modulus is almost constant, with deviations within ±10% for all the successive compression cycles. For CNTs grown on Si, the modulus is found to be higher and constant throughout cyclic loading, averaging at 170 MPa for all cycles. The higher stiffness found on CNTs grown on Si compared to steels, can be correlated to the higher quality and significantly more height of the CNT forests grown on Si. The loss coefficient, which reflects the degree to which a material dissipates energy, is slightly decreasing for each consecutive cycle for all steel types. We obtain similar values for all samples grown on steels and on Si, which lie between 2x10 -2 and 7x10 -2 . We also investigate the deformation recovery of the CNTs after compression. We find that CNTs grown on the steels S1 and S2 show the largest recovery, averaging at 45% for all compressive cycles. The CNTs on S3 and S4 have also an almost constant recovery throughout all cycles, at 23% and 26%, respectively. CNT forests grown on Si recover significantly more, with an average at 78% throughout all compression cycles. This difference for recovery of CNTs grown on steels compared to Si, can be justified by the much higher thickness of the CNT forest on Si, as reported in previous studies Our results show that the denser, thicker and more aligned CNT forests grown on S1-S2, exhibit the highest energy dissipation, peak stress, loss coefficient and recovery, while the less dense, smaller diameter and more tortuous CNTs grown on sample S4, result in higher stiffness. This is in agreement with previous observations of CNTs grown on Si 10 . The mechanical performance of the CNT forests suggests that they may be suitable for vibration mitigation and protective applications because they combine high energy dissipation, strength and recoverability. We compare the performance of our materials with other CNT foams or polymeric foams of similar density, which are used in those applications, in an Ashby plot The Ashby plot of Fig. Corrosion protection on steel surfaces can be obtained using superhydrophobic coatings which prevent water diffusion to the surfaces, thereby extending their service life All the fabricated CNT forests are hydrophobic, and in some cases superhydrophobic. The best performance is obtained for the CNT forest on S2, which has a water contact angle of 161.5 o , followed by S3, S1 and S4, for which the contact angles vary from 153.6 to 144.8 o . The measured contact angle of the control CNT sample grown on a Si wafer is 133.2 ± 5.8 o , which is the lowest measured value. This can be explained by the enhanced surface roughness of the steel surfaces, compared to that of a Si wafer. The higher surface roughness of steels yields a less uniform CNT height, therefore a rougher top surface of the forest. It is known that a higher surface roughness leads to higher contact angles The morphological differences of CNTs on the steel substrates can justify the lower hydrophobicity of S4 compared to S1, S2 and S3. As shown by the IG/D index, calculated from the Raman spectra of the samples, S4 presents the highest defect density and tortuosity, and therefore has more non-aligned CNT tips exposed on the surface which justifies the lowest hydrophobicity compared to the rest of the samples. The CNTs on S2 have the highest CNT quality, as indicated by the Raman IG/D index, suggesting more aligned CNT tips on the surface and thus a higher hydrophobicity is expected. To evaluate the adhesion between the CNT forests and the steel substrates, we use a custommade scratching setup (Fig. As previously discussed and shown in Table Due to the use of different techniques to measure the adhesion-related strength or energy release, a comparison with all literature reported values is not always possible In this work, we report the synthesis, structural and mechanical characterization of CNT forests grown on commercial steel substrates. The CNT forests are grown using the floating catalyst method, directly on top of the steel substrates without the use of intermediate adhesive layers, to allow a robust direct contact. We study the mechanical properties, wettability and adhesion of the synthesized CNTs and investigate the structure-property relationships that govern the CNTs' performance. We find that the steel substrate composition and morphology determine the CNT diameter and density. CNTs with larger diameter and density exhibit higher degree of alignment and have the highest energy dissipation, peak stress, loss coefficient and recovery, as well as higher hydrophobicity. CNTs with smaller diameter, density and higher tortuosity result in higher stiffness and lower hydrophobicity. The results reveal that CNT forests grown on steel combine high energy dissipation, high compressive strength and stiffness with recoverability. Their mechanical performance, lightweight and superhydrophobicity, combined with their adhesion to steel, highlight the possibility to use carbon nanotubes forests as a protective multifunctional layer material for metal surfaces. 