Increasing pressure on the power industry to reduce carbon emissions has led to increased research into the use of biomass feedstocks. This work investigates the effects of HCl and KCl, key species influencing biomass boiler corrosion, on a laser clad coating of the FeCrAl alloy Kanthal APMT. In-Situ SEM exposure of the coating at 450 o C for 1 h was performed to investigate the initial effects of KCl on the corrosion process. The same coatings were exposed to 250 h exposures in both an air environment and a HCl rich environment. The influence of KCl was investigated in both. Evidence of a slow growing aluminium oxide was observed. It was found that HCl allowed chlorine based corrosion to occur suggesting it can interact from the gas phase. It was also observed that the presence of both HCl and KCl reduced the mass gain compared to KCl in an air environment. As global legislation pressures countries to transition to more sustainable energy systems, there has been an increase in the uptake of biomass combustion as an alternative to conventional fossil fuels Biomass combustion can create a more aggressive combustion environment within a boiler, leading to increased material loss from boiler components and significant reductions in operational performance One of the techniques used to combat the aggressive high temperature corrosion environments within boilers is to use materials with higher corrosion resistance. Many of these materials are expensive, and as such it is not economically feasible to replace conventional materials in bulk. In these situations, a surface engineering solution or a corrosion resistant coating can be applied to the outside of a bulk material made from inexpensive, low performance alloy. One such technique for carrying out this coating process is laser cladding whereby the feedstock material is fed into a meltpool on the surface of the substrate generated by a laser. As the meltpool is moved across the surface a coating is built up. Currently, materials used in heat exchanger components are mainly ferritic steels and the most commonly used coating materials for heat exchangers are corrosion resistant nickel based chromia forming alloys Other work has shown that a thin alumina layer will form at temperatures of 600 o C on a FeCrAl alloy, however this is most likely transient and so not stable and therefore non-protective Salts play an important role in the corrosion performance of materials at high temperature. Corrosion performance can be influenced by these salts in both their solid and liquid phase. With typical meting temperatures in the rage of 500 o C to 1000 o C, these temperature ranges are the most studied. It is well established in the literature that chloride salts play a particularly important role in biomass induced fireside corrosion due to their high levels in many biomass feedstocks FeCrAl alloys offer an alternative to conventionally used low alloy steels. The addition of aluminium allows for the formation of alumina, as well as chromia scales. These scales are dense and thermodynamically stable. The current research into the effects of KCl and HCl on FeCrAl alloys is focused on two main areas: short scale, and long scale exposures. In short scale tests, it has been shown that pre-formed alumina scales, formed at 900 o C for 1 h, provide protection against chlorine attack. Flaws in this protective alumina layer provide pathways for chlorine ingress and the eventual failure of the coating For much of the previous work discussed above, In-Situ Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (In-Situ ESEM) was used. In-Situ ESEM offers opportunities to investigate the progression of corrosion as it occurs. Environmental SEM chambers allow carful control of the gaseous environment surrounding a sample. This can be paired with real time imaging of the sample. The technique becomes more powerful when a heated stage is added into the chamber, allowing for high temperature corrosion tests to be imaged in real time. When looking at iron at 500 o C and 700 o C, in-situ measurements allowed for the structure of the initial iron oxides that grow on the surface to be investigated, providing insight into the earliest mechanisms to act The existing literature investigates the performance of FeCrAl alloys at temperatures of 600 o C or higher, and often in a pre-oxidised state. This work investigates a laser clad FeCrAl alloy on stainless steel at 450 o C, a temperature matching the current operational temperatures of biomass fired boilers, and below much of the range currently explored in the literature. Despite this being a relatively small temperature change, it moves the temperature well away from the melting point of KCl, ensuring that interactions in the solid phase are investigated. Pre-oxidising components adds to their manufacturing coast and is unfeasible when retrofitting components. The laser cladding of corrosion resistant coatings is a cost effective alternative to bulk component manufacture. There is little work carried out in the literature looking at laser clad coatings, whose dilution and microstructure may influence the corrosion performance of the coating material. In this work, the effects of Potassium Chloride crystals and Hydrogen Chloride gas on the formation of alumina and other corrosion products on a laser clad FeCrAl alloy is investigated. and a wire feed rate of 6.6 mm s -1 . Each successive pass of the laser deposited at a step distance of 2.618 mm producing a 40% overlap coating. These parameters were selected from previous work on optimising coatings for corrosion performance x 10 mm sections using a silicon carbide precision cut off disc. The top surface of each of these sections was ground sequentially with silicon carbide grinding papers and finally to a diamond finish to 1 μm. Energy-Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy was performed on the segregated areas to determine their composition. An 80 mm 2 spectrometer (Oxford Instruments, UK) was used to take these measurements and the analysis software INCA (Oxford Instruments, UK) to draw elemental information. This was again performed pre and post exposure. The samples were deposited with a saturated solution of KCl in water and industrial methylated spirit pipetted onto the surface. In-situ high temperature oxidation tests were carried out in an FEI Quanta 200 Field Emission Gun Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (FEG ESEM) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). The setup of the SEM is the same as that found in previous work These cross-sections were cut, ground and polished using the same process as for the initial surface preparation, however non-aqueous lubricants were used to ensure chlorides were not removed. These sections were cold mounted to ensure the protection of any deposit formed and were again analysed with SEM and EDX using the same instrumentation to form a complete analysis of the samples. In-situ SEM exposure of APMT at 450 o C This is matched by a decrease in iron concentration over the same distance from its maximum at A of 82.6 % to a minimum of 43.9 %. This region represents an iron oxide with a thickness of approximately 10 nm, giving a total oxide thickness of 16 nm. In Figure Beyond this region, across the boundary at B, there is a very rapid chromium depletion over a distance of approximately 6 nm. Here chromium concentration reaches 13.8 %. This is again matched by a change in iron as its concentration raises back to 74.5 % over the same region. As oxygen has been excluded from the EDX measurements, this transition region most probably represents the ironchromium spinel. Moving inwards from point B we see a small region in Figure Figure In the bulk material there is a depletion of both iron and chromium close to the coating oxide interface at B. In the approximately 4 nm before the boundary, iron is depleted from the bulk level to 61.0 %. The chromium depletes to a lesser extent but over a greater distance, dropping to 14.9 % over a distance of approximately 22 nm. The region between points B and C again represent the bulk material and have a composition of 68.4 ± 0.2 % iron and 21.6 ± 0.2 % chromium. Figure Figure with peak positions at 44.4 o , 64.6 o and 81.7 o and associated d-spacing of 2.04 Å, 1.44 Å and 1.18 Å respectively. As such it is suggested that this is an iron solid solution containing chromium and aluminium, as would be expected from APMT. After 1 h there were no oxide peaks found within the detection limit of the XRD. After 250 h in both air and HCl, peaks can be identified matching the crystal structure of haematite and chromia. It can also be seen that the presence of HCl increases the intensity of these peaks. Aside from these peaks there are no other phases visible from the XRD scans and as such, any other phases present under these conditions are expected to be very thin. Figure The other major phase noticed is potassium chloride. This can be seen in all of the samples with potassium chloride deposits and is never fully consumed. After 250 h in the presence of HCl the intensity of KCl in comparison to the other samples is lower, suggesting more of the KCl has been consumed. In the presence of air, the coating peaks cannot be observed. This could be due to a thick layer of KCl covering the surface and obscuring the substrate. There is an unindexed peak centred at a 2θ of 58 o . This peak appears in all samples in the presence of KCl, however a match could not be found. Long term exposure of APMT at 450 o C in air After completing exposures in air for 1 h, long term exposures were carried out for 250 h. The top surface of the sample exposed without a KCl deposit can be seen in Figure When exposed for 250 h in the presence of KCl, the deposits which grow on the surface of the APMT, seen in Figure Figure After investigating the behaviour of the coating for different exposure lengths in air, a synthetic flue gas rich in HCl was used for a 250 h test. This can be seen in Figure Figure The final sample analysed was in a combination of both HCl gas and a KCl deposit. It can be seen in Figure Mass change was taken from the coated to the poste exposure samples. The greatest mass gain arises when KCl is present in both air and HCl environments. The addition of HCl seems to have little effect without the presence of KCl, however, when KCl is present, it is observed to have a protective effect. Whilst HCl and KCl individually exhibit corrosive effects on the coatings, combined, there effect is reduced in comparison to KCl alone. In the TEM cross-sections of the APMT clad exposed for 1 h in air, in a region where the influence of KCl is not obvious, there were three major phases identified at the coating-environment interface; an iron rich oxide, an ironchromium mixed oxide and an aluminium enriched layer. In regions free from the presence of any KCl crystal on the top surface of the APMT clad, there was a chromium depletion zone observed within the coating inward of the innermost mixed iron-chromium oxide layer. This outward movement of chromium is what causes the observed relative decrease in iron. The formation of mixed iron and chromium oxides in stainless steel alloys is expected and well documented in the literature The final thing that can be noted from this in-situ exposure is the enrichment of aluminium at the initial coating-environment interface. The formation of aluminium oxide is expected to be very slow at temperatures of 450 o C. During early stages of oxidation, before the formation of thick corrosion products, alumina can form, however as fast growing iron and mixed oxide scales form, the oxygen partial pressure at the coating, scale substrate decreases, slowing the growth of alumina further, preventing a thick layer from froming. This structure of a mixed oxide with aluminium enrichment at the coating-oxide interface is observed elsewhere in the literature under similar conditions in the alloy Kanthal AF Long term exposures were carried out for 250 h in four different environments: air without KCl, air with KCl, HCl without KCl, and HCl with KCl. In the simplest environment, in air without KCl, the results observed were consistent with the short term exposures in that very little was observed on the surface within the limitations of SEM imaging. There is some evidence that manganese oxide formed on the surface. This is unexpected due to the minimal manganese in the coating (0.4 wt.%); however, this may be a region in which dilution of the substrate into the coating is high and as such the manganese concentration is higher in the coating than in the bulk. Looking at the slightly more complex environment of HCl without KCl in long term exposures shows similar results after a 250 h exposure to that in air. The mass change of these two sets is very similar, initially suggesting that the presence of HCl does not affect corrosion; however, like in an air environment, the observable reaction products are very small, and as such the similarities in mass change could be due to measurements of such small amounts of reaction product; despite this chlorine was detected on the surface of the sample under SEM analysis. This could be particularly important when looking at the plume like structures that have grown from pores in the sample (Figure Looking at the same TEM cross sections (Figure Additionally, a potassium chloride enrichment was observed at the original coating-environment interface. A chromium depletion zone was again observed within the coating after the innermost mixed oxide layer. When comparing the depth of this chromium depletion zone in the presence of KCl as opposed to areas far from the KCl crystals, it can be seen that both the depth of the depletion zone, and the overall thickness of the reaction products are increased in the presence of the KCl. This increased thickness is especially true of the iron oxide that has grown outermost. It is well established that the presence of chlorine can inhibit the growth of chromium oxides and as such could explain the increased thickness of the iron based outer oxide In the presence of KCl a much more extensive set of corrosion products are found on the APMT clad. These products are formed to a much greater extent than that which was observed without KCl. The formation of oxides exclusively at the sites of consumed KCl crystals is consistent with the results observed in the in-situ test, and supports the theory that KCl plays a role in increased mass gain in these samples. EDX of the regions around former KCl crystals show a decrease in chromium, when compared with other regions of the sample. This, paired with the expected increase in chlorine and potassium in these areas adds further credence to the theory that chlorine in selectively removing chromium in a volatile phase, and is consistent with the results obtained from in-situ measurements. The increased rate of reaction product formation in the furnace test compared to that performed in-situ is not unexpected and can be explained by the difference in oxygen partial pressure in each case, 4.46 kPa and 0.03 kPa respectively. The presence of potassium and chlorine is also expected from the results of shorter exposures; however, it shows that over longer time scales it has neither been completely consumed nor evaporated, and is instead still present on the surface of the sample. The cause of the formation of the tube like structures which are not observed at shorter exposures in-situ is unexplained. With the presence of HCl instead of air, the most notable result is the reduced mass gain in the coating with KCl as can be seen in Figure This is consistent with the chlorine detected in EDX on the sample exposed in HCl without a KCl deposit, suggesting that the HCl gas is providing some chlorine to the surface. In the most simple environment of APMT clad in air, the formation of oxides can be explained by the following process When HCl is added to the system, there is no reason to think that the above mentioned mechanism will not continue to take place. This is confirmed in the exposures seen where similar reaction products are formed. The formation of the plume like structures may be explained using the presence of HCl. It has been shown that Cl -, rather than HCl itself is the main aggressive species This can be formed through Equation When KCl is added to the system again, it gets more complex. Looking at KCl in an air environment, these mechanisms likely change again, which accounts for the vast differences in the corrosion products formed with and without KCl. As before, the initial stages of oxidation are the same, with the formation of Cr2O3. Once the Cr2O3 has formed, then it can react with the KCl and O2 as through Equation In the most complex environment, a combination of all of these processes are in action. Initially, corrosion will follow the mechanism described above in Equation 3. The free chlorine ions originating from the KCl will play a role in the chlorine cycle, moving metal ions to the surface in the form of metal chlorides. Under normal conditions in air, Equation 2, these metal chlorides would be converted to metallic oxides at the surface, releasing chlorine to continue the cycle. This reaction will occur at a slower rate in the presence of HCl, due to the higher concentration of chlorine present at the surface already, formed from Equation This proposed mechanism is consistent with the results observed. In all cross-sections, an outer iron rich oxide is seen on top of an inner mixed spinel. The introduction of HCl shows the formation of a thicker oxide layer as well as evidence of potential potassium chromate forming from pores. In this study, the corrosion mechanics of the iron-chromium-aluminium Kanthal APMT were investigated. The corrosion performance was tested in two environments. A short term corrosion test was carried out for 1 h at 450 o C in an air environment. These tests were carried out in an in-situ ESEM. Longer term exposures were carried out in tube furnace for 250 h in air. These tests were also repeated in a HCl rich environment. These were also carried out at 450 o C. All tests were carried out with and without the presence of KCl. The resulting corrosion products were analysed and the following conclusions made:  Further evidence is found to support the role that chlorine plays in corrosion of APMT. Chlorine was found at the oxide coating interface after only 1 h when KCl was present.  Aluminium is shown to migrate to the oxide coating interface suggesting that alumina may be slow growing in this region over longer time scales.  Results obtained in-situ were able to be replicated in a furnace, observing similar levels of oxidation over the same time scales. This was replicated at longer time scales where oxide growth was greater but compositions were similar.  In the presence of a hydrogen chloride environment the role of chlorine could still be seen suggesting that chlorine can interact with the surface from the gas phase as well as from the solid potassium chloride.  The presence of hydrogen chloride provided protection to surfaces deposited with KCl. This is proposed to occur due to the breakdown of hydrogen chloride and oxygen into water and gaseous chlorine, slowing the dissociation of potassium and chlorine and hence limiting the rate of oxidation. Composition of Figure