Motivated by the excellent electronic and optoelectronic properties of twodimensional (2D) tin oxides, we systematically investigated the thermal conductivity (κ) of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 by the first-principles calculations. The room-temperature κ of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 reaches 9.6 W/(m•K) and 98.8 W/(m•K), respectively. The size effect is much weaker for monolayer SnO than for monolayer SnO 2 , due to the coexistence of size dependent and independent component in the κ of monolayer SnO. The large difference between the κ of 2D tin oxides can be attributed to the small phonon group velocity and strong anharmonicity strength of monolayer SnO. Further electronic structure analysis reveals that the existence of sterically active lone-pair electrons is the key factor for the small κ of monolayer SnO. These results provide a guide for the manipulation of thermal transport in the electronic or thermoelectric devices based on 2D tin oxides. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted much attention as the candidates for developing next-generation high-performance electronics, optoelectronics, and spintronic devices. In this work, we calculated the thermal conductivity of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 by the first-principles calculations coupled with the phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE). The stable structures of 2D tin oxides are identified. Monolayer SnO 2 have a high roomtemperature κ which is dominated by acoustic phonons. In contrast, monolayer SnO has a κ which is almost ten times lower than that of SnO 2 . The size effect of κ in tin oxides was investigated. We analyzed the role of phonon group velocity, anharmonicity and phase space for anharmonicity scattering in the thermal transport. The imparity of κ between 2D tin oxides can be attributed to the lone-pair electrons in the monolayer SnO. The lattice thermal conductivity κ is obtained by 30 where N and Ω are the number of q point and volume of the unit cell, respectively. C q,s , v α q,s and τ q,s is the mode specific capacity, group velocity along the α-th direction and phonon lifetime in the single-mode relaxation time approximation (RTA) of the phonon with wavevector q and branch index s, respectively. τ q,s was obtained by combing the anharmonic scattering, isotopic impurities scattering and boundary scattering, according to the Matthiessen rule 30 where the completely rough boundary with size of L was used, leading to 1/τ b q,s = L/|v q,s |. All computational details are given in the supplementary material Figure The temperatures (T) dependence of κ without boundary scattering is shown in Fig. We found that the effect of isotopic impurities scattering to κ is small compared with the anharmonic scattering in the temperature above 250 K. For example, if we exclude the 1/τ iso q,s from the total 1/τ q,s in Eq. 2, the room-temperature κ will increase only by 0.6% and 3.3% for monolayer SnO and SnO 2 , respectively. The 1/τ iso q,s is inversely proportional to atomic mass The normalized cumulative κ(ω < ω 0 ), which represents the contribution of κ from the phonons with frequencies less than ω 0 , is shown in Fig. The phonon scattering from rough edge can decrease the κ of semiconductors to achieve excellent thermoelectricity. The large difference between the κ of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 can not be simply attributed to the different mean atomic mass. We analyzed the role of each term in Eq. 1 in determining the κ of 2D tin oxides. Figure with respect to strain. The mode phonon lifetimes τ q,s of 2D tin oxides at room temperature are shown in Fig. The large imparity between the anharmonicity strength of tin oxides can be further attributed to the electron configuration. The projected density of states (PDOS) of tin oxides are shown in Fig. In contrast to SnO, the lattice crystal of monolayer SnO 2 is centrosymmetric. The mixing between Sn-5p states and anti-bonding states of O-2p and Sn-5s is prohibited due to the different parity of s and p orbital. The anti-bonding states of O-2p and Sn-5s is above the Fermi level and unfilled. Thus, both the s and p electrons of Sn atom participate in Sn-O bonding in a form of sp 3 hybridization. Electrons transfer from Sn to O atom, as shown in Fig. See supplementary material for the computational details; The convergence test of κ; The phonon dispersion of monolayer, bilayer and bulk SnO with a = b; The structural and energetical properties of bilayer SnO 2 ; The 2D effective elastic module, band structure, projected phonon density of states of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 ; The isotropic κ of monolayer SnO; The temperature dependence of κ of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 ; The contribution of κ from different branches; The three-phonon scattering phase space (P 3 ) q,s for absorption and emission process; The distribution of charge density of monolayer SnO and SnO 2 .