Based on density functional simulations combined with the Landauer transport theory, the mechanical strain impacts on the chemical bonds of phosphorene and their effects on the electronic properties are studied. Moreover, the effect of the tensile strain along the zigzag direction on the charge transport properties of a two-terminal phosphorene device is evaluated. Enhancement of the intra-planar interactions, in particular between the next-nearest-neighbors in strained phosphorene is found to be essential in the band structure evolution. The charge transport analyzing shows that phosphorene has a strong piezoconductance sensitivity, which makes this material highly desirable for high-pressure nanoelectromechanical applications. The piezoconductance gauge factor increases by strain from 46 in 5% tension to 220 in 12% tension which is comparable to state-of-the-art silicon strain sensors. The transmission pathways monitor the current flowing in terms of the chemical bonds and hopping, however, the transport mostly arises from the charge transferring through the chemical bonds. The strong anisotropy in the transport properties along zigzag and armchair directions is observed. Strain is an old but alive concept in the semiconductor technology Among two-dimensional (2D) crystalline materials, phosphorene, which is an elemental 2D material, shows great potential for nanoelectronic applications. Phosphorene is a promising 2D material to utilize as an ideal electronic device. It has an 1.4 eV direct band gap, high carrier mobility and high on/off ratio for field-effect transistor applications The great mechanical properties of phosphorene make strong motivation to study this system under various types of strain and deformations Based on the particular mechanical properties of phosphorene and the observed coupling between its mechanical and electronic properties, phosphorene could be considered as a favorable novel material for nanoelectromechanical systems applications. Our aim in this article is to investigate the piezoresistance/piezoconductance characteristic of phosphorene under a uniaxial tension strain along the zz direction. Piezoresistance, which means changing the electrical resistance of a system as a result of pressure, was discovered by lord Kelvin in elongated copper and iron systems in 1856 In this study, we consider a phosphorene device under an applied external strain and calculate its electronic structure and its I -V curve based on the ab initio Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) Our calculations predict a strong piezoconductance sensitivity in our proposed phosphorene based device. This property could be important for a wide range of applications in biological, environmental, medical, chemical pressure sensors, and transducer devices In addition, using Bader's "atoms in molecules"theory This paper is organized as follows. Having reviewed the theoretical and technical methods in the next section, we present our results in Sec. III. Analyzing and description of the band structure of phosphorene and doped phosphorene under strain, calculating transport properties of different strained phosphorene-based systems under an applied bias, the I -V characteristic, the transmission spectrum, the carrier type, and the transmission pathways are discussed in this section. Finally, we end with a brief summary of our main results in Sec. IV. We consider a phosphorene based system that consists of three main parts involving semi-infinite left and right electrodes, and a finite central scattering region. Figure The key quantity to evaluate the transport properties is the transmission coefficient ), and Σ L(R) is the self-energy which defines the coupling between the semi-infinite left (right) electrode and the finite central region. The retarded Green's function of the central region is calculated as , where H is the Hamiltonian matrix of the central region. Regarding the standard Landauer formalism, current is evaluated by transmission integration over the bias energy window. The relation at bias voltage V is given by where the coefficient G 0 = 2e 2 /h (h and e are the Planck constant and electron charge, respectively.) is known as the quantum of the conductance, and is the electrochemical potentials of the left (right) electrode. The difference of the electrode potentials is equal to the value of the bias voltage, eV = μ L -μ R . The ab initio DFT calculations are performed using SIESTA/TranSIESTA code In addition, we use AIMALL package The lattice parameters of 2D phosphorene are obtained a ac = 4.37 Å and a zz = 3.25 Å. Furthermore, its band gap is 0.96 eV which is close to one obtained using other DFT-PBE simulations Figure To explain the change of the preferred conducting direction as well as the shift of the gap position in the strained systems, we should note that the stretching of phosphorene under tensile strain along the zz direction is accompanied with its compression in the ac direction, and the enhancement of the inter-planar distance which reflects the negative Poisson ratio of phosphorene along this direction We also perform a charge density analysis based on the Bader's theory to investigate the effect of strain on the charge density distribution in real space, as well as its possible correlation with the electronic band structure properties. This analysis has been successfully used for many crystalline materials In this section, we consider the strain-free phosphorene device as well as different strained systems under an applied bias voltage to the aim of investigating the electromechanical properties of phosphorene. Because of the left-right symmetry of the proposed structures, we just consider the positive biases in the range of 0 -1.5 V. The external tensile strain is applied along the zz direction on the whole device, including the scattering region and electrodes, and it is increased up to 12%. Having discussed in the earlier section and shown in Fig. The top panel of Fig. The electrical resistance of a material depends on its intrinsic properties and its geometry, and it is defined by R = l σ0A where l (A) is the device length (cross-section area) and σ 0 is its conductivity. The geometry changes under strain, but in piezoresistance (piezoconductance) materials, the resistance modulation induced by conductivity is several orders of magnitude greater than the geometrical effects. The conductivity is inversely pro- G0 is the conductance of the strain-free system. The triangles show the ∆G/G0 ratio under the external strain of 7% for two different devices with 0.75 times shorter and 1.5 times longer scattering regions with respect to that of the reference system (l0 ∼ 3.5 nm). portional to the gap size and charge carrier's effective mass. Also, it depends on the density of the charge carriers The sensitivity of the piezoresistance characteristic is measured by a gauge factor which is determined as the ratio of the relative change of resistance to strain value, GF = ∆R/R0 . Here, similar to the GF defined for a piezoresistance characteristic, we estimate the piezoconductance sensitivity of our device as the ratio of the relative change of conductance to strain value, GF = ∆G/G0 = ∆I/I0 , where G is the conductance, G = 1/R. It is worth mentioning that the calculated GFs of the usual well-known piezoresistance materials like carbon nanotube, graphene, silicon and germanium Therefore, we can compare our GF with the reported GFs for these materials. To calculate the ∆G/G 0 ratio, which is equal to ∆I/I 0 , we use the linear part of the I -V diagrams namely the bias range below 0.5 V. The lower panel of Fig. The predicted gauge factor of our device is one or two orders of magnitude higher than that of suspended graphene membranes Figure In order to investigate more details of the charge transport mechanism in our device, we calculate the transmission pathways (also known as bond current) of the strain-free system when the applied bias is along the ac direction, and the transmission pathways of the system under 12% tension when the electric bias is along the zz direction. The applied bias is equal to 1.5 V, and the results are displayed in Fig. The transmission pathway Finally, we would like to emphasize that the observed piezoconductance behavior arises from the phosphorene band structure properties in electrodes and scattering region. Therefore, changing the dopant concentration of electrodes could be a way to control the current intensity as well as piezoconductance properties of such a phosphorene base device. In this paper, on the basis of ab initio calculations, we have studied a 2D phosphorene system under tensile strain along the zigzag direction. Due to its puckered structure, phosphorene has remarkable mechanical properties and could sustain tensile strains up to 30%. In addition, the phosphorene band structure strongly changes under tension, and the gap size as well as the carrier effective masses are tuned by the applied strain. Based on all these properties, phosphorene has a strong potential for application as a nanoelectromechanical material. Our results presented in Sec. III, are divided into two parts. First, we have employed charge density analysis techniques based on Bader's "Atoms in Molecules"theory to explore the effect of strain in the real space properties of phosphorene, as well as finding the possible connections between the real space and k-space behaviors. Shifting the gap position as well as changing the gap size in the strained phosphorene are understood by forming bonds between the in-plane next-nearest-neighbor phosphorus atoms. Also, the rotation of the preferred conducting direction in strained phosphorene is explained by the enhancement of the intra-planar interactions to-gether with the weakening the inter-planar contribution of the charge density. Finally, the transport properties of our proposed piezoconductance device have been studied under an applied bias. A strong electromechanical response has been predicted in this system. Our focus of this study is on the relatively high stresses in the range between 5%-12%. Based on our results, phosphorene is a promising material for nanoelectromechanical applications in high-pressure limits. The transmission spectra reveal that transport comes from electrons in the conduction bands. Moreover, the transmission pathways show how electrons propagate through the chemical bonds of the scattering region from the source electrode toward the drain. The doping concentrations of electrodes are introduced as a tool to control and engineer the piezoconductance properties.