Presently, silicon photonics requires photodetectors that are sensitive in a broad infrared range, can operate at room temperature, and are suitable for integration with the existing Si technology process. Here, we demonstrate strong room-temperature sub-bandgap photoresponse of photodiodes based on Si hyperdoped with tellurium. The epitaxially recrystallized Te-hyperdoped Si layers are developed by ion implantation combined with pulsed laser melting and incorporate Te dopant concentrations several orders of magnitude above the solid solubility limit. With increasing Te concentration, the Te-hyperdoped layer changes from insulating to quasi-metallic behavior with a finite conductivity as the temperature tends to zero. The optical absorptance is found to increase monotonically with increasing Te concentration and extends well into the mid-infrared range. Temperaturedependent optoelectronic photoresponse unambiguously demonstrates that the extended infrared photoresponsivity from Te-hyperdoped Si p-n photodiodes is mediated by a Teintermediate band within the upper half of the Si bandgap. This work contributes to pave the way towards establishing a Si-based broadband infrared photonic system operating at room temperature. Presently, there is need for overcoming the bottleneck in the processing of the huge volume of data transmitted over the traditional telecommunication wavelengths around 1.3 μm and 1.5 μm However, extrinsic IR photodetectors based on Si with dopants of group III (B, Al and Ga) and V (P, As and Sb) can only operate at temperatures below 40 K Alternatively, Si photodetectors that make use of deep level dopants (with a much higher thermal ionization energy), such as Ti, Ag, Au, S and Se Double-side polished Si (100) wafers (p-type, boron-doped, ρ ≈ 1-10 Ωcm) were implanted with Te ions at six different fluences at room temperature (see table To analyze the microstructure of the PLM-treated Te-hyperdoped Si layers, highresolution TEM (HRTEM) was performed on an image C s -corrected Titan 80-300 microscope (FEI) operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging and spectrum imaging based on energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) were done at 200 kV with a Talos F200X microscope equipped with an X-FEG electron source and a Super-X EDXS detector system (FEI). Prior to STEM analysis, the specimen mounted in a high-visibility low-background holder was placed for 10 s into a Model 1020 Plasma Cleaner (Fischione) to remove contamination. Classical cross-sectional TEM lamella preparation was done by sawing, grinding, polishing, dimpling, and final Ar ion milling. RBS/C measurements were performed with a collimated 1.7 MeV He + beam of the Rossendorf van de Graff accelerator with a 10-20 nA beam current at a backscattering angle of 170° to investigate the crystalline quality of the pulsed-laser annealed Te-hyperdoped Si layers. The channeling spectra were collected by aligning the sample to make the impinging He + beam parallel to the Si [001] axes. The conductivity type, carrier concentration and carrier mobility of the PLM-treated Tehyperdoped layers were measured by a commercial Lake Shore Hall measurement system in a van der Pauw configuration The magnetic field was swept from -4 T to 4 T. The gold electrodes were sputtered onto the four corners of the square-like samples. The native SiO 2 layer was removed by HF etching prior to the sputtering process. Next, a silver conductive glue paste was used to contact the wires to the gold electrodes. All contacts were confirmed to be ohmic by measuring the current-voltage curves at different temperatures. A vacuum pump was used to avoid moisture condensation at low temperatures Electrical measurements were made to investigate the transport properties of the PLMtreated Te-hyperdoped Si layers. To avoid the influence of the parallel conduction from the ptype Si substrate, a set of samples with the same range of Te concentrations were processed on an intrinsic Si substrate (ρ >10 4 Ωcm). FIG. A strong and broad sub-bandgap optical absorptance in Te-hyperdoped Si layers, as compared with a bare Si sample, is shown in FIG. where I 0 is the saturation current, q is the electron charge, T is the temperature, η is the ideality factor and k B is the Boltzmann constant. V and I are the total voltage and current whereas R s and R shunt are the series and parallel resistances, respectively. Hence, R s , R shunt , I 0 and η were found to be 6.4 , 850 , 68 μA and 2.2, respectively. The deduced series resistance value is in agreement with the calculated series resistance, R s = ρ t A , assuming a wafer resistivity of ρ=1-10 cm, a wafer thickness of t=380 μm and an electrode area of A=0.068 cm 2 . This confirms the ohmic character of the contacts. On the other hand, an ideality factor of 2.2 suggests i) the existence of a p-n junction rather than a metalsemiconductor junction, in which the ideality factor is expected to be 1 where R ph is the spectral responsivity (i.e. the ratio of the electrical output to the optical input.), λ is the wavelength in nm, h is the Planck constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum, and e is the elementary charge. The estimated EQE values are comparable to other deep level impurity-hyperdoped Si photodiodes where hν is the photon energy, A is a constant, E g stands for the Si bandgap and n would adopt the value of 2 for the indirect optical transitions. A Tauc-type plot for both the hightemperature and the low-temperature ranges at two representative temperatures (viz. 300 K and 120 K) is shown in FIG. Alternatively, a second absorption edge band is found to be E L =0.33±0.01 eV at 120 K. The slight difference between the deduced E H values at 300 K and 120 K are thought to be related with the temperature dependence of the Si bandgap. Next, we recorded the device photocurrent as a function of the input optical power at photon energies of 0.82 eV and 0.42 eV at 300 K and 120 K, respectively (FIG. ii) In the low-temperature range (160 K to 60 K), the thermal carrier generation is then suppressed by the freeze-out effect The possibility of generating photocarriers at room temperature using sub-bandgap radiation in high-quality single-crystal Si films doped with Te concentrations greater than the 