Specific heat measurements from 2 to 300 K of hydrogenated amorphous silicon prepared by hotwire chemical vapor deposition show a large excess specific heat at low temperature, significantly larger than the Debye specific heat calculated from the sound velocity. The as-prepared films have a Schottky anomaly that is associated with metastable hydrogen in the amorphous network, as well as large linear and excess cubic term commonly associated with tunneling two-level systems in amorphous solids. Annealing at 200 • C, a temperature that enables hydrogen mobility but not evaporation, irreversibly reduces the heat capacity, eliminating the Schottky anomaly and leaving a reduced linear heat capacity. A non-monotonic dependence on growth temperature and H content is observed in all effects, except for sound velocity, which suggests that the tunneling two-level systems and the Schottky anomaly are associated with atomic hydrogen and require low density regions to form, while sound velocity is associated with the silicon network and improves with increasing growth temperature. The low temperature properties of amorphous insulating solids are dominated by low energy excitations not normally found in crystalline solids The STM also explain other low temperature glassy properties, such as internal friction, Q -1 (T ), measurements in which the TLS lead to mechanical loss at low temperature. Remarkably, the magnitude of Q -1 (T ) at low T (0.1 -10 K) has a nearly universal value between 10 -3 and 10 -4 , a result which has provoked much discussion over the decades without resolution, although a recent publication has suggested an explanation In addition to the linear heat capacity term, amorphous insulating solids also generally contain a higher-order excess specific heat term which theories try to explain, such as the theory of random fluctuating transverse elastic constants Despite the success of the SPM in explaining the excess specific heat for several glasses, it has been shown in our previous work to fail when applied to a-Si Because these tetrahedrally-bonded amorphous materials, including a-Si:H, can only be made as thin films by vapor deposition, measurements of TLS require techniques sensitive to the low mass of a thin film, such as nanocalorimetry. In the present work, we investigate the specific heat, density, and sound velocity of HWCVD a-Si:H films prepared at different growth temperatures yielding different H concentrations, both in their as-deposited and annealed states, and focus on the role that hydrogen plays in the formation of TLS in a-Si:H and the deviations from the TLS model that we observe. Device quality (low dangling bond density) a-Si:H thin films were prepared by HWCVD using pure silane, at growth rates between 1 to 3 nm/s, and substrate temperatures, T S , of 300, 370, 430, and 470 • C After the first C P (T ) measurement, samples were annealed at T A = 200 • C, then fast-cooled (quenched) at ∼ 10 4 K/s, measured, annealed again at the same T A , then slow-cooled at ∼ 5 K/min and re-measured. This series was repeated for T A = 300 • C (for the samples grown at 370 and 430 • C). The fast cooling rate was achieved by turning off the sample heater power while keeping the thermal bath at 4.2 K; the slow cooling required software control to ensure a constant rate. The quenching preserves the high T equilibrated state, including any electronic or bonding defects, while slow cooling allows for further mobility and quasi-equilibration of the system at lower temperatures Figure The low temperature (below 10 K) C P (T ) is significantly reduced after the first anneal, changes little with further annealing, and remains significantly larger than c D , which shows no change on annealing. The large change in C P (T ) on annealing, along with the lack of change in sound velocity, is a strong indication that the change in C P (T ) is due to H rearrangement. We have observed no magnetic field dependence for C P (T ) in these a-Si:H samples, indicating that electronic states are not responsible for the changes in C P (T ) No cooling rate dependence was observed, indicating that metastable states, if present after annealing, equilibrate even during fast cooling. The differences in C P (T ) between annealed states at different temperatures are negligible, so we focus our analysis on the differences between samples in as-prepared and 200 • C annealed states. Figure to have a finite entropy at T = 0 K. The simplest physical explanation for such a peak is a Schottky anomaly associated with two-level systems (which may or may not be due to tunneling) with a specific energy splitting The specific heat C P (T ) of a distribution of two-level systems n(∆) is given by where ∆ = E/k B is the energy splitting of the two-level systems, n(∆) the density of states for two-level systems with a particular ∆, k B the Boltzmann constant, and T the temperature. Note that Eq. 1 is valid both for the tunneling two-level systems (TLS) and for any other type of two-level systems. In the standard tunneling model, n(∆) is taken as constant over a wide energy range due to the uniform distribution of tunnel barrier heights, so that n(∆) ∼ n 0 . Under these conditions, the solution for Eq. 1 yields the canonical linear • C), growth temperature T S , atomic hydrogen percentage at.% H, thickness t, total atomic density n at , longitudinal sound velocity v l , excess specific heat T 3 term c ex calculated from c ex = c 3 -c D [the cubic specific heat term, c 3 , is obtained from low T fits using Eq. 4, the Debye specific heat, c D , is calculated from sound velocity, v l , measurements, where c D = (12π 4 /5)N A k B (T /T D ) 3 , specific heat term due to tunneling states where n 0 is the density of TLS per unit energy and unit volume (J -1 m -3 ), n at the total atomic density, and N A is Avogadro's number. If instead n(∆) is considered to be a delta function, N δ(∆ 0 ), to represent N two-level systems per mol of sample with a specific energy splitting, ∆ 0 , and assuming no degeneracy, from Eq. 1 we obtain the specific heat for a Schottky anomaly The a-Si:H data presented in this work are well described by where the cubic term coefficient, c 3 , is decomposed as c 3 = c D + c ex , where c D is the Debye specific heat due to phonons, calculated from the sound velocity, and c ex is an excess specific heat T 3 term that is comparable in magnitude to c D but not explained by the standard tunneling model and likely associated with localized non-propagating modes Figure The values of n 0 and c ex from the fits for as-prepared and annealed states are shown in Table • C), again an indication that n 0 of a-Si:H is significantly affected by H redistribution. As found in pure a-Si, a-Si:H films with larger n 0 also have larger c ex (red symbols), suggesting again that the structures responsible for TLS and non-propagating modes in a-Si:H are related to each other. The values of n 0 (and c ex ) are larger in a-Si:H than those for a-Si grown at similar temperatures. The dangling bond density, n DB , in HWCVD a-Si:H samples is ≤ 10 16 cm -3 In a-Si we observed that increasing the growth temperature reduces the density of TLS, and we suggested this is because higher growth temperature enables Si adatoms to find more stable sites during growth, leading to a denser and more energetically stable structure, which in turn leads to low TLS due to the absence of "nearby" similar energy wells that enable tunneling states to form The Schottky peak amplitude also shows the same minimum with growth T, as seen most clearly in Fig. We next consider the structural motifs that may give rise to the TLS in a-Si:H. Based on the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) work by Crandall and suggesting that the network becomes more ordered (specifically, reduced bond angle disorder) with increasing growth temperature. By contrast, the atomic density, n at , is nonmonotonic in growth temperature, with a maximum at 370 • C and a strong reduction at both higher and lower T S , indicating an increased amount of low density regions at both low and high T S . That increased amount of low density regions in turn leads to a higher amount of TLS (n 0 and c ex ) as well as the traditional two-level systems (c Sch , associated with a single ∆ 0 ). We suggest that lower density regions contain underconstrained Si atoms and H, which lead to TLS and to the Schottky anomaly. Most strikingly, as seen in Fig. The local hydrogen environment in similar HWCVD a-Si:H samples shows that hydrogen is primarily found as bonded Si-H, and secondarily as molecular hydrogen (H 2 ), in both cases either clustered or isolated hydrogen diffuses away from clustered Si-H regions and increases the fraction of isolated Si-H bonds, where it is trapped via a mechanism of reconstructing Si-H bonds Hydrogen molecules have been shown to lead to a Schottky anomaly below 5 K, attributed to the freezing of the rotational motion of ortho-H 2 trapped in the film To understand the dependence of n 0 and c ex on growth temperature, we first consider the films atomic density, n at , shown in Table techniques traditionally used to establish the film quality. It is similarly notable that the reduction in n DB in device quality a-Si:H requires H, but is not proportional to its content. The significant variation in atomic density with growth temperature cannot be explained solely in terms of network distortion, nor dangling bonds, but instead requires the presence of nanovoids or loosely bonded regions. As discussed by Street It is known that hydrogen lowers the energy barrier for breaking weak Si-Si bonds Upon annealing, H diffuses from clustered Si-H to locally deep potential wells increasing the isolated Si-H bonds fraction, and perhaps the H 2 concentration. These results suggest that both the Schottky anomaly and the large n 0 in the as-prepared state are associated with clustered Si-H. The lack of correlation of at.% H with TLS density, despite the necessity of H to produce the large TLS, is similar to the effects seen with elimination of dangling bonds in a-Si:H, where H is essential to create device quality electronic materials, but the necessary at.% ranges from 1 to 20%, depending on preparation details, and is uncorrelated with the reduction in n DB . After annealing, the a-Si:H samples presented in this work show a decoupling between n 0 and c ex not observed in a-Si, despite the strong correlation in the as-prepared state. The TLS density, n 0 , decreases (solid to dashed black lines in Fig. A large excess specific heat is seen at low temperatures in as-prepared films of a-Si:H that show a Schottky anomaly in addition to the linear and cubic terms that are commonly seen in amorphous materials and attributed to tunneling two-level systems. The Schottky anomaly as well as the large value of n 0 decrease upon annealing at modest temperatures (200 • C), well below the growth temperature, with the former vanishing entirely. These annealing conditions are known to cause hydrogen to diffuse from a clustered Si-H to a more uniform distribution of isolated Si-H bonds. The specific heat observations are suggested to be due to clustered atomic H in low density regions, which leads to both the two-level systems that produce the Schottky anomaly (H near weak Si-Si bonds) and, via depressed energy barriers, a greater probability of atomic rearrangements of Si structures that produce TLS. A strong correlation of n 0 , c ex , and c Sch with atomic density, which is not monotonic in growth temperature, and the lack of correlation with at.% H, despite the critical role that H plays in creating these specific heat effects, demonstrates that low density regions are essential to producing these effects, as was seen in pure a-Si. Atomic H thus greatly enhances the TLS compared to that seen in pure a-Si by lowering energy barriers, but the effects are not proportional to at.% H, similar to the lack of proportionality between dangling bond density and at.% H in device quality a-Si:H. The monotonic increase of the sound velocity with growth temperature also suggests that TLS originate in low density regions, and not in the network. The nature of the cubic c ex term is not yet understood, but the correlation in the asprepared state with n 0 (as was found in pure a-Si) implies that the structures responsible for its existence are related to those that produce the TLS density, n 0 . The different effect of annealing on n 0 and c ex of a-Si:H points to an intriguing interpretation; the same structures lead to both, but atomic H is essential for n 0 and not for c ex .