We consider an atomic chain of magnetic impurities on the surface of a spin-orbit coupled superconductor with a dominating d-wave and subdominating s-wave order parameters. In particular, we investigate the properties of the Majorana bound states (MBSs) emerging at the chain end points in the topological phase and how MBSs are affected by the d-wave order parameter. We provide a comprehensive picture by both studying time-reversal invariant and breaking superconducting substrates as well as chains oriented in different directions relative to the d-wave rotation. We show that increasing the d-wave order parameter significantly enhances the localization of MBSs and their protective minigap, as long as the direction along which the impurity chain is oriented does not cross any nodal lines of the gap function. Moreover, we find an extra gap-closing for a specific condensate and chain orientation within the topological phase, which we are able to attribute to simple geometrical effects in the corresponding two-dimensional limit. These results show how high-temperature d-wave superconductors can be used to significantly enhance the properties and stability of MBSs. Topological superconductivity generating Majorana bound states (MBSs) in low dimensional systems represent one of the most spectacular quantum states in condensed matter physics The unconventional d-wave cuprate SCs offer a tantalizing possibility to realize MBSs at much higher temperatures thanks to their larger order parameter The problem with nodal quasiparticles in d-wave SCs could potentially be resolved if a coexisting but subdominant s-wave order parameter is also present. There exists some evidence for such coexistence of dominant d-wave and subdominant swave order parameter in cuprate SCs In this paper, we investigate if and how a coexisting swave order can turn high-temperature d-wave SCs into a viable platform for MBSs forming at the end of magnetic impurity chains. We assume dominating d-wave order, consider both TRI and TRB coexistence phases with a small s-wave component, and study chains oriented in different directions on the substrate relative to the d-wave rotation, all to provide a comprehensive study. First, we show that MBSs actually emerge for an impurity chain embedded in TRI SC with d+s-wave symmetry, despite the nodal lines in the order parameter. However, it requires some tuning, especially of the doping level. Also, there is a strong dependence on chain orientation relative to the d-wave rotation: If the impurity chain crosses the nodal lines of the order parameter, the minigap which protects the MBSs from quasiparticle excitations is strongly suppressed. Besides the emergence of MBSs and the protecting minigap, we also focus on the localization of the MBSs. We show that the localization length of the MBSs depends on effective order parameter along the chain, not necessarily the minigap. For all viable chain orientations, we find that the d-wave component significantly enhances the MBS localization and the minigap compared to a pure s-wave substrate. Next we study an impurity chain on a TRB d+is-wave SC. The complex order parameter results in a full energy gap in the excitation spectrum, which results in the appearance of MBSs becoming largely parameter independent, as well as directional independent. Importantly, the d-wave component strongly enhances the minigap and MBS localization. The only exception is the TRB d xy +is-wave SC, where we find an extra gap-closing for y-axis chains, but not for x-axis chains. We show that the extra gap-closing is not due to any additional topological phases or phase transitions, but are the result of flat chiral edge states in the 2D limit. This demonstrates that sample geometry can, in fact, overshadow topology in determining the boundary spectrum. It is here worth mentioning that spin-orbit coupled nanowires on top of a pure d-wave SC have also recently been studied. However, the emergence of a topologically non-trival superconducting phase was in that setup predicted to be strongly dependent on the relative orientation of the nanowire and d-wave order The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the numerical tight-binding lattice model used to study dand s-wave substrates with magnetic impurity chains. In Sec. III, we present our results where we focus on how d-wave pairing affects the MBSs at the impurity chain end points. We explain both how different chain orientations and different d-wave order parameter rotations influence the results. We present complementary discussions and a short comparison to the pure d-wave and nanowire platform in Sec. IV and, finally, in Sec. V we summarize our results. To model impurity chains with emergent MBSs, we consider a system with a spin-orbit coupled superconducting substrate. To easily incorporate different superconducting pairing symmetries while still keeping the model as simple as possible, we consider a mean-field Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian given by where c i (c † i ) is creation (annihilation) operator at i = (i x , i y ), which represents a site in a square lattice, with the lattice spacing a set to be 1. Here μ represents the chemical potential, while t is the hopping matrix element to the nearest neighbors. We also add Rashba spin-orbit interaction in the substrate set by λ R , which is always present due to inversion symmetry breaking at the SC surface. For superconductivity, we assume both d-wave and s-wave pairing. The d x 2 -y 2wave (d xy -wave) order can be modeled to exist on nearest-(next-nearest) neighboring bonds, while the conventional swave order is an on-site parameter. In most calculations, we keep the order parameter constant, i.e., non-self-consistent calculations, where we enforce d x 2 -y 2 -wave order by setting ∆ d ((i x , i y ), (i x ± 1, i y )) = -∆ d ((i x , i y ), (i x , i y ± 1)) for all sites. For the d xy -wave order, we follow the same procedure but on the diagonal bonds instead. The coexistence of d-wave and s-wave order parameters has been observed in several materials and for generality we consider ∆ = ∆ d +e iα ∆ s , where α is set to be either α = 0 or π/2. This captures both all fully real condensates (α = 0) and TRB cases (α = π/2). The latter is generally favored if external factors do not prevent a full relaxation of the superconducting order since it has a fully gapped spectrum. All TRB superconducting substrates, d x 2 -y 2 +isand d xy +is-wave SCs, have a full energy gap in the spectrum and thus the order parameter does not have any nodal lines. However, for the TRI solutions, the gap structure depends in more detail on the parameters. We start with exploring the TRI d x 2 -y 2 +s-wave superconducting substrate. After performing a Fourier transform, the superconducting order parameter in reciprocal space reads ∆(k) = ∆ d (cos k ycos k x )/2 + ∆ s , where we assume both ∆ s and ∆ d are positive definite without loss of generality. This order parameter contains an isotropic s-wave and a sign-changing anisotropic d-wave order parameters. As long as the s-wave component is the dominant order, i.e., ∆ s > ∆ d , the gap function does not have any nodes and the spectrum must be fully gapped. However, as shown in Fig. In Fig. 1. (Color Online) Nodal lines of the order parameter, ∆(k) = 0, (black, green) for d x 2 -y 2 +s-wave (a) and dxy+s-wave states (b) with Fermi surfaces of the normal Hamiltonian, ξ±(k) = 0 (blue, red). Here ∆s = 0.1 and μ = -3.9. For ∆1(k) (black) and ∆2(k) (green), we set ∆ d to be 0.2 and 0.5, respectively. Being interested in dominant d-wave superconductivity but still requiring a fully gapped spectrum, a prerequisite for YSR-states to emerge, we need the Fermi surfaces to not cross the nodal lines. As a consequence, for all TRI cases, we have to consider the Fermi level to be at the bottom or top of the band |μ| ≈ 4 and avoid too large ∆ d /∆ s ratios. As an example, for ∆ d /∆ s = 5 (green) in Fig. To model an impurity chain, we assume the spin of each impurity to be a classical vector which effectively acts as a local Zeeman field where S R is the impurity spin and J represents the exchange coupling between each impurity and the superconducting substrate. The impurity chain can be spatially oriented either along the xor y-axis and is always placed in the middle of the square lattice to avid any possible influence from the boundaries. Working in the classical limit, we set | S| → ∞ while J → 0 in the manner that U mag ≡ J| S| remains finite. To drive the chain into the topological phase, we need to assume either a ferromagnetic impurity chain with Rashba spin-orbit interaction in the substrate or a spin helical impurity chain. In this work, we mainly set the impurity chain to be ferromagnetic and we include Rashba spin-orbit interaction in the substrate. The only exception is Sec. III F where we exclude the substrate spin-orbit interaction and instead assume a helical structure for the local moments of impurities. Since the hopping t in H sub is also active between impurity chains, it can be seen as either the hopping in the substrate or between the impurities. In this way we capture within a single simple model qualitatively both the Shiba band and the ferromagnetic wire limits In this paper, all the energies are scaled by the nearest neighbor hopping matrix element; t = 1. Moreover, for the ferromagnetic impurity chain we assume that the spins are along z direction and we fix the spin-orbit interaction to be λ R = 0.3. The Rashba spin-orbit interaction for an Fe chain on top of Pb has been estimated to λ R = 0.05 eV, while the hopping to the nearest neighbors for different orbitals of the Fe atom ranges from 0.1 eV to 0.7 eV Having defined a general model to study the influence of d-wave pairing in the previous section, we here report the results. In Secs. III A and III B, we study a ferromagnetic impurity chain on a general TRI SC substrate and describe how the properties of MBSs, such as localization length scale and minigap energy, are affected by the additional d-wave order parameter and compare it with pure s-wave case. Considering the symmetry of d-wave component of the order parameter, we discuss d x 2 -y 2 -wave and d xy -wave state in two different subsections. In Secs. III C and III D, we instead consider the opposite type of coexistence of dand s-wave order, by allowing the SC to break time-reversal symmetry. Finally, in Sec. III E, we discuss the effect of self-consistent calculations for the order parameters and also consider spin helical impurity chains in Sec. III F. To understand the overall behavior of a TRI d x 2 -y 2 +swave substrate, we use Fig. which means that the d-wave order enhances the total order parameter along the impurity chain. On the other hand, for a y-axis impurity chain, the total order parameter reads Obviously, in this latter case the total order parameter has nodal points, ∆(k y ) = 0, where the superconducting order parameter will be strongly suppressed anywhere near these nodes. Therefore, we anticipate very different behavior for xand y-axis impurity chains in d x 2 -y 2 +s-wave SCs. In Fig. (1) mag ≈ 0.5 and disappear for U (2) mag ≈ 5.8, thus, the system is in topological nontrivial phase in between. Thermal hybridization of the MBSs with other states is protected by the minigap ∆ m , the energy barrier between MBSs and the first excited state Next we consider a y-axis impurity chain for the same d x 2 -y 2 +s-wave substrate. As shown in Fig. One might tend to naively directly relate the enhancement (suppression) of MBSs localization to having larger (smaller) minigap. However, we find that this is not always true, as illustrated in Fig. Moving on to the other TRI d-wave substrate, d xy +s, we use the same dimensional reduction scheme presented in Sec. III A and thus temporarily set k y = 0 (k x = 0) for an impurity chain oriented along the x-axis (y-axis). For both chain orientations, the reduced order parameter reads ∆(k) = ∆ s . This means that for the d xy +s-wave substrate, whether the chain is along the xor y-axis, the order parameter is always finite. Another way to see this, is to look at the nodal lines of the order parameter in Fig. We present the energy of the lowest energy states for an impurity chain embedded in a d xy +s-wave substrate in Fig. We next turn to the TRB cases, where the order parameter develops a π/2 phase shift between the sand d-wave parts. We start by studying the d x 2 -y 2 +is-wave substrate. Just as before, we consider impurity chains orientated both along the xor y-axis. As we calculate the energy of the lowest energy states for the TRB d x 2 -y 2 +is-wave SC, we find the spectrum to be exactly the same for both chain orientations, see Fig. In Fig. We also consider the TRB order parameter of d xy +is-wave symmetry with the impurity chain oriented along the xor yaxis. Surprisingly, the orientation of the impurity chain in this case significantly affects the spectrum, in spite of the fact of having a hard gap and same magnitude of the order parameter along xand y-directions. More precisely, the minigap for an impurity chain along the x-axis is different from a chain along the y-axis as depicted in Fig. To study the parent 2D model, we consider a superconducting nanoribbon (width 51 lattice points) fully covered with a layer of magnetic impurities. We Fourier transform the Hamiltonian along the nanoribbon and observe that the system exhibits a topological phase transition with increasing U mag into a topological phase with chiral edge modes, plotted in Fig. To relate the 2D magnetic layer to the 1D impurity chain, we shrink the magnetic layer in one direction, which leads to discretization of the chiral edge states. One pair of these discrete energy levels sticks to zero energy, giving the MBSs, while the remaining nonzero energy levels are the YSR states. Therefore, when the chiral edge states along the y-axis become very flat, it means that, in addition to MBSs, there exist extra states in the middle of energy gap. These extra midgap states are not topologically protected but can still appear close to or even at zero energy. As a result, different dispersion relations for the 2D case gives very different low-energy spectra for xand y-axis chains in the d xy +is-wave SC, although both belong to the same topological class. This phenomena is connected to the way the chiral edge state's dispersion relation depends on the relation between the geometry of the boundary and the superconducting order parameter. Similar edge sensitivity has been seen in a chiral p-wave SC on the square lattice, where edge states disperse very different along the straight So far, we have assumed constant order parameter and neglected any depletion of the order parameter in the vicinity of the impurity chain and its consequences. To assess impurity chains while relaxing this constraint, we also perform reference self-consistent calculations for the superconducting order parameter. Here, we only have to assume a finite and constant pair potential V in each pairing channel but then calculate the order parameter(s) explicitly everywhere in the lattice. For a d-wave state, we use the self-consistent condition ∆ d (i, j) = -V d /2 c i↓ c j↑c i↑ c j↓ , where i, j are nearestneighbor sites. In the self-consistent calculation, we start by guessing a value for ∆ d on each bond, solve Eq. ( As an example, we take an impurity chain along the x-axis on the surface of d x 2 -y 2 +is-wave SC and find all the order parameters self-consistently. For μ = -2, we find the π/2 phase-shift between the s-wave and d x 2 -y 2 -wave order parameters even in the fully self-consistent solution. We see that, in this case, the dominant d x 2 -y 2 -wave and subdominant s-wave order parameters are both heavily depleted in the vicinity of the impurity chain and a small extended s-wave order parameter also appears close to the chain, similar to the situation for a single magnetic impurity To assess the generality of the obtained results using ferromagnetic chains, we also study a spin helical impurity chain. Here we exclude Rashba spin-orbit interaction in the substrate and instead assume an in-plane spin-helix structure for the local moments of the impurities Having, in detail, analyzed the different combinations of dand s-wave orders in the preceding sections and especially how a d-wave state can enhance the robustness of the MBSs, we summarize the results in Fig. Turning to y-axis chains embedded in TRI SC as shown in Fig. The results summarized in Fig. Finally, let us compare our results with the case of a semiconductor nanowire in proximity to a spin-orbit-coupled dwave SC. In Refs. In this paper, we study a chain of magnetic impurities located on the surface of a d-wave SC with a subdominant swave order parameter and in the presence of Rashba spinorbit coupling from inversion-breaking surface. This set-up is a promising platform for realizing MBSs and exploiting their non-Abelian statistics in high-temperature SCs. Performing numerical tight-binding lattice calculations, we investigate the effect of d-wave pairing on the topological phase transition and the associated MBSs. We show that a pair of MBSs emerge at the two end points of the impurity chain for a wide range of physical parameters and for both TRI and TRB condensates. The presence of the d-wave order parameter provides the advantage of larger order parameter thanks to higher superconducting transition temperature. Remarkably, as long as the chain orientation does not cross any remaining nodal lines of the order parameter, the presence of the d-wave order gives rise to dramatically more localized MBSs than the pure s-wave case. This we attribute to the large enhancement of the effective order parameter along the impurity chain. We also show that the d-wave order parameter can strongly enhance the minigap energy which protects the MBSs from thermal hybridization. Larger minigap offers a promising way to increase the robustness of MBSs specially for a TRB substrate. This property should not be confused with the localization of MBSs since we bring an example where more localized MBSs emerge with smaller minigap. Furthermore, we report on an exotic feature for an impurity chain along the y-axis and embedded in a d xy +is-wave SC, where an extra gap-closing occurs within the topologically nontrivial phase. Evaluating the Berry phase, we do not find any signature for a topological phase transition at this extra gap-closing point. Instead, we trace the extra gap-closing back to a flat dispersion of the topological edge state of the equivalent 2D system. This result shows that even 1D topological phases can exhibit a low-energy spectrum not determined by topology alone. To conclude, this paper shows that using a d-wave SC with any subdominant s-wave order can strongly enhance the thermal robustness and localization of MBSs. This paves the way for topological quantum computation at much higher temperatures and will hopefully inspire both future experimental and theoretical investigation in this direction.