Topological superconductors are predicted to harbor exotic boundary states -Majorana zero-energy modes -whose non-Abelian braiding statistics present a new paradigm for the realization of topological quantum computing. Using low-temperature scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), we here report on the direct real-space visualization of chiral Majorana edge states in a monolayer topological superconductor, a prototypical magnetsuperconductor hybrid system comprised of nano-scale Fe islands of monoatomic height on a Re(0001)-O(2×1) surface. In particular, we demonstrate that interface engineering by an atomically thin oxide layer is crucial for driving the hybrid system into a topologically nontrivial state as confirmed by theoretical calculations of the topological invariant, the Chern number. Majorana zero-energy modes in topological superconductors are currently attracting great scientific interest because of their potential application in topological quantum information processing based on their non-Abelian quantum exchange statistics To demonstrate the creation of topological superconductivity and the ensuing chiral Majorana modes through interface engineering in 2D magnet-superconductor hybrid structure, we have grown nano-scale Fe islands of monoatomic height on the (2×1) oxygen-reconstructed (0001) surface of the s-wave superconductor Re under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions. The insertion of an atomically thin oxide separation layer between the magnetic Fe island and the superconducting Re surface is shown to be crucial for the emergence of a topologically nontrivial superconducting state, which is absent when the Fe island is deposited directly on the surface of the superconducting Re substrate. The spatially-and energy-resolved differential tunneling conductance, dI/dU, was measured in situ using a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope (STM) with a superconducting Nb tip to improve the energy resolution (see Supplemental Information (SI) Materials and Methods). A constant-current STM image of the Fe/Re(0001)-O(2×1) hybrid system with a single nanoscale Fe island is shown in Fig. A necessary requirement for the emergence of topological superconductivity is that the Fe islands couple magnetically to the superconducting Re surface. The observation in dI/dU of a Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) in-gap state A hallmark of 2D topological superconductors is the existence of dispersive, in-gap Majorana modes that are spatially located along the edges of the system To theoretically understand the origin of the combined spatial and energy distribution of the experimentally observed differential tunneling conductance, we consider the Hamiltonian H = H Re + H Fe + H FeRe (for details and parameters, see SI Sec. 3), where H Re (H Fe ) describes the real-space intra-and inter-orbital hopping elements, the spin-orbit coupling, and superconducting pairing in the Re 5d-orbitals (Fe 3d-orbitals), and H FeRe represents the electronic hopping/hybridization between the Re surface and the Fe island. As the magnetic structure of the Fe island cannot be deduced from the experimental STS data obtained with a superconducting Nbtip, we consider two magnetic structures for the Fe magnetic moments, which are typically observed on surfaces: a ferromagnetic, out-of-plane alignment For a ferromagnetic structure, the theoretically computed spatial and energy dependence of the LDOS (Figs. A further important signature of Majorana modes is that they are topologically protected against edge disorder according to the bulk-boundary correspondence To further elucidate the properties of the Majorana edge modes, we present in Fig. The question naturally arises to what extent the observed topological superconducting phase of the Fe/Re(0001)-O(2×1) hybrid system is robust against variations in the strength of parameters, such as the hybridization between the Re surface and the Fe island, V FeRe , which is mediated by the O(2×1) oxide layer, or the chemical potentials, μ Fe or μ Re . To investigate this question, we present in Fig. To demonstrate that interface engineering using an atomically thin oxide layer is crucial for the emergence of topological superconductivity in the Fe/Re(0001)-O(2×1) hybrid system, we contrast the above results with those obtained when the Fe layer is directly deposited on the Re(0001) surface without an intermediate oxide layer In conclusion, we reported the engineering of topological superconductivity and direct visualization of theoretically predicted Majorana edge modes in a nano-scale Fe island located on a Re(0001)-O(2×1) substrate. The combination of spatially resolved spectroscopy and topographic information allowed us to not only correlate for the first time the energy and spatial dependence of the observed in-gap edge modes with the physical edge of the Fe island, but also to demonstrate the robustness of these edge modes against edge disorder [no topographic information was available in a previous study using Pb/Co/Si(111) heterostructures Preparation of the model-type hybrid sample and the STM-tip An atomically clean Re(0001) surface was prepared in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) by repeated cycles of Ar + -ion sputtering and annealing at temperatures between 1150°C and 1250°C followed by flashing the substrate at 1530°C The Nb-tip used for the STM/STS experiments was mechanically cut ex situ at ambient conditions and then inserted into the UHV system. It was conditioned by applying voltage pulses (few V for 50 ms) and gentle indentation into the Re(0001) surface. Its quality was judged acceptable if a sufficiently large Nb gap could be reproduced and no in-gap states were observed in the tunneling spectra obtained on the Re(0001) surface. The experiments were carried out in a 3 He-cooled low-temperature STM system (USM-1300S, Unisoku, Japan) operating at T=360 mK under UHV conditions. Spectroscopic data were obtained by measuring the differential tunneling conductance (dI/dU) using a standard lock-in technique with a bias modulation voltage of 20 μVrms and a frequency of 841 Hz with opened feedback loop. The bias voltage was applied to the sample and the tunneling current was measured through the tip using a commercially available controller (Nanonis, SPECS, Swiss). A typical STM image of the Fe/Re(0001)-O(2×1) hybrid system with an individual Fe adatom (red dot) is shown in Fig. The differential tunneling conductance, dI/dU, measured above the O(2×1) surface (Fig. Section 2: Deconvolution procedure of the tunneling spectra for the superconductorsuperconductor tunneling junctions In the STM configuration, the tunneling current (I T ) through the STM junction is proportional to the convolution of the tip density of states (TDOS, ρ T (E)), surface density of states (SDOS, ρ S (E)), and the Fermi-Dirac distribution function (f(E, T)). Therefore, the tunneling current and the differential tunneling conductance are expressed by where T is the temperature of the system. Here, in this study, we were using a superconducting Nb tip to improve the energy resolution of the tunneling spectroscopy measurements. We assume a conventional BCS-type DOS for both the tip and the surface with the superconducting gaps of the tip and surface (∆ T , ∆ S ) and the broadening parameter  We find ∆ T , ∆ S and  values of 1.41 (0.86) meV, 0.28 (0.30) meV and 0.023 (0.020) meV at the effective temperature, Teff=0.4 K, by fitting the spectra obtained on the oxidized Re surface (the bare Re surface) away from the Fe island, and by considering the ac modulation of 20 μVrms used for the spectroscopic measurements (Fig. The Eq. ( The matrix A is defined by: Here, the matrix elements of A can be obtained by considering Eq. (S2): To minimize the error, we assume h(x) to be a smooth function and introduce an adjusting parameter γ as a prefactor of the trivial matrix H, which can be arbitrarily chosen Finally, we can obtain the column vector of the deconvoluted spectrum by applying the operation into the column vector of the measured spectrum as given by: All deconvoluted spectra (Fig. 