We improve the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer wave function with a fixed particle number so as to incorporate many-body correlations beyond the mean-field treatment. It is shown that the correlations lower the ground-state energy far more than Cooper-pair condensation in the weakcoupling region. Moreover, they naturally bring a superposition over the number of condensed particles. Thus, Cooper-pair condensation is special among the various bound-state formations of quantum mechanics in that number fluctuations are necessarily present in the condensate through the dynamical exchange of particles with the non-condensate reservoir. On the basis of this result, we propose ∆Ncon • ∆φ 1 as the uncertainty relation relevant to the number-phase fluctuations in superconductors and superfluids, where the number of condensed particles Ncon is used instead of the total particle number N . The formula implies that a macroscopic phase φ can be established even in number-fixed superconductors and superfluids since ∆Ncon ≫ 1. One of the most controversial issues in the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, Weak-coupling superconductors have been described theoretically within the mean-field framework. The corresponding ground state with N fermions has been identified as the antisymmetrized product of N/2 Cooper pairs with no superposition, To make our problem mathematically well-defined and tractable, we consider a simplified model that consists of N identical fermions (N : even) with mass m and spin 1 2 interacting via a two-body attractive potential U (r) in a box of volume V . where ε k and U q are and operators (ĉ kα , ĉ † kα ) satisfy the anticommutation relations of fermions with α =↑, ↓ for α = 1 2 , -1 2 , respectively. Anticipating condensation into a homogeneous s-wave pairing for this model, we introduce the pair creation operator by where i.e., the ket is characterized as the vacuum of the numberconserving Bogoliubov operator where (u k , v k ) denote satisfying u 2 k + |v k | 2 = 1, and operators P and P † are defined by Thus, P ( P † ) decreases (increases) the number of Cooper pairs by one. They satisfy asymptotically for ν ≪ N/2 and can be treated as commutative with (ĉ kα , ĉ † kα ). Now, we incorporate many-body correlations into Eq. (4). Equation (5) indicates that the Bogoliubov quasiparticles are absent from the mean-field BCS ground state given by Eq. ( where κ j denotes κ j ≡ k j α j , and w κ1κ2κ3κ4 is a variational parameter that is antisymmetric with respect to any permutation of (κ 1 , κ 2 , κ 3 , κ 4 ) by definition. This operator π † 4 describes the process where two Cooper pairs are broken up into four quasiparticles. Our variational wave function is given in terms of Eqs. ( where B N denotes the normalization constant. This |Φ N indeed has finite occupations of quasiparticles when w κ1κ2κ3κ4 = 0 is realized. It should also be noted that operating the exponential function exp(π † 4 ) on |Φ BCS N , among other possible functions of π † 4 , has a technical advantage that we can use linked cluster expansions in the evaluation of various physical quantities. For example, the normalization constant B N is obtained as The exponent in the second expression is expressible as Fig. It will turn out below that Eqs. ( Evaluation of the variational ground-state energy can be performed in exactly the same way as that for the interacting Bose-Einstein condensates. based on Eq. ( where we have used Eq. ( we find another finite average where we have omitted the possibility of spin polarization; accordingly, |w κκ2κ3κ4 | 2 in Eq. ( where we have assumed that φ k is also real. Note that The fourth term is the correlation energy characteristic of the present theory, whereas the first, second, and third terms are the kinetic, Hartree-Fock, and paircondensation energies, respectively. Setting η k and w κ1κ2κ3κ4 to zero in Eq. ( To minimize Eq. ( given in terms of Eq. (16a) by the method of Lagrange multipliers. Specifically, we introduce the functional with μ denoting the Lagrange multiplier, and set its first variations with respect to φ k and w κ1κ2κ3κ4 equal to zero simultaneously. These variations can be calculated straightforwardly but rather tediously as detailed in Appendix A, which is outlined as follows. The equation for δw κ1κ2κ3κ4 turns out to be linear in w κ1κ2κ3κ4 and can be solved explicitly. Substitution of the resultant expression into the equation for δφ k yields with which Eq. ( However, correlations are now incorporated in the singleparticle energy ξ k and energy gap ∆ k as where k is defined by k , which are obtained from Eqs. (22a) and (22b) by omitting the correlation terms proportional to V -2 . The solution of the equation for δw κ1κ2κ3κ4 , which is mentioned above, is also expressible in terms of E (0) where (two terms) denotes terms obtained from the first term in the square brackets by the two cyclic permutations of (2, 3, 4). This w k1α1k2α2k3α3k4α4 is antisymmetric in accordance with its original definition. Equations ( where θ(x) is the step function, and k F is the Fermi wave number at which n k exhibits a discontinuity. Note that k F remains invariant after switching on the interaction. The operator π † 4 in Eq. ( where we have used Eq. ( Numerical calculations were performed for the model attractive potential with two parameters a < 0 and r 0 > 0, whose Fourier coefficients are given by The reason of using Eq. ( 2m is the non-interacting Fermi energy and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Actually, we have chosen for which T c ∼ 2 × 10 -2 ε 0 F /k B , to make the evaluation of the correlation parts in Eqs. (22a) and (22b) numerically tractable with high accuracy; Appendix B simplifies the triple sums of wave vectors into triple radial and double angular integrals. The radial integrals were performed over 0 ≤ k ≤ k cut with cutoff k cut ∼ 50k F by expressing k = k F (1+sinh x 3 ) and discretizing variable x at an equal interval so as to accumulate integration points around k ∼ k F . It turned out that E (0) k defined below Eq. ( We present numerical results calculated for Eq. ( given in terms of the density of states (0) = mk F V /2π 2 2 and energy gap ∆ BCS kF = 0.0354ε 0 F at the Fermi level. An important quantity that characterizes the correlations is η k defined by Eq. ( and the resultant reduction of the discontinuity at k = k F from 1. A finite η k also produces a superposition over the number of Cooper pairs in the condensate that is expressed as Eq. ( The present study has clarified that the correlations naturally produce a superposition over the number of Cooper pairs in the ground-state wave function. This superposition, which is given by Eq. ( Thus, the present theory supports the mean-field description of superconductivity using the grand-canonical ensemble 1,8,9,15 in the thermodynamic limit. For systems with a small number of particles or of low dimensions, on the other hand, the fluctuations ∆N con are expected to have substantial effects on the physical properties and realization of coherence. However, the present treatment cannot be applied directly to finite systems because of the approximation introduced around Eq. ( We also write k 3 using R 12 as where ( θ3 , φ3 ) are polar angles in the coordinate system where k + k 2 lies along the z axis. This representation enables us to write (k + k 2 ) • k 3 and |k + k 3 | concisely as We can thereby transform Eq. (B1) into (B10) The two inequalities are satisfied when In addition, Eq. (B10) is expressible in terms of two angles (θ 2i , θ 2f ) defined through as θ 2i ≤ θ 2 ≤ θ 2f . We can thereby transform Eq. (B9) into where k 12 and k 13 are respectively defined by Eqs. (B3a) and (B8) in terms of θ 12 and θ3 given by Eq. (B3b) and The last integral over φ3 in Eq. (B12) can be performed analytically for the present model given by Eq. (25b) as may be seen from Eq. (B8). efficiently, which is necessary for calculating Eqs. (22a) and (22b) numerically. First, we choose k along the z axis and express k 2 in polar coordinates. Then k + k 2 can be written as k