Anisotropic thermal properties are of both fundamental and practical interests, but remain challenging to characterize using conventional methods. In this work, a new metrology based on asymmetric beam time-domain thermoreflectance (AB-TDTR) is developed to measure three-dimensional anisotropic thermal transport by extending the conventional TDTR technique. Using an elliptical laser beam with controlled elliptical ratio and spot size, the experimental signals can be exploited to be dominantly sensitive to measure thermal conductivity along the cross-plane or any specific in-plane directions. An analytic solution for a multi-layer system is derived for the AB-TDTR signal in response to the periodical pulse, elliptical laser beam, and heating geometry, to extract the anisotropic thermal conductivity from experimental measurement. Examples with experimental data are given for various materials with in-plane thermal conductivity from 5 W/mK to 2000W/mK, including isotropic materials (silicon, boron phosphide, boron nitride), transversely isotropic materials (graphite, quartz, sapphire) and transversely anisotropic materials (black phosphorus). Furthermore, a detailed sensitivity analysis is conducted to guide the optimal setting of experimental configurations for different materials. The developed AB-TDTR metrology provides a new approach to accurately measure anisotropic thermal phenomena for rational materials design and thermal applications. Anisotropic thermal transport is of both fundamental and practical importance. Orientation-dependent thermal conductivity has been observed in many materials systems because of their highly asymmetric crystal structures The traditional spirit of measuring anisotropic thermal conductivity is to align temperature gradient and heat flux along the sample orientation that is of interest, so that no temperature gradient exists in any other directions, like steady-state methods and transient laser flash Here we develop a new metrology based on asymmetric beam time-domain thermoreflectance (AB-TDTR) to measure anisotropic thermal transport along crossplane or any in-plane directions. The AB-TDTR signal sensitivity to thermal transport along different in-plane directions is decoupled and exploited using an elliptical laser beam with controlled elliptical ratio and spot size, to accomplish fast three-dimensional anisotropic thermal conductivity measurement. We first develop a mathematical model of anisotropic heat diffusion in multilayers heated by elliptical laser beam and provide the working principle of AB-TDTR method. Sensitivity analysis is conducted to guide the setting of experimental configuration for various materials. Demonstration experiments are performed on standard materials, including silicon (Si), cubic boron nitride (c-BN), boron phosphide, graphite, sapphire, quartz. Finally, the angle dependent thermal conductivity of black phosphorus is measured and compared with theoretical prediction to show the capability of our approach to measure thermal conductivity of threedimensional anisotropic materials. For pump probe spectroscopy measurement, a thin metal film is coated on the sample surface to serve as a thermal transducer, which is instantaneously heated by absorbing femtosecond pump laser pulses. This metal film also serves as the temperature sensor by reflecting a probe beam to photo diode with its reflectivity linearly proportional to temperature under a small temperature change. Thus, the transient temperature decay with time can be continuously detected by controlling the delay time between pump and probe beams using a mechanical stage and fitted with a multilayer thermal model to obtain the thermal conductivity (κ) of the sample. To achieve high signal to noise ratio, the laser pulses are modulated, and lock-in technique are used to detect temperature response at modulation frequency f0. Under the assumption that temperature response of the sample to laser heating is both linear and time invariant, the detected signal by lock-in amplifier was given by Cahill as 52 where H(f) is the frequency response of sample heated periodically, β indicating temperature coefficient of reflectivity and electronic gains, Q and Qs power of each pump pulse and probe pulse respectively, Ts the period of laser pulses, fs the frequency of laser pulses, τ the delay time between pump beam and probe beam. The detected in-phase signal Vin and out-of-phase signal Vout by lock-in amplifier are real part and imaginary part of Z(f0). Since the phase signal tan -1 (Vout/Vin) can exclude effects from some of the noise signals, we would discuss only the phase signals in the rest sections. For conventional TDTR, more details of experimental setup and derivation of H(f) can be found in literatures Different from isotropic medium, where heat flux is always along temperature gradient direction, heat conduction in anisotropic medium is much more complicated, where heat flux is related with temperature gradient along all the directions. Mathematically, it can be expressed in cartesian coordinates as 17 where i, j mean the directions and T is temperature. Nine κij elements constitute a second rank tensor, which is called thermal conductivity tensor. Under a certain orthogonal Cartesian coordinate system, the off-diagonal elements of thermal conductivity tensor can vanish The axes of this coordinate system are defined the principal thermal transport axes. The anisotropic heat conduction equation in AB-TDTR measurement in this coordinate is expressed as where S is the heat source term, Cv volumetric heat capacity of anisotropic solids ) is treated as a heat flux boundary condition, where A0 is the absorbed power of pump beam, w0,x and w0,y the 1/e 2 semiminor axis length and 1/e 2 semi-major axis length respectively as shown in Fig. where T ̂ is temperature in frequency domain, f, ξ and η the variables in Fourier space corresponding to t, x and y. This one-dimensional multi-layer heat conduction equation was solved by Schmidt et al. following the approach of Carslaw and Jaegar where C and D are elements of transfer matrix as function of thickness and λ, indicating geometry and thermal properties of each layer )dξdη (8) where As is the reflected power of probe beam, ws,x and ws,y the semi-minor length and semi-major length of probe beam. Here it should be noted that the only important characteristic sizes of laser beams in AB-TDTR are the root mean square of the minor and of the major axis length . Note, the alignment between the elliptical beams and the principal crystal directions can be controlled using a rotating sample holder (Fig. The setup schematic of AB-TDTR is shown in Fig. In addition, it should be noted that the elliptical modeling for AB-TDTR can minimize the measurement uncertainty from an imperfect laser beam profile. In conventional TDTR, circular beams are usually assumed in data analysis despite that the actual beam shape always deviates from a perfect circular shape. Such a deviation from a perfect circular beam to a practically elliptical beam can bring non-negligible errors for the fitted thermal conductivity. A hypothetical example is given below with the following listed parameters: isotropic thermal conductivity κ = 100 W/mK, volumetric heat capacity Cv = 2×10 6 J/m 3 K, interfacial thermal conductance G = 1×10 8 W/m 2 K. The actual elliptical ratio of is 1.25 and Dx is 5 μm. Under modulation frequency of 1 MHz and a circular beam assumption, the fitted κ would be 87 W/mK, 13 % lower than the actual value. Therefore, the anisotropic mathematical modeling presented for the AB-TDTR would avoid such an error to improve measurement accuracy. To provide a guideline for optimizing experimental settings for different materials, a comprehensive sensitivity analysis is conducted in this work by varying materials anisotropy, beam spot size and modulation frequency. Considering the generality of this analysis, some properties are fixed at most common values. For example, the volumetric heat capacity is fixed at 2×10 6 J/m 3 K since most of solid materials at room temperature have values from 1~3×10 6 J/m 3 K 58 , while G between our hypothetical sample and aluminum is 1×10 8 W/m 2 K, located in the most common range of 1×10 7~9 W/m 2 K 59 . The sensitivity of TDTR phase signal to a certain parameter α was defined as 60 where α can be κxx, κyy. Here, a sensitivity ratio is defined as γ = S κ xx S κ yy ⁄ , representing the key metric to quantitatively determine the measurement unce rtainty due to the two competing parameters, i.e. κxx, κyy. The sensitivity ratio as a functio n of thermal conductivity and beam diameters are plotted as color contours in Fig. First, the AB-TDTR experiment is conducted on prototype isotropic materials, including silicon, cubic boron nitride, and cubic boron phosphide. As the first step, the cross-plane thermal conductivity κzz is accurately measured. Based on the sensitivity analysis (Fig. Next, AB-TDTR is performed on transversely isotropic material which possesses isotropic in-plane thermal conductivity but different from the cross-plane thermal conductivity. Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) is used as a prototype exemplary material here. Since in each layer of graphite carbon atoms are arranged at honeycomb lattice, thermal transport in basal plane is isotropic. A two-step measurement procedure is performed. First of all, the interfacial thermal conductance (G) and κzz are measured at a high modulation frequency and a large beam spot. Specifically, here by using modulation frequency f0 = 9.8 MHz and big circular spot with diameter of 30 μm, the interface conductance between graphite and aluminum is measured as 5.5×10 7 W/m 2 K, which is consistent with the reported value at room temperature by Schmidt et al Specifically, the modulation frequency is set as f0 = 1.1 MHz and beam spot size are Dx = 30 μm and Dy = 900 μm. Consequently, with the value of G fixed, κxx was extracted by fitting the AB-TDTR measurement data (Fig. In addition to the highly anisotropic graphite, AB-TDTR is applied to measure weakly anisotropic materials with relatively low thermal conductivity such as quartz and sapphire used as examples. For quartz, because of the absolute value of thermal conductivity is less than 10 W/mK, smaller spot size Dx = 3 μm is adopted to improve sensitivity to in-plane thermal conductivity. The AB-TDTR results on these relatively low thermal conductivity materials show consistency with literature (Fig. As we mentioned in the previous section, the most important advantage of AB-TDTR over variable spot size approach Here, we performed AB-TDTR measured and studied the angle dependent thermal conductivity of BP. The G between BP and aluminum is measured as 3.3×10 7 W/m 2 K by using a modulation frequency f0 = 9.8 MHz and circular beam spot diameter of 30 μm. Measurement sensitivity analysis is simulated in Figure Importantly, AB-TDTR measurement can clearly identify the diagonal elements in the thermal conductivity tensor, i.e., κxx, κyy, and κzz. Mathematically, the off-diagonal elements of thermal conductivity tensor as described by the anisotropic heat conduction equation In AB-TDTR measurement, the temperature gradient (i.e., 2κ xy ∂ 2 T ∂x∂y ) along major direction is vanishing, under a large elliptical ratio of laser beams. When the incidence direction of laser beam is normal to one principal directions, the other two off-diagonal terms would also vanish, and the heat conduction equation would become 11). Based on equation (11), we can calculate the new diagonal elements of thermal conductivity when we rotate an angle θ between zigzag direction of BP and the minor axis direction of beam. First, we can build a new coordinate by rotating θ degree along z axis. In the new coordinate, x ' cos θ = x and x ' sin θ = y, where x ' is along the minor axis direction of laser beams, x along zigzag direction and y along armchair direction. The new heat conduction equation would be So the thermal conductivity element along x ′ would be where κxx and κyy are thermal conductivity along zigzag and armchair direction respectively. Based on Eqn. ( In summary, a new metrology based on AB-TDTR method is developed for anisotropic thermal measurement. Experiments are conducted for different materials with a wide range of thermal conductivity values from ~ 5 to 2000 W/mK and thermal conductivity anisotropy from 0.5 to 400. The AB-TDTR measurement results are plotted in Fig. plane thermal conductivity increases sensitivity to κxx due to an increased crossplane thermal penetration depth and thereby an increased effective inplane heating size in the deeper layer beneath the top surface. Overall, the sensitivity anal TDTR method to measure the thermal conductivity of interest (i.e. κxx). A. Sood, J. Cho, K.D. Hobart, T.I. Feygelson, B.B. Pate, M. Asheghi, D.G. Cahill, and K.E. Goodson, J. Appl. Phys. 119(17), 5103 (2016). Z. Aksamija and I. Knezevic, Phys. Rev. B -Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 82(4), G.A. Slack, Phys. Rev. 122(5), 1451 (1961).