Magnetic refrigeration at room-temperature is a technology that could potentially be more environmentallyfriendly, efficient and affordable than traditional refrigeration. The search for suitable materials for magnetocaloric refrigeration led to the study of double-perovskites La2MnNiO6, La2MnCoO6 and La2MnFeO6. While La2MnNiO6 and La2MnCoO6 are ferromagnets with near room-temperature TC s, previous theoretical study of double-perovskite La2MnFeO6 revealed that this material is a ferrimagnet due to strong electronic interactions in Fe-d orbitals. Here, we investigate the double-perovskites La2MnRuO6 and LaA"MnFeO6 (A" = Ba, Ca and Sr) with density functional theory (DFT) as materials that can counteract the effects the strong repulsion present in the in Fe-d shells of La2MnFeO6 and lead to a ferromagnetic state. Our study reaveals that while La2MnRuO6 is also a ferrimagnet, but with a higher net magnetic moment per formula than La2MnFeO6, doubly-ordered LaA"MnFeO6 are ferromagnets. By mapping the total energy of the LaA"MnFeO6 compounds obtained from DFT calculations to the Ising model, we also calculate their magnetic exchange couplings. This allows us to estimate the trend in TC of the three doped La2MnFeO6 materials with classical Monte-Carlo calculations and predict that doubly-ordered LaBaMnFeO6 and LaSrMnFeO6 could be suitable materials for room-temperature magnetic refrigeration. Traditional cooling utilizes refrigerant gases that are harmful to the environment due to their global warming potential. The design of new magnetocaloric materials is one of the main research areas in the field. Double-perovskites La 2 MnNiO 6 (LMNO) and La 2 MnCoO 6 (LMCO) have been proposed and investigated extensively because they are ferromagnetic insulators with large total moments, 5 and 6μ B /f.u. respectively The main factor that drives LMFO to be a ferrimagnet is the strong electron-electron interaction in Fe-d shells that overcomes the crystal field splitting in Mn-d shells. In order to promote Mn 4+ oxidation state and to design materials that could potentially be more suitable than LMNO and LMCO for magnetic refrigeration, we consider and discuss two solutions. First, we study the double-perovskite La 2 MnRuO 6 (LMRO). This compound is obtained by iso-electronic substitution of Fe with Ru. The valence orbitals of Ru are 4d. These orbitals are more extended in space than the Fe-3d, and hence show less significant electronic correlations. One could then hope for a Mn 4+ -O-Ru 2+ ferromagnetic superexchange interaction. Second, we consider the effect of hole-doping LMFO by substituting half of the La atoms with A" = Ba, Sr or Ca, leading to LaA"MnFeO 6 with ferromagnetic Mn 4+ -O-Fe 3+ superexchange interaction in the ordered materials. In this paper, we employ the real material calculation described in Sec. II to find in Sec. III the magnetic ground state of LMRO and in Sec. IV of hole-doped LMFO. The latter section contains information on structure optimization, magnetic and electronic ground state properties, estimates of magnetic exchange couplings and of the Curie temperature. We investigate the ground state structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of double-perovskites LMRO, LBMFO, LSMFO and LCMFO with density functional theory calculations. The calculations are performed within the full-potential all electron basis set as implemented in the WIEN2k package, using the PBE GGA functional. We first studied LMRO in order to see if a ferromagnetic superexchange interaction is possible between Mn and Ru ions, considering the fact that electronic repulsion in Ru-4d shells are less important than in Fe-3d shells. We used experimental crystal structure data to perform the calculations, without structure relaxation Our GGA calculations show that the ground sate of LMRO is a spin density wave with anti-parallel magnetic moments of the neighboring Mn and Ru ions. Fig. An ionic picture for Ru ions is not quite applicable. Indeed, in contrast to Mn-d orbitals, in which spin-dependent orbital occupation is almost zero or one and does not depend sensitively on the magnetic order, some of Ru-d orbitals are partially occupied (see Table LaA"MnFeO6 WITH A" = Ba, Sr OR Ca In LMFO, strong electronic correlations in the Fe-d orbitals favor Fe 3+ oxidation states in order to avoid double occupancy. This consequently leads to Mn 3+ states, Jahn-Teller distortion and, ultimately, a ferrimagnetic ground state. Here, we study LaA"MnFeO 6 , with A"=Ba, Sr or Ca, in which the total oxidation of the cations at the B site is 7 + instead of 6 + . This could lead to Mn 4+ and Fe 3+ oxidation states and to a ferromagnetic ground state. We investigate this possibility here. Since doubly-ordered LA"MFO (A"=Ba, Sr, Ca) have not been reported experimentally, we start our study by optimizing their crystal structure. Most A 2 B'B"O 6 doubleperovskites with B-site order crystallize in the P 2 1 /c space group. where r A and r B denote the average ionic radius at the A and B sites, respectively, while r O is the ionic radius of oxygen. The ideal, cubic situation with 180 • B'-O-B" bonding angles occurs when t = 1. Most ordered double-perovskites with t 1 crystallize in the F m 3m cubic space group. When t is smaller than 1, octahedral tilting occurs. In order to optimize the structures with unit cells containing a reasonable number of atoms, we had to impose A-site and B-site order. We chose a layered order on the A site and a rock-salt order on the B site, which are the most common orderings in doubly ordered A'A"B'B"O 6 double-perovskites. For LBMFO, the ground state predicted by GGA+U calculations is in the P 2 1 space group. We optimized the structures in the same space group for LCMFO and for the GGA calculations on both of these materials. In the case of LSMFO, the ground state predicted by GGA and GGA+U calculations is P 1. In agreement with the tolerance factors listed above, we found from the relaxed structures that the amount of octahedral tilting in LBMFO is the smallest out of the three compounds, while it is the largest in LCMFO. In previous work on double-perovskite LMFO (t 0.96), we found that the Mn-O-Fe bonding angles are 152 • . All three compounds are predicted to be ferromagnetic insulators by both GGA and GGA+U methods. In the GGA calculations, the band gaps are very small for the three compounds. They are 0.14, 0.17 and 0.25 eV for LBMFO, LSMFO and LCMFO respectively. As seen in Fig. The total moment is predicted to be 8μ B /f.u. in all three materials. Analysis of the partial moment, partial density of states and partial charge in the five d shells leads to the conclusion that the magnetic ions are in high spin configuration in all three ferromagnetic materials with Mn 4+ and Fe 3+ oxidation states. The magnetic orderings of these three compounds are easily understood from the superexchange interaction that can be deduced from these oxidation states. Indeed, as illustrated in Fig. All of these conclusions arise from the assumption that LBMFO, LSMFO and LCMFO are doubly-ordered. Experimentally, in A 2 B'B"O 6 double-perovskites, B-site order seems to arise from charge and size difference between the B' and B" ions. Typically, the materials are disordered when the charge difference is smaller than 2. 12 Moreover, A-site order seems to be linked with B-site order: if the B site is disordered, then the A site is also disordered. In order to see whether LBMFO, LSMFO and LCMFO are suitable for magnetic refrigeration, one needs to know if their T C is close to room-temperature. It is possible to map the DFT total energy to the Ising model in order to obtain the magnetic exchange couplings that can afterwards be used in the calculation of the Curie temperature. In Eq. ( In order to calculate the six exchange parameters, we fix the atomic positions and use seven different collinear magnetic configurations to calculate six total energy differences. We use an additional magnetic configuration to verify the validity of our results. All the magnetic configurations we consider are listed in Table One can notice that LBMFO has the largest values of J Values (meV) A"=Ba Sr Ca J1 Mn-Fe (in plane) 2.31 2.19 1.74 J2 Mn-Fe (out of plane) 2.24 2.12 1.19 J3 Mn-Mn (in plane) -0.28 -0.18 -0.12 J4 Mn-Mn (out of plane) -0.32 -0.22 -0.07 J 3 Fe-Fe (in plane) -0.003 -0.02 0.03 J 4 Fe-Fe (out of plane) -0.01 -0.03 -0.06 Calculated magnetic exchange interactions for LaA"MnFeO6. Positive (negative) value denotes FM (AFM) coupling. The extreme values of the spins are S z Mn = 3/2 and S z Fe = 5/2. J 2 LCMFO has the smallest ones. This trend can be explained by the structural differences between the three compounds. As explained in Sec. (IV A), the Mn-O-Fe bonding angle is an interesting feature in the relaxed structures. Superexchange mechanisms are more effective when the two magnetic ions are aligned with the oxygen atom. A 180 • bonding angle indeed leads to the biggest overlap between the orbitals that participate in the superexchange. In LBMFO, the angles are closer to the ideal 180 • case, leading to more effective superexchange interactions. Similarly, in LCMFO, the angles are the farthest from 180 • : in that case, the crystal structure shows important distortions from the ideal double-perovskite one, which could lead to less effective superexchange interactions. Hence, the largest nearest-neighbor exchange couplings are obtained when the Mn-O-Fe bonding angle is close to 180 One can extract the Curie temperature of the materials using the exchange couplings listed in Table In order to be adequate for magnetic refrigeration, a material must display a number of properties, among which are ferromagnetism with a T C around room temperature, as explained previously. For real applications, a material must also have an appreciable isothermal magnetic entropy change under the application of an external magnetic field ∆S m (T, 0 → H) = S m (T, H) -S m (T, 0) and a large adiabatic temperature change ∆T ad (S, H → 0) = T ad (S, H) -T ad (S, 0). Here, we use mean-field calculations in order to compute the magnetic entropy of LBMFO and LSMFO. In order to check the accuracy of the method, we performed the same calculations for LMNO and compared our results to available experimental data. Appendix A gives the details of the method. For LBMFO and LSMFO, the extreme values of the spins are S z Mn = 3/2 and S z Fe = 5/2, and the exchange couplings are the ones from Table Fig. We studied two different types of materials in order to see if a ferromagnetic and insulating LaA"MnB"O 6 -based doubleperovskite with a higher moment per formula unit and Curie temperature than LMNO and LMCO could be designed. Since strong electronic correlations have been found to induce an antiferromagnetic insulating ground state in LMFO, we first studied LMRO, in which electronic correlations are less important. We found that this material is also predicted to be ferrimagnetic. The total moment is predicted to be 3μ B /f.u., which is higher than what was predicted with similar calculations for LMFO (1μ B ). This predicted ground state and the fact that Ru is rather expensive strongly suggests that LMRO is not suitable for magnetic refrigeration. By contrast, our study of hole-doped LMFO through divalent substitution of one of the La atoms leads to promising results. All three compounds studied (LBMFO, LSMFO and LCMFO) are predicted to be ferromagnetic insulators by GGA and GGA+U calculations, with a total moment of 8μ B /f.u, which is higher than that of LMCO and LMNO. Moreover, our study of the trend in T C of these hole-doped LMFO materials indicate that LBMFO and LSMFO are likely to have a T C close to room-temperature, making both of them promising for room-temperature magnetic refrigeration, provided that they can be synthesized experimentally as doubly ordered doped double-perovskites. Even though maximum isothermal entropy change and adiabatic temperature change with magnetic field are smaller than for the best reference materials, these double perovskites have other advantages, such as high resistance, low price and chemical stability, that can make them useful for applications. Canada First Research Excellence Fund, and by the Research Chair in the Theory of Quantum Materials. Ab initio simulations and Monte Carlo calculations were performed on computers provided by the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, the Ministère de l'Éducation des Loisirs et du Sport (Québec), Calcul Québec, and Compute Canada. Appendix A: Mean-field calculation of the magnetocaloric properties We used the two-spin mean-field approach to the Ising model described in Ref. 6. This mean-field scheme takes into account the two magnetic ions of LaA"MnB"O 6 (A" = La, Ba or Sr, B" = Ni or Fe). It yields the following self-consistent equations for the magnetizations m(T ) and m (T ) per Mn and B" site, considering an external magnetic field H: where the mean fields h M F and h M F are given by: Here, S z is the maximal spin value at the Mn site, S z is the maximal spin value at the B" site. Also, β = 1/k B T , the Js are the exchange-coupling constants discussed in Sec. (IV C). Self-consistent solution of these equation for a given temperature gives the sublattice magnetization and the corresponding mean fields. The magnetic entropy S m (T, H) in the presence of an external magnetic field H is defined as: The expression for the entropy due to the B" magnetic atom is analogous. We computed h M F and h M F for LMNO from the selfconsistency equations, and then calculated the entropy from Eq. (A1), with S z = 3/2 and S z = 1. In particular, we calculated the isothermal entropy change ∆S m (T, 0 → H) = S m (T, H) -S m (T, 0) for LMNO. This mean field theory can also be used to compute a lower limit for the adiabatic temperature change ∆T ad , using the Dulong-Petit limit for the heat capacity: C p = 3nR, where n is the number of atoms in a unit cell, and R the universal gas constant. We use the approximate form of the ∆T ad : In our calculations, we used N = 1.235 × 10 24 formula units, which corresponds to one kilogram of LMNO. The behavior of the calculated ∆S m around T C agrees qualitatively with the experiment, but the full width at half maximum is smaller. One can also notice that the maximal value ∆S max is better reproduced by the present two-spin mean-field approach than by the effective one-spin mean-field approach of Ref. 2. This is illustrated in Fig. • . D. Curie temperature from mean-field and Monte Carlo calculations