Methanol occupies a central role in chemical synthesis and is considered an ideal candidate for cleaner fuel storage and transportation. It can be catalyzed from water and volatile organic compounds such as carbon dioxide, thereby offering an attractive solution for reducing carbon emissions. However molecular-level experimental observations of the catalytic process are scarce, and most existing catalysts tend to rely on empirically optimized, expensive and complex nanocomposite materials. This lack of molecular-level insights has precluded the development of simpler, more cost-effective alternatives. Here we show that graphite immersed in ultrapure water is able to spontaneously catalyze methanol from volatile organic compounds in ambient conditions. Using single-molecule resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM) in liquid, we directly observe the formation and evolution of methanol-water nanostructures at the surface of graphite. These molecularly ordered structures nucleate near catalytically active surface features such as atomic step edges and grow progressively as further methanol is being catalyzed. Complementary nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of the liquid confirms the formation of methanol and quantifies its concentration. We also show that electric fields significantly enhance the catalysis rate, even when as small as that induced by the natural surface potential of the silicon AFM tip. These findings could have a significant impact on the development of organic catalysts and on the function of nanoscale carbon devices. The conversion of unwanted volatile organics such as carbon dioxide to methanol is of high interest given the pressing need for alternative energy sources to fossil fuel Organic materials such as graphite derivatives present obvious candidates as alternative catalysts. GrO retains some of the unique electronic properties of graphene, but the presence of hydrophilic groups makes it soluble in water, opening new avenues for applications in water filtration and ion sieving The surface of bulk graphite presents singularities at exposed atomic steps and edges. These singularities have long been known to make the edges of graphite electrochemically active. Here we demonstrate catalytic production of methanol at the surface of immersed highly orientated pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) in ambient conditions. The process occurs spontaneously with the thermal energy available, but is stimulated in the presence of an applied electric field. We quantify the amount of methanol produced using 1 H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy of the resulting solution and follow in-situ the process with single-molecule resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM) in liquid. This includes the resulting self-assembly of water and alcohol molecules at the HOPG-water interface. Representative examples of this selfassembly can be seen in Figure A recent study by our group has shown that water and methanol can self-assemble into stable, layered structures To independently confirm the formation of methanol, we conducted NMR analysis on the solution in direct contact with the HOPG before and after nucleation was observed. Practically, the measurement is challenging because it requires observing small quantities of methanol (typically sub-millimolar) in the presence of a signal (water) that is five orders of magnitude larger. Therefore, it was necessary to suppress the water signal very efficiently to allow for unambiguous identification of the methanol produced. This was achieved with the recently reported Robust-5 pulse sequence Sample (i) act as an immediate control for possible contaminants since no supramolecular structures could be observed by AFM on such short timescale. We chose a 5 seconds water-HOPG contact time as the shortest timescale in which the sample could be prepared. No detectable level of methanol is expected and this is indeed confirmed (Figure Since catalysis can occur spontaneously at room temperature and is enhanced by the presence of an electric field, the silicon oxide AFM tip may also enhance the process. Silicon oxide tips such as those used in the present study develop a negative surface potential of typically -60 mV Overall, the NMR results confirm spontaneous methanol catalysis. The process is enhanced by the presence of an electric field, potentially even as small as that induced by an immersed AFM tip at the interface with HOPG. Composite nanomaterials involving oxides are widely used in methanol catalysis, and could play a significant role here. We therefore decided to further investigate the effect of small voltages (comparable in magnitude to the surface potential of typical oxides) on the formation of interfacial structures. Since most of the alcohol produced resides at the interface with the HOPG, even small electric potentials could potentially have a significant impact. Here we compared the evolution of samples exposed to 50 ± 1 mV or in open circuit for 24h. In both cases, it was necessary to de-wet the HOPG surface in order to transfer the pre-conditioned sample to the AFM chamber, thereby leaving a thin interfacial liquid layer containing the produced methanol. More ultrapure water is then added and the imaging starts within minutes. This procedure makes it difficult to rule out any disassembly/reassembly of the interfacial structures during the transfer, but the differences between the two samples are obvious nonetheless (Figure Figure In contrast, when a 50 mV external electric field is applied for 24h prior to imaging, unstructured patches form a monolayer on the HOPG surface and can immediately be observed (Figure The patches rapidly develop into ordered structures resembling those of the methanol-water monolayers. Significantly, within an hour of imaging the structures have almost completely covered the surface of the graphite (Figure AFM and NMR experiments consistently demonstrate catalysis of methanol at the surface of immersed graphite in ambient conditions. The mechanism allowing the methanol synthesized at the surface of graphite to be released in the bulk liquid is not immediately obvious from out data. Our results show that the water-methanol assembly is fully stable when directly in contact with the surface of graphite, but becomes progressively less stable as new layers form on top of the first layer. Additional layers could occasionally be observed (Figure The exact molecular mechanism underlying the catalytic process cannot by deduced from the present results alone, partly because the exact chemical details of the graphite are not know; surface groups at the edge plane From an electrochemical perspective, our results suggest that a graphite electrode immersed into an aqueous solution progressively develops an interfacial 'passivation' layer formed by a solid self-assembled layer of water and methanol molecules produced in-situ. While relatively easy to destroy, this layer reforms spontaneously and may significantly affect interfacial processes such as charge exchange In conclusion, our combined AFM and NMR results consistently show that graphite is able to spontenously catalyse methanol at room temperature. The amount of methanol produced is relatively modest and catalysis appears to occur almost exclusively at surface singularities on the graphite such as atomic steps and in the absence of any external input of energy. The underlying molecular mechanism remains unclear due uncertainties over the chemical composition of the graphite, but applying an external electrical potential across the interface considerably enhances the catalysis rate, even when due to the surface potential of nano-objects located near the interface. We believe our findings could have a significant impact on the development and understanding of novel carbon-based catalytic materials as well as devices highly sensitive to interfacial liquids. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION Sample preparation. All the solutions were prepared with ultrapure water (AnalaR NORMAPUR ISO 3696 Grade 3, VWR Chemicals, Leicestershire, UK) and HPLC-grade methanol with a purity of ≥99% (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK). In a typical experiment, a liquid droplet (~200 μL) of water was deposited on a freshly cleaved HOPG substrate (SPI supplies, West Chester, PA, USA) mounted on a stainless steel disk using silver paint (Ted Pella Inc, Redding, CA, USA). In all cases the HOPG was baked to >120 oC for 15 minutes to remove any contaminants The error associated with estimating the quantity of methanol produced is dominated by the error in measuring the volume of liquid for NMR analysis, leading to an overall uncertainty on the concentrations of ±0.01 μM. The contribution to this error from the NMR measurement itself is negligible. Imaging was conducted in amplitude modulation mode using a commercial Cypher ES AFM (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara, USA) equipped with temperature control and photothermal drive. The cantilevers (Arrow UHF-AUD, Nanoworld, Neuchatel, Switzerland) exhibit a nominal spring constant of ~1.95 nN/nm (from thermal spectrum calibration) and a resonance frequency of ~430 kHz in liquid. The cantilevers were cleaned by immersion in ultrapure water before imaging. All parts of the AFM in direct and indirect contact with the solution (cantilever holder, imaging chamber) where thoroughly cleaned with ultrapure water prior to imaging. After washing, the stage was heated to 105 oC for 20 minutes to evaporate possible