X-ray diffraction pressure studies at room temperature demonstrate that the spinel FeAl2O4 transforms to a tetragonal phase at ~18 GPa. This tetragonal phase has a highly irregular unit-cell volume versus pressure dependence up to ~45 GPa, after which a transformation to a Cmcm post-spinel phase is onset. This is attributable to pressure driven Fe  Al site inversion at room temperature, corroborated by signatures in the 57 Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy pressure data. At the tetragonal  post-spinel transition, onset in the range 4550 GPa, there is a concurrent emergence of a non-magnetic spectral component in the Mössbauer data at variable cryogenic temperatures. This is interpreted as spin crossover at sixfold coordinated Fe locations emanated from site inversion. Spin crossover commences at the end of the pressure range of the tetragonal phase and progresses in the post-spinel structure. There is also a much steeper volume change V/V ~ 10% in the range 4550 GPa compared to the preceding pressure regime, from the combined effects of the structural transition and spin crossover electronic change. At the highest pressure attained, ~106 GPa, the Mössbauer data evidences a diamagnetic Fe low-spin abundance of ~50%. The rest of the high-spin Fe in eightfold coordinated sites continue to experience a relatively small internal magnetic field of ~33 T. This is indicative of a magnetic ground state  Author to whom all Hercynite FeAl2O4 is a 2-3 cubic spinel, which is isomorphic to the mineral MgAl2O4. In this structure the Fe 2+ and Al 3+ cations can occupy both tetrahedral A and octahedral B sites of a spinel with a general compound formulation AB2O4. An inversion parameter x specifying the fraction of A sites occupied by trivalent cations in hercynite leads to a formulation:     Fe Al Fe Al O , where the roman numerals refer to the fourfold and sixfold coordination sites. The degree of inversion at ambient conditions depends on synthesis conditions, viz, high temperature annealing value and cooling rate A and B sites in turn determines the chemical and physical properties of the spinel. From a magnetic perspective the normal spinel x = 0 case, FeAl2O4, is of considerable interest. The B-site cations form a pyrochlore sublattice. A-site cations in these ferrous spinels form a diamond sublattice. This in itself does not lead to geometric spin frustration, but nearest-neighbor spin coupling J1 and next nearest neighbor coupling J2 engenders strong frustration. Consequentially exotic spin liquid or orbital liquid/glass ground states may be stabilized, as ascertained from comprehensive magnetic susceptibility and neutron scattering experiments Different degrees of inversion disrupt these exotic ground states and for relatively low levels of inversion, say x ~ 0.2, spin glass behavior tends to be rendered in the system Our interest is in the pressure response of the magnetic-electronic behavior of these ferrous spinels, up to the current state-of-the-art megabar (100 GPa  0.6 eV Ǻ -3 ) regime. Such energy density input is necessary to impact on the typical pertinent large energy scales (~eV) of important electron interactions in these transition metal oxide systems. Moreover spinels under pressure are known to transit through various structural phases which have been investigated primarily by x-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy, for a review see ref summarized in the following. We extend similar such investigations to FeAl2O4 in this study. In our recent high pressure study of the normal spinel (Fe) IV (Cr2) VI O4 in which both A and B cations have a magnetic moment and resultant interesting magneticelectronic properties (e.g., dynamical Jahn-Teller effect, orbital ordering, multiferroicity), we have demonstrated that an unusual pressure response occurs A cubic to tetragonal transition occurs at ~12 GPa at room temperature and then persistent increased tetragonality prevails up to nearly a megabar. Fe  Cr site inversion is onset at ~30 GPa at room temperature. This leads to a situation where Cr 3+ (3d 3 ) is unusually stabilized in tetrahedral coordination. The inverted Fe 2+ , at distorted octahedral sites, then undergo high-to low-spin crossover (HS  LS transition) onset at ~60 GPa. Near to 100 GPa 50% of the Fe is LS implying pressure driven inversion to attain x ~ 0.5 in     Fe Cr Fe Cr O . In spite of a more than 30% decrease in unit cell volume the tetragonal high pressure phase remains persistently non-metallic. In our subsequent study in ulvöspinel (Fe) IV (FeTi) VI O4 The two above-mentioned cases represented some of the first studies of the interplay between magnetic-electronic behavior and structural response of magnetic spinels to high densification. Establishing that pressure driven site-inversion and partial spin crossover may occur, is crucial for knowledge of the physical and chemical properties of such systems in mineral assemblages under extreme pressuretemperature conditions of the deep Earth. Moreover there is also now some intrigue as to the resilience of the charge gap at such high densification. As a follow-up to these recent studies we have conducted similar structural and magnetic-electronic investigations of FeAl2O4 to the megabar regime. Our study aims to answer questions of whether pressure induces site-inversion, orbital moment quenching, spin state crossover and whether the band gap prevails to such high pressures. This may then constitute a comparative study with the behavior of other ferrous analogs FeCr2O4 (normal spinel) and Fe2TiO4 (inverse spinel). To this end we employ 57 Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy (MS) as arguably the most suitable direct probe of the Fe magnetic-electronic state to extreme conditions, pressures of ~100 GPa and temperatures in the range 3004 K. For this purpose an 57 Fe isotopically enriched sample was prepared. This was to ensure spectra with an adequate signal-to-noise ratio could be obtained for a reliable analysis, when probing the microscopic pressurized sample cavity to extreme conditions in a diamond anvil cell with MS. As such, in the synthesis procedure briefly described in the next section, some degree of inversion has been attained, x ~ 0.2. Hence ~20% of the Fe (tetrahedral) sites on the diamond sublattice are populated by spin vacancies (nonmagnetic Al 3+ cations), and the magnetic ground state is certainly expected to be a spin glass. The pressure response of this spin glass state is thus investigated to very high densification. Complementary x-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) at room temperature and temperature-dependent electrical-resistance measurements, both to the vicinity of a megabar, delineate the structural response to pressurization of the spinel and evolution of the charge gap, respectively. FeAl2O4 was synthesized using stoichiometric quantities of Fe, Al2O3 and Fe2O3. The Fe2O3 precursor material was enriched to ~20% 57 Fe. The pelleted mixture was heated in an evacuated quartz tube at 1000 °C for 24 hours and then annealed at 500 °C for a week to minimize the inversion. The single-phase purity of the sample, cubic structure and magnetic properties compared with the literature The combination of high pressure MS , resistivity and XRD methodologies used here are very similar to that of our previous investigations of ferrous spinels Pressure generation was by means of custom built miniature piston cylinder diamond anvil cells (DACs) made at Tel-Aviv University (TAU) The error in the pressure determination is 510% of the reported average pressure from the ruby fluorescence measurements in the case of the MS and resistance experiments. Liquid argon was used as a pressurizing medium For the resistance measurements the rhenium gasket was insulated with a layer of Al2O3-NaCl (3:1 wt. %) mixed with epoxy to avoid short-circuiting the Pt electrodes used to measure the sample resistance in the DC four-probe configuration. A few ruby fragments for pressure determination were located in the region between the Pt electrode tips overlapping the sample. No pressure transmitting medium was used, but pressure is effectively transmitted to the sample upon compression by way of the surrounding insulation. Pressure gradients are expected to be small in the distances Variable temperature, 300-5 K Mössbauer studies involved 57 Co(Rh) 10-mCi point-source methodology and a top-loading liquid-helium cryostat The isomer shift in the present work is calibrated relative to -Fe. For variable low temperature resistance measurements the DAC was placed on a probe connected to a "dip-stick" stepper-motor assembly, which by computer control slowly changed the height of the DAC above the cryogen level in a liquid nitrogen or helium Dewar. The temperature was monitored by a Lakeshore Si (DT-421-HR) diode in proximity to the DAC. Powder XRD measurements were carried out at room temperature up to 80 GPa at the 13ID-D beamline of the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne , Il, USA), with a wavelength of  = 0.3344 Å in angle-dispersive mode and patterns were collected using a MAR CCD detector. Ne was used as the pressure transmitting medium. Pressure was determined from the ruby fluorescence spectra up to 5060 GPa. The Ne equation of state was used to ascertain pressures through most of the pressure range, and especially at pressures beyond P > 50 GPa Powder diffraction patterns were analyzed using the GSAS-II software The intensities of the diffraction peaks are affected by instrumental and grainsize issues (diamond x-ray absorption and low statistics in the random distribution of sample crystallites). Therefore the Rietveld refinement of the powder diffraction patterns did not result in a good enough fit. Hence diffraction patterns were analyzed by using the whole profile fitting (Pawley) method Our MS spectra of FeAl2O4 at ambient pressure involving measurements at room temperature (RT) and liquid helium temperatures are similar to those of Dormann et al. we infer that our sample is also a partially inverse spinel, with 2025% of the Fe 2+ cations located in B (octahedral) sites. We expect the quadrupole doublet splitting (QS), representing deviations of the Fe local environment from cubic symmetry, of B sites to be larger than the A sites. The latter fourfold coordinated sites normally deviate less from cubic symmetry than the octahedral B sites in spinels Hence the spectrum at ambient conditions has been fitted by using two sub-spectra with an abundance of 80:20 for the different A-and B-site QS components, respectively, see Fig. We have analyzed the magnetic spectra at low temperatures (LT) using a similar fitting strategy to that of Dormann et al. We have also attempted to maintain consistency between RT and LT spectra for the respective abundances assigned to A-and B-sites. The hyperfine interaction (HI) parameters of the various sub-components like the centroid IS and Hhf values as estimates of average values of Hhf distributions are quite reliable. This is considered a good starting model for monitoring changes in the HI parameters and component abundances as evolved at pressure. The pressure evolution of spectra at RT and LT is depicted in Fig. In this pressure range the XRD data shows that FeAl2O4 is in the spinel phase, see Fig. 3 . The plot of MS HI parameters at RT in Fig. where it was attributed to pressure effects on the dynamical Jahn-Teller distortion The IS values have a negative linear dependence on s(0), the s-electron density at the nucleus Low-temperature MS spectra, measured at ~10 K, each retain the same profile as ambient pressure up to 10 GPa. From this we infer that the spin glass nature, reported by Dorman et al. The assignment of the large Hhf ~ 48 T component to Fe at B-sites (inversion) is partly based on how it evolves at much higher pressures, as discussed in the following sub-sections. The XRD profiles in Fig. In the vicinity just prior to ~50 GPa XRD patterns show evidence of reflections of another structural transition occurring, see Fig. FeAl2O4 is fully converted to post-spinel as pressure rises above 55 GPa. At ~55 GPa RT and LT MS profiles show rather conspicuous changes compared to spectra at lower pressure. The RT spectrum develops pronounced asymmetry in the overall spectral envelope and the LT spectrum exhibits an appreciable increase in intensity in the centralized velocity region. These are considered manifestations of a new doublet component emerging. In the RT spectrum this is a component with HI parameters of IS = 0.45 mm s -1 and QS = 0.8 mm s -1 . This new doublet component remains as such down to the lowest temperature measured, 12 K. This indicates that it is non-magnetic in nature and accounts for the increased intensity in the centralized region of the magnetic spectrum, see Fig. These HS(VIII) sites likely evolve from the tetrahedral HS(IV) sites of the tetragonal spinel, involving the reconstructive mechanisms described by Arévalo-López et al. The XRD data in Fig. Fe at sixfold coordinated sites, from 3d spin crossover at HS(VI) sites Differences in the onset pressures of spin crossover as discerned by XRD (45-50 GPa) and MS (50-55 GPa) may be attributed to the different pressure transmitting media used and how the degree of non-hydrostaticity affects the electronic transition The evolution of the MS spectra beyond ~55 GPa , Fig. A broadened magnetic component with average Hhf ~33 T is still present in the LT spectrum at the highest pressure attained. This is ascribed to the 50% abundant Fe sites in eightfold coordination, HS (VIII), originated from non-inverted HS(IV) sites of the cubic spinel phase. In such a high-coordination local environment the crystal field splitting is not large enough for spin crossover to ensue Similarly the sublattice involving sixfold coordinated sites has LS(VI) Fe 2+ and Al 3+ constituents. This renders the overall lattice configuration as one involving a large degree of site disorder. The resistance measurements up to the highest pressure of ~90 GPa in Fig. A high density ~400 meV gapped state prevails to ~100 GPa as inferred from an extrapolation of the activation energies from lower pressures. The ~26% decrease in unit-cell volume up to a ~100 GPa from combined lattice compressibility, structural transitions and partial spin crossover should lead to an appreciable increase in 3d band-broadening and gap closure, yet the compound remains resiliently non-metallic. We rationalize this in terms of an increase in Ueff , the electron-correlation gap between upper and lower Hubbard sub-bands, at spin crossover which is specific to Fe 2+ (3d 6 ) It is noteworthy that according to XRD data in Fig. Hercynite FeAl2O4 up to a megabar has the following sequence of structural transitions : cubic ( 3 Fd m )  16 GPa tetragonal (I41/amd)  45 GPa orthorhombic (Cmcm), at the indicated onset transition pressures. The following physical properties of these various structural phases are manifest : (i) In the cubic spinel spin ordering temperatures rise from a spin-freezing Tg ~ 14 K at ambient pressure to ordering temperatures that exceed 25 K above 10 GPa. In the tetragonal phase the compression of the unit-cell volume is highly irregular. This is ascribed to "cold compression" driven Fe  Al site inversion at room temperature. (ii) There is a steep change in unit-cell volume V/V ~ 10% in a pressure window of 10 GPa encompassing ~50 GPa, to culminate in the fully stabilized Cmcm postspinel phase as pressure rises above 55 GPa. Mössbauer spectra also evidence the emergence of a diamagnetic spectral component. Part of this volume contraction as well as the diamagnetic spectral component are accounted for by spin crossover at sixfold coordinated sites, initiated at the end of the pressure range of the tetragonal phase and progressed in the emergent post-spinel phase. (iii) These are Fe sites originated from prior inversion processes from both sample synthesis conditions and pressure effects on the tetragonal phase. The low-spin abundance evolves to maximally ~50% of the Fe sites in the post-spinel phase at the highest measured pressure of 106 GPa. This high density post-spinel is inferred to have the formulation     Fe Al Fe Al O with x ~ 0.5 and is a highly disordered lattice structure. (iv) The structural transition from tetragonal (I41/amd) to orthorhombic (Cmcm) is irreversible, possibly as a result of the appreciable disorder in the Cmcm phase. Furthermore, upon decompression to 28 GPa there is an increase in unit-cell volume with no change in symmetry. This deviates to above the EOS of the orthorhombic Cmcm high pressure phase from a back transition to HS, limited to about half of all the Fe in octahedral sites (partial hysteretic behavior of the electronic HS-LS transition). In closing : partial spin crossover appears to be the preferred electronic response of ferrous spinels at sufficiently high density, as demonstrated in our work on FeCr2O4 (chromite), Fe2TiO4 (ulvöspinel) and again in the current case of FeAl2O4 (hercynite). In the chromite and hercynite normal spinels at room temperature pressure drives inversion, notably HS(IV)  HS(VI) site diffusion. Appreciable polyhedral distortions and increased CF values trigger spin crossover at selected (VI) sites in high-density phases of these partially inverse systems. Similar site-specific spin crossover occurs in the originally fully inverse ulvöspinel system to render a partially spin converted post-spinel phase. It is noteworthy that in all of the ferrous iron systems we have investigated, this partial HS-LS transition takes place in the vicinity of ~50 GPa, irrespective of whether the structure is tetragonal or orthorhombic. This is a regime involving sufficiently reduced and distorted octahedral volumes such that the corresponding CF is at critical values to invoke spin crossover At a megabar these ferrous iron systems are all spin-diluted by "Hund's spin vacancies" (LS sites), to differing degrees of dilution. In spite of this and the appreciable 3d band broadening from various lattice responses that contribute to the unit-cell reduction, they continue to have concurrent resilient magnetic and nonmetallic ground-state features of strong electron correlations. It is likely that the positive pressure dependence developed by Ueff at spin crossover, specific to the 3d 6 electronic structure 