We look back on the turning point of the concept of individual electron carrier and paired electrons carrier in superconductivity history, look back on the magnetic flux quantization interpretation and experiment, reference the new discovery of new phenomena including the hc/e magnetic flux periodicity and the scaling law of transition temperature of superconducting thin films. The conclusion is: In a circuit including only one electron, the magnetic flux period is hc/e in general, but hc/(2e) in the first step starting with zero flux. Early experiments had not observed hc/e periodicity because multiple electrons do each first step starting with zero flux. According to the new experimental explanation, the theory of individual electron carrier is proposed. It integrates with the energy band theory and the Hubbard model. In the frame of energy band theory and electron correlation, we do not add Cooper pair for the carrier, we can use the energy band theory to explain the phenomenon of superconductivity. It needs the Hubbard model when a superconductor is a Mott insulator. The theory makes the whole image of super-insulators, insulators, semiconductors, conductors, superconductors transition smoothly and continuously. The transition to fractional quantum Holzer effect is continuous and smooth. In 1961, Deaver and Fairbank's experiments The first discovery of high transition temperature superconductivity in 1986 exceeded the prediction of early BCS theory. Since then, some difficulties have been solved by modifying the mechanism of electron pairing. Up to now, BCS theory has not fully explained all high Tc superconductivity phenomena The latest experimental results of I. Boovivich, X. He, J. Wu, A. T. Bollinger in 2016 opposed to the prediction of BCS theory In 2016, TaoYong's superconducting thin films temperature scaling law The other background in the field of superconductivity includes below. Before 1953, Cheng Kai-Jia and Born proposed the double band theory of superconductivity In 2007, Heersche, Jarillo-Herrero, Oostinga, Vandersypen & Morpurgo used the Andreev reflection concept to explain the transition of double-electron and single-electron in superconducting-graphene-superconducting junctions In 2008, Tzu-Chieh Wei, Paul M. Goldbart measured the hc/e magnetic flux period in the superconducting ring experiment and summarized the experience that the smaller ring, the easier it is to show hc/e magnetic flux period In 2008, Loder, Kampf, Kopp, Mannhart, Schneider, Barash cited a variety of magnetic flux period as hc/e, the magnetic flux change period is not always hc/(2e) In 2008, Vinokur, Baturina, Fistul, Mironov, Baklanov & Strunk discovered the phenomenon of super-insulation. It is a phenomenon with In 2009, Hirsch issued many doubts on BCS theory In 2012, Cao Tian-De published his views on the Josephson effect. The Josephson effect is not the tunneling of electron pairs, but also the single electron passing through The phenomenological theory regards "dismantling-tunneling-pairing" as the equivalent "tunneling of electron pairs", which is a coincidental success but conceals the physical essence. In 2013, Rosenberg and Agassi gave the loop electron flux quantization In April 2016, Hamidian, Edkins, Sang Hyun Joo, Kostin, Eisaki, Uchida, Lawler, Kim, Mackenzie, Fujita, Jinho Lee, Séamus Davis first experimentally measured electron (pair) density waves in superconductors In May 2016, Van Zanten, Basko, Khaymovich, Pekola, Courtois, Winkelmann experimentally demonstrated the superconducting single electron tunneling effect Before this paper, we launched a discussion in the public. Based on at least two rare and affirmative experimental results since 2008, the appearance of superconducting carriers has been deduced. The carrier is not the Cooper pair that was originally described in 1957 BCS theory. We propose to modify one description on the basis of BCS theory: Cooper pair is not the carrier. Responsible for the carrier is still not paired electrons. Carriers are free/individual electrons. The energy band theory including free electron approximation and the interaction between electrons can be used to understand superconductivity by band diagrams and electron filling rules. The modified description is equivalent to the old description. In terms of conventional superconductivity, when a stable Cooper pair exists, the Cooper pair will not be dismantled and exchanged with the carrier electrons, that is, the material exhibits superconductivity. For high Tc superconductor and conventional superconductor, the material exhibits superconductivity when the fully filled band electrons is not dismantled and exchanged with the current-carrying electrons, and/or the valence band electrons are not exchanged with the current-carrying electrons. By now, expanded discussions have taken shape. This paper focuses on explaining the questions that must be answered behind this understanding. In order to eliminate doubts and even disdain emotions. By insisting that Cooper pairs are carriers, scholars may ask: How can we explain why the flux quantization experiment has shown that superconducting carriers are advancing in pairs? We answer: Back in 1961, when the quantization of magnetic flux was made and the artificial conclusion was drawn, it would be fair to assume that another formulation was proposed before the academic community reversed to the point that Cooper pairs were carriers, and Cooper pairs carriers would be worth criticizing. BCS theory uses the concept of phonon, proposed Cooper pair, clearly explained the gap, but said that magnetic flux quantization experiment "proves" the superconducting carriers in pairs, be contrary to another basic principle of quantum mechanics -Fermion obeys Dirac statistics. In experiments, people pay attention to the motion shown by electrons, which is described by Bloch electrons. The global motion of Bloch electrons also obeys the basic principle of quantum mechanics. The appearance of Bloch electrons is also fermions. In a closed loop (or solenoid), the wave function of the Bloch electron constructs an odd number of antinodes to conform to Dirac statistics. This shows that the phase of the wave function of the electron changes the odd number of π every loop. The 1961 literature is based on the even number of π . Relevant conclusion has been widely adopted so far. One sentence seems to be very perfunctory today. "Because the wave function is a single value function, the electron phase changes the integral number of 2 π around a circle." People who study quantum mechanics have never said that Dirac's statistical function is not a single-valued function. In other words, under the premise of understanding the properties of fermions, People who study quantum mechanics didn't say that the function of returning around two circles is not a single-valued function. How to explain the exact results of the magnetic flux period hc/(2e)? We answer: The hc/e magnetic flux period has been verified by new experiments in paper By insisting that Cooper pairs are carriers, scholars may ask: Cooper pairs of supercurrent is adopted precisely because the unpaired free electrons are scattered by the lattice vibration to produce resistance. If we talk about free electron current carrying, then scattering cannot be evaded. What is the explanation? We answer: Is scattering the cause of resistance? It's everybody's question. Where is the conclusive evidence? The lack of empirical evidence is only depicted in the brain. Today, we realize that it is impossible to simulate a large number of carriers scattered by phonons (lattice vibrations) and transfer energy to phonons. Rather than simulating a single locality, the correct simulation is a large number of carriers and phonons, long enough to evolve. To be exact, we point out that the exchange energy of carriers and phonons is in dynamic equilibrium, that is, the heat balance. If we regard superconductor as carriers group and ions group. The temperature of the carriers group is equal to the temperature of the ions group. In addition, the performance of Bloch electrons should also be subject to translational symmetry. After changing the inertial coordinate system, the laws of physics remain unchanged. In the inertial coordinate system following Bloch global walking, Bloch electrons are not moving. By insisting that Cooper pairs are carriers, scholars may ask: Since scattering is classified as superconductivity, how to explain resistivity? We answer: That's the problem. Resistivity and superconductivity are a pair of complementary concepts. If the explanation of resistivity is clear, then the explanation of superconductivity has not yet been pending. We point out that the cause of resistivity which is generally accepted is actually two cases, but not one. In two cases, one case is that the carrier electron is still the carrier after the collision between the carrier electron and the ion, the other case is that the carrier electron is not a carrier after the combination of the carrier electron and the ion. So far, most scholars believe that resistance occurs in both cases. We pointed out that the case in which the carrier electrons are still carriers after the collision with the ions is actually superconducting and the resistance is zero. In view of the fact that the carrier electrons are not carriers after binding with the ion, the action of the electron being bound by the ion has to give energy, and this part of energy cannot be retrieved as it is when the electron becomes the next carrier. After excluding the cause of a resistance and attributing it to the superconductivity explanation, the two concepts of resistivity and superconductivity are clearly separated and complementary to each other. Take the According to the basic principles of quantum mechanics, electrons are fermions, when an electron appears in the same area twice, the phase must be odd times of π (using radian), even for electrons in superconducting loops. We make the derivation process of superconducting magnetic flux quantization. Books usually start with formula (1). S j is the current density provided by superconducting electrons. It should be pointed out that according to the description of existing books, a large number of superconducting electrons occupy a single quantum state together, so the matter wave of each electron is the same, so formula (1) can be obtained. However, inheriting the band theory requires that each electron occupy a different quantum state. We point out that the matter wave examined here is not a matter wave in the quantum state of the electron, but a matter wave represented by the global motion of the Bloch electron. Due to the limitations of standing wave conditions, a large number of Bloch electrons obey the uniform wave function, and thus formula (1) can be obtained. The part of the superconducting ring that leaves the depth of penetration on the surface 0 = S j . Formula ( The early theory held that the wave function was a single-valued function and that the phase difference could only be an even number of π after the electron went around the loop. But now, we're pointing out that the phase difference can only be an odd number of π . There's formula According to Stokes theorem, the line integral of equation ( S is the area around the superconducting ring, and Φ is the flux that's passing through S . From formula (2), we get (5). The magnetic flux through the superconducting ring is quantized, odd times of 0 φ . Equation ( The theory of individual electrons superconductivity also agrees with the Cooper pair and its energy gap. Cooper pair and its energy gap are confirmed by experimental Super-insulators: There are no electrons at the delocalization level, or there are electrons at the delocalization level but they are a fully filled band, and there is no transient damage to the above characteristics. Insulator: Delocalization energy levels generally have no electrons, or delocalization energy levels have electrons but are generally fully filled band electrons, locally there is a transient destruction of the above characteristics, but can not form a continuous conductor. Semiconductor: The transition state as an insulator and conductor. Conductor: There are a large number of free electrons in the delocalized energy level, and free electrons are not fully filled band electrons, so they conduct electricity. The resistance effect is caused by the exchange of free electrons with valence electrons or fully filled band electrons. Superconductor: There are free electrons in the delocalized energy level, and free electrons are not fully filled band electrons, so they conduct electricity. The zero resistance effect is caused by no free electrons being exchanged with valence electrons or fully filled band electrons. The above five material states can be converted to one another at different temperatures. Superconductors turn into insulators, semiconductors, and conductors in turn when the temperature rises and superconductors turn into conductors when the temperature rises. The above five material states can be converted into one another under different pressures. The smaller the pressure, the more inclined the insulator or superinsulator, the greater the pressure, the more inclined the conductor or superconductor. The reason is that, as the distance between atoms is forced to shrink, the position of the Fermi plane gradually shifts to the position of the electron at the highest level. When there are free electrons in the conduction band, it becomes a conductor or a superconductor, and when there are no free electrons in the conduction band, it becomes an insulator or a super-insulator. The state of the above five materials is dependent on the band properties of the material at the same temperature and pressure. People expect superconductivity at room temperature under atmospheric pressure. The individual electrons theory can also explain fractional quantum Holzer effect. Fractional quantum Hall effect does not need to be realized in superconductors. It only needs very pure materials, even if the materials are resistive. Therefore, the phenomena of a conductor, the phenomena of superconductor and the picture of a smooth continuous transition reflect each other. The fractional quantum Holzer effect is quantum Holzer resistance divided by the quantization of fractions. The denominator of a fraction is odd, and the numerator is an integer. Because the phase of electrons in the loop is odd times of π , electrons can only form odd antinodes in a homogeneous medium. Electrons can only appear on paths that allow odd numbered antinodes. The experiment of fractional quantum Hall effect usually adopts constant current and calculates Hall resistance by measuring voltage. Therefore, under constant current conditions, there are two voltages per two antinodes. It shows that there are two Holzer resistance in each of the two antinodes. This means that an odd number of the voltage leads to the quantization of the "quantum Hall resistance" divided by the fraction, where a denominator is an odd number. In addition, numerator are integers and are easy to understand. More than one electron involves more than one current, so the numerator is an integer. Using STM to verify the electron density wave in the superconducting closed loop, we will get the conclusion that the number of odd antinodes. Because it is an odd antinodes, which is consistent with the theory of individual electrons superconductivity. It should not be described as a Cooper pair density wave. The magnetic flux quantization experiment of superconducting will show a step of hc/e period after all carriers begin to carry current. The smaller the number of carriers is, the easier it is to find hc/e. The experiment of bismuth single crystal superconductivity in 2008 is recommended. (References)