We extend the first-principles analysis of attosecond transient absorption spectroscopy to two-dimensional materials. As an example of two-dimensional materials, we apply the analysis to monolayer hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) and compute its transient optical properties under intense few-cycle infrared laser pulses. Nonadiabatic features are observed in the computed transient absorption spectra. To elucidate the microscopic origin of these features, we analyze the electronic structure of h-BN with density functional theory and investigate the dynamics of specific energy bands with a simple two-band model. Finally, we find that laser-induced intraband transitions play a significant role in the transient absorption even for the two-dimensional material and that the nonadiabatic features are induced by the dynamical Franz-Keldysh effect with an anomalous band dispersion. Attosecond transient absorption spectroscopy (ATAS) is a technique that employs attosecond laser pulses to probe modifications to the optical absorption in the time domain. Because its attosecond time-resolution is shorter than a typical time-scale of electron dynamics, it can naturally capture ultrafast electron dynamics in matter. Therefore, ATAS is one of the key experimental techniques to explore ultrafast phenomena where nonlinear electron dynamics plays a significant role. Indeed, ATAS has been extensively applied to atoms and molecules over the past decade to investigate ultrafast electron dynamics in such relatively small systems Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been attracting great interest from both fundamental and technological points of view because of their remarkable properties. For example, graphene-like 2D materials such as hexagonal boron-nitride (h-BN) have been intensively studied for applications in optelectronic devices and energy storage among others In order to fully understand such laser-induced ultrafast electron dynamics, ATAS is one of the most desirable experimental techniques as it can resolve the dynamics with natural time-resolution. While ATAS for solid-state materials provides a wealth of information on microscopic electron dynamics in materials, the resulting experimental data are often very complicated due to complex electronic structure and highly-nonlinear effects in the dynamics. Therefore, it is hard to directly interpret the experimental results. Ab-initio simulation based on the time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) Likewise, experimental results of ATAS for 2D materials are expected to be rather complicated. Therefore, ab-initio TDDFT simulations are a good candidate to analyze ATAS for 2D materials. To realize such simulation methods, we extend the TDDFT pump-probe simulation This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 2 we first describe the electron dynamics simulation based on TDDFT. Then, we further describe the linear response calculation and the pump-probe simulation to compute static and transient absorption properties, respectively. In Sec. 3 we apply the TDDFT pump-probe simulation to monolayer h-BN and investigate its transient optical properties. Furthermore, we analyze the obtained transient absorption spectra with a parabolic two-band model. Finally, our findings are summarized in Sec. 4. In this section, we describe our theoretical and numerical methods to simulate ATAS for 2D materials. As an example of 2D materials, we choose monolayer h-BN in this work. First, we briefly describe the first-principles electron dynamics simulation based on TDDFT where u b k ( r, t) is the Kohn-Sham Bloch wavefunction, b is a band index, and k is the Bloch wave vector. The electron-ion interaction is described by the ionic potential vion , while the electron-electron interaction is described by the combination of the Hartree potential v H ( r, t) and the exchange-correlation potential v XC ( r, t). The Hartree potential satisfies the Poisson equation, ∇ 2 v H ( r, t) = 4e 2 πρ( r, t), where the electron density ρ( r, t) is evaluated as with occupation factors, n b k . The exchange-correlation potential v XC ( r, t) is a functional of the electron density. Because its exact form is unknown, one has to approximate it. In this work, we employ the adiabatic local-density approximation To describe monolayer h-BN, we employ three-dimensional periodic boundary conditions with a hexagonal lattice. The real-space atomic configuration in the plane is shown in Fig. We discretize the hexagonal lattice into three-dimensional real-space grid points with a grid spacing about 0.36 a.u. We further discretize the two-dimensional first Brillouin zone of h-BN into 32 × 32 k-points. In this work, dynamics of core electrons in the 1s shell of Boron and Nitrogen atoms are not expected to be significant for transient absorption. Therefore, we treat explicitly only valence electrons while the core electrons are frozen. For this purpose, we employ the Hartwigsen-Goedecker-Hutter pseudopotentials All the density functional theory (DFT) and TDDFT calculations in this work are carried out with the Octopus code Here, we revisit the linear response calculation in time domain to obtain optical properties of 2D materials. For this purpose, we consider electron dynamics in monolayer h-BN under an impulsive perturbation, E(t) = e x k 0 δ(t). The polarization of the perturbation is set along the x-direction in Fig. In this context, one of the most useful results of TDDFT calculations for 2D materials is the surface density of the electric current, where S is the area of the h-BN sheet in the simulation cell, and v k is the velocity operator: Note that the velocity operator contains a contribution from the ionic potential vion because of the nonlocality of the pseudopotential, which is not commutative with the position operator r One can extract the optical conductivity from the computed current in time domain. The diagonal element of the conductivity can be evaluated as where J(t) and E(t) are the electric current and the electric field for the polarization direction of the impulsive distortion, respectively. To reduce numerical error due to the finite time propagation in the Fourier transform of Eq. ( Now we describe the pump-probe simulation to investigate transient optical properties. Details of the numerical pump-probe simulation are described elsewhere To compute transient optical properties of materials, we consider electron dynamics under pump E pump (t) and probe E probe (t) electric fields. Solving the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equation (1) under the presence of both the pump and probe fields, one can simulate the electron dynamics induced by the fields. Furthermore, one can calculate the induced electric current by using Eq. (3); we shall call the current under both the pump and probe pulses pump-probe current, J pump-probe (t). Additionally, one can simulate electron dynamics under only the pump pulse, and compute the current: we shall call the current induced solely by the pump pulse pump current, J pump (t). To extract the current induced by the probe pulse under the presence of the pump, we define the probe current, J probe (t), as Finally, referring to the above linear response equation, the transient conductivity can be evaluated as where T probe is the central time of the probe pulse. In contrast to the linear response calculation in equilibrium, the transient conductivity under the pump pulse depends also on the central time of the probe pulse since the time translation symmetry is broken by the pump. Thus, one may investigate dynamics of transient optical properties in time domain by changing the time delay between pump and probe pulses. To practically carry out the pump-probe simulations, we employ a pump vector potential of the following form; in the domain (-T pump /2 < t < T pump /2) and zero outside of it. Here, E pump is the peak electric field, ω pump is the mean frequency, and T pump is the full duration of the pump pulse. To perform the pump-probe simulation, we also employ a similar form for the probe vector potential; in the domain (-T probe /2 < t -T delay < T probe /2) and zero outside of it. Here, E probe is the peak electric field, ω probe is the mean frequency, T probe is the full duration of the probe pulse. The time delay between pump and probe pulses is expressed by T delay . In this section, we investigate transient optical properties of monolayer h-BN under intense IR pulses. For this purpose, we employ the TDDFT pump-probe approach explained in Sec. 2. For the pump-probe simulation, we first set the polarization direction of both the pump and probe pulses to the x-direction in Fig. Figure Figure Furthermore, we numerically confirmed that all the other vertical transitions in Fig. In the parabolic two-band model, the electron dynamics at each k point in the Brillouin zone is described by the following Schrödinger equation for two-dimensional state vectors, where the off-diagonal matrix element of the Hamiltonian is given by where ∆ cv, k is the transition energy between the valence and the conduction states at k, and p vc, k is the transition momentum. In the Hamiltonian matrix, the Bloch wavevector is shifted based on the acceleration theorem, K(t) = k + e A pump (t)/hc, by the pump pulse Here, in order to elucidate the role of the pump-induced intraband transitions, only the probe electric field E probe (t) is coupled to the transition momentum p vc , while only the pump vector potential A pump (t) is taken into account in the acceleration theorem. Thus, the probe pulse induces only the interband transitions, while the pump pulse is responsible for intraband transitions. For this model, we approximate the transition energy by the parabolic band as where g is the band gap, and μ eh is the reduced mass of an electron-hole pair. To describe the negative-mass band at the M point, the reduced mass μ eh is set to μ M = -3.3m e , and the band gap g is set to g,M = 14.1 eV. These parameters are extracted from the parabolic fit shown as the blue-dashed line in in Fig. The negative-mass band causes an artificial crossing of the conduction and the valence bands. To eliminate the effect from the artificial band crossing of the model, we truncate the transition momentum matrix as follows Here, the transition momentum at the gap p vc is set to 0.1 a.u. Note that the value of the transition momentum does not affect the structure of absorption spectra as long as the field strength of the probe pulse is weak enough to satisfy the linear response condition. We apply a pump-probe simulation to the parabolic two-band model and compute the transient absorption spectrum of the negative-mass band. Since the parabolic-band approximation is an appropriate approximation of the electronic structure only around the band edge, we truncate the signal to reduce the contribution from inappropriate regions by applying the following attenuation function to the transient conductivity Here, g,M is the corresponding band gap at the M-point, which is 14.1 eV. We set the width of the attenuation σ to 1 eV. Figure Here, g,Γ is the corresponding band gap, which is 13.1 eV. Figure To provide the complete description, we combine the results of the two-band models for the M and Γ points by simply summing the transient conductivities in Figs. Since the pump-induced interband transitions are completely omitted in the model by construction, the transient absorption of the two-band model in Fig. Furthermore, based on the decomposition of the transient absorption spectrum in Fig. Figure Because the two-band model has spatial inversion symmetry and does not have any even-order nonlinearity, the present model is not appropriate to investigate the ω pump -oscillation in the spectrum of Fig. In this work, we extended the ab-initio pump-probe simulation of ATAS for 2D materials in order to provide a platform to understand the microscopic origin of the features observed in ATAS experiments. As an example, we investigated ultrafast modification of optical properties of monolayer h-BN under intense IR pulses. First, we performed the pump-probe simulations, setting the polarization of the pump and probe pulses along the x-direction in Fig. To clarify the microscopic mechanism of the observed transient absorption spectrum of h-BN, we studied the electronic structure of the material with the DFT and found relevant transitions at the M and Γ points. To elucidate the contribution from these transitions, we further analyzed the transient absorption spectra with a parabolic two-band model. As a result, we identified that the fishbone structure in Fig. Next, we performed the TDDFT pump-probe simulation, setting the polarization of the pump and probe pulses along the y-direction. For this direction, the inversion symmetry of the material is broken, and the system displays even-order nonlinear responses. Indeed, reflecting the nature of the even-order nonlinearity, the obtained transient absorption spectrum shows an oscillation with the frequency of the pump pulse, ω pump . Therefore, it was demonstrated that the system presents a qualitatively different behavior for different polarization directions. However, despite of the significant differences for the different polarizations in Fig. The demonstrated ab-initio ATAS simulation for 2D materials is a very general approach that is applicable not only to single-layered materials but also to multi-layered systems including heterostructures. Here, the interplay of multi-layer and interface effects with geometrical tilting, such as moiré patterns, could strongly affect the electron dynamics and be observed in the time domain.