We put forward a new proposal of designing charge-based logic devices considering a cyclic molecule that can be programmed and re-programmed for different functional logical operations and suitably engineered for data storage as well. The key idea is based on the appearance of bias induced circular current under asymmetric molecule-to-electrode interface configuration which does not dissipate even when the bias is off. Our results are valid for a broad range of parameter values, and provide a boost in the field of storage mechanism, reconfigurable computing, charge-based logic functions and other nano-scale applications. Designing of logic gates at nano-scale level based on molecules has been the subject of growing attention as they are treated as basic building blocks of digital nanoelectronics 1-7 . Among different molecular systems, cyclic molecules play the central role because of their widespread applications in electronic devices due to high integration density, low cost and chemical stability. Following the proposal of molecular logic gates by de Silva and his group 1 , interest in this subject has rapidly picked up, circumventing the use of FETs and MOSFETs. Instead of designing individual logic gates it is always beneficial to construct functional programmable logic devices (PLDs) In this communication we explore how charge-based logic gates can be designed from a single benzene molecule that can be used as a storage device as well. Five logical operations (OR, NOT, XOR, XNOR, NAND) are designed from the benzene ring, though other two (AND, NOR) can eventually be performed from the rest. Very recently, in a separate work, we have described how three primary logic gates, OR, AND and NOT, can be implemented considering a benzene molecule exploiting the effect of quantum interference among the electronic waves passing through different arms of the molecular ring The work is arranged as follows. In Sec. II we describe a general model of molecular junction comprising a phenyl ring which is the key element of our system and illustrate the theoretical prescription for the calculation of circular current under different conditions. The essential results which include logic functions and storage mechanisms are given in Sec. III. Finally, we summarize our key findings in Sec. IV. Let us begin with the model molecular junction shown in Fig. The full system is modeled by a tight-binding (TB) framework and the Hamiltonian becomes where H M represents the molecular Hamiltonian, H S and H D are the Hamiltonians for the S and D electrodes, and the Hamiltonian H tun is associated with the coupling of the molecule with side-attached electrodes. All these Hamiltonians are described by a similar kind of TB form and within non-interacting picture the general form of Hamiltonian reads as 14,16 where K = M , S, D and tun as used in Eq. 1. The parameters ǫ p and η describe the site-energy and nearestneighbor hopping (NNH) integral, respectively, and c † p , c p are the Fermionic operators. Now, depending on different parts of the molecular junction we use different symbols of site energy and NNH integrals. For the two perfect electrodes these are ǫ 0 and t 0 , respectively, while for the molecule, having six atomic sites, these parameters are ǫ m and v, respectively. The molecular ring is coupled to S and D through the coupling parameter τ S and τ D , respectively, and these are responsible for the tunneling of electrons between the molecule and electrodes. This is all about the Hamiltonian of our system. Now, in order to explore logical operations and storage mechanisms first we need to calculate bias induced circular current, and we do it by using wave-guide theory where |ψ = p C p |p . C p 's are the wave amplitudes and |p 's are the Wannier states. Assuming plane wave incidence from the source electrode with unit amplitude we can write the wave amplitude at any particular site q (say) of S as e ik(q+1)a + re -ik(q+1)a , where k is the wavevector and it is determined from the relation E = ǫ 0 + 2t 0 cos(ka) (a being the lattice spacing). r is the reflection coefficient. For the drain electrode the wave amplitude at any particular site l (say) becomes quite simpler as there is no reflection from the drain end and gets the form te ikla , where t is the transmission coefficient, and, its absolute square gives the transmission probability. Using the above wave forms of incident and transmitted waves, we solve the coupled linear equations involving wave amplitudes at different lattice sites for different injecting electron energies, and then we calculate bond current density between any two neighboring sites (say, m and m + 1) of the molecule following the expression Integrating this current density we compute bond current for a particular bias voltage V and it becomes 14,16,27 where E F is the equilibrium Fermi energy. Once the bond current is evaluated, the net circular current in the molecular ring is obtained from the relation 14,16,28,29 where L (= N a) describes the circumference of the molecular ring geometry and N corresponds to the total number of atomic sites in it. The circular charge current can be positive or negative as well depending on bias regimes, unlike transport charge current which is always positive. We assign positive sign for the circular current flowing in the counter-clockwise direction. Thus, for a lengthwise symmetric molecular junction when the status of the upper and lower arms are exactly identical, equal currents pass through these arms but they propagate in opposite directions which leads to a vanishing circular current. We refer it as OFF state for the logical operations. On the other hand, for the asymmetric conditions currents in different arms are no longer identical which results a finite I c and we define it as ON state of the output. The non-zero circular current produces a magnetic field B, and we can easily calculate it (B) at any desired point r by using Biot-Savart's law where r ′ is the position vector of the current element I m,n d r ′ , and μ 0 (= 4π × 10 -7 NA -2 ) is the magnetic constant. To calculate magnetic field we need to take the sum over all bonds m, n of the molecular ring. This circular current induced magnetic field may be utilized for storage mechanism as well, as we discuss below. For the entire discussion we set the system temperature at absolute zero, for simplification, and no physics will be altered at all at finite (low) temperatures since the system size is too small which yields much higher average spacing of energy levels and at the same time the thermal energy broadening is extremely small compared to the broadening caused by the molecule-to-electrode coupling In what follows we present our results. Before scrutinizing the individual logical operations along with storage functions, based on the mechanism of bias induced circular current under two input conditions, we explore the general features of circular current I c in the molecular ring. In order to explore it, let us start with the setup given in Fig. difference between these two inputs are maximum. The above facts can be explained clearly by incorporating the concept of symmetry between the upper and lower arms of the molecular junction. When ǫ α = ǫ β , both these two arms are physically identical, and therefore, the currents passing through these arms are equal in magnitude but as they traverse in the opposite directions the net circular current vanishes. Naturally, a finite current appears only when the symmetry between the two arms is broken, and that is done by making the site energies of the two green sites unequal. The underlying physics of getting circular current (resultant of individual bond currents, see Eq. 6) is that at least one molecular energy level has to appear within the bias window for which we are interested to get circular current. With increasing this voltage window, more energy levels may appear and all of them contribute to the current (both positive and negative currents are highly expected). Eventually the net response is determined by the dominating energy levels. So, nat-urally, we can expect both the two signs of this current, unlike the transport charge current which always be positive. As for the logical operations we are not bothering about the sign of the current I c , in Fig. We conclude by pointing out that a single benzene molecule (or any other cyclic molecule having even number of sites, though smaller rings are always appreciable as they can produce large circular current) is capable of performing different logical operations and can be programmed and re-programmed for suitable functional operations. Our proposal leads to a significant impact in designing charge based storage device along with functional logical operations. MP gratefully acknowledges UGC, India (F. 2-10/2012(SA-I)) for providing her doctoral fellowship. * Electronic address: santanu.maiti@isical.ac.in 1 A. P. de Silva, H. Q. N. Gunaratne, and C. P. McCoy, A molecular photoionic AND gate based on fluorescent signalling. Nature 364, 42 (1993).