Acoustic materials displaying coupling between pressure and momentum are known as Willis materials. The simplest Willis materials are comprised of sub-wavelength scatterers that couple monopoles to dipoles and vice versa, with the interaction defined by a polarizability tensor. We propose a method for retrieving the polarizability tensor for sub-wavelength Willis acoustic scatterers using a finite set of scattering amplitudes. We relate the polarizability tensor to standard T-matrix and S-matrix scattering formalisms. This leads to an explicit method for retrieving the components of the polarizability tensor in terms of a small set of scattered pressure data in the near-or far-field. Numerical examples demonstrate the retrieval method for one and two dimensional configurations. Acoustic metamaterials comprised of sub-wavelength inclusions have attracted much attention due to their extraordinary acoustical effects. By proper design of the inclusions one can achieve a variety of exotic effective material properties such as negative bulk modulus and density, 1-3 zero index, Examples of acoustic retrieval of Willis properties are limited. Thus, Muhlestein et al. Explicit formulae are given for retrieving the polarizability tensor from finite sets of scattering data and are illustrated using numerical simulations. The method developed here is significantly simpler than that of Quan et al. This paper is arranged as follows. In Sec. II, we formulate the scattered fields for both 2D and 1D problems. Then we present our retrieval method in Sec. III with Eqs. ( The type of scatterer considered here is one that couples monopole and dipole terms with little or no contribution from higher order multipoles. In this way it is the simplest embodiment of a Willis material, analogous to a standard lumped element in uni-dimensional acoustics. For that reason we refer to the scatterer as a Willis scatterer or a Willis element. The scattered fields from a Willis element under arbitrary incidence can be written in terms of the polarizability tensor as first introduced by Quan et al. Consider sound radiation from a point source in a background medium with mass density ρ and sound speed c. The radiated pressure can be written in terms of the Green's function as where ω is the angular frequency (e -iωt assumed). All high order multipole terms are dropped in the multipole expansion except for the monopole mass M and dipole moment D. The Green's function G(x) takes the form (1) 0 (k|x|), 2D free field, where S is the cross-sectional area of the 1D waveguide; k = ω/c is the wavenumber in the background medium; H n is the Hankel function of the first kind. The mass and dipole moment are proportional to the incident pressure p i and velocity v i , where α is the polarizability tensor with components The diagonal terms in Eq. ( Consider an acoustically small asymmetric scatterer in 2D, with incident pressure and velocity fields at the scatterer location defined as Using Eqs. ( 1 (kr), ( The 2D (scattering) T-matrix T is defined by t = T a with a = (A 0 A x A y ) T , and hence where the modified polarization tensor α ′ is This expression is consistent with that in Ref. 21. Reciprocity implies that α vv′ xy = α vv′ yx , α pv′ x = -α vp′ x and α pv′ y = -α vp′ y . We will see later in the numerical examples that the retrieved parameters satisfy these reciprocity requirements. The explicit form of the scattered field for any incident wave can be obtained using the above equations. For example, a plane wave incident along the +x-direction with unit magnitude is defined by A 0 = A x / √ 2 = 1 and A y = 0; the unit plane wave incident along the positive diagonal direction corresponds to The importance of using the T-matrix formalism is that it is related to the S-matrix, S = I + 2T , which is unitary in the absence of absorption: SS † = I. This places direct limits on the polarizability tensor, specifically that the eigenvalues of I + i 4 ω 2 α ′ must be of unit magnitude. In the case of energy dissipation the eigenvalue magnitudes must be less than or equal to unity. This result and its implications, which generalizes the bounds obtained by The scattering problem in a 1D waveguide is simpler in that it only involves forward and backward scattered waves. In this case the incident pressure and velocity fields at the scattering location are Using Eqs. ( Note that the size of the scatterer must be much smaller than the radius of the waveguide, so we do not need to consider the narrow region nearby. The frequency range is sufficiently low so that only the fundamental waveguide mode propagates. By analogy with the 2D case, The scattering matrix, defined by t = T (A 1 A 2 ) T , is and the modified polarizability tensor is Reciprocity requirements impose the constraint: α pv′ = -α vp′ . It should be pointed out that the monopole and dipole moments are more dominant in this case since only the fundamental mode can propagate within the frequency range of interest. Therefore, the two eigenvalues of the S-matrix S = I + 2T must be close to unity. The explicit form of the scattered field can be obtained as in 2D. The form of the incident waves are simpler with A 1 = A 2 = 1 corresponding to a unit amplitude wave incident wave in the +x-direction, while A 1 = -A 2 = 1 corresponds to a wave incident along the -x-direction. The coupling between monopoles and dipoles in a Willis scatterer is achieved by a physically asymmetric object, for which there are rarely closed-form expressions available for the polarizability tensor α. It is therefore essential to have a rigorous and efficient numerical retrieval method. The objective of this section is to provide a simple recipe for retrieving α from FEM simulations or experimental data. In this section we will use the nine-component form of the 3 × 3 polarizability tensor for later comparison, even though it has only six independent components due to reciprocity. We consider four plane wave excitations along the ±x-and ±y-directions. These are defined by taking appropriate amplitudes in Eq. (5). For instance, a plane wave incident along the +x-direction with pressure and velocity at the scatterer location (the origin) equal to 1 and 1/ρc, respectively, corresponds to A 0 = A x / √ 2 = 1 and A y = 0. Similarly, A 0 = -A x / √ 2 = 1 and A y = 0 for -x-incidence; A 0 = A y / √ 2 = 1 and A x = 0 for y-incidence; A 0 = -A y / √ 2 = 1 and A x = 0 for -yincidence. The scattered pressure for the four cases are 1 (kr), where the superscript and subscript on the left side of p s denote the incident direction. For example, - x p s (x) is the scattering solution for incidence along the -x-direction. The retrieval method uses four scattered pressure measurements at distance r = |x| along ±x-and ±ydirections for each excitation, implying 16 data points. The probed pressure values are ± x p ± sx (r), ± x p ± sy (r), ± y p ± sx (r) and ± y p ± sy (r), with the superscript and subscript on the right side of p s denoting the location r = |x|, at which the pressure is measured along the specific axis. For instance, x p + sy (r) is the scattered pressure at distance r along the +y-direction for incidence along the -x-direction. However, the quadrupole component is not negligible when ka ∼ 1. In order to obtain more accurate results, we filter out the quadrupole based on the orthogonality of each harmonic. For example, the quadrupole components in the four scattered fields for +x-incidence can be filtered by setting + x R = ( + x p + sx -+ x p + sy + + x p - sx -+ x p - sy )/4 and redefining the pressures as All the other probed data corresponding to different incidences should be filtered in a similar fashion, such that they only include monopole and dipole components. Plugging the 16 filtered pressures into Eq. ( (1) 0 (kr) 1 (kr) 1 (kr) Note that the combinations of the pressures in Eq. ( The retrieved parameters should satisfy the constraints imposed by reciprocity: α pv′ x = -α vp′ x , α pv′ y = -α vp′ y and α vv′ xy = α vv′ yx . These relations are in fact automatically satisfied by the retrieval method of Eq. ( x p + sx = - x p - sx , which combined with Eq. ( The retrieval procedure for Willis scatterers in a 1D waveguide is simpler than the previous 2D case since there are only four polarizability components to be found. Consider a wave incident along the ±x-direction (axial direction) such that the incident pressure and velocity at the scatterer location are 1 and ±1/ρc, respectively. Hence, taking A 1 = ±A 2 = 1, the scattered fields for these two incidences are, with obvious notation, (17) Following the 2D procedure, the polarizabilities can be expressed in terms of the forward and backward scattered pressure as Hence, in order to retrieve the polarizabilities we only need to simulate plane wave incidence from the two opposite directions and probe on both sides of the scatterer. The retrieved parameters should satisfy the reciprocity relation α pv′ = -α vp′ . It is clear from Eq. ( This form is similar to the transmission and reflection coefficients for two-dimensional bianisotropic materials under normal incidence in electromagnetics. with α vp′ = -α pv′ . The asymmetric reflection for waves incident from opposite directions is a characteristic property of Willis elements, which is not observed for similarly sub-wavelength monopole or dipole scatterers. The difference in the reflection coefficients is induced by the pressure-velocity cross-coupling term α vp′ (= -α pv′ ). More specifically, the pressure excited dipole and the velocity excited monopole interfere destructively in the forward direction, but constructively for the backward scattered wave. In the absence of material loss, the two reflected waves have the same magnitude but different phases. For lossy Willis scatterers, the magnitudes are unequal because the momentum exchange processes and hence the absorption depends on the direction of incidence. This feature can potentially be used to design unidirectional perfect absorbers or unidirectional reflectionless materials. Two examples are presented to demonstrate how our retrieval method works in 2D free field and 1D waveguide situations. The common procedure is to simulate plane wave excitation and probe the scattered pressure according to the algorithms presented in Sec. III, then use Eq. ( We consider a Willis element with a radius on the order of λ/10, where λ is the wavelength in the background medium, see Fig. The background medium is air with bulk modulus B = 1.42 × 10 5 Pa and mass density ρ = 1.225 kg/m 3 . The acoustically rigid and small Willis scatterer was placed at the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system. Four plane wave excitations along the ±x-and ±y-directions were simulated. Then four probes of the scattered pressure were taken at a fixed distance r from the origin along the ±x-and ±y-directions for each excitation, thus providing the sixteen scattered pressure data needed for the parameter retrieval. Plugging the probed pressure into Eq. ( Figure We consider an acoustically small Willis scatterer centered in a circular rigid waveguide. The radius of the waveguide is much larger than the radius of the scatterer, and only the fundamental mode is allowed to propagate within the frequency range of interest. The scatterer has rotational symmetry about the waveguide axis, with cross-sectional view shown in Fig. As mentioned earlier, the monopole and dipole moment are extremely dominant in the waveguide at low frequencies. Hence the retrieved polarizabilities should lead to two unitary eigenvalues for the S-matrix S = I + 2T , which is verified in Fig. We have presented a simple retrieval method for extracting the polarizability tensors for 2D and 1D Willis elements using a finite set of scattering amplitudes. Two examples have been presented to show the implementation procedure. The retrieval method is based on the assumption that only monopole and dipole moment contribute to the far-field, this reduces the T-matrix to a closed (d + 1) × (d + 1) matrix where d is the dimension. It can be seen from the 2D example that the retrieved parameters agree well with those obtained using full monopole and dipole integration. In addition, the eigenvalues of the S-matrix in both examples are close to unity satisfying the energy conservation requirement. Therefore, our method can be used to evaluate acoustically small Willis scatterers effectively. Although the retrieval method for 3D scattering is not presented, the derivation is straightforward following the procedure for the 2D case. The retrieval method presented in this paper is also suitable for experimental realizations. In conclusion, the retrieval method developed in this paper can be used to design and optimize Willis inclusions for ad-vanced wave-steering and sound absorption applications.