We present angle dependent measurements of the damping properties of epitaxial Fe layers with MgO, Al and Pt capping layers. Based on the preferential distribution of lattice defects following the crystal symmetry, we make use of a model of the defect density to separate the contribution of twomagnon scattering to the damping from the isotropic contribution originating in the spin pumping effect, the viscous Gilbert damping and the magnetic proximity effect. The separation of the twomagnon contribution, which depends strongly on the defect density, allows for the measurement of a value of the effective spin mixing conductance which is closer to the value exclusively due to spin pumping. The influence of the defect density for bilayers systems due to the different capping layers and to the unavoidable spread in defect density from sample to sample is thus removed. This shows the potential of studying spin pumping phenomena in fully ordered systems in which this separation is possible, contrary to polycrystalline or amorphous metallic thin films. In bilayers systems formed by a ferromagnetic (FM) layer in contact with a metallic non-magnetic (NM) one, a pure spin current can be generated and injected in the latter when the ferromagnetic resonance is excited. Typically, a microwave magnetic field is used for this purpose. The whole process is commonly referred to as spin pumping Since the spin current leaving the magnetic layer carries away angular momentum from the magnetization precession, it represents an additional loss channel for the magnetic system and consequently causes an increase in the measured Gilbert damping parameter α where g ↑↓ is the real part of the spin mixing conductance which is controlling the magnitude of the generated spin current and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. This expression is only valid for sufficiently thick NM layers where no reflection of the spin current takes place at the film surface or interface with other materials, i.e. no spin current is flowing back into the magnetic layer. In principle, it allows the estimation of g ↑↓ by measuring the increase in damping compared to the intrinsic value. However, to perform this measurement is not straightforward. If the estimation of g ↑↓ for a FM/Pt system is needed, ideally one should measure the effective Gilbert damping parameter α 0 for a single standing magnetic layer acting as a reference sample with no losses due to spin pumping and repeat the same after depositing a thick Pt layer. However, most of the common ferromagnetic materials, with exception of the magnetic insulators like YIG, will change its properties due to oxidation processes. Therefore, a capping layer is required and one has to find an appropriate one, in the sense that its introduction must not modify the damping properties of the magnetic layer. Examples in the literature show that this is far to be a trivial task For the reference layers, the most convenient candidates as capping material are oxides like MgO, for which it has been proven that they are able to block the flow of spin current and therefore to deactivate spin pumping Here we present angle dependent measurements of the damping properties of epitaxial Fe layers with MgO, Al and Pt capping layers. Fully epitaxial systems constitute a perfect ordered model with almost ideal and well defined interfaces. Here, we will show that the angle dependence of damping allows for a measurement of the strength of the two-magnon scattering and of its contribution to the effective damping parameter. With the separation of this contribution we access the increase of damping caused only by spin pumping and magnetic proximity effect and to an estimation of g ↑↓ without the contamination of defects effects. The samples were deposited by e-beam evaporation on MgO(100) substrates in a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber with a base pressure P b = 5 × 10 -10 mbar. A set of Fe/Pt bilayers with fixed Fe thickness (12 nm) and varying Pt thickness were prepared. Additional reference samples, where Pt is substituted by MgO or Al, have also been prepared. The Fe and Pt films were grown with a deposition rate of 0.05 Å/s. The samples were deposited with a substrate temperature of 300 • C and subsequently annealed at the same temperature. The characterization by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) (presented elsewhere The dynamic properties and material parameters were studied by measuring the ferromagnetic resonance using a strip-line vector network analyzer (VNA-FMR). For this, the samples were placed facing the strip-line and the S12 transmission parameter was recorded. As commented before, the choice of capping layer can have a large influence on the linewidth and effective damping of the magnetic layer, even for light metals. The magnetic proximity effect (MPE) in the case of Pt also contributes to an increase on damping, Here α 0 is the intrinsic damping parameter which can be defined as characteristic of the material under investigation (growth conditions however may influence it strongly) and it is the sum of the losses by two-magnon scattering and by energy transfer to the phonon system. α mpe is the contribution due to the dynamic coupling between the ordered spins in Pt due to the MPE and the magnetization in the magnetic layer. α sp is the result of the losses by the spin current generated in the ferromagnetic layer by the precession of the magnetization and that flows into the Pt layer (spin pumping). The last term α i summarizes the increase of damping due to other interfacial effects such as interface PMA as commented above, spin memory loss Several efforts have been made in order to separate some of the contributions to α eff . In a recent work with CoFeB/Pt The term α 0 is a result of two contributions Here, ∆H 0 is the inhomogeneous broadening and is related to film quality. The lines in Figs. where K 1 is the cubic anisotropy constant, φ the in-plane azimuthal angle and HFMR is the averaged resonance field value. The fraction 2K1 Ms is directly the anisotropy field H B . In Fig. where the value for the cubic anisotropy field was taken from Figure In the literature concerning epitaxial layers, it is possible to find different symmetries for the dependence of the FMR linewidth or the damping parameter on the in-plane field direction. For the Heusler alloy Co 2 FeAl both fourand eight-fold symmetries for the linewidth have been reported. The situation differs depending on the thickness of the film where Γ xi represents the strength of the two-magnon scattering contribution along the in-plane crystallographic direction x i . The function f (φ Hφ xi ) allows for an angle dependent two-magnon contribution to damping with respect to the orientation of the external field H relative to the crystallographic directions x i . The physical interpretation of the function f (φ Hφ xi ) lays in the Fourier transform of the defects in the film where α iso includes now all the isotropic contributions to damping, i.e. α mpe , α sp , pure Gilbert damping and potentially isotropic interface contributions from the term α i , mainly spin memory loss and interface PMA related effects. The red lines in Fig. For the Fe/MgO sample the value for α iso increases by a factor larger than 2 although also here α sp,MPE = 0. The main differences between Fe/Al and Fe/MgO are that the MgO is single crystalline while Al is polycrystalline and the contrast between the metallic character of Al with the insulating oxide. The lattice mismatch between MgO and Fe is around 4% and introduces therefore a certain degree of stress in the Fe layer which is not present when the capping is polycrystalline Al and which can have an impact on damping. At the same time, since the Gilbert damping is sensitive to the density of states and this one is modified at the interface by the kind of bonds between the Fe atom and the atoms from the capping layer, the simple material difference may also explain the difference. In this sense it is remarkable that the low damping value by Lee et al. commented before is only observed for CoFe with a MgO capping layer and a larger value is measured when MgAl 2 O 4 is used A further increase in the value of α iso is observed for the Fe/Pt sample where additional losses through spin pumping and MPE are present. Unfortunately the data presented in this paper does not allow to disentangle these two contributions. For this reason, when using Eq. 1 for the calculation of spin mixing conductance, it makes sense to refer to an effective value g ↑↓ eff which is at the same time an upper limit for the corresponding value for spin pumping alone. Using the Fe/Al sample as a reference we obtain a value for the spin mixing conductance of 3.7 ± 0.9 × 10 19 m -2 . This value is lower than the one presented in our previous report The parameter Γ 2M provides further insight into the origin of total damping in the samples. This parameter is larger for the Fe/Al sample in comparison to the fully epitaxial bilayers being almost three times larger than for Fe/MgO. As a result, the total damping in the Fe/Al sample is dominated by the two-magnon scattering due also to the low α iso while the same is not true in the other two systems. It has to be taken into account that, since as scattering centers for magnon scattering the defects at the interfaces play a role, they can be dominant in thin films. From TEM images (presented for instance in For completeness we want to discuss two additional effects potentially affecting the linewidth and damping. Due to the spread of internal and anisotropy field due to mosaicity in the film, there is a contribution to the line broadening which has the following form where ∆φ H is the average spread of the direction of the easy axes in the film plane. From Fig. Although certain theoretical works point to an anisotropic Gilbert damping in fully epitaxial systems due to its dependence on the density of states at the Fermi energy Making use of the well defined dependence of the twomagnon scattering mechanism on the in-plane field direction, we have been able to separate this contribution to damping from the isotropic contributions originating from the viscous Gilbert damping mechanism, from spin pumping and from the magnetic proximity effect in Pt. The method can be implemented thanks to the preferential ordering of crystalline defects with respect to the crystallographic directions in epitaxial systems and therefore cannot be extended to amorphous or polycrystalline magnetic films. This shows the potential of the study of spin pumping related phenomena in ordered systems. Without the contribution of the two-magnon scattering, which depends strongly on the chosen capping layer and defect density, a value of the effective spin mixing conductance g ↑↓ eff is obtained which is closer to the g ↑↓ associated only to spin pumping. This approach allows for a better estimation of the spin Hall angle in metals.