Evolutionary algorithms and the particle swarm optimization method have been used to predict stable and metastable high hydrides of iron between 150-300 GPa that have not been discussed in previous studies. Cmca FeH 5 , P mma FeH 6 and P 2/c FeH 6 contain hydrogenic lattices that result from slight distortions of the previously predicted I4/mmm FeH 5 and Cmmm FeH 6 structures. Density functional theory calculations show that neither the I4/mmm nor the Cmca symmetry FeH 5 phases are superconducting. A P 1 symmetry FeH 7 phase, which is found to be dynamically stable at 200 and 300 GPa, adds another member to the set of predicted nonmetallic transition metal hydrides under pressure. Two metastable phases of FeH 8 are found, and the preferred structure at 300 GPa contains a unique 1-dimensional hydrogenic lattice. The composition and structure that hydrides of iron may assume under pressure has long been of interest to geoscientists. Seismic models suggest that the Earth's core consists of iron alloyed with nickel and numerous light elements, one of which is suspected to be hydrogen. The search for stable high pressure structures with FeH n (n = 5 -8) stoichiometries was carried out using the XTALOPT In the EA search duplicate structures were detected via the XTALCOMP algorithm. Geometry optimizations and electronic structure calculations were performed in the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) Tests carried out on I4/mmm and Cmca FeH 5 showed that the k-meshes and energy cutoffs used yielded relative enthalpies that were converged to within ∼0.1 meV/atom . The magnetic moment was calculated for select phases. It was found to be zero, in agreement with previous studies, which found that the high hydrides of iron become nonmagnetic above 100 GPa, These are the same pseudopotentials used in Ref. Superconductivity in FeH 5 ? Fig. A unit cell of the Cmca structure contains twice as many atoms as does I4/mmm. However, the main difference between these phases originates from their two stacked hydrogenic layers, col-ored green and pink in Fig. First principles calculations did not find superconductivity in P m 3m FeH 3 at 150 GPa, For the FeH 6 stoichiometry evolutionary searches predicted that a C2/m symmetry phase would be thermodynamically stable between 35-82 GPa. In addition to Cmmm FeH 6 , our EA searches found the P mma and P 2/c phases illustrated in Fig. The Cmmm, P mma and P 2/c symmetry FeH 6 structures are all related, since they are comprised of layers of the same face-sharing FeH 3 units found in FeH 5 separated by two puckered layers of hydrogen atoms that are in turn separated by a layer of H 2 molecules. The main difference between these three phases arises from small distortions of their hydrogenic sublattices. As for the P mma phase in the whole pressure range studied. As the pressure increases, so does the difference in the volume and the P V contribution to the enthalpy favors the more compact P mma phase. The electronic contribution to the enthalpy for the two phases is nearly the same at 150 GPa, but because of the P V term P mma FeH 6 is favored by 0.6 meV/atom at this pressure. The P 2/c phase represents a further distortion of the hydrogenic sublattice. The main difference between the P mma and P 2/c geometries is that the two layers of hydrogen atoms are no longer stacked on top of each other in the latter. The shear in the lattice, which can be seen most clearly when comparing Fig. At 150 GPa the dynamically stable C2/c FeH 7 phase illustrated in Fig. The most stable FeH 8 phase found possessed P mma symmetry up to 290 GPa and assumed Ima2 symmetry at higher pressures. As illustrated in Fig. Crystal structure prediction techniques coupled with density functional theory calculations were employed to find the most stable FeH n (n = 5 -8) structures at 150, 200 and 300 GPa. The geometries, electronic structures and propensity for superconductivity of stable and metastable phases has been investigated. Our work adds the following contributions to the already published theoretical studies of hydrides of iron under pressure: • via crystal structure prediction techniques we have found three new phases, Cmca FeH 5 , P mma FeH 6 , and P 2/c FeH 6 , whose hydrogenic lattices can be derived by distortions of the previously reported I4/mmm FeH 5 and Cmmm FeH 6 phases. The structural distortions decrease the volume and the P V contribution to the enthalpy, however they increase the electronic energy. The interplay between these two factors can render two or more distinct, dynamically stable phases nearly isoenthalpic within a given pressure range. Increasing pressure typically tends to stabilize the phase with the smaller volume. • we add one more nonmetallic high pressure transition metal hydride, P 1 FeH 7 , to the list of previously reported insulating structures: P 2 1 3 and P 2 1 /m FeH 4 , • two metastable FeH 8 phases are predicted, with the structure found at 150 and 200 GPa being composed of motifs that could be derived from the FeH 3 building blocks common to many of the high pressure iron hydrides. The 300 GPa structure contains a 1-dimensional hydrogenic sublattice that has not been previously observed.