We present a novel paradigm for dispersion engineering in coupled transmission lines (CTLs) based on exceptional points of degeneracy (EPDs). We develop a theory for fourth-order EPDs consisting of four Floquet-Bloch eigenmodes coalescing into one degenerate eigenmode. We present unique wave propagation properties associated to the EPD and develop a figure of merit to assess the practical occurrence of fourth-order EPDs in CTLs with tolerances and losses. We experimentally verify for the first time the existence of a fourth EPD (the degenerate band edge), through dispersion and transmission measurements in microstrip-based CTLs at microwave frequencies. In addition, we report that based on experimental observation and the developed figure of merit, the EPD features are still observable in structures that radiate (leak energy away), even in the presence of fabrication tolerances and dissipative losses. We investigate the "gain and loss balance" regime in CTLs as a mean of recovering an EPD in the presence of radiation and/or dissipative losses, without necessarily resorting to Parity-Time (PT)-symmetry regimes. The versatile EPD concept is promising in applications such as high intensity and power-efficiency oscillators, spatial power combiners, or low-threshold oscillators and opens new frontiers for boosting the performance of large coherent sources. LECTROMAGNETIC guiding structures or resonators are characterized by their evolution equations in terms of the eigenmodes (eigenvalues and eigenvectors). Among many features of the evolution of these eigenmodes, we explore the points in the parameter space of such system at which two or more eigenmodes coalesce into a single degenerate eigenmode Fig. point out that EPDs cannot occur in systems whose evolution is described by a Hermitian matrix (see Section II). Thus, an EPD occurs in systems where the evolution of the system vector, in space or time, is described by a non-Hermitian matrix which can be imposed by periodicity or by having losses and gain in the system In this paper, we investigate second and fourth order EPDs occurring in periodic guiding structures whose wave dynamics are represented by two periodic coupled TLs. In particular we are interested in the fourth order EPDs that occur when all four independent Floquet-Bloch eigenmodes coalesce in their eigenvalues and eigenvectors and form one single degenerate eigenvector Besides the presented general formulation that is applicable to any CTL, we discuss in detail the two microstrip coupled transmission lines shown in Fig. We consider a pair of CTLs such that two independent modal fields are able to propagate along each z-direction (so a total of four independent modes are present when we consider propagation in both positive and negative z directions). At an EPD some of these modes (two or four, depending on the case, in a system satisfying reciprocity) will no longer be independent and thus will coalesce. We refer entirely to the formulation in We start by representing the field amplitudes in the two CTLs by equivalent voltage and current vectors that comprises voltages and currents at any coordinate z in the CTL. This technique has been employed in where M is a 4×4 CTL system matrix, where M is given by where 0 is the 2×2 zero matrix, and Z and Y are the series impedance and shunt admittance matrices describing the per unit parameters of the CTL The series impedance and shunt admittance matrices describing the per unit parameters of the CTL are defined as , and The CTL per unit length inductance L and capacitance C matrices are 2×2 symmetric and positive definite matrices The homogenous solution of (2), assuming a certain boundary condition at z = z0, namely 00 () z = ΨΨ inside a uniform (i.e., z-invariant) CTL segment, is found by representing the state vector solution at any arbitrary coordinate where we define 10 (z , z ) T as the transfer matrix which translates the state vector () z Ψ between the two points 0 z and 1 z . Within a uniform segment the transfer matrix is easily calculated as ( ) and the transfer matrix satisfies the group property and the symmetry property where 1 is the 4×4 identity matrix. The previous discussion identifies the transfer matrix of a uniform segment of a CTL, and it is used to describe periodic waveguides made of a cascade of uniform CTL segments. Let us assume a periodic CTL composed of two uniform segments A and B cascaded as shown in Figs. where U is 4×4 matrix that serves as a non-singular similarity transformation that diagonalizes U T , and is computed using the four regular, normalized eigenvectors of meaning that the column vectors of U are the regular eigenvectors of U T that are linearly independent. If ( T is similar to a diagonal matrix. In principle, the matrix U T is non-Hermitian, but it satisfies some other important properties in the absence of gain and loss, where each constitutive CTL segment has a z-evolution matrix M that is J-Hermitian and a Hermitian characteristic matrix ZY , mainly the J-unitarity property, where J is defined in eq. ( We define the fourth-order EPD as a point in the parameter space of the periodic CTL at which the four eigenvectors coalesce into a single degenerate eigenvector. At an EPD the matrix U T becomes defective, i.e., it cannot be diagonalized. At a fourth order EPD, the eigenvalue problem (9) does not provide a complete basis of independent eigenvectors: they coalesce into a single one, hence U in (11) becomes singular. Strictly speaking, it means that it is not possible to find a nonsingular similarity transformation as in where are the generalized eigenvectors of ranks 2, 3, and 4, respectively (see details of generalized eigenvectors in Ch. 7 in The examples in Fig. We first assume the periodic CTL to be lossless (no gain is introduced yet; we will investigate the case with gain and loss in Section VI), hence the matrix M for each segment satisfies the J-Hermiticity property where J and N are defined in eq. ( The periodic CTL has eigenvalues exp( ) , where n k is the Bloch wavenumber, that is obtained from the solution of When a system parameter of the CTL (a geometry or electrical parameter like m C , or frequency, or because of the introduction of losses) is perturbed by a small parameter  , the perturbed eigenvalue is written as a perturbation of the degenerate eigenvalue in the neighborhood of an EPD eigenvalue exp( ) e e jk d  =- in terms of a fractional power expansion (also called Puiseux series where h is a parameter that defines flatness of the dispersion near d  . Indeed, from ( , it is clear that the flatness parameter is , and it depends on the system parameters. The smaller the value of h the flatter the dispersion curve, indicating higher Q factor In Fig. The determinant of the similarity transformation U of the transfer matrix in at two different frequencies (the upper and lower band edges) designating two distinct second order EPDs. At this second order EPD, two eigenmodes coalesce and this is in principle analogous to the second order EPD that occurs in the uniform CTL investigated in = . Increasing Cm, such that Cm = Cm,d, we find the proper conditions for the fourth order EPD (the DBE) to be manifested. At the DBE, four Floquet-Bloch eigenmodes coalesce to a single degenerate eigenmode; as explained in Fig. and thereby approximated by the quartic law Increasing the coupling such that Cm > Cm,d will lead to altering the DBE to a split band edge (SBE) In order to distinguish a fourth order EPD among others, and in order to understand how "far" from the EPD a system is, one ought to define a figure of merit (or hyperdistance) to assess the quality of such EPD subject to any kind of perturbation, like losses, frequency detuning, or tolerances of CTL parameters. Here we focus on losses and coupling as the cause of EPD perturbation. Structures, such as that in Fig. T to determine the closeness to an EPD. Various choices could be made for its definition, and here the hyperdistance that represents a figure of merit (FOM) is defined as = Ψ Ψ Ψ Ψ , where the dagger symbol † denotes the complex conjugate transpose operation, and DH is defined to be always positive. This FOM yields a hyperdistance ideally equal to zero when all four eigenvectors in the CTL system coalesce, i.e., when the CTL system experiences a fourth order EPD. Mathematically this is described by the transfer matrix of the unit cell U T becoming similar to a 4×4 Jordan Block as in To better illustrate this concept, we plot in Figs. Fig.   when 1   ; which takes place in the close "vicinity" of the fourth order EPD. We again stress that the FOM H D provides a more quantitative identification of the fourth order degeneracy compared to the simpler measure ( ) det U . The deviation in the ideal EPD conditions due to losses can be seen in Fig. In this section we experimentally verify the existence of the EPD in the microstrip example in Fig. In order to assess the existence of the EPD in practical terms, we utilize the hyperdistance concept developed in Section III for the first time. We use the transfer matrix U T of the unit cell in Fig. We investigate the properties of a finite length periodic CTL as in Fig. Consider the finite length microstrip CTL made of a finite number N of unit cells as shown in Fig.  approaches d  for large number N of unit cells. Thanks to the DBE degeneracy condition, a large enhancement in the energy stored is expected because we approach the zero-group velocity conditions when , and causing a giant enhancement in the Q-factor We show in Fig. The RBE and DBE (EPDs of order 2 and 4, respectively) exist in structures that are lossless, indeed the presence of losses would inhibit the existence of the DBE, i.e., it would degrade the degree of coalescence of the four eigenmodes. This phenomenon is monitored by the hyperdistance parameter H D that increases with increasing losses. And this is the reason why we have observed a non-ideal DBE dispersion relation in Fig Increasing radiation losses (e.g., for antenna applications) will further degrade the DBE. Here our aim is to provide a mean to recover EPDs deteriorated by losses by strategically incorporating a proper distribution of gain in each unit cell. The perfect condition that allows the existence of an EPD is named perfect and gain balance." (For perfect EPD condition we mean the exact mathematical condition described in Section II that leads to 0 This "loss and gain balance" condition is different from the situation previously studied in PT-symmetric literature The following discussion is based on the periodic coupled transmission line as in Fig. Losses in the CTL are assumed to be in the form of a per unit length series resistance in both TLs, representing radiation and/or dissipation losses. Here, gain is introduced in the periodic CTL using a negative per-unit-length conductance G in both TLs (therefore -G is positive with units of Siemens/m). Note that here, we assume that such gain is introduced in both TLs, i.e., each TL has a self-negative conductance G in addition to a series resistance Rn associated to radiation and metal losses for the n th TL, with n = 1,2. Losses are described using the quality factor TL, / ZY that is non-Hermitian. A simple procedure is developed to estimate the value of the needed G in the CTL to "recover" the fourth order EPD occurring at more or less the same angular frequency as that would occur in the lossless structure d  = . Note that here for "recovering" an EPD we mean that the required hyperdistance H D shall be smaller than a specific low threshold  , that is arbitrarily predetermined (at a lossless 4 th order EPD, i.e. at a DBE, this H D vanishes). Therefore, we find the value of the optimum distributed gain parameter, namely Ge such that the H D   at d  = , where here we assume  = 0.1 as an example. In Fig. We analyze another CTL configuration that has losses and gain not satisfying PT-symmetry. Losses in the CTL are assumed to be in the form of a per unit length shunt conductance GL,n in both TLs, representing radiation and/or dissipation losses. Shunt per-unit-length losses are analogously described by a quality factor Gain is introduced in the periodic CTL using a negative per-unit-length conductance G in only TL1 (therefore -G is positive with units of Siemens/m). Note that this CTL configuration differs from the one in Case A in: (i) gain is introduced to only one TL, not in both TLs as in the previous case, and (ii) losses are introduced using a shunt conductance per unit length rather than a series resistance per unit length. Therefore, TL1 has a self-negative conductance G in addition to a GL,1 associated to losses, whereas TL2 has only GL,2 associated to losses. Similar to Case A, each constitutive CTL segment has a characteristic matrix ZY in (3) that is non-Hermitian, and the value of the needed gain G in TL1 to "recover" the fourth order EPD is determined with same procedure used in Case A. In Fig. We have experimentally demonstrated for the first time the occurrence of a fourth order EPD (the DBE) in microstrip CTLs at microwave frequencies, first through four-port measurements of a unit cell leading to the DBE dispersion relation and then through the transmission characteristics of a finite-length CTL. We have also introduced the novel concept of a hyperdistance figure of merit to estimate the effect of perturbations like imperfect coupling, presence of losses and any other perturbation that may arise from fabrications or numerical simulation on the EPD. The hyperdistance concept is a way to measure the eigenvectors mutual "distance" in a multidimensional vector space, that should ideally vanish at the exact EPD condition. The smaller the hyperdistance the closer a system is to the EPD occurrence. Based on the defined figure of merit, our experimental verification has confirmed for the first time that the main EPD features of almost parallel eigenvectors can still exist in realistic periodic arrays that include radiation and dissipative losses. Furthermore, in CTLs that experience significant radiation and dissipative losses, we have shown that the so-called "gain and loss balance" condition leads to recovering an EPD, up to a level that can be quantified via the hyperdistance concept, even in schemes that do not necessarily imply PT-symmetry. The gain and loss balance condition scheme can be applied in principle for any amount of loss in a CTL, paving the way to use it in the design of active grid array antennas. The capability of obtaining EPDs in CTLs with large radiation losses when adding gain in a proper manner in each unit cell also paves the way to use this multi-eigenmode degenerate scheme in the design of array oscillators and highintensity spatial power combiners. Potential benefits may include low oscillation threshold, or even high-intensity radiation with high power efficiency, and spectral purity. We summarize here some important properties associated with matrices related to the system description for the coupled transmission lines. L and C are 2×2 symmetric and positive definite matrices Therefore, if we consider only lossless/gainless systems, both ZY and YZ matrices are Hermitian (i.e. † = AA ) as they are real symmetric matrices, which implies that they are diagonalizable and they have real eigenvalues and real determinant 