QPC G (2e 2 /h) 0.1 0.15 G (2e 2 /h) 0.1 0.2 0 -0.15 0.15 -Φ 0 0 Φ 0 B || = 775 mT 0 -0.15 0.15 -Φ 0 0 Φ 0 B || = 600 mT 0 -0.15 0.15 -Φ 0 0 Φ Majorana zero modes are quasiparticle states localized at the boundaries of topological superconductors that are expected to be ideal building blocks for fault-tolerant quantum computing The Josephson junctions (JJs) studied in this work were fabricated from a planar heterostructure comprising of a thin Al layer epitaxially covering a high mobility InAs two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) Here we investigate planar JJs as that of Fig 1a as a function of B , chemical potential μ and phase difference φ. Phase biasing is obtained by embedding the JJ in a direct-current superconducting quantum interference device (DC SQUID) threaded by a magnetic flux Figure As B is increased, discrete Andreev bound states (ABSs) enter the gap and move towards zero energy, as shown in Fig. For B = 525 mT a ZBP in conductance appears at Φ = (2n + 1)Φ 0 /2 (corresponding to φ ∼ π, see Fig. The observed behavior of the ZBP in field and phase is in good qualitative agreement with the calculated spectrum of a topological JJ with realistic parameters, as shown in Extended Data Fig. One of the most interesting features predicted for a perfectly transparent JJ is the significant expansion of the topological phase in magnetic field and chemical potential at φ = π A ZBP in conductance is therefore identified by a positive value of I 3ω (V sd = 0), i.e., by a negative value of G (V sd = 0), which indicates a negative curvature around V sd = 0. The finite range of V 1 over which the ZBP is stable is explained by the narrow width W S1 ξ S of the superconducting leads, which effectively decrease the ratio between Andreev and normal reflection probabilities, thus reducing the size of the topological phase as a function of μ (see Extended Data Fig. 3.5 is the second derivative of the conductance at zero bias. A positive value of I3ω(V sd = 0) corresponds to a ZBP in conductance as a function of V sd . The complementary study of the ZBP stability in Φ and This behavior is in qualitative agreement with the topological phase diagrams calculated for our system (see Extended Data Fig. We note that the strong asymmetry in the phase dependence of the ZBP region observed at different values of V 1 is not fully captured by the numerical model and might be due to unintended asymmetries in the geometry of the etched superconducting leads. Lastly, we note that the ZBP is robust over a range of ∼ 70 mV in V qpc and in V top , which modify the above-gap conductance by approximately one order of magnitude, as shown in Extended Data Fig. As another interesting test of the topological nature of the observed ZBPs, we performed spectroscopy as a function of the magnetic field B t applied in the plane of the 2DEG but orthogonal to the one dimensional channel defined by JJ1 (see Fig. In summary, we have investigated phase-dependent ZBPs in tunneling conductance measured at the edge of a JJ patterned in a two-dimensional InAs/Al heterostructure. The critical field at which the ZBP appears depends on the phase bias and is minimal at φ ∼ π, as expected for a topological JJ. We studied the ZBP stability as a function of field B , phase φ and chemical potential μ, obtaining results qualitatively consistent with the topological phase diagram of a finite-size junction. Future material and design improvements might allow the investigation of JJs with W S1 ξ S , where the influence of μ is expected to be suppressed Wafer structure. The wafer structure used for this work was grown on an insulating InP substrate by molecular beam epitaxy. From bottom to top, it is comprised of a 100-nm-thick In 0.52 Al 0.48 As matched buffer, a 1-μmthick step-graded buffer realized with alloy steps from In 0.52 Al 0.48 As to In 0.89 Al 0.11 As (20 steps, 50 nm/step), a 58 nm In 0.82 Al 0.18 As layer, a 4 nm In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As bottom barrier, a 7 nm InAs quantum well, a 10 nm In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As top barrier, two monolayers of GaAs and a 7 nm film of epitaxial Al. The top Al layer has been grown in the same molecular beam epitaxy chamber used for the rest of the growth, without breaking the vacuum. This result in semiconductor/superconductor interfaces characterized by almost unitary transparency Characterization performed in a Hall bar geometry where the Al was removed revealed an electron mobility peak μ = 43, 000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for an electron density n = 8 × 10 11 cm -2 , corresponding to an electron mean free path of ∼ 600 nm. Characterization of a large area Al film revealed a critical magnetic field of 2.5 T when the field is applied in the plane of the 2DEG. Device fabrication. Samples were fabricated with conventional electron beam lithography techniques. Measurements. Electrical measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 15 mK with conventional DC and lock-in techniques using low frequencies (ν < 200 Hz) excitations. In order to measure the differential conductance G = dI/dV , an AC voltage bias of V ac = 3 μV, superimposed to a variable DC bias V sd , was applied to the top lead of the device (see Fig. Since [sin(ωt)] 3 = 1/4[-sin(3ωt) + 3 sin(ωt)], we obtain: In order to increase the signal-to-noise ratio, the measurement of I 3ω (V sd ) was performed with an amplitude V ac of the excitation greater than the temperature-limited full width at half maximum of a Lorentzian feature, i.e., V ac > ∼ 3.5 k B T , where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T ∼ 40 mK is the electron temperature in our devices. The comparison between I 3ω (V sd ) and G (V sd ) is shown in Extended Data Fig. The SQUID device was separately characterized. The SQUID differential resistance R = dV /dI was obtained by applying an AC current bias I ac < 5 nA, superimposed to a variable DC current bias I DC , to the superconducting leads of the interferometer, with the tunnneling probe closed and floating. The behavior of the Josephson critical current is shown in Extended Data Figs. We studied five devices characterized by different dimensions of JJ1. Devices 1 and 2 have W 1 = 80 nm and W S1 = 160 nm, device 3 has W 1 = 120 nm and W S1 = 160 nm, device 4 has W 1 = 80 nm and W S1 = 500 nm, whereas device 5 has W 1 = 80 nm and W S1 = 1 μm. All the devices were designed with L 1 = 1.6 μm, W 2 = 40 nm, L 2 = 5 μm and W S2 = 160 nm. In device 3 spectroscopy was performed by means of a QPC coupling JJ1 to a wide Al plane, following the approach of Refs. 6, 7 (see Extended Data Fig. Theoretical model. We model JJ1 of the measured device using the Hamiltonian where ψ ↑,↓ are the annihilation operators for electrons with spin up and down, σ and τ are the Pauli matrices acting in the spin and particle-hole basis, respectively with τ ± = (τ x ± iτ y )/2. Here, m * is the effective electron mass, μ is the chemical potential, α is the spin-orbit coupling strength of InAs, E Z = gμ B B /2 is the Zeeman field strength due to the applied magnetic field along the junction (y direction) and ∆ is the proximity-induced pairing potential. The proximity-induced pairing potential is taken to be nonzero in the 2DEG below the superconducting leads and zero in the junction, i.e., where φ is the superconducting phase difference between the two superconductors, W 1 and W S1 are the width of the junction and superconducting leads, respectively. The Zeeman field E Z is taken to be uniform throughout the system. Numerical simulations in this paper are done using experimental parameters: m * = 0.026m e Phase diagram. We study the phase diagram of the system as a function of the in-plane Zeeman field, phase difference across the junction, and chemical potential. In the limit of very wide superconducting leads (W S1 ξ S , where ξ S = v F /π∆ is the superconducting coherence length and v F is the Fermi velocity in the semiconductor), the topological phase transition depends on both the phase bias across the junction and the in-plane Zeeman field, with very weak dependence on the chemical potential To obtain the phase diagram of the system, we perform numerical simulations by using the tight-binding version of the Hamiltonian [Eq. ( Energy spectra and Majorana wave function. We calculate the energy spectra and Majorana wave functions by diagonalizing the tight-binding Hamiltonian for a finite-length system (L 1 = 1.6 μm). Extended Data Figures where the term 2W S1 /(2W S1 + W 1 ) is the ratio of the superconductors width to the total width of the system. For a finite-length junction, the gap still has its minimum at φ = π but does not close at zero Zeeman field as shown in Extended Data Fig. * These authors contributed equally to this work. † email: marcus@nbi.ku.dk ‡ email: fni@ibm.zurich.com; Present address: IBM Research -Zurich, Sumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rschlikon, Switzerland.