We report an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study of the iron-based superconductor family, Ba1-xNaxFe2As2. This system harbors the recently discovered double-Q magnetic order appearing in a reentrant C4 phase deep within the underdoped regime of the phase diagram that is otherwise dominated by the coupled nematic phase and collinear antiferromagnetic order. From a detailed temperature-dependence study, we identify the electronic response to the nematic phase in an orbital-dependent band shift that strictly follows the rotational symmetry of the lattice and disappears when the system restores C4 symmetry in the low temperature phase. In addition, we report the observation of a distinct electronic reconstruction that cannot be explained by the known electronic orders in the system. Quantum phases emerge in strongly correlated electron systems via the interplay of four fundamental degrees of freedom: lattice, charge, orbital, and spin. For both copper-and iron-based high temperature superconductors, the spin degree of freedom plays a prominent role as long-range magnetism has been found in the parent phase of both materials To elucidate the interactions between the rich electronic orders in this system, we study the reentrant C 4 phase in the Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 family using angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Three doping regimes in the Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 family are studied, x=0.18 (BN18), 0.25 (BN25), and 0.4 (BN40), representing the C 2 phase-only regime, the reentrant C 4 phase regime, and the purely superconducting phase regime, respectively (Fig. High quality single crystals of Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 were grown using the self-flux method We begin with the simplest compound, BN40, which has no symmetry breaking phases except superconductivity (Fig. phase, this degeneracy is lifted with an upward (downward) shift of the d yz (d xz ) band in orthogonal directions. On a twinned sample, this orbital-dependent band shift is therefore manifested in a band splitting (Fig. Next, we discuss the sample harboring the reentrant C 4 phase, BN25. In Fig. Having demonstrated that the electronic structure of BN25 follows the onset and disappearance of the nematic order through the reentrant C 4 phase, we now point to an unexpected observation. In contrast to the nonmonotonic temperature-dependence of the band splitting magnitude at k 1 , a simultaneous measurement at the X point, k 2 , reveals a strikingly distinct behavior-a single feature monotonically splitting into two with decreasing temperature (Fig. To extract the onset temperature of this splitting, we again exploit the single-peak fitting procedure used for k 1 . The fitted FWHM as a function of temperature at k 2 (Fig. From the bands measured across the X point in the C 4 phase (Fig. In contrast, to produce the band doubling effect at the X point as observed, one possibility is band folding associated with a checkerboard order with q 3 = (π, 0, 0) T (Fig. Finally, a comparison between the three doping levels shows that the band splitting at X suggestive of the checkerboard order only occurs for BN25 (Fig. The finding of this emergent order and its strong coupling to the DQMO in underdoped FeSCs unveils another parallel with the intertwined electronic "stripe" order appearing at 1/8 doping in the La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 cuprate system where the CO couples strongly to the spin order 