Structured light enables the characterization of chirality of optically small nanoparticles by taking advantage of the helicity maximization concept recently introduced in A variety of natural and artificial materials are chiral, meaning their building blocks (the constituent inclusions), i.e., molecules and meta-atoms, are not superimposable to their mirror images In a separate work (see Ref. In this complementary work, we study in detail the properties of two illustrative examples of structured lights, i.e., an optical beam and the nearfield of a nanoantenna, both with maximized helicity density. We demonstrate how a properly engineered nanoantenna substantially improves the chirality detection by locally maximizing the helicity and energy densities, while enabling chirality characterization. By suggesting the proposed method to employ highly localized electromagnetic fields, our findings provide a strong theoretical foundation in the study of nanoscale chirality detection and characterization of NPs using near fields and structured light. This section is devoted to developing a theoretical basis for chirality detection and characterization of NPs by utilizing structured lights. Before starting the discussion, we emphasize to distinguish between detection and characterization: while in detection our goal is to determine whether a particle is chiral, by characterization we aim at the determination of the exact strength of the particle's chirality. We consider NPs whose optical response is well approximated by the fundamental electric and magnetic dipoles, and higher order multipoles are considered negligible, which is a judicious assumption for optically small NPs where ee  and mm  are the electric and magnetic polariza- bilities, respectively, and 0  denotes the vacuum's mag- netic permeability [see Appendix A for the definitions of dipole moments p and m ]. Moreover, the magnetoelectric polarizability em  indicates the NP's chirality, and deter- mining this quantity is the goal in the chirality characterization. Considering that the dipole moments are not directly observable, we require to find a relation between the measurable rate of energy transfer to the particle, i.e., the transferred power, and the particle's magnetoelectric polarizability em  where "*" denotes complex conjugation. Moreover, 0 , 0 c , and k are, respectively, the permittivity, speed of light, and wavenumber in vacuum. Note that monochromatic electromagnetic fields with time dependence exp( ) being the angular frequency, are considered throughout the paper. The time-averaged extinction power is obtained as being the time-averaged helicity density of the local field acting on the NP, discussed in detail in the next subsection since it is one of the core quantities in this work. Finally, the time-averaged absorbed power abs ext sca is obtained from Eqs. ( on magnetoelectric polarizability em  and the helicity den- sity of the field, suggests that it is possible to dismiss the first two terms and keep the last term by properly engineering of the local fields. Therefore, we conclude that the extinction power, Eq. ( Let us next study how to dismiss the first two terms in the expression of the extinction power, Eq. ( , and This means that the electric and magnetic local fields in the two experiments are required to be equal in magnitude, which is our suggested choice. Although conditions Next, by introducing the new condition for fields, which means that fields in the two experiments possess helicity densities with equal amplitudes and opposite signs and implies higher possibilities of detection of NPs' chirality for fields satisfying conditions (5) (see Ref. [1] for discussion), the dissymmetry factor g reduces to Now, following Ref. for each of the two excitations, where 0  is the intrinsic im- pedance of vacuum, and call the fields satisfying these condition optimally chiral Conditions and it measures the particle's chirality with respect to its electric and magnetic polarizabilities independent of the field's property which was denoted by the field's helicity and energy densities. Moreover, for particles with weak magnetic polarizabilities, i.e., , the dissymmetry factor g reduces to and measures the ratio between the magnetoelectric and electric polarizability, i.e., it characterizes the NP's chirality assuming that the NP's electric polarizability ee  is known. In this subsection, the helicity of fields, which is a quantitative measure of the fields' curliness and plays an important role in the chirality detection of particles, is briefly reviewed and discussed. Conservation of physical quantities such as energy and momentum along with the Maxwell's equations enable us to define some properties such as linear momentum, angular momentum, chirality, etc. for electromagnetic fields analogous to the mechanical and geometrical properties for matter was introduced to show how lines of field vectors are linked in the chirality detection of particles. Note that the time-averaged helicity density for monochromatic fields is proportional to their time-averaged optical chirality through the relation  --. However, optical chiral- ity is related to the conservation of the spin angular momentum associated to the curl of fields As mentioned earlier, in this section we discuss engineered beams that enhance the possibility of chirality detection and enable characterization of NPs' chirality. Indeed, we investigate the helicity densities of two chiral optical beams and demonstrate how they offer the possibility of enhancing helicity densities by manipulating their field profiles and polarizations. We first consider a Gaussian beam (GB) with circular polarization. Suppressing the time dependence exp( ) it  -, the electric field vector of a GB which travels in the z + direc- tion under the paraxial approximation reads where / +-sign, represents right/left-handed circular polarizations, and x and ŷ are the unit vectors in the Cartesian coordinate system. Here, with 0 w and  being, respectively, the beam parameter and the excita- tion wavelength. The beam parameter represents half a beam waist when the beam is not tightly focused V are, respectively, the radial distance from the beam axis (here the z-axis of the Cartesian coordinate system) and the complex amplitude of the beam (with the unit of Volt). The magnitude of the electric field of a typical GB with 0 w  = in the x-z plane and the electric field vectors along the propagation direction (here the z-axis) are depicted in FIG. It is noteworthy that the GB in Eq. ( [see Appendix C], which is a restricted area in space, since under these conditions the fields of a GB look more like those of a plane wave. The quantity | | / hu  , which takes the value of 1 when the conditions A GB with circular polarization is a trivial optimally chiral beam. However, it would be interesting if we could introduce an alternative optimally chiral optical beam with different properties). Here we propose the superposition of an Azimuthally Polarized Beam (APB) and a Radially Polarized Beam (RPB), which we call ARPB, as a chiral optical beam that can be used to characterize the chirality of NPs. The APB and ARB are obtained by superposing Laguerre Gaussian beams with opposite angular momenta. Let us study the distinctive features of the ARPB compared to a GB with circular polarization. The electric field vector in an APB which is propagating along the z-direction (optical axis of the beam) is polarized along the azimuthal direction  in the transverse plane and reads where A V (with the unit of Volt) is the complex amplitude of the beam and R 1/ iz z  =-. Other parameters are similar to those defined for a GB in Eq. with a complex amplitude R V (with the unit of Volt). Note, an RPB has a nonzero longitudinal electric field component along its axis (for the longitudinal field expressions see Refs. [34],  at all points in space when choosing in contrast to a GB where a circular polarization is obtainable only in a limited area around the beam axis. Second, the ARPB has field vectors at the beam axis which are exclusively longitudinal. This provides the opportunity of characterization of longitudinal chirality in contrast to a GB with circular polarization that supports the characterization of a transverse chirality So far, we have studied how to enhance the helicity density by engineering an optical beam and we have achieved about an order of magnitude enhancement [see FIG. We propose the use of specific nano-antennas (NAs) to enhance helicity density. We show how the nearfield of a properly engineered NA, excited by a chiral beam, provides at least one extra order of magnitude helicity density enhancement compared to the helicity of the exciting beam. The total nearfield of a NA includes the contributions from both the incident optical beam and scattered nearfields, therefore, its helicity density h reads Equation ( Let us assume that a NA is located at the center of Cartesian coordinates and it is illuminated by a chiral beam propagating along the z + direction (FIG. ensures the relation sca 0 sca i = EH holds everywhere in space and not only in the near zone of the NA, indicating that condition (25) implies the best possible scattered nearfields everywhere. Therefore, the problem of obtaining the maximum achievable helicity density of the scattered nearfields is reduced to designing a NA that satisfies the balance relation To that end, we consider a spherical silicon (Si) nanoparticle with radius a and plot the normalized (to its maximum) | h | u  = holds everywhere in space as long as NA NA ee 0 mm  = is valid for the proposed NA. It is now appropriate to discuss practical scenarios when the engineered NA is exposed to external illuminations and investigate the enhancement of the helicity density. We first consider the case when the NA is illuminated with an ARPB since its analytical investigation is more straightforward and then consider the illumination with a circularly polarized GB. Finally, we note that full-wave analysis shows that the quadrupoles for the considered parameters  and a are negligible since /1 a  . We consider a situation when the engineered NA is illuminated by an ARPB propagating in the z + direction with 0 w =  , where the electric and magnetic field vectors are oriented along the z direction, at the position of the NA, as discussed in Sec. IIIB. Since the NA is azimuthally symmetric, the induced electric and magnetic dipole moments NA p and NA m are parallel to the z-axis under such an illumination, and the helicity density of the scattered nearfield, introduced in Eq. ( So far, we have discussed about the helicity enhancement due to the scattering nearfields of the NA. However, the overall helicity density of the field around the particle is determined by Eq. ( Under the balance condition To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed spherical NA with high dielectric constant to other illumination scenarios, we examine the helicity enhancement by the proposed NA when illuminated by a Gaussian beam with circular polarization. In contrast to ARPB, the GB satisfies conditions and the interference helicity density follows the same form as in Eq. ( We have analyzed the interaction between small chiral nanoparticles and general electromagnetic fields and have determined the best field properties for chirality detection and characterization at nanoscale. We have demonstrated that any pair of electromagnetic fields with equal electric and magnetic energy densities is capable of detecting chirality if the pair constituents possess unequal helicity densities. Moreover, such pair of fields with equal electric and magnetic energy densities may be employed for chirality characterization only when the two fields possess opposite handedness and both satisfy the universal relation | | / hu  = with h and u being the time-averaged helicity and energy densities of the field, respectively. In particular, we have investigated chiral fields of two kinds of optical beams: Gaussian beams with circular polarization, and combinations of beams with azimuthal symmetry forming an ARPB that needs to be properly engineered to satisfy the conditions in Eq. ( Our study confirms the fundamental limit of energy density as a determinant factor for the upper bound of helicity density introduced in our concurrent work where we considered interaction of monochromatic electromagnetic fields and matters and averaged the quantities over one cycle of time. Here, E , B , D , H , and J are the "phasors" electric field, magnetic induction, electric displacement, magnetic field, and current density, respectively. Moreover, superscript "*" denotes conjugation and V is the integration volume. We assume the medium is non-conductive, i.e., 0  = JE , and the constitutive relations The left and right sides of Eq. (A2) are the total power going out of the surface S surrounding the volume V and negative of the absorbed power in V , respectively. The extra negative sign for the absorbed power is considered because when calculating the absorbed power, we should integrate the power going into the volume V . Note, in the calculation of scattered power in Eq. (A5), we have used the expressions (B1) and (B2) for the scattered electric and magnetic fields of an electric and a magnetic dipole, respectively. For ease of reading we provide here the scattered electric and magnetic fields from the electric and magnetic dipole moments NA p and NA m of a NA located at the origin of the coordinate system The z component of the magnetic field of a circularly polarized Gaussian beam with electric field defined in Eq. ( ext P and scattered power sca P are, respectively, obtained as   Note that there are also other physical measurable quantities such as electromagnetic force and torque, which are out