In this work, layered perovskite SBN was investigated in a new doped form for hole as well as electron transport layer (HTL/ETL) in perovskite solar cells. This work was targeted to conclude the effect of tin doping in lanthanum-bismuth layer SBN on optical energy band gap besides dominant electron-hole transportation to assist in perovskite solar cell applications. Thoroughly hard ball-milled compositions Sr1-xSnxBi1.95La0.05Nb2O9 (x=0.0, 0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2) were prepared by special microwave synthesis to obtain fine (~10-60nm) mesoporous particle network of atomic level substitutions. Microwave synthesis was crucial in modifying dielectric, semiconducting and optical characteristics of prepared SBN materials. The band gap reduced in continuous manner and carrier mobility was increased by 112% for maximum tin doping. Nano particle formation assisted in raising carrier mobility by bridging bigger grains through nano particles. The effect of macro-sized grains and nano-sized grain boundaries on carrier transport were further investigated in detail using impedance spectroscopy. In recent years, perovskites (ABX3; X-oxides and halides) have emerged as multitasking materials not only limited to conventional ferroelectric and piezoelectric applications but also like promising pyroelectric and solar cell's hole transport medium (HTM) Reagent-grade oxide and carbonate powders of SrCO3, SnO, Bi2O3, La2O3 and Nb2O5 (all from Sigma-Aldrich with purity > 99.99 %) were used as the starting materials to prepare desired Sr1-xSnxBi1.95La0.05Nb2O9 (SSBLN) ceramic compositions. The stoichiometric proportions of these powders were taken for dry milling up to 6h, 12h and 20h in a planetary ball mill Retsch PM200 using hard tungsten carbide balls of diameter 5mm (the ball to powder mass ratio was 8:1). The obtained powders were admixed with 4.0wt% polyvinylalcohol (PVA) binder solution and were pressed into circular disks of 10.8 mm diameter using uniaxial pressure of 120MPa. The obtained pellets were single step microwave sintered at 1000 o C for 2 h with a heating rate of 3 o C/min. and cooling rate of 2 o C/min to minimize density gradients. For this purpose, a microwave furnace operating at 2.45GHz frequency based on a pair of magnetrons consuming power 2.2KW was used. The crystal structure of each sample was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using CuKα radiation (D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany), in the 2θ range of 10-80 o (step increment-0.02 o with a time duration of 2sec/step). Nano particle size formation in ball-milled SSBLN compositions was investigated using competent transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For this purpose, typical (x=0.0 and 0.2) doped SSBLN composition pellets were crushed and converted powders were used for investigating crystallinity and particle size. TEM images were taken using the Carl Zeiss make LIBRA 200FE high resolution TEM with information limit of 0.13nm equipped with EDS andit operated at 200 kV. Optical energy band gap for each modified SSBLN composition was calculated using Tauc plots. These plots were derived using UV-Vis diffuse absorption spectra measured in an integral sphere mode using spectrophotometer SHIMADZU UV-Vis 3700. For reflecting incident radiations BaSO4 was used as a medium co-mixed with each modified SBN composition. Oxidation-reduction analysis was carried using cyclic voltammetry (CV) performed on Autolab Potentiostat Galvanostat PGSTAT302N (Metrohm, Netherlands). For this electrochemical characterization, CV measurements were recorded in a three-electrode set-up consisting of Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, platinum wire as the counter electrode and glassy carbon electrode (GCE) modified with individual SSBLN composition as the working electrode. The standard electrolyte used in reaction was 5 mM of Potassium Ferro/ Ferry cyanide in 0.1 M KCl. The CV scans were recorded from -0.4 V to 1V with the scan rate of 0.50mVs -1 . The vibrational characteristics of all present bonds in investigated SSBLN compositions were studied using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. These FTIR spectra were recorded on FTIR Spectrophotometer of Thermo Fisher Scientific make and model Nicolet iS5 in the range of 400 and 4500 cm -1 . The dielectric properties were measured by using high frequency LCR meter ZM2376 (NF corporation, Japan ) with an applied oscillation level voltage of 1V over the frequency range 20Hz-2MHz. Randomly chosen SSBLN composition thin pellets were used for investing carrier mobility in SSBLN compositions using Hall Effect based on van der Pauw (vdP) method. All SSBLN composition powders milled up to 20 hours are uniaxially pressed at 120MPa into circular discs and sintered using microwaves at 1000 o C for 2hrs. Perfect perovskite phase is observed in all SSBLN samples, Fig. All samples show weight loss in the range 0.01%-0.04%, that is significantly lower compared to earlier reported values in these Aurivillius materials due to incorporation of lanthanum onto bismuth sites. These samples have shown weight loss before adding lanthanum in the range 0.1% to 2%. In addition, rigorous hard milling of SBN has helped in avoiding calcination stage and preserve bismuth oxide as much as can be achieved The spectrums for all samples are identical in nature suggesting that a) the expected double occupancy of Sn 2+ at sites of Sr 2+ in the SSBLN system is successful and b) it preserves the parent Tin as dopant is observed to increase the dielectric constant (ε ′ ) of SSBLN compositions in a systematic manner for doping concentrations multiple of 5% Overall increase in ε ′ -values for all tin-doped samples compared to the undoped one is due to the presence of more polar covalent tin at the site of ionic-bonded strontium. This can also be seen in all dispersion curves of Fig. phase transitions recorded at 1MHz frequency, Fig. Fig. Fig. The space charge saturates at typical frequency known as relaxation frequency. The relaxation frequency shifts towards lower frequencies on increasing tin content (x) further confirming presence of low mass negative space charge present is these typical 10 and 20% tin-doped SSBLN compositions. This is also an indicative of lower eddy current losses in higher tin-doped SSBLN samples. The presence of broad relaxation peak in low tin-doped (≤ 5%) SSBLN samples impedance response is an indicative of strong multiple high frequency relaxations. Thus, low tin doping in SSBLN compositions can be extremely useful for high frequency broadband filter circuit applications. The p-orbital electrons of Sn 2+ in the SSBLN system facilitate the quick electron transfer at electrode-electrolyte interface. This improved C-V behaviour of GCE/SSBLN20 sample compared to undoped SSBLN is also an indicative of increased electrical conductivity of tin-doped samples besides having limited redox sources Due to opaque nature of the SBN ceramics, the diffuse absorption spectra is used to observe the change in the optical energy band gap of SSBLN ceramics in an integrating sphere mode of UVvis spectrophotometer, Fig. Reducing optical energy band gap values for investigated SSBLN system along with increasing Hall mobilities provided a strong indication for further utilizing current SSBLN composition for hole transport layer (HTL) as well as electron transport layer (ETL) in perovskite solar cells. The occupancy of tin (Sn