Silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) electro-optic (EO) modulators combine small footprint with low operating voltage and hence low power dissipation, thus lending themselves to on-chip integration of large-scale device arrays. Here we demonstrate an electrical packaging concept that enables high-density radio-frequency (RF) interfaces between on-chip SOH devices and external circuits. The concept combines high-resolution Al2O3 printed-circuit boards with technically simple metal wire bonds and is amenable to packaging of device arrays with small on-chip bond pad pitches. In a set of experiments, we characterize the performance of the underlying RF building blocks and we demonstrate the viability of the overall concept by generation of high-speed optical communication signals. Achieving line rates (symbols rates) of 128 Gbit/s (64 GBd) using quadrature-phase-shift-keying (QPSK) modulation and of 160 Gbit/s (40 GBd) using 16-state quadrature-amplitude-modulation (16QAM), we believe that our demonstration represents an important step in bringing SOH modulators from proofof-concept experiments to deployment in commercial environments. Efficient broadband electro-optic (EO) modulators are key components in microwave photonics and in optical communication systems. Over the last decade, the footprint of EO modulators has been radically reduced, moving from centimeter-long LiNbO3-devices to millimeter-or sub-millimeter components that exploit high-index-contrast waveguides on semiconductor substrates However, while reducing the on-chip footprint of EO modulators increases integration density as well as modulation speed, electrical packaging of the devices becomes increasingly difficult In this paper, we demonstrate an electrically packaged SOH EO modulator that exploits simple metal wirebonds in combination with a high-resolution ceramic PCB to establish broadband connections from standard coaxial connectors to sub-mm on-chip devices. Our approach allows to adapt the bond-pad pitch on the PCB to that of the PIC, thereby permitting connections through short parallel metal wire bonds that are amenable to broadband packaging of large-scale device arrays. In a set of experiments, we expand upon our earlier work This section introduces the concept of silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) modulators, reports on the fabrication and characterization of the high-frequency ceramic printed circuit board (PCB), and shows the assembly of the electrically packaged modulator. The concept of a strip-loaded SOH Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) The PCB traces are realized as 50 Ω coplanar ground-signal-ground (GSG) transmission lines (TL). To facilitate electrical board-to-chip connections with short wire bonds and to enable the integration of densely spaced modulator arrays, the spacing of the board-level RF traces must be matched to the pitch of the bond pads on the silicon chip, which is chosen to be 100 μm to save chip area while enabling reliable placement of metal wire bonds. At the same time, the board-level RF traces must allow for easy interfacing to discrete devices such as coaxial connectors or surface mount devices (SMD), which feature millimeter-size contact spacing. To this end, we use tapered sections of RF traces with impedance-matched transitions between RF traces of different dimensions. Fabrication of the underlying PCB requires structuring techniques that combine micrometer resolution with the ability to process boards with centimeter-scale overall dimensions. To this end, we have developed a direct-laser write (DLW) fabrication process which allows for flexible mask-less fabrication at low cost. The process starts from square 100 × 100 mm 2 Al2O3 ceramic substrates which are covered by a 3 μm thick electroplated Au layer. The substrates are coated with a positive-tone photoresist (AZ1500) and patterned with a Nd:YAG laser. After development of the exposed structures, the Au layer is wet-etched using a KI solution, and the resist mask is removed. The performance of the RF building blocks is characterized using dedicated test structures. Figure The transition between TL of different cross sections is realized by an impedance-matched linear taper. Figure To feed the signal from coaxial cables to the PCB, surface-mounted coaxial connectors are soldered to appropriate pads connected to the centimeter-scale transmission line. Measured Sparameters of a structure comprising two such connectors (surface-mounted type SMP-M) at the ends of a 7.8 mm long TL indicate good performance up to 20 GHz. However, the increase of the power reflections limits the performance in the 25...40 GHz range, see Fig. Figure To measure the optical transmission spectrum of the electrically packaged MZM, we use a tunable laser. The static extinction ratio of the modulator exceeds 30 dB. The fiber-to-fiber insertion loss is 11.6 dB. This includes overall fiber-chip coupling losses of 8.9 dB caused by the two grating couplers, as well as an on-chip device loss of 1.3 dB, caused by passive components, namely two MMI splitters (0.37 dB each), input/output access waveguides (0.2 dB in total), and mode converters at the strip-slot waveguide interface (0.4 dB in total). The remaining 1.4 dB are attributed to slot waveguide loss in the phase shifter sections, which leads to an estimated propagation loss of a = 2.3 dB/mm. The π-voltage Uπ of the MZM is measured by applying a low-frequency (< 1 kHz) electrical signal, and by recording the applied voltage and the transmitted optical power using an oscilloscope. The π-voltage Uπ corresponds to the voltage that needs to be applied to the center electrode of the MZM in the low-frequency limit to induce a relative phase shift of π between the two arms of the device. We find Uπ = 1.5 V, leading to a modulation efficiency of the 0.6 mm long MZM of UπL = 0.9 Vmm and a πvoltage-loss product aUπL = 2.1 dBV -the best value so far achieved in SOH modulators using an EO material with a high glass transition temperature Tg. Note that this π-voltage-loss product is significantly smaller than the best value achieved in high-speed depletion-type SiP modulators, which amounts to 12 dBV Note that the response of the Pockels-type EO material in the modulator is ultra-fast and would in principle allow for THz modulation bandwidths. In real SOH devices, however, the speed is limited by the capacitance of the slot waveguide that needs to be charged and discharged via the resistive doped silicon slabs Using a single MZM, intensity-modulated signals are generated in a first set of experiments. Four channels of a pulse pattern generator (PPG) are serialized in an electrical 4 × 1 multiplexer (MUX) to generate a pseudo random binary sequence (PRBS) with a length of 2 31 1. The output of the MUX delivers a voltage swing of 2 Vpp and is directly connected to the input of the module. Light is coupled to the device using grating couplers. After the modulator, the optical signal is amplified by an erbium-doped amplifier (EDFA). Out-of-band amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise is removed using an optical band-pass filter. The signal is detected using a photodiode connected to an equivalent-time sampling oscilloscope (Agilent 86100C), exploiting the repetitive nature of the test pattern for broadband electrical acquisition. Recorded eye diagrams at 20 Gbit/s and 40 Gbit/s are shown in Fig. In a second set of experiments, an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Keysight M8196A) replaces the PPG, and a real-time sampling oscilloscope (Keysight DSO-X 93204A) replaces the equivalent-time sampling oscilloscope of the previous experiment. In a first step, we generate intensity-modulated two-and multilevel signals, record the received data, and apply digital signal processing (DSP) for equalization and analysis of the received signal. The AWG generates a PRBS with a length of 2 15 1. The resulting pulses are shaped to have root-raised cosine spectrum. Figure The IM/DD data generation is complemented by the generation of quadrature-amplitudemodulated (QAM) signals, driving the electrically packaged SOH IQ modulator by a twochannel AWG and detecting the signal by a coherent receiver. Figure These results compare well with previously published signaling demonstrations using SiP modulators accessed by metal wire bonds, for which 16QAM symbol rates of 28 GBd and line rates of 112 Gbit/s were demonstrated for a single polarization. Relying on the published stateof-the art, we believe that our demonstrations of 64 GBd QPSK and of 40 GBd 16QAM correspond to the highest symbol rate and the highest line rate achieved so far with a wirebonded SiP modulators We demonstrate for the first time that electrical packaging of high-speed SOH modulators is possible without significantly degrading the performance of the devices. To this end, we developed a dedicated packaging concept that utilizes technically simple metal wire bonding for packaging of highly compact SOH devices. The concept relies on high-resolution ceramic PCB that allow to adapt the interposer bond-pad pitch to that of the PIC, thereby permitting connections through short parallel metal wire bonds that are amenable to broadband packaging of densely integrated device arrays. The modulators feature a π-voltage-length product of UπL = 0.9 Vmm and a π-voltage-loss product of aUπL = 2.1 dBV, thereby outperforming conventional depletion-type pn-modulators. In our experiments, we demonstrate generation of intensity modulated signals with line rates of up to 80 Gbit/s as well as of QPSK and 16QAM signals with symbol rates up to 64 GBd and lines rates up to 160 Gbit/s, respectively. In combination with recent progress regarding EO material stability 