This report shows the universal previtreous behavior of the pressure related apparent fragility, i.e. the steepness index     Glass transition constitutes the grand challenge of the solid state physics, chemical physics, geophysics and many branches of material engineering. However, despite more and more advanced experimental and theoretical insights, the long-awaited cognitive breakthrough still seems to be distant Notwithstanding, the problem of most basic and characteristic feature of the glass transition, namely the previtreous behavior of the primary relaxation time (or alternatively viscosity), remains puzzling, particularly for the pressure path where const T  and , and     is the normalized apparent, pressure dependent, activation volume. At the end of the 19 th century, Barus (2). In subsequent decades eq. ( . This plot enabled a common presentation of previtreous changes of the primary (structural) relaxation time and viscosity for different low molecular weight liquids and polymers. The fragility coefficient was defined as This report focuses on yet undiscussed issues of the universal previtreous ( behavior of the apparent pressure fragility and the resulted from this finding new equation for portraying the pressure evolution of the primary (structural) relaxation time or viscosity. This report presents results of high pressure studies, up to 2 2. P GPa, of the structural relaxation time in few glass formers: liquid crystalline (8*OCB, isooctyloxycyanobiphenyl) The long-range previtreous behaviour of viscosity or the primary (structural) relaxation time is the hallmark of the glass transition physics : their values are collected in Table Pressure dependences of the primary relaxation time for 8OCB and EPON 828, for two isotherms in each case. Experimental data are portrayed by eq. ( For the broad-pressure-range previtreous effects of the structural relaxation time the apparent fragility (steepness indexes) were calculated via where Results of such analysis are presented below, in Figures where the singular pressure   * P is easily determined from the conditions The universal previtreous behavior of the reciprocal of the pressure apparent fragility for supercooled 8*OCB and EPON 828, basing on experimental data from Figs. Tested isotherms recalls values are also given in these Figures. Results of the linear regression fit (eq. ( vs. P behavior (eq. 5) and domains of the validity of eq. ( vs. P can also serve as the modelfree tool for estimating the dynamic crossover location: it seems to emerge for the 'high temperature' isotherm for EPON 828 ( validity of a model equation, used in analysis carried out so far It is also notable that the critical type behavior of   P  (eq. ( ) and low-pressure (remote-from-Pg: ) domains. In the opinion of the author the latter can be associated with the mode-coupling theory (MCT) behavior This report presents the evidence for the presumably 'universal' behavior of the apparent fragility , offering also a simple and reliable estimation of the extrapolated 'spinodal' pressure  P as well as the 'discontinuity' of the glass transition for the pressure path: , for which the fair ability for portraying experimental data was shown in the broad range of pressures. When comparing fittings of experimental data via the new eq. ( For obtaining the discussed evidence important was the extreme range of teste pressures, reaching even 2.2 GPa. g P ; remote P  -remote from g P T : see eq. (5). g P ; remote P  -remote from g P ; (# ) MCT C * P P 