An approach to visualize the accessible reciprocal space accounting the goniometer angles limitation and the resolution element in the reciprocal space is presented. The shapes of the accessible reciprocal space region for coplanar and non-coplanar geometries are given employing the additional degree of freedom provided by detector arm. The examples of the resolution elements in different points of the reciprocal space are shown. The equations obtained permit to find these regions and to calculate the experimental geometry to obtain the diffraction from any accessible reflections, which makes a further extension of previously reported methods. The introduced algorithm has been testified by experimental measurements of reciprocal space maps in coplanar and non-coplanar geometries. The examples of the resolution elements in different points of the reciprocal space are calculated to illustrate the method proposed. The high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) experiments for thin film analysis involve quite complicated techniques for geometrical configuration of the experiment and calculations of expected resolution parameters. The planning of such measurements is one of the important stages of the X-ray experiment and data analysis. The properly done planning can reduce the measurement preparation time, as well as bring closer the success of the result. The visualization tool for the accessible reciprocal space area providing the schematic drawing of the sample's Bragg reflections simplifies the planning of X-ray diffraction experiment. Usually the accessible reciprocal space regions are drawn for the case of coplanar diffraction, when the incident, the outgoing wave vectors and the surface normal lie in the same plane, The additional in-plane degree of freedom provided by the detector arm is very beneficial for the analysis of thin films, X-ray diffraction methods are based on X-rays elastic scattering from the atoms of the investigated substance. The incident wave is characterized by the wave vector k in , and the scattered wave propagated in the detector direction is characterized by the wave vector k out . Due to an elastic nature of scattering process λ , where λ is a wavelength of the incident and scattered waves and the diffraction vector Q = k out -k in contains the information on the sample structure. There are three coordinate systems used for the analysis and for the interpretation of X-ray diffraction results: the laboratory coordinate system L x , L y , L z , the sample coordinate system S x , S y , S z and the crystal coordinate system where Θ i2 , Θ i1 , Θ o2 , Θ o1 are the rotation operators. The goniometer axes related to the sample positioning define the matrix M LS . A. Main formulas for the vertical diffractometer with the additional detector axis The X-ray diffractometer setup (Fig. • θ in is the angle between the line connecting sample and X-ray source and the horizontal plane of goniometer; • θ out is the angle between plane of the axis of inplane arm rotation and the horizontal plane of goniometer; in case of no in-plane arm rotation θ out is the angle between the line connecting sample and detector and and the horizontal plane of goniometer; • θ χ is the angle of the in-plane arm rotation. The incidence beam is defined by one rotation angle and for the exit beam two angles with the following order are assigned: where As a result, the explicit form for the following param-eters is obtained: The diffraction vector in the laboratory coordinate system is a function of three parameters. The definition range for the angular parameters θ in , θ out , θ χ may be limited up to -π . . . π range without loss of generality. In the case of goniometer without additional arm for the non-coplanar diffraction geometry (θ χ ≡ 0), the equations (4) take the following form: The inverse problem consists in the finding the positions θ in , θ out , θ χ for the goniometer axes at certain reciprocal space point for Bragg reflection H. where Hy k0 , Hz k0 . In the case of the goniometer with additional axis for non-coplanar diffraction geometry using the vector Q from the equation (4c), a common solution of the inverse problem contains a set of solutions due to presence of periodical functions, but only 4 of them fall into the definition range of angles θ in , θ out , θ χ : where n is an integer value. The accessible reciprocal space view is usually connected with a view of a set of available for investigated sample Bragg reflections. Here the accessible reciprocal space will be considered separately from a set of Bragg reflections and from the sample orientations in the laboratory system. The main goal of such separation is to reduce a number of parameters for reciprocal space representation and to take into account the physical limitations of the goniometer, which are caused by the instrument design. For the considered in this paper typical goniometer, the ranges of the accessible angles are shown in the Table I. In the case of goniometer without additional axis θ χ , all measurements will be done in a coplanar geometry. According to the equation (5c), the accessible reciprocal space is restricted by the plane L x L z . Figure The drawing of two parametric surfaces in the case of the vector Q(θ in , θ out ) is straightforward, however, in the case of goniometer with the additional axis θ χ becomes a quite complicated task because of the accessible reciprocal space is then described by three parametric function Q(θ in , θ out , θ χ ). In that case, the drawing of the accessible reciprocal space is reduced to the outer surface mapping Q(θ in , θ out , θ χ ). To plot this complex picture, the property of the conformal mappings of a simply connected regions is used, which transfer the boundaries of one region into the boundaries of the second region. The region (θ in , θ out , θ χ ) is quite easy represented, however, the regions of a single-valued correspondence (θ in , θ out , θ χ ) ←→ (Q x , Q y , Q z ) have to be found. The condition Q = 0 defines the part of the outer surface (Q x , Q y , Q z ) or the boundary of the regions of a single-valued correspondence, and at fixed θ χ this condition is satisfied when θ in + θ out = nπ. Figure For the proper analysis of the measured X-ray diffraction data, both the resolution function of the optical system and the contribution of a sample form and size into the intensity of the detected signal have to be taken into account. The accounting of the additional degree of freedom of the detector arm introduces the additional complications where angle θ φ is the angle of a small deviation of the line connecting sample and X-ray source in horizontal plane (see Fig. The function of the resolution element at the fixed reciprocal space point parameterized with the angles θ in , θ φ , θ out , θ χ , in the case if θ φ = 0 has the following form: where δθ in , δθ φ , δθ out , δθ χ are the angular parameters of the resolution of the goniometer optical system. Assuming the volume of the detected pixel to be small enough and the uniformity of the resolution element, and using the property of conformal mapping of boundaries for connected regions, we can plot the outer boundaries of the resolution element if each of 24 faces of fourdimensional cube of angular space δθ in , δθ φ , δθ out , δθ χ is projected into reciprocal space. The shape and the volume of the resolution element essentially depends on the position in reciprocal space. The typical shapes of the resolution element in different point of reciprocal space are shown on Fig. In order to define the range of the angular parameters and to set up the measurement geometry, a set of expected reflections and the accessible reciprocal space have to be combined in a single view. This view helps to select a proper region of measurements in reciprocal space. On the basis of the equations In order to demonstrate the introduced above scheme of the experiment planning, the reciprocal space mappings have been carried out for the sample consisting of Ge layer on Si substrate and for the following reflections: (113) in a coplanar geometry with large incidence angle, (113) in a coplanar geometry with small incidence angle and (113) in a non-coplanar geometry. The sample position in space was fixed during all measurements. The 2θ/ω maps were received for the reflections (113) and (113), and 2θ/θ χ map was measured for the reflection (113). The results of these measurements are presented in Fig. In the most common sense, the expressions for noncoplanar case of X-ray diffraction are more complicated due to non-zero Y component of the diffraction vector. However, a non-coplanar measurement geometry delivers more advantageous information on the sample, which is not accessible in coplanar geometry. For example, the measurements of reciprocal space maps for the reflections (113) and (113) require grazing angles (∼ 2.8 • ) for either incidence or exit beam, which makes the analysis quite difficult. In opposite, the (113) reciprocal space mapping is performed at the incidence and the exit angles, which are far from the grazing angles. The X component of the vector Q is close to zero in the case of (113) reciprocal space map. All the measurements are performed at fixed sample, which is convenient for experimentalist and makes possible to introduce three offsets for the sample alignment correction applied to all measurements. The presented approach provides the algorithms for convenient visualization of the accessible reciprocal space in the case when the vertical goniometer with a detector arm possesses two degrees of freedom. The proposed analytical expressions for the angular coordinates in the considered parametrization for the position of the reciprocal lattice vector are used for computer tool assisting the X-ray diffraction experiments. The calculation of the resolution element in the reciprocal space is a part of the presented method and the examples of the resolution elements in different points of the reciprocal space are demonstrated. The advantages of a non-coplanar diffraction with two degrees of freedom provided by detector arm are shortly discussed. θin 53.3 • θout 2.82 • θχ 0 • θin 2.82 • θout 53.3 • θχ 0 • θin 31.33 • θout 21.18 • θχ 23.65 •