Axion insulators are magnetic topological insulators in which the non-trivial Z2 index is protected by inversion symmetry instead of time-reversal symmetry. The naturally gapped surfaces of axion insulators give rise to a half-quantized surface anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC), but the sign of the surface AHC cannot be determined from topological arguments. In this paper, we consider topological phenomena at the surface of an axion insulator. To be explicit, we construct a minimal tight-binding model on the pyrochlore lattice and investigate the all-in-all-out (AIAO) and ferromagnetic (FM) spin configurations. We also implement a recently proposed approach for calculating the surface AHC directly, which allows us to explore how the interplay between surface termination and magnetic ordering determines the sign of the half-quantized surface AHC. In the case of AIAO ordering, we show that it is possible to construct a topological state with no protected metallic states on boundaries of any dimension (surfaces, hinges, or corners), although chiral hinge modes do occur for many surface configurations. In the FM case, rotation of the magnetization by an external field offers promising means of control of chiral hinge modes, which can also appear on surface steps or where bulk domain walls emerge at the surface. Topological insulators are classified according to the rule that two states belong to the same class if one can be gradually converted into the other without gap closure. Such a topological classification represents a paradigm shift in the way we understand phases of matter. One of the most widely recognized aspects of the theory of topological states is the "bulk-boundary correspondence," which refers to the notion that the boundary between two insulating states with different topological indices, or between a nontrivial topological state and the vacuum, must display metallic states at the boundary. These are robust in the sense that they cannot be removed by any modification at the boundary or in the bulk, as long as the bulk topological state remains unchanged. This is the case for the chiral states on the surface of a Chern insulator, and for the helical Dirac states on all surfaces of a strong topological insulator (TI) when time-reversal (T ) symmetry is preserved. What is not so widely appreciated is that the bulkboundary correspondence is not always enforced. In particular, if the bulk topological classification relies on the presence of some symmetries, then the bulk-boundary correspondence typically comes into play only if the surface also respects the same symmetries. For example, the Z 2 topology of a strong TI is protected by T ; if one breaks T symmetry at the surface, as for example by proximity to a ferromagnetic coating material, the surface states are no longer guaranteed to be present. In some cases, however, topological behavior can still be left behind at the boundary. In the case of a strong TI, an insulating surface resulting from local breaking of T is guaranteed to exhibit a half-quantized anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) of e 2 /2h, 1 as was recently verified experimentally. In this paper we explore various topological phenomena at the surface of an axion insulator, many of which cannot be obtained from a strong TI with broken T on its surface. In doing so we hope to raise the awareness of the community regarding this promising class of materials, in the expectation that they may soon be realized and their unique surface properties explored. We investigate the conditions under which the surface magnetic point group forces the surface AHC to vanish, and when it does not, what factors decide the sign of the surface AHC. We find that the answers depend on the bulk and surface symmetry, the specific surface termination, and the magnetic configuration of the surface, yielding a plethora of possibilities to explore and manipulate. Specifically, we carry out these investigations in the context of a model for the R 2 Ir 2 O 7 pyrochlore iridates (R is typically a rare earth). Many members of this class exhibit a low-temperature insulating phase with AIAO antiferromagnetic order, although some also display FM or other magnetic orderings. Nevertheless, motivated by the interest in this material system, we have adopted a minimal tight-binding model of the magnetic sites in a pyrochlore iridate, but with weakened magnetic exchange splitting, as a platform for investigating hypothetical axion-insulator materials. Our model consists of spinors on the Ir sites; these form a simple pyrochlore lattice, and therefore may also be relevant to some spinels. The Hamiltonian includes onsite Zeeman splitting terms representing the effects of the magnetic order, as well as spin-dependent and independent nearest-neighbor hoppings. The phase diagram of our model exhibits a trivial insulator phase for large Zeeman splitting, and then passes through a Weyl semimetal phase before entering an axion-insulator phase as the Zeeman splitting is reduced. We explore the behavior of the bulk and surface properties of our model primarily in this axion-insulator region of the phase diagram, focusing mainly on the case of AIAO magnetic order where the symmetry is highest, but considering FM and other orderings as well. In particular, we make use of a recently introduced numerical approach, The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we establish the theoretical ideas that will be invoked in this work. Namely, the connection between the axion coupling and the surface AHC is discussed in Sec. II A, while the role of symmetries is discussed in Sec. II B. In Sec. II C we derive an expression for the "partial Chern number," which will be used later to calculate the surface AHC. In Sec. III we motivate and introduce our tight-binding model for an axion insulator on the pyrochlore lattice. Section IV, which presents the results, is divided into two subsections. In the first we discuss the case of the AIAO spin configuration in detail, while in the second we briefly consider the FM configuration. There are subsections devoted to the bulk energy bands, the phase diagram, the surface states, the surface AHC and the Wannier bands. In Sec. V we discuss various phenomena on the surfaces of axion insulators. We first consider an FM axion insulator and explore what happens as we rotate the magnetization about an axis perpendicular or parallel to the surface, then investigate the consequences of the atomic layer sensitivity of the surface AHC in the AIAO configuration, and end with a consideration of crystallite geometries in the FM configuration. Section VI contains a brief summary and conclusions. One of the unique and exciting aspects of topological phases of matter is that they can give rise to quantized physical quantities. For example, the formal polarization P of a 1D insulator is either 0 or e/2 when the system has inversion symmetry, while the isotropic magnetoelectric coupling α iso is 0 or e 2 /2h in 3D systems with either time-reversal or inversion symmetry. Perhaps surprisingly, these bulk quantities determine (up to a quantum) certain surface responses of these material systems. In the following we explore how the interplay between topological quantities and symmetries give rise to quantized surface responses, in the context of axion insulators. There is a nice analogy between the Berry phase φ in 1D and the axion coupling θ in 3D, that reveals their deep connection. Starting from the integral expression for the first Chern number in 2D and through a dimensional reduction procedure, 1 one can derive the well known integral expression for the Berry phase where A = A nm (k) is the 1D version of the Berry connection A nm j (k) = u nk |i∂ kj |u mk . A physical interpretation for Eq. (1) came from King-Smith and Vanderbilt, Note that φ is not quantized and it is only well defined modulo 2π, as it is evident from a gauge transformation of the cell-periodic Bloch functions |u nk → e -iβ(k) |u nk . The 2π ambiguity explains why the angle variable φ is used and why bulk polarization is well defined modulo e, the quantum of charge. Finally, King-Smith and Vanderbilt showed that for a finite 1D insulator there will be a charge accumulation on the surface given by We can follow the same recipe starting from the second Chern number. This is defined in four dimensions such that the dimensional reduction procedure returns a 3D expression, the Chern-Simons axion coupling As in the 1D case, a gauge transformation can cause θ → θ + 2πn, n ∈ Z, showing that it is only well defined modulo 2π. Now the physical significance of this quantity is that it describes an isotropic contribution to the magnetoelectric tensor That is, an electric field will induce a parallel magnetization with a constant of proportionality that is given by which shows that α iso is only well defined modulo e 2 /h, the quantum of conductance. Continuing with our analogy, the surfaces of a 3D insulator will exhibit a surface AHC given by 17 as long as the surface is insulating. In fact for a metallic surface, there is another contribution from the metallic states at the Fermi energy, so that the total is 18 The extra φ term is the Berry phase taken along the surface Fermi loop. The fact that the surface AHC cannot be determined just from bulk considerations, i.e., from the knowledge of the axion coupling, can be understood as follows. Consider a block of a material with some initial α iso which we wrap with a 2D quantum anomalous Hall insulator with Chern index C = 1. As long as we do this without closing the surface gap, we are able to increase σ surf AHC by e 2 /h without altering the bulk, and therefore without altering the axion coupling θ. The presence of I or T symmetry can restrict the Berry phase or the axion coupling in a profound way. For example, the Berry phase of a 1D insulator can only take the values φ = 0 or π when I is a good symmetry, because φ is odd under I and only these two values respect this restriction. On the other hand, φ is even under T , so the presence of T enforces no restriction on φ. In contrast, either I or T will reverse the sign of θ, and since θ is also only well-defined modulo 2π, the presence of either operator will quantize θ to be 0 (trivial) or π (topological). The set of two possible value of θ corresponds to a topological "axion Z 2 " classification. Note that irrespective of the bulk topological state, the presence of T in the surface region requires σ surf AHC to vanish there, although possibly by forcing the surface to be metallic. In the usual usage, a "strong TI" is one for which a nontrivial Z 2 index is protected by T . In that case, σ surf AHC = 0 and θ = π, so Eq. ( More generally, we can observe that θ is quantized to be 0 or π by the presence of any operation in the magnetic point group that is either (i) a proper rotation (possibly the identity) composed with time reversal, or (ii) an improper rotation not composed with time reversal. In the remainder of the present work we consider only the case that I itself is a symmetry, so that the system is an axion insulator in the widely accepted sense. Nevertheless, other symmetries may be present as well, and may play an important role in determining certain features of the bulk and surface band structure and the surface AHC, as will be illustrated in the context of our tight-binding model system below. In particular, we shall be concerned with the symmetries present at a surface facet with unit normal n. The relevant surface magnetic point group is composed only of operations that map n onto itself, and whose corresponding space-group operations do not involve any fractional translation along n. That is, screw and glide-mirror operations with fractional translations normal to the surface are excluded. The surface AHC transforms like the component of a magnetic field or magnetization normal to the surface, and therefore it must vanish if the surface magnetic point group contains: (i) any mirror operation M v (not T -reversed and with mirror plane normal to the surface); or (ii) any T -reversed proper rotation about n (i.e., C 2 , C 3 , C 4 , or C 6 ). For the calculation of the surface anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC), we implement a recently proposed approach from which the local CS contribution to the AHC can be obtained via σ CS (r) = (e 2 /h)C(r). Here P and Q are the projection operators onto the occupied and unoccupied subspaces, respectively. In contrast with the usual reciprocal-space integral expression, the real space one can be used to study bounded systems such as finite crystallines or surface slabs. This is exactly what we need to calculate the surface AHC and determine its sign. We apply this theory in the context of a surface slab geometry. The unit cell is small in the in-plane direction, with primitive lattice vectors a 1 and a 2 and cell area A = |a 1 × a 2 |, but it extends through the entire thickness of the slab in the vertical z direction, including top and bottom surfaces. The Hamiltonian eigenstates in the valence (v) and conduction (c) bands are ψ vk (r) and ψ ck (r), respectively, with k = (k x , k y ). The valence and conduction projectors are then where N k is the number of k-points in the 2D Brillouin zone mesh. Plugging these expressions into Eq. ( where and similarly for Y vck . The second form in Eq. ( thereby taming the problematic position operator in the Bloch-state matrix element. Averaging Eq. ( such that the total slab Chern number is In this equation, is the matrix element in the Bloch representation of the projector onto the slice through the unit cell at coordinate z. Because we work here in the tight-binding approximation, the sum over conduction states in Eq. ( (and similarly for v y ), again making use of Eq. (11). Then the contribution of layer l to the Chern number of the slab follows the form of Eq. ( Now is the Bloch representation of the projection onto layer l, where the sum is over orbitals j belonging to that layer. All of the ingredients needed to compute Eq. ( As explained in Ref. [14], the object F vv k = (XY † ) vv k is the covariant metric-curvature tensor. Because ρ k (l) is a Hermitian matrix, the imaginary part operation in Eq. ( or, when converted to a Brillouin zone integral, While this form is not as convenient for computational purposes as Eq. ( In summary, we use Eq. ( We can arrive at a simple tight-binding description of the pyrochlore iridates by considering the electronic states close to the Fermi energy. The oxygen octahedra surround the Ir 4+ ions, creating a strong cubic crystal field that splits the Ir 5d orbitals into t 2g and e g multiplets. The effective angular momentum of the t 2g levels is L eff = 1, so when the onsite SOC is "turned on," it splits the t 2g multiplet into an effective pseudospin J eff = 1/2 doublet and a corresponding J eff = 3/2 quadruplet, In the following we consider only nearest-neighbor interactions, with describing the spin-independent hoppings. For the spindependent interactions, we begin by imposing timereversal symmetry, in which case the spin-orbit induced hopping between nearest neighbors takes the form Here σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are the Pauli spin matrices, dij is the unit vector connecting site i to site j, and bij is the unit vector from the center of a tetrahedron to the midpoint of the bond ij (see Fig. where ni , i = {1, 2, 3, 4} are the vectors on each site describing the spin configuration. In the following, we first consider in detail the case of AIAO spin ordering, and then briefly describe how the results change when considering the FM ordering as a function of orientation of the magnetization. The calculation of bulk energy bands, surface states and Wannier bands was done using the built-in tools provided by the open-source code package PythTB. As we have seen in section III B, the Hamiltonian consists of three terms H(t, λ, ∆) = H t + H λ + H ∆ . To get a better picture of the nature of the interactions, we turn our attention to the energy bands. First, we turn on only the spin-independent hoppings, H = H(t, 0, 0), obtaining the results shown in Fig. where A k = cos 2k x cos 2k y + cos 2k y cos 2k z + cos 2k z cos 2k x . (23) (The extra degeneracy of the first two bands is a wellknown artifact of this minimal model.) Since we are at half filling, this Hamiltonian describes a metal with a quadratic band touching at Γ. Next we turn on the T -invariant intersite spin-orbit coupling term, so that now H = H(t, λ, 0). Even though the Hamiltonian contains spin-dependent interactions, the combination of T and I symmetries forces the bands to remain doubly degenerate everywhere. However, the other degeneracies are lifted except at some high-symmetry points, as shown in Fig. Finally, we break T by turning on ∆. For ∆ small enough that the gap does not close, as in Fig. Even though the expression for θ in Eq. ( Using this rule, we iterate over the parameters of our model to acquire the phase diagram shown in Fig. The boundaries in Fig. Our picture, then, is as follows. Choose any path that starts from the axion phase, enters the Weyl semimetal phase, and ends in the trivial phase in Fig. We create slabs that are in the axion-insulator phase and then use Eq. ( A slab along the (111) direction consists of alternating kagome and triangular atomic layers, so the 2D Brillouin zone is hexagonal. Fig. Along (001) the slab consists of tetragonal layers rotated 90 • with respect to each other, so the 2D Brillouin zone is tetragonal. As before, we choose the top and bottom layers to have the same orientation, so that the slab as a whole has inversion symmetry. In contrast with the (111) case, the surface states do not become gapped in the axion phase, as shown in Fig. We apply Eq. ( where Cl,l+1 is the coarse-grained average of two neighboring layers: Cl,l+1 = [C(l) + C(l + 1)]/2 with the exception C0,1 = C(1)/2. In this way each layer is counted once except for the layer at depth n, which is counted with weight 1/2. This can be regarded as an application of the sliding window averaging method as described, e.g., in Appendix C of Ref. 39. Since these pairwise layer averages decay to zero in the bulk, the sum converges rapidly with depth n. In both slabs we see that each time we add or remove a layer, the sign of σ AHC flips. For the (001) slab, we can understand this as follows. Adding a layer is equivalent to a 90 • rotation around [001] and a half-lattice-constant translation along [001] followed by T , as is evident from Fig. An analysis based on Wannier functions (WFs) offers an alternative description of the ground state of a periodic crystal. Namely, one carries out a unitary transformation from the Bloch functions |ψ nk = e ik•r |u nk to a set of localized WFs labeled by a cell index R and a band-like index n, such that WFs at different R are translational images of m U mn (k)|ψ mk before applying Eq. ( In one dimension, however, there is a unique gauge that minimizes the spread functional of the WFs. where we have chosen ẑ as the Wannierization direction. One can plot the Wannier charge centers (WCC) in the home unit cell and examine how the WCCs "flow", in the sense of connectedness along the Wannierization direction. This kind of analysis of the flow of the hybrid WCCs, otherwise known as Wilson loop eigenvalues, has been used extensively to study the topological properties of crystals. One may wonder, is the same is true of an axion insulator? Both axion insulators and strong TIs have the same non-trivial axion index, but axion insulators have broken T symmetry. It turns out that the answer is no: a non-trivial axion index does not require flow. To demonstrate this, in Fig. It has been theoretically argued In the previous sections we have constructed a model for an axion insulator and introduced a computational tool that enables us to calculate the surface AHC. In a sense, then, we have in hand a kind of virtual laboratory that we can use to explore the various phenomena that can occur on the surface of an axion insulator. One interesting aspect of the FM configuration is that we can examine the behavior of σ AHC as we rotate the magnetization. For example, we know that the surface AHC wants to align with the magnetization, so when we rotate M from [ 111 ] to [111] we should see a sign flip of σ AHC . Of course as M is rotated, σ AHC has to vanish for some critical angle θ c , and one would naively expect θ c = π/2. This is not the generic case, however; nothing forces σ AHC to vanish for θ = π/2, as can be seen for example in Fig. To understand Fig. The surface AHC response of an axion insulator in the AIAO spin configuration is fascinating because it is at the same time robust, in the sense that it is half-quantized, and sensitive, since adding or removing a layer flips the sign of the surface AHC. Fig. The same chiral channel could also be obtained at the intersection of the surface with an antiferromagnetic domain wall (AFM DW), as was first discussed by Mong et al.. Another interesting scenario comes into play when we think of macroscopic crystallites. At the edges (or "hinges") where facets meet, the facets can have either the same or opposite signs of surface AHC. This is illustrated for the case of a cubic crystallite in Figs. As we have seen above, the half-quantized surface AHC of an axion insulator may lead to chiral channels flowing along boundaries on its surface. We start with an octahedral crystallite in the FM axion-insulator phase and imagine changing the direction of the magnetization. It is tempting to assume that as long as M is not parallel to a facet, the perpendicular component of M will open the surface state gap, with the sign of the half-quantized surface AHC determined by the outward-normal component of M. By the same token, one may guess that if M is parallel to a facet, σ AHC = 0 and the facet will be metallic. While our results are broadly consistent with this picture, we have found that σ AHC does not necessarily pass through zero exactly at the expected 90 • critical angle between M and the surface normal, a fact that we shall return to shortly. For now, however, we adopt the broad picture in which the direction of M determines the sign of the surface AHC on each facet in the expected way. In what follows, we argue that the surface of an axion insulator exhibits multiple higher-order topological phases, and the surface phase diagram is described by a polyhedron embedded in the magnetization sphere, which serves as the parameter space. For example, the surface phase diagram of an octahedral crystallite in real space is described by a cuboctahedron in M space, as shown in Figs. This shows that each face of the cuboctahedron corresponds to a different topological phase of the crystallite, characterized by a particular chiral loop configuration flowing on the edges of the crystallite. The edges of the cuboctahedron then correspond to boundaries between two topological phases. Realization of such a device would enable control of conducting channels using magnetic fields. For example, one can imagine attaching wires to the top, bottom, left, and right corners of the octahedron in Fig. We now return to a point mentioned earlier and recall that the picture presented above needs a slight modifica-tion. That is, when tilting the magnetic field orientation, the closure of the surface gap may occur when the magnetic field is near, but not at, the condition of being parallel to the facet, unless this is enforced by some symmetry. An example was shown in Fig. In this work, we have constructed a minimal tightbinding model of an axion insulator and explored its behavior using a newly developed computational tool that allows for a direct calculations of the surface AHC. This provides us with a virtual laboratory that enables us to answer questions regarding the sign of the surface AHC that could not previously be addressed. We have found that the sign of the surface AHC is extremely sensitive to the surface magnetic configuration, and have shown how the surface AHC is forced to vanish when certain surface symmetries are present. Our observations distinguish intrinsic axion insulators from magnetically doped strong TIs, which have drawn much attention in recent years. While the former remain relatively unexplored, they have the advantage of providing exciting opportunites for the control of macroscopic behavior by the manipulation of surface structural and magnetic configurations. In our pyrochlore model, for example, the pattern of signs of the surface AHC on the crystal facets can be manipulated by a single-atomiclayer surface modification in the AIAO case, or by rotation of a weak external magnetic field in the FM case. In this way, it may be possible to controllably switch between different configurations of chiral edge and step channels on the surface, or to eliminate such channels altogether in order to achieve the topological magnetoelectric effect. Such a state is an extreme limit of a higher-order TI in which no protected boundary modes are present. We nevertheless emphasize that our tight-binding model, though physically motivated, does not describe real insulating pyrochlore iridates with AIAO magnetic order, which instead are believed to lie in the trivial insulator portion of our phase diagram in Fig. 