We address the inhibition of tunnelling in polariton condensates confined in a potential landscape created by a honeycomb array of microcavity pillars in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting in the external magnetic field. The coupling rate between the microcavity pillars can be strongly impacted even by weak out-of-phase temporal modulations of the depths of the corresponding potential wells. When such a modulation is implemented in truncated honeycomb arrays that realize a polariton topological insulator, which supports unidirectional edge states in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting, it allows controlling the velocity of the states. The origin of the phenomenon is the dynamical modulation with a proper frequency, which notably changes the dispersion of the system and the group velocity of edge states. We show that such a control is possible for modulation frequencies close to resonances for inhibition of tunnelling in a two-well configuration. Edge states considerably slow down, and even stop completely, when the modulation frequency approaches a resonant value, while above such frequency splitting of the edge states into wavepackets moving with different velocities occurs. Topological insulators are a topic of highest interest currently. One of their most representative features, which distinguishes them from conventional insulators, is the existence of unidirectional in-gap edge states that emerge when the topological insulator is placed in contact with a material of distinct topology The uncommon dispersion of the edge states, whose unidirectional motion becomes apparent when wavepackets with localized envelope are used for edge state excitation, is determined by the physical factors leading to opening of the topological gap and, most importantly, by the internal structure (symmetry) of the insulator. Thus, photonic Floquet Here we expose one such mechanism that keeps the internal structure of the topological insulator unchanged and that is based on shallow periodic temporal modulations of the depths of the potential wells in the honeycomb array. It relies on the phenomenon of inhibition of tunnelling that was introduced in quantum mechanics and that leads to a considerable suppression of tunnelling for certain modulation frequencies in time-modulated potentials We consider a polariton topological insulator built as a honeycomb array of microcavity pillars that can be readily fabricated experimentally and that has been already used for demonstration of nontopological polaritonic edge states The evolution of a spinor wavefunction T ( , ) y y describing a polariton condensate in a time-modulated and spatially-truncated honeycomb array of microcavity pillars is governed by the system of the dimensionless coupled Schrödinger equations We adopt a circular polarization basis, where the relation between the wavefunctions of the spinpositive and spin-negative components and wavefunctions of conventional TE (subscript y ) and TM (subscript x ) polarizations reads as with the width d and depth p , the separation between neighbouring potential wells in the resulting array  is given by a . Each potential well in  oscillates in time out-of-phase with its three nearest neighbours, which is a crucial ingredient for tunnelling inhibition. Here we assume that the array is truncated along the x -axis and that it is periodic along the y -axis, so that two zigzag edges appear for - profile, as depicted in Fig . In Eq. (1) all spatial coordinates are normalized to the characteristic length L , all energy parameters (including potential depth and Zeeman splitting) are nor- malized to the characteristic energy , where is the effective polariton mass, while time is normalized to was used, which gives 0 0.7 meV   . Topological edge states appear due to simultaneous action of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting. These two effects, acting together, break the time-reversal invariance in the Eq. ( and presented in Fig. T » . If an out-of-phase temporal modulation of the potential wells is imposed, the evolution of the t -periodic system is governed by quasi-energies, rather than by usual energy  as in the static system. The solutions in this case can be found in the form e ) ( )  , where  is the quasi-energy defined modulo w , and is the time-periodic function whose period is defined by the period of the temporal modulation. As we found numerically, in modulated two-pillar system quasi-energies  of localized modes practically (but not exactly) coincide at a set of resonance frequencies w that depend on the system parameters, such as depths of potential wells, separation between them, and spin-orbit coupling strength. At these frequencies the modes of the system do not experience dephasing [out of resonance, blue dot in Fig. [primary resonance, red dot in Fig. The quantity 1 ccharacterizes the width of the wavepacket. In Figs. , respectively. There is a clear correlation between the width and the displacement. For example, the minimal width is achieved close to the resonance frequencies, where displacement is also minimal. Figure / k ¶ ¶  for topological branches determining the velocity and effective dispersion of the corresponding topological edge states decrease too, hence the reduced displacement and dispersion close to resonant frequencies. Figure . The amplitude of one of these wavepackets gradually decreases and for high frequencies one again observes considerable shifts in the negative direction of the y -axis ( 0.84) w = . Similar dynamics was observed for other transverse momenta k and not only around princi- pal, but also around secondary resonances in w . Figure 