Metamaterial-based absorbers have been extensively investigated in the terahertz (THz) range with ever increasing performances. In this paper, we propose an all-dielectric THz absorber based on doped silicon. The unit cell consists of a silicon cross resonator with an internal cross-shaped air cavity. Numerical results suggest that the proposed absorber can operate from THz to mid-infrared, having an average power absorption of ∼95% between 0.6 and 10 THz. Experimental results using THz time-domain spectroscopy show a good agreement with simulations. The underlying mechanisms for broadband absorptions are attributed to the combined effects of multiple cavities modes formed by silicon resonators and bulk absorption in the substrate, as confirmed by simulated field patterns. This ultra-wideband absorption is polarization insensitive and can operate across a wide range of the incident angle. The proposed absorber can be readily integrated into silicon-based platforms and is expected to be used in sensing, imaging, energy harvesting and wireless communications systems. Terahertz (THz) absorbers with broadband operations are essential components for various applications such as sensing, imaging, energy harvesting and wireless communications. Although some materials in nature have shown reasonably good absorptions within the THz regime, it is still in great demand of ultra-wideband absorbers with flat and high power absorptance. Metamaterial-based perfect absorbers (MPAs) have been extensively studied since it was first proposed in the microwave range by Landy et al The unit cell of conventional MPAs usually consists of a metallic resonator, a dielectric spacer and a ground layer. At its resonant frequency, near-unity power absorptance can be achieved as both the power transmittance and reflectance are minimised. However, MPAs with metallic resonators normally exhibit narrow bandwidths because of their resonating nature. For broadband operation, either complicated unit cells shapes, or composite and multilayer structures are required, limiting the applications for the increased fabrication and design complexities. To tackle this problem, doped silicon substrates have been used to create broadband MPAs. Different unit cells patterns, including circular holes Inspired by these previous studies, in this paper, we propose an ultra-wideband absorber based on a standard 400 μm thick doped silicon substrate and investigate its electromagnetic responses in the THz and mid-infrared spectra. The unit cell consists of a silicon cross structure with an internal cross-shaped air cavity, creating multiple air-cavity modes to reduce the reflection over a large bandwidth. Numerical results suggest an average power absorptance of ∼95% from 0.6 to 10 THz, and a consistent performance across a wide range of the incident angle for both TE and TM polarisations can be obtained. Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) measurements from 0.2 to 2.6 THz show a good agreement with simulated results. A 400 μm thick doped silicon substrate with a resistivity of 0.02 Ω•cm is used to fabricate the absorber. The complex dielectric constant of silicon can be described by Drude model as where ∞ = 11.68 is the permittivity of silicon at high frequencies, ω p = 2π×7.88 THz is the plasma frequency, and γ = 2π × 1.78 THz is the collision frequency As shown in Figure In order to investigate the origins of these absorption peaks, instantaneous electric fields and average magnetic fields at the resonant frequencies are shown in Figure The proposed design was fabricated using a 4-inch 400 μm thick silicon wafer. First, a 5 μm thick AZ9260 photoresist layer was spin-coated on the primer prepared wafer surface. Then, the wafer was exposed by ultraviolet (UV) light through the designed photomask. After the development process in the developer AZ400K, the exposed areas of the photoresist layer were striped, followed by a standard deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) process to etch silicon through the photoresist-free windows. Once the DRIE process is finished, the wafer was socked into acetone solution for at least 30 minutes to strip organic outgrowths and the residual photoresist. Finally, the 75 μm deep silicon trenches were formed on the substrate. The overall size of the fabricated sample chip was 19.95 × 19.95 mm 2 with 95×95 (9025) unit cells. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the sample is shown in Figure Both transmission and reflection measurements were performed at normal incidence (TEpolarisation) using a Zomega Z-3 THz time-domain spectrometer with a spectral coverage from 0.2 to 2.6 THz. Measured results agree well with simulated values, having the designed resonant frequencies clearly identified. There is a slight redshift at the first resonance of 0.75 THz, and a reduced power absorptance near 1 THz. The discrepancies are mainly due to fabrication errors of the sample. Higher absorptions can be achieved by employing additional capping layers As a four-fold symmetric structure, the proposed absorber is polarisation insensitive at normal incidence under both TE-and TM-polarisazitons. At oblique incidence, this structure is dependent on the polrisation as well as the incident angle due to the power imbalance within the cavity structures. Figure In conclusion, we have designed, fabricated and experimentally demonstrated an ultra-wideband absorber within the THz and mid-infrared spectra. The absorber was fabricated based on a standard 400 μm thick doped silicon substrate. Each unit cell contains a 75 μm thick silicon cross structure with an inner cross-shaped air cavity. The ultra-wideband absorption was achieved due to the combined effects of multiple cavity modes and bulk absorption of the silicon substrate. At low frequencies, different cavity modes were formed within this structure, significantly increasing the absorption when compared to unpatterned silicon substrate of the same thickness. At high frequencies, more energy was absorber by the silicon substrate itself. The average power absorptance was simulated to be ∼95% from 0.6 to 10 THz and agrees well with the THz-TDS measurements between 0.2 and 2.6 THz. This absorber is polarisation insensitive, and can sustain a high power absorptance for incident angles up to 50 • under both polarisations. More importantly, it can be readily integrated into other silicon-based platforms, and can be used in sensing, imaging, wireless communications, thermal emitting and energy harvesting systems.