1 Abstract-A low-cost chipless RFID sensor tag to determine the dielectric properties of materials is presented. The sensor is based on a depolarizing dipole resonator loaded with printed capacitors whose capacitance depends on the permittivity of the material located on contact with the tag. The permittivity is obtained from the shift of the resonance frequency. The resonator is tested both individually as well as placed on a periodic arrangement so as to form a frequency selective structure (FSS) to increase the crosspolar radar cross section, thus facilitating the tag detection. The proposed structure and measurement procedure is particularly suitable for the characterization of civil materials as a nondestructive testing (NDT). Index Terms-Chipless RFID, Frequency Selective Surfaces (FSS), non-destructive testing (NDT), concrete, permittivity sensor. hipless radio identification (RFID) tags are passive transponders that do not uses a microchip. Chipless RFID technology has emerged during last years in the literature. The main research efforts have been oriented to increase the number of bits that the electromagnetic structure can encode The tag consists of a Frequency-Selective-Surface (FSS). The unit cell element is a bent dipole over a ground plane loaded with capacitors whose capacitance depends on the relative permittivity of the material that is on contact with the tag. Therefore, its resonance frequency depends on the electrical characteristics of this material. The absence of a battery in the proposed tag makes it cheaper than the active ones and suitable for harsh environments. The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the system and the sensing principle. Section III presents the simulations of the tag. Some preliminary experimental results are presented in Section IV. Section V presents a method to calibrate the tag and the experimental results. A low-cost reader based on Software Defined Radio (SDR) is presented in Section VI. Finally, Section VI draws the conclusions. A chipless frequency-coded tag is based on one or several resonators that produces a change in the frequency response of the Radar Cross Section (RCS). Then, the detection is based on the measurement of the resonance frequency. However, the reflections at the environment (especially large objects near the tag) are often noticeably higher than the power reflected at the tag when conventional (non-depolarizing) resonators are used. This makes tags difficult to be detected in real environments, especially when attached to large elements, such as civil structures. To this end, this work uses of depolarizing tags A representation of the measurement system is shown in Fig. In order to maximize the cross-polar component, the induced current in the lateral arms must be comparable to the current in the center of the dipole that contributes mainly to the co-polar component of the radar cross section. The current at the ends of the unit cell resonator must be zero imposed by the open circuit condition. The capacitor presents a low impedance at the resonance frequency. Therefore, a low value of current is expected at this point. An approximated current density distribution along the resonator is shown in Fig. The resonance frequency can be obtained from the transverse resonance method The impedance from the middle point can be obtained from the input impedance of a transmission line of length L2/2 and a characteristic impedance Z0 loaded with an impedance ZL: Where ZL is the parallel combination impedance of the capacitance C in series with inductance Lvia and the open circuit transmission line of length L1: (2) Fig. In order to increase the RCS and the detectability, the manufactured tag is composed by four unit cells, as shown in Fig. One of the main difficulties in chipless RFID technology is the calibration needed for tag detection. Usually the background subtraction technique is used, but this approach is unpractical in most real applications, since it requires to remove the tag to measure the scene First of all, an analysis of the received signal (parameter S21 measured between the transmit and receive antennas) is taken into account. The measured signal can be modelled as the sum of three contributions: the tag response, stag(t), the coupling interference between the antennas, sc(t), and the clutter due to the backscattered field on the surrounding objects, sclutter(t). (3) The coupling signal is due to the crosstalk between the antennas and depends on the antennas used and the distance between them. It can be considered constant with respect to the distance between the tag and reader and often it presents a much higher amplitude than the tag and the clutter. The amplitude of the tag response depends on the distance between tag and reader. The clutter response can be split in a couple of terms: one due to the objects close to the tag and the other due to the objects far from the tag. The first contribution presents higher amplitude and it often strongly depends on frequency. In case of depolarizing tags, the reflection in flat surfaces such as walls or ground is minimized because co-polar component that is filtered by the receiver antenna in cross polarization is produced. Following the model (3), the tag response can be obtained subtracting a reference measurement without tag response (sref(t)≈sc(t)+sclutter(t)) to the measurement of the tag. Therefore, the reference measurement can be obtained eliminating the tag response by locating an absorbent that attenuates the reflection in both polarizations or placing a metallic plate that eliminates the reflection in the cross polar component. In both cases, it is assumed that the clutter is invariant along the measurement with the tag and the calibration with the reference. The metallic plate can be replaced by the wall or another material where the tag is attached, assuming that the distance remains invariant. Two different practical scenarios are considered. In the first one, the read range is very small (20-30 cm), and in the second one the distance to the material under test is higher (50 cm). In all the cases, the crosstalk between antennas dominates, especially outside the resonance frequency of the tag, but it is removed using any of the previous reference measurements. In the first case, the tag response dominates over the clutter contributions, whereas in the second the clutter amplitude is dominant. For small read range (Fig. Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. one measurement is needed. However, for longer distances (Fig. Experimental results with the tag attached on a wall of bricks in the laboratory (indoor environment) located at 20 cm and 50 cm from the antennas are shown in Figure Finally, the measurement method is tested, in a realistic environment, with different types of walls. Sample 1 is a wall of concrete (100% concrete), sample 2 is a block of 50% concrete and 50% sand and sample 3 is a wall of bricks. In order to compare the values of permittivity obtained with the chipless sensor, the samples have also been measured with the ring resonator method Where R is the radius of the resonator (6.9 mm), W is the width of the line (1.85 mm), h is the thickness of the substrate (32 mil) and t is the metallization thickness (34 μm). εrs and εrmat is the relative permittivity of the substrate and the material, respectively. We is the effective width given by: When the material under test is located on the top of the resonator, a shift in the resonance frequency is produced due to the variation of the effective permittivity. Fig. In order to study the influence of the moisture in the sample some experiments have been done. First, a dry concrete wall is measured. Later the wall has been wet with water and the measurement has been repeated. The results are shown in Fig. The temperature can also affect the measurement of the resonance of the chipless tag. A small change in the permittivity of the substrate and the expansion of the resonator is produced. Fig. A novel cross-polarized chipless sensor based on a depolarizing dipole loaded with capacitors is proposed as permittivity sensor for long-term non-destructive testing of structures. A simple model based on a loaded transmission line is presented. Simulated and experimental results show a nearlylinear dependence of the resonance frequency of the tag with the permittivity, which permits the calibration of the sensor. The tag has been tested in realistic scenarios and different procedures to detect the sensor on large civil structures are proposed, which do not require tag removal, as an alternative to background subtraction. For small distances the tag can be detected from the raw measurement without subtracting any background subtraction. However, for higher distances, the tag can be detected subtracting the crosstalk measurement or using a reference tag composed by a metallic plate in front the tag or an absorbent. The influence of temperature, moisture and ambient humidity is empirically analyzed. Finally, the feasibility of detecting the sensor using a low-cost reader based on SDR receiver has been demonstrated for short ranges. Antonio Lazaro, Senior Member, IEEE, Ramon Villarino, Filippo Costa, Member IEEE, Simone Genovesi, Member IEEE, Antonio Gentile, Luca Buoncristiani, David Girbau, Senior Member, IEEE Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.