Using electron beam manipulation, we enable deterministic motion of individual Si atoms in graphene along predefined trajectories. Structural evolution during the dopant motion was explored, providing information on changes of the Si atom neighborhood during atomic motion and providing statistical information of possible defect configurations. The combination of a Gaussian mixture model and principal component analysis applied to the deep learning-processed experimental data allowed disentangling of the atomic distortions for two different graphene sublattices. This approach demonstrates the potential of e-beam manipulation to create defect libraries of multiple realizations of the same defect and explore the potential of symmetry breaking physics. The rapid image analytics enabled via a deep learning network further empowers instrumentation for e-beam controlled atom-by-atom fabrication. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) has become one of the most powerful tools for exploring materials structure on the atomic scale. Image data collected with STEM contains encoded information about configurations and interactions of single atomic defects, Recently, STEM was shown to be a powerful tool for moving atoms. Following predictions that STEM might be utilized to produce controlled atomic motion, Here, we combine direct atomic e-beam manipulation with deep machine learning based analysis to extract material evolution at the atomic level during manipulations. Specifically, we realize long-range linear and rotational motion through a graphene lattice. This allows us to collect multiple statistically independent configurations for individual defects, track changes in the specific atomic bonds in time, and determine whether symmetry breaking is present in the system. Moving an impurity with an electron beam. A focused STEM electron beam can be used to move dopant atoms through a crystal lattice, as already mentioned. To accomplish this, the beam is positioned at a lattice site adjacent to the dopant. In the case of moving Bi in a Si crystal, the beam creates a vacancy in the adjacent column and induces a controlled diffusion of the Bi toward the beam. Two experiments were performed where Si dopant atoms were moved through a graphene lattice using the electron beam and an image was acquired after each successive movement of the atom. These image sequences were concatenated to form videos of the atomic motion and are available via the accompanying notebook. Figure The bottleneck layer represents a spatial pyramid of dilated convolutions with dilated rates 2, 4, and 6. The network classifies every pixel in the raw data and outputs a set of well-defined circular blobs on a uniform background whose centers of mass correspond to the atomic centers. This enables a bijective (i.e., one-to-one) mapping of the extracted features with the original input data. The (x, y) positions of atoms can be (optionally) further refined by using the blob centers of mass from the network's output as the initial guess and performing a standard 2D Gaussian peak fitting within the specified area (e.g., within a box with a side equal to 1⁄2 of an average nearest neighbor distance) on the raw input image pixels. We note however that this approach may not improve the accuracy of atom finding for noisy data where there are no clear maxima associated with atomic positions. The number of classes in the output can be equal to the number of different atomic species that one expects to observe in the experiment. However, it is usually difficult predict beforehand which chemical species will be observed (e.g., due to the presence of contaminations). The alternative strategy, which was used in this work, is first to categorize all atoms as a single class and then perform an additional post-processing step where atoms are separated into different classes based on the statistical analysis of their intensities or of their local neighborhood. The neural network was trained to recognize atoms in graphene atomic structures based on a library of MultiSlice The bond lengths are normally distributed with a mean of 144.7 pm and a standard deviation of 10.4 pm. The mean value is very close to the graphene equilibrium lattice constant 142 pm. Next, we attempted to trace whether there is any specific bond distortion (local strain) that moves with a dopant atom. For this, we use the information extracted for atomic bond lengths to construct the real-space strain maps for one of movies. Here, we define strain as s = (a-a0)/a0, where a0 is the mean value determined from data shown in Fig. We next analyze local atomic neighborhoods via Gaussian mixture model (GMM) The analysis of spatial localization and temporal evolution of these patterns does not reveal any specific structure, as can be expected given the extremely slow (compared to the atomic dynamic) timescales of the STEM measurements. Hence in certain sense the PCA components in Fig. The rapid image analytics enabled through the deep learning network further provides enabling instrumentation for e-beam atom-by-atom fabrication.