Negative thermal expansion (NTE) describes the anomalous propensity of materials to shrink when heated. Since its discovery, the NTE effect has been found in a wide variety of materials with an array of magnetic, electronic and structural properties. In some cases, the NTE originates from phase competition arising from the electronic or magnetic degrees of freedom but we here focus on a particular class of NTE which originates from intrinsic dynamical origins related to the lattice degrees of freedom, a property we term structural negative thermal expansion (SNTE). Here we review some select cases of NTE which strictly arise from anharmonic phonon dynamics, with a focus on open perovskite lattices. We find that NTE is often present close in proximity to competing structural phases, with structural phase transition lines terminating near T =0 K yielding the most superlative displays of the SNTE effect. We further provide a theoretical model to make precise the proposed relationship among the signature behavior of SNTE, the proximity of these systems to structural quantum phase transitions and the effects of phase fluctuations near these unique regions of the structural phase diagram. The effects of compositional disorder on NTE and structural phase stability in perovskites are discussed. Thermal expansion is among the most widely recognized thermodynamic properties of materials. From a textbook perspective 1 , thermal expansion occurs through anharmonic free energy terms arising from nuclear lattice degrees of freedom. The dominant appearance of the positive thermal expansion (PTE) found in both research-grade and industrial materials is heuristically ascribed This second circumstance for NTE, which we term structural NTE (SNTE), is the focus of the present article. The field of SNTE has been met with sustained interest from the physics, chemistry, and materials science communities since the re-discovery of the strong SNTE in ZrW 2 O 8 in 1996 Despite decades of intense research, the complex structure and associated dynamics of the ZrW 2 O 8 lattice and the related M A 2 O 8 compounds complicates the interpretation of both theoretical and experimental investigations into the mechanisms of SNTE. For instance, a commonly identified feature in the low-temperature α-phase is the two WO 4 tetrahedra with unshared "terminal" oxygen atoms aligned along the screw axis. The under-constrained freedom of these tetrahedra along this axis are often cited as being responsible for the softness of the crucial NTE modes, but there is much debate as to the precise nature of the mode and its contributions to NTE is the extent to which the molecular subunits may be regarded as rigid We consider the rich structural phase diagrams of the perovskite structure and their description in terms of octahedral tilts and the corresponding slow lattice dynamics associated with the structural transitions. Although numerous, the hierarchy of phases is well understood and documented, making perovskites a particularly simple framework on which to study the interplay of lattice dynamics and macroscopic phenomena like NTE. In particular, we note how the corresponding dynamic modes of the perovskite lattice relate to soft-mode instabilities that accompany the approach to realized and incipient structural phase transitions and how these are coupled to mechanisms resulting in SNTE. Most importantly, we further develop the apparent connection between the emergence of SNTE alongside phase fluctuations that occur near T =0K structural quantum phase transitions (SQPTs), for which we present the available experimental evidence and develop a systematic modeling scheme to explain the coupling between phase fluctuations and thermal expansion anomalies in perovskite materials. The perovskite lattice structure may well be identified as the double-helix of the solid state -a framework which is highly functionalizable, tunable, robust, and underpins perhaps every known category of physical behavior. This includes high-temperature superconducting, itinerant ferromagnetic, local ferromagnetic, ferroelectric, insulating, metallic, glassy, as well as a plethora of antiferromagnetic and other poorly understood phases which appear to compete, coexist, and cooperate within typically rich and complex phase diagrams The highest-symmetry solid phase is shown below in Figures One of the best-studied structural instabilities in a perovskite structure is the transition at T c 110K in SrTiO 3 , first identified with electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra by Unoki and Sakudo [001] rotation axis, that is an octahedral tilting pattern of a 0 a 0 c -(Figure This dependence for the R-point soft-mode in SrTiO 3 is shown in Figure Nonetheless, soft modes can be used to interpret weakly first-order transitions and their frequency can be indicative of an incipient transition due to soft-mode coupling to other, primary order parameters. The 110K transition in SrTiO 3 is also a prototypical example of critical behavior that can emerge in the vicinity of a structural transition, most notably the "central-peak" phenomenon discovered through an anomalous quasi-elastic peak in INS energy-transfer spectra, which can be explored elsewhere In extreme cases, a material can approach dynamic instability with lowering temperature to near-zero soft mode energy, yet no temperature-induced transition is observed. In this situation, subsequent application of pressure, introduction of compositional disorder (doping) or other nonthermal parameters can perturb the ground-state of the system to drive the transition at T = 0K, realizing a quantum phase transition (QPT) Most oxide perovskites ABO 3 form with an A-site, otherwise requiring a rare hexavalent electronic configuration for charge balance. One prominent exception is ReO 3 , which forms with no A-site and maintains its cubic P m 3m space group symmetry down to the lowest measured temperatures. In addition, ReO high-temperature data, the pressure-induced phase is likely the tetragonal P 4/mbm, although recent indications of a direct transition to a cubic Im 3 phase have also been reported The soft mode driving the pressure and temperature induced structural transition between the P m 3m and Im 3 cubic phases was shown to be three-component M + 3 phonon mode involving anti-phase rotation of the neighboring ReO 3 octahedra in an a + a + a + tilt pattern (Figure The temperature-dependence of the M + 3 mode frequency as a function of temperature at ambient pressure is shown in Figure Unlike oxides, fluorides commonly form stable A-site-free perovskite structures BF 3 due to the wider array of available B 3+ ion valence configurations among the transition metals. Prominent among these open-perovskite fluorides is ScF 3 , which was discovered in 2010 by Greve et al. to possess related structural instabilitiies corresponding to zone-boundary optical phonons. In ReO 3 , the condensing soft mode responsible for the low-T high-P structural phase transition is the M + 3 distortion, while ScF 3 and other 3d-transition metal trifluorides fall into the lower-symmetry rhombohedral R 3c space group symmetry, attributed to the condensation of the R + 4 optical phonon. Although the cubic phase of ScF 3 is stable at ambient pressure over the entire temperature of the solid phase down to T = 0.4K 90 , X-ray diffraction The IXS results combined with structural data permit an estimation that pressures as small as P c 0.074 GPa would be sufficient to drive the transition to 0 K. The sensitivity of the phase boundary suggests that the nature of the cubic phase is delicate at low temperature and has been shown to be susceptible to even mild perturbations Phase stability and thermal expansion effects in the open-perovskite trifluoride structure have also been investigated thoroughly through chemical substitution. Chemical substitutions of Sc by Ti 94 , Al The resultant (πππ) pattern is likely a key feature when attempting to relate these materials, and is in particular likely to impact the (simple cubic) M -R BZ edge mode dispersion and dimensional reduction observed in ScF 3 Furthermore, isothermal measurements of the soft-mode energy versus hydrostatic pressure are provided in Figure Together, the results of these data clearly show in all respects that ScF 3 is closer to a SQPT than ReO 3 . Although data at this level in unavailable for CaZrF 6 , the amorphization boundary at the Hg dimer in Hg 2 I 2 NTE is often understood through the response of the phonon spectrum to the application of hydrostatic pressure, which has been formalized in the quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA) known as the Grüneisen approach 1 . Each phonon in the Brillouin zone of frequency and wavevector (ω i , k i ) is assigned a mode Grüneisen parameter γ i , defined as, where κ is the isothermal compressibility. Performing an average over all k, weighted by the mode contribution to the heat capacity c V,i , gives the overall lattice Grüneisen constant γ which is thermodynamically proportional to the volumetric thermal expansion α V for isotropic materials. At low-temperatures, the thermodynamic properties are dominated by contributions from the lowest energy excitations. If the low-energy phonon spectrum has large magnitude, negative mode Grüneisen parameters (negative contributions to CTE), then the k-averaged CTE will decrease as temperature is lowered. If strong enough to overcome the many high-energy excitations commonly attributed to conventional PTE, the overall expansion may turn negative in sign, strengthening at lower temperature, which is the typical functional form among the SNTE perovskites (Figure The purpose of this section is to present a microscopic description of NTE arising from soft modes in ReO 3 -type lattice structures. Such modes break the symmetry of the lattice and lead to displacive structural phase transitions Here, we present a microscopic phenomenology that describes NTE in these open perovskite frameworks. The model includes the usual rigid tilts coupled to long-wavelength strain-generating acoustic modes as well as a cooperative interaction between tilts that drives the structural transition, e.g., dipolar interactions in the metal trifluorides Our model analysis is by no means exhaustive. More elaborate descriptions that go beyond the picture of rigid tilts involving, for instance, distortions and translations of such building units are usually needed to describe the observed TE 110 . Also the observed structural transitions are frequently of first-order, which we do not consider here for the sake of simplicity. Nonetheless, our semi-analytic approach accounts for microscopic aspects of the phonon dynamics and its relation to NTE and help in finding general trends of the solution. Moreover, it provides the basis to build other frameworks that capture atomistic details such as first-principles-based effective model Hamiltonians 111 . We consider a cubic lattice with N sites and choose normal mode coordinates in the unit cell i (i = 1, 2, ...., N ) associated with the R + 4 mode, the condensation of which leads to the R 3c rhombohedral phase. Q i is proportional to the local displacements generated by the cooperative tilts of the MF 6 octahedra. In addition, we introduce the strain tensor in Voigt notation iα , α = 1, ..., 6 in unit cell i, which is induced by displacements u i = (u ix , u iy , u iz ) of the centers of mass of the unit cells with respect to the acoustic-branch phonons. In order to determine the optical phonon contribution to the thermal expansion, we must couple the displacements Q i with strains iα , leading to a 3-term Hamiltonian of the form, Here, H Q accounts for harmonic and anharmonic energy contributions from the soft optical phonon up to quartic order in Q i ; H is the strain-induced energy depending on the elasticity through the bulk modulus C a , shear moduli and hydrostatic pressure P ; and H Q models the coupling between these displacements and strain degrees of freedom with g a the coupling constant between the displacements and the volume strain. The explicit form of these terms is given in the supplementary material (SM). To solve the statistical mechanical problem posed by the Hamiltonian in Eq. 3, we use a variational formulation of a SCPA, in which the temperature and pressure dependence of the phonon energies Ω ν , (ν = R + 4 , A 1g , E g ), displacements, strain order parameters and phase fluctuations are determined self-consistently from the minimization of the free energy 112 . We here focus on the main results. The details of the model Hamiltonian and its approximate solution are given in the SM. We first focus on the volume strain V = 1 + 2 + 3 , which gives the change in volume with temperature and pressure with respect to a reference volume V 0 . We use the notation .... to denote thermal average. By minimizing the free energy associated with the Hamiltonian in Eq. 3, we find that the volume strain is given as follows, where |Q| 2 is the thermal average of the squared magnitude of the MF 6 tilt. Eq. 4 already illustrates one of the the main points of our work: in a mean-field theory and in the absence of pressure, |Q| 2 = 0 above T c ; thus fluctuations around the OP must be included to describe NTE. For instance, within the SCPA and for temperatures much greater than the phonon energy, we find that |Q| 2 ∝ T in the cubic phase and Eq. 4 gives, where α V is the CTE at high temperatures and v R is the strength of the cooperative interaction. and its CTE ( α V = d V /dT ) in the full temperature range. Model parameters were obtained by fitting to experiments We note that Eq. 5 gives α V in terms of the microscopic model parameters. It shows that mechanically compliant materials with low bulk moduli (C a ) and strong strain-phonon couplings (g a ) favor thermal expansion. α V also increases by weakening the strength of the cooperative interaction v R at the expense of decreasing the transition temperatures since T c ∝ v R , as it is shown in the SM. It also shows that the sign of this coupling plays an essential role in the thermal expansion: g a > 0 for NTE while g a < 0 for PTE. Another physically relevant quantity is the the Grüneisen parameter γ ν associated with each lattice mode ν = R + 4 , A 1g , E g . We find that the temperature and pressure dependence of γ ν is entirely determined by the phonon energy Ω ν , and thus diverges near the c-r transition as Ω ν → 0. This is in agreement with previous analytic work 107 and ab-initio calculations, where large, negative values for γ R + FIG. The phonon symmetry labels for x = 0.5 in (c) are the same as those for x = 1 and are not shown for clarity. Disorder is an inevitable part of any real material system. Here we discuss and develop the role of disorder in on the SNTE effect within the open perovskite structural class. ReO 3 has been known as a SNTE material for many years, but there are varying reports of the strength and also extent in temperature over which the effect occurs, which is summarized for recent data by Following the spirit of Attfield, who has studied compositional disorder effects on the A-site of transition metal oxide phase transitions 117-119 , we borrow the hypothesis that the ionic radius of the substituted ions represents a local energetic influence on the stability of the ordered phase and discuss in our case the probability distribution P (r B ) of finding a B-site ion of radius r B in the series Sc 1-x L x F 3 . We calculate the first two moments of this distribution and associate the mean ionic radius (1st moment) r B to an energetic effect on the transition and the variance (2nd moment) σ 2 B of the distribution as representative of disorder. For the simple binary distributions shown in Figure These relations are general for any binary mixture, and are applied for M =Sc and L=Y,Al,Ti in Figure B . There is not a clear common trend in either plot, except that the Y and Al substitution series are linear in σ 2 B , implying that quenched disorder is the dominant contribution toward driving the transition, as we have pointed out previously m V + 9 5 5 p w y N 1 a 2 c x 8 y U Z K x 5 y S q y T e g P D x 5 I M m 8 m V + 9 5 5 p w y N 1 a 2 c x 8 y U Z K x 5 y S q y T e g P D x 5 I M m 8 m V + 9 5 5 p w y N 1 a 2 c x 8 y U Z K x 5 y S q y T e g P D x 5 I M m 8 m V + 9 5 5 p w y N 1 a 2 c x 8 y U Z K x 5 y S q y T e g P D x 5 I M m 8 at liquid helium temperatures would help immensely toward refining the QCP in these systems where SNTE seems to arise near the T =0 termination of a structural phase boundary. We have discussed the broad issue of SNTE with particular focus on perovskite-structured SNTE materials. We have identified the presence of several competing octahedral tilt instabilities occurring near the zero-temperature state of these materials and their associated fluctuations in the high-symmetry phase as key to the SNTE effect in these materials. We have provided a model treatment beyond mean field theory to account for these fluctuations and identified key elements that move toward control of negative thermal expansion and may be invoked for rational design and discovery of future SNTE systems. We also find that quantum mechanical effects are non-negligible and play an important role in SNTE. Finally, we have described existing data in a new analysis which attempts to isolate the influences of energetics and disorder and presented a holistic and generalizable approach leading to the conclusion that disorder disrupts the balance which drives the SNTE effect in ScF 3 , ReO 3 , and other SNTE materials. Our thorough combined analysis of the physical properties and special circumstances in this simple structural class has identified trends and influences that we hope will guide discovery of new SNTE materials. near the precipice of structural stability We consider a cubic lattice with N sites and choose normal mode coordinates that describe in the unit cell i (i = 1, 2, ...., N ) that are associated with the relevant soft R + 4 phonon mode, the condensation of which leads to a structural transition to a rhombohedral R3c phase. In addition, we introduce symmetry adapted strains 3 and io = i1 -i2 , as well as shear strain components i4 , i5 , and i6 in the usual Voigt notation: iα = ∂u iα /∂x α (α = 1, 2, 3), i4 = 2 (∂u iy /∂z + ∂u iz /∂y) , i5 = 2 (∂u ix /∂z + ∂u iz /∂x), and i6 = 2 (∂u ix /∂y + ∂u iy /∂x). u i = (u ix , u iy , u iz ) is the displacement of the center of mass of the unit cell i from its equilibrium position due to the acoustic phonon mode. Physically, ia and it/o are, respectively, volume and tetragonal strains. We consider the model Hamiltonian, where, and Here, Π i and π i are, respectively, the conjugate momenta of Q i and u i . v λλ ij (λ, λ = x, y, z) is an interaction between the soft mode coordinates with Fourier transform v λλ R+q = v R δ λλ +q 2 F λλ ( q). This form is typical of cubic lattices with F λλ ( q) dependent on the direction of the unit wavevector q = q/q and independent of the magnitude q. R1 Within the local SCPA, the equations derived from the stationary property of the free energy are independent of the particular form of F λλ ( q) as long as there is no self-interaction. R2 C a = (C 11 + 2C 12 ) /3, is the bulk modulus, and C t = (C 11 -C 12 ) /2, C r = C 44 , are deviatoric and shear moduli, respectively. g a , g t , and g r are coupling constants between the lattice and the strain degrees of freedom, and P is an applied hydrostatic pressure. κ i is the lattice stiffness at site i; γ 1 and γ 2 are coefficients of the isotropic and anisotropic cubic anharmonicites, respectively. To account for quenched compositional disorder in mixed-compounds, we note that at the mean field level the energy barriers between different lattice stuctures depend on the ratio between the harmonic and anharmonic coefficients of the model. To solve the statistical mechanical problem posed by the Hamiltonian (S1), we use a variational formulation of a SCPA in which the energies of the phonon excitations, displacement and strain order parameters are determined from the minimization of the free energy. We consider the trial probability distribution, where H tr is the Hamiltonian of the local uncoupled problem, Z tr = Tre -βH tr is its normalization. A iα = Q iα and e iα = e iα are the spontaneous displacement and strain order parameters which will be determined by minimization of the free energy; M αβ is the dynamical matrix with eigenfrequencies ω λ of the non-ineracting problem (v λλ ij = 0). Here, ... = Tr ρ tr .... denotes thermal average over the trial probability distribution (S5). We set the long-range ordering associated with the condenstation of the R + 4 mode at R = (1, 1, 1)(π/a), by writing A iα = A α e iR•r i , where r i is the position vector the lattice site i. This corresponds to out-of-phase tilts where A iλ changes sign from site to site. The free energy is calculated in the usual way F = H + k B T ln ρ tr , where, and, with ψ λλ are the local OP fluctuations given as follows, where b νλ is an unitary transformation that diagonalizes M αβ . κ the lattice stiffness averaged over compositional disorder. In writing Eq. (S9), we have ignored all terms that do not depend on A λ , e α , and ω λ as they do not have an effect on the miminization procedure. Minimization of the free energy (S9) with respect to the strains e α gives the following result, By substituting the strains of Eq. (S15) into the Eq. (S9), we obtain a free energy which depends on the displacements Q only, where, where κ ≡ κ -2g a P/C a . The free energies (S9) & (S16) are the starting point for our calculation of the thermodynamic quantities of interest. The soft mode frequencies are computed from the free energy (S9) with the e α constant and then must be evaluated at the equilibrium points given in Eq (S15). This is because the frequency of the acoustic modes associated with uniform strains vanishes in the long-wavelength limit. where Q λ Q λ is given by Eq. (S13). To proceed further, we now consider the cubic and rhombohedral phases separately. In the cubic phase, where ω Eg,A 1g = Ω 2 Eg,A 1g + v R . As mentioned above, the temperature and pressure dependence of the the Grüneisen parameters of the E g and A 1g phonons are again entirely determined by their corresponding energies, Eg,A 1g . (S25) Equations ( It is useful to consider the classical limit of the above results, as it allow us to derive analytical expressions for several relevant macroscopic quantities in terms of microscopic parameters. We consider the high-T cubic phase. In the classical limit (βω 1) and near the structural transition, ψ 0 k B T /v R , thus, where α V is the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE). We find that he T and P dependence of Ω R + 4 matches that of Landau theory, as expected, R2 where T c (x, 0) is the transiton temperature at ambient pressure, with γ ≡ 5γ 1 + 2γ 2 -6g 2 a /C a . Note that when there is a c-r transition, the high symmetry phase is unstable in the purely harmonic approximations and thus ω 2 , which in turn depends κ, i.e., the lattice stiffness averaged over compositional disorder. Note that for g a > 0, hydrostatic pressure destabilizes the c-phase. From Eq. (S28), we find a proportionality relation between the slope of the T -P phase diagram and the CTE, We conclude the presentation of our model here. The model parameters are given in Table essential, guiding observations were revealed during the ensuing years: (i) ZrW 2 O 8 has unusually low-energy lattice modes near 2-3meV The open-perovskites presented above demonstrate this frameworks' favorable environment for harboring SNTE, but begs the question of why most other purely stoichiometric transition metal trifluorides and perovskites show more conventional thermal expansion. The lattice parameters of each of these SNTE perovskites are plotted in comparison to the prototypical SNTE material t √ 3 v R ,