The control of magnetization by electric current is a rapidly developing area motivated by a strong synergy between breakthrough basic research discoveries and industrial applications in the fields of magnetic recording, magnetic field sensors, spintronics and nonvolatile memories. In recent years, the discovery of the spin-orbit torque has opened a spectrum of opportunities to manipulate the magnetization efficiently. This article presents a review of the historical background and recent literature focusing on spin-orbit torques (SOTs), highlighting the most exciting new scientific results and suggesting promising future research directions. It starts with an introduction and overview of the underlying physics of spin-orbit coupling effects in bulk and at interfaces, then describes the use of SOTs to control ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. Finally, we summarize the prospects for the future developments of spintronics devices based on SOTs. In 1996, Slonczewski For STT, the charge current flowing across the ferromagnetic layer induces the spin polarization, which affects ferromagnetic magnetization through the interactions between the spin polarized electrons and local magnetic moments where it offers advantages over competing technologies due to its high speed and non-volatility As an alternative to STT, manipulation of magnetization by spin-orbit torques (SOTs) could enable faster and more stable devices with lower power consumption In this review, firstly the underlying physics and the different kinds of spin-orbit couplings in bulk and interface are briefly introduced. We then review the recent progress of the SOTs on ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. Finally, we point to the prospects for future developments of spintronics devices based on SOTs. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is a relativistic effect of a particle's spin with its motion in an electric field. In atomic energy levels, the SOC can split degenerate states with finite angular momentum (p, d, and f), and the contribution to the Hamiltonian can be expressed as ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) ( ) 2 (137) 2 ( 1/ 2)( 1) where l , s and j are the orbital, spin and total angular momentum quantum numbers, respectively, Z is the effective nuclear charge and n is the principal quantum number. It is noticed that the SOC increases as the fourth power of Z but as the third power of n, suggesting the SOC is larger for atoms that are further down a particular column of the periodic table. Although the SOC term contributes a small perturbation to the The Dresselhaus SOC originates from the bulk inversion asymmetry, as was first discovered by Dresselhaus where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, is the reduced Planck constant, Further breaking of symmetry, such as the deformation introduced by uniaxial strain, will generate additional SOC terms Dresselhaus SOC At the interfaces or surfaces of materials, the lack of spatial inversion symmetry generates a built-in internal electric field, and the itinerant electrons experience an effective magnetic field, called the Rashba SOC [27] , with the corresponding Hamiltonian Both Dresselhaus and Rashba effects can induce spin-momentum locking and energy band splitting, and the resulting spin textures at the Fermi surface are presented in figure Furthermore, for materials lacking inversion symmetry, the SOC competing with the exchange interaction results in a chiral exchange interaction referred to as the DMI  D S S The spin Hall effect (SHE) and anomalous Hall effect (AHE) are closely related transport phenomena resulting from SOC. When electric current passes through a heavy metal or semiconductor with strong SOC, opposite sign spins will be accumulated at opposing lateral surface boundaries The SHE can be of either extrinsic and/or intrinsic origin. The extrinsic mechanism is due to electrons scattering against spin-orbit coupled impurities (Mott scattering) In ferromagnetic materials, in addition to the ordinary Hall resistance, a large anomalous Hall resistance Current-assisted switching by SOTs was first discovered in Ga 1-x Mn x As by Chernyshov el al. Later, detailed studies of the anisotropy of current-induced switching Soon after Chernyshov el al.'s work, investigations of SOTs were extended to magnetic heterostructures. Miron et al. reported the domain wall motion driven by SOTs However, Liu et al. Generally, to make clear the contributions from Rashba effect and/or SHE to SOTs is a crucial issue, which can provide a useful physical guidance to the application. However, up to now, the relative importance of the SOTs induced by the SHE or Rashba effect remains ambiguous though many efforts have been devoted to understanding the underlying mechanism SOTs switching of ferromagnetic layers with in-plane The action of SOTs on magnetic materials can be described by adding an extra term in the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation describing precessional magnetization dynamics: where the  is the gyromagnetic ratio, , where m is the magnetization unit vector and y denotes the axis perpendicular to the current in plane. Both field-like torque and damping-like torque can be generated by Rashba and SHE but the SOTs from different mechanisms differ in magnitude The torques for current-induced magnetization switching in heavy-metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) bilayer are illustrated in figure 2. SOTs can be used in switching the magnetic free layer of a MTJ, which forms the memory cell of a MRAM A magnetic field applied to a multi-domain ferromagnet will favor the expansion of a magnetic domain over its neighbors and move the bordering domain walls In 2010, Miron et al. Generally, SOTs in HM/FM structure drive the domain walls in the same direction with same speed, without changing the overall magnetization. However, when an external magnetic field applied along the current direction alters the central domain wall moments, the SOTs driving the adjacent domain walls with different velocities will result in the magnetization switching Driving the motion of skyrmions by SOTs is attractive due to the ultra-low critical current density (below 10 2 Acm -2 ) Current-induced skyrmion motion was observed by MOKE microscopy in a Ta/CoFeB/TaO x heterostructure However, some features of the motion are not consistent with theoretical expectations, such as the dependence of the velocity and the size of skyrmion, The skyrmion Hall effect hinders the practical application of skyrmion in racetrack memory. The opposite transverse components of the coupled skyrmions motion in different magnetic sublattices can result in their cancellation, leading to pure longitudinal motion, which was studied theoretically in antiferromagnetic systems In perpendicularly magnetized HM/FM structures, magnetization can be switched by SOTs to a fixed direction under an in-plane magnetic field; without a magnetic field, switching is to a random up or down direction. The requirement for an external magnetic field greatly limits the applications of SOT. Therefore, a large volume of work has focused on magnetization switching by SOTs without external field. Importantly, in 2014 Yu et al. Thus the asymmetrical geometric shape provides an effective means to achieve deterministic switching Cai et al. Recently, Ma et al. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Modifying the interface asymmetry using, e.g., spacer layers, capping layers, oxidation etc. provides an important route to tune the magnitude and direction of SOTs Fan et al. By controlling the thickness of the top SiO 2 layer in a Pt/CoFeB/MgO/SiO 2 heterostructure, Qiu el al. A different switching sequence was observed for small and large thicknesses of SiO 2 , with a sign change of the effective field occurring for the thickness of 1.5 nm SiO 2 . This means the interfacial SOTs can be effectively tuned by oxidation. Emori et al. The capping layer is also found to greatly affect the SOTs. Qiu et al. For the HM/FM/Ru system, the Ru acquires a negative spin polarization which enhances the absorption of spin current. Seung-heon et al. To increase the efficiency of magnetization switching by SOTs, it is crucial to search for materials with large spin Hall angle (the ratio between spin current density and charge current density). Metals with strong spin orbit coupling The SHE is not limited to nonmagnetic materials. Miao et al. Topological insulators with large spin Hall angle, such as Bi 2 Se 3 have attracted increasing attention for current-induced magnetization switching. Topological insulators are insulating in the interior but have metallic states on the surface The effective field to current ratio and the spin Hall angle were detected by second-harmonic methods, and were found to be much larger than for HM/FM systems. Similar phenomena in topological insulator/ferromagnet systems were also observed by other groups The ultralow power SOT switching by topological insulators has been shown by NHD Khang et al. Oxide interfaces with strong Rashba effect have also been actively studied We summarize the key parameters describing the spin conversion efficiency obtained experimentally for different materials in Table Hext (Oe) jc( Antiferromagnetic materials have zero net magnetization in the ground state and are insensitive to external magnetic fields, so the magnetic order is difficult to manipulate and detect. On the other hand, these properties also make the antiferromagnet a potential candidate for high density and high stability devices. More importantly, the high precession frequency of antiferromagnets offers potential for higher speed of antiferromagnetic devices than that of the ferromagnetic counterparts. The SOT has proved to be an effective way to modulate the magnetic order in a certain class of antiferromagnets, which was predicted in Mn 2 Au by Železný el al., where the two spin sublattices of this antiferromagnet have broken inversion symmetry and form inversion partners Wadley et al. Reproduced with permission Manipulation of antiferromagnets by interfacial SOTs in heavymetal/antiferromagnet heterostructure is still a challenge. SOTs in Ta/IrMn/CoFeB heterostructure were investigated using the second harmonic resistance technique by Reichlová et al. Synthetic antiferromagnets, consisting of two ferromagnets with antiparallel coupling, combine the advantages of natural antiferromagnets (high density, high speed and high stability) and ferromagnets (easy to be manipulated and detected). For example, the dipolar coupling from fringing magnetic fields limits storage density in memory devices, but this influence can be eliminated in synthetic antiferromagnets. Furthermore, the domain wall speed in synthetic antiferromagnets can be much larger than that in ferromagnets, as was demonstrated in Co/Ni/Co/Ru/Co/Ni/Co The manipulation of antiferromagnets by SOTs remains a challenging field. Many obstacles need to be overcome, such as effectively controlling the magnetization in heavy-metal/antiferromagnet structures, detecting the magnetic order with larger signal and with spatial resolution, and accessing the THz switching regime in nanosized device geometries. Even so, this is an area with great potential for future applications. We have reviewed recent progress in manipulation of magnetization by SOTs. The SOTs induced by the bulk and interfacial SOC have been widely used to manipulate the magnetization successfully: efficiently drive domain walls at high speed; deterministically switch the magnetization without external magnetic field through special geometries, exchange bias field and ferroelectric substrate polarization; and tune the magnetic order in antiferromagnets. To realize applicable memory devices, it is vital to find new, Spin logic using SOTs has also drawn enormous attention, with the prospect of using spin rather charge to process information. The reconfigurable spin logic and the complementary logic operation have been reported based on the SOTs and VCMA Imitating the activities of neurons in the brain would markedly increase the processing power for artificial intelligence applications. The possibility of artificial synapses and neural networks based on SOTs has been demonstrated 