In this study, we examine the mechanism of nanopore-based DNA sequencing using a voltage bias across a graphene nanoribbon. Using density function theory and a non-equilibrium Green's function approach, we determine the transmission spectra and current profile for adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine, and uracil as a function of bias voltage in an energy minimized configuration. Utilizing the transmission current, we provide a general methodology for the development of a three nanopore graphene-based device that can be used to distinguish between the various nucleobases for DNA/RNA sequencing. From our analysis, we deduce that it is possible to use different transverse currents across a multi-nanopore device to differentiate between nucleobases using various voltages of 0.5, 1.3, and 1.6 V. Overall, our goal is to improve nanopore design to further DNA/RNA nucleobase sequencing and biomolecule identification techniques. Advances in medicine and the understanding of biomolecule interactions is on the forefront of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) sequencing research There are numerous approaches for nucleobase sequencing Nanopore-based technology has the potential to be an efficient method for nucleobase sequencing FIG. Recently, graphene has been suggested as a possible 2D nanopore material due to its increased electron mobility and its high tensile strength In this study, we examine the viability of a multinanoribbon graphene nanopore device as a nucleobase sequencer. Using density functional theory and a nonequilibrium Green's function (NEGF) method, we simulate transmission spectra and calculate the ballistic currents and tunneling conductance as functions of voltage bias for adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and uracil (U) translocating through the graphene nanopore. Through the analysis of I-V curves, we show that by applying various bias voltages across a graphene ribbon for the general, energy-minimized position of the translocated nucleobase, it is possible to distinguish individual bases using the resulting current. Furthermore, we provide a general mechanism that can be used for identification of the nucleobases with specific voltage biases. For our simulation, we construct a graphene nanoribbon structure with a single 0.5 nm nanopore in the center. Hydrogen atoms were used to passivate the dangling bonds of the dangling orbitals of the carbon atoms at the edge of the nanoribbon and nanopore, which prevents the nucleobases from bonding to the nanoribbon and provides stability translating molecule. In addition, we place electrodes at each end of the ribbon that will simulate with a finite voltage bias (shown in Fig. To help isolate the individual base responses, the sugar-phosphate backbone, typically found in ssDNA, is ignored, and only the individual nucleobases are placed in the nanopore. The backbone produces noise that can interrupt the current response. However, since the backbone will produce a systematic noise, previous studies have shown that analysis of cross-correlations between multiple nanoribbons can be used to reduce and possibly eliminate the systematic noise, as well as thermal and fluid fluctuations due to general flow of the DNA through the nanopore Using Atomistix Toolkit (ATK) by Quantumwise R , we performed density functional calculations using a generalized gradient approach (GGA) where t nl (k) represents the transmission amplitude from ψ n (k) in the left (L) electrode to ψ l (k) in the right (R) electrode. This is determined through a calculation of the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian and the density matrix, which is given as Here, Ḡ(ω) is the retarded Green's function and Σ is the self energy for the left and right electrodes Using various simulated voltages, we determined the current versus voltage for each nucleobase in the nanopore. The current is independent of how the left and right voltages are applied and only depends on voltage bias or difference. Figure Through an integration of transmission coefficient, the ballistic current for nucleobase can be calculated as a function of voltage where n F is the Fermi function and voltage is defined as the difference between the left and right electrode chemical potentials, μ Rμ L = eV . In Fig. From the current, the tunneling conductance (dI/dV) FIG. FIG. Figure Graphene has been shown to be a potential material for nanopore-based sequencing, due to its atomic thick-ness and relative strength. Using density functional calculations, we find that the five nucleobases, including uracil, can be distinguished through the use of multiple nanoribbons using variable voltage biases. From the simulated transmission spectra, we calculate the I-V curves for these nucleobases. By examining specific differences in the calculated current, the precise nucleobase that is translocating through the nanopore can be determined. We focus on voltages of 0.5, 1.3, and 1.6 V as a proof of principle for a specific nanopore sequencing device. Future work includes performing conductance calculations for specific voltages for a better microscopic understanding as well as looking at surface plasmon resonances. In addition, increasing the size of the calculation, such as a large nanopore or a full DNA strands calculation. Further investigations include a time-dependent translocation through the nanopore that includes thermal fluctuations. Here, we focused on graphene as possible 2D materials. However, there should also be a push forward with other 2D materials for comparison.