To understand superconductivity in Chevrel phase compounds and guide the search for interesting properties in materials created with Chevrel phase molecules as building blocks, we use ab-initio methods to study the properties of single Mo 6 X 8 molecules with X = S, Se, T e as well as the bulk solid PbMo 6 S 8 . In bulk PbMo 6 S 8 , the different energy scales from strong to weak are: the band kinetic energy, the intra-molecular Coulomb interaction, the on-molecule Jahn-Teller energy and the Hund's exchange coupling. The metallic state is stable with respect to Mott and polaronic insulating states. The bulk compound is characterized by a strong electron-phonon interaction with the largest coupling involving phonon modes with energies in the range from 11 meV to 17 meV and with a strong inter-molecule (Peierls) character. A two-band Eliashberg equation analysis shows that the superconductivity is strong-coupling, with different gaps on the two Fermi surface sheets. A Bergman-Rainer analysis of the functioanl derivative of the transition temperature with respect to the electron-phonon coupling reveals that the Peierls modes provide the most important contribution to the superconductivity. This work illustrates the importance of inter-molecular coupling for collective phenomena in molecular solids. Synthetic chemists are now able to assemble molecular clusters into crystal structures with atomic precision 1 , making the search for collective and emergent properties in those super-atomic solids a timely and important topic. The notion of bootstrapping interesting molecular properties and strong molecular interactions into important bulk properties is an important theme in the field. For example, the relatively high transition temperature superconductivity in some members of the alkali-doped fullerenes is believed to arise from intra-molecular vibrational modes In this paper we analyze PbMo 6 S 8 as a model system to gain insight into the role of intra and inter-site interactions in molecular crystals and into the specifics of superconductivity in the Chevrel marterials. To approach this system, we first calculate properties of isolated Mo 6 X 8 molecules and use the results to derive and parametrize effective Hamiltonians including electron-electron and electron-phonon couplings. We study the bulk properties of PbMo 6 S 8 , calculating electron and phonon band structures, the electron-phonon coupling and the intra-molecular Coulomb interaction. Migdal-Eliashberg theory is then used to calculate the phonon renormalization of the bands and the superconducting gap functions and transition temperatures. Our key result is that the picture of intra-molecular interactions combined with weak constant electronic hopping between molecular units is not an adequate description of the bulk compounds. Inter-molecule effects, most notably phonons that simply do not exist in the single molecule case except as a translation or a rotation of model, play a crucial role in setting the electronic properties including superconductivity while the intra-molecular couplings have significantly weaker effects. Screening of the intra-molecular Coulomb interaction is of significant importance important in Chevrel phase compounds. This manuscript is organized as follows. In section II, we consider isolated Mo 6 X 8 molecules, identifying the important low energy degrees of freedom and interactions within the building blocks of the solids. Section III and IV discuss electron and phonon band structures, Hubbard U, Hund's exchange J and electron-phonon interaction in bulk PbMo 6 S 8 . In section V, we present the consequences of the electron-phonon interaction and diagnose which phonons are most important for superconductivity. Section VI is a conclusion. Molecular solids such as the Chevrel phase materials are composed of molecular building blocks (Mo 6 X 8 in the present case) held together with other elements (metal ions such as Pb, in the present case). The first step in understanding the properties of molecular solids is to determine the relevant orbitals of the building blocks, and the electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions relevant to these orbitals. To obtain this information we study properties of isolated netural and charged Mo 6 X 8 molecules using Density Functional Theory (DFT) methods with the PW91 generalized gradient approximation exchange-correlation functional and Hund's exchange J from the energy difference between singlet and triplet: we can see U ≈ 3.5 eV for Mo 6 X 8 molecules. J ≈ 100 meV for all three molecules, and is just large enough to overcome the Jahn-Teller electron phonon coupling in Mo 6 X 2- 8 molecules as discussed below. We now turn to the electron-phonon coupling, focussing on those modes that couple linearly to the LUMO orbitals. Phonons couple to electron bilinears; the electrons transform as the E g representation of O h and the direct product of two E g representations of the O h group can be reduced as E g × E g = a 1g + a 2g + e g , so we need to consider only vibrational modes belonging to the a 1g , a 2g and e g representations. The e g mode is Jahn-Teller active, phonons we have where n el is the number of electrons in the LUMO states, and α labels phonon modes. For e-symmetry (doublet) phonon modes we represent the mode as a two component where τ is a Pauli matrix and a, b label the two states of the electronic E g doublet. The adiabatic potential energy surface (APE) for phonon mode α is defined as the ground state eigenvalue of Eq. 1,2 with the kinetic energy (∂ Qα ) terms neglected. The difference between the value at the minimum and the value at Q = 0 defines the phonon stabilization energy Here ρ el is the LUMO occupancy for the A-symmetry modes and is the maximal orbital disproportionation (ρ = 1 for n = 1, 3 and ρ = 2 for n = 2) in the E (Jahn-Teller) case. The coupling constants g α are determined from the calculated APES. For A-symmetry phonons the APE is a parabola with minimum at Q α = -gαn el ωα . We find two A modes, with frequencies of 41.6 and 50.4 meV. The associated stabilization energies are 0.2 and 7 meV, respectively, too small to be of relevance to the issues discussed here. We neglect the A symmetry phonons henceforth. For the E (doublet) phonons the APES has the familiar "mexican hat" form shown for one of the phonons in Fig. Higher order terms in Q lift the degeneracy leading to three degenerate minima (visible TABLE I. Quadratic frequency, linear coupling energy, and the Jahn-Teller stabilization energy for occupation number n = 1, 2, 3. For the neutral molecule, ω 1 = 32.8meV and ω 2 = 29.9 meV. For occupation n = 4, the Jahn-Teller effect is no longer active, but mode softening is still visible. on close inspection in Fig. In the isolated singly charged molecule Mo 6 X 1- 8 , the Jahn-Teller effect (E JT ≈ 50 meV) is unopposed and we expect the molecule to distort away from a cubic shape. For the doubly charged Mo 6 X 2- 8 , the Jahn-Teller energy is about four times as large as it is for the singly charged case, however, the distortion energy is reduced by the Hund's exchange J (≈ 100 meV). Our calculation indicates a spin triplet ground state for Mo 6 X 2- 8 , but the energy difference is small enough that this conclusion should be treated as preliminary. The large value of the on-site Coulomb interaction, which is much greater than the n = 2 Jahn-Teller stability energy, implies that an ensemble of singly charged molecules will not disproportionate into bipolarons. The Jahn-Teller stabilization energy is a useful measure for comparing the relative strengths of the Jahn-Teller effects across different material families. The stabilization en-ergies 186 meV we find for Mo 6 S 8 at n = 2 is smaller than the 500 meV found in LaMnO We next study the electronic structure of PbMo 6 S 8 solid via DFT calculations with PBE as exchange-correlation functional, The left panel of Fig. The relaxed lattice constant and bond angle are a = 6.55 Å and α = 89.12 • , in good agreement with experimental values of a = 6.55 Å and α = 89.33 • . eV. Near the R-point the energy of the E g bands is lower than that of the other filled bands, but there are no band crossings, thus no band entanglement, enabling a straightforward Wannier analysis of the two conduction bands. The right panel shows the total density of states and its projection onto the component Using the Wannier90 32 implementation of the maximally-localised Wannier function method We performed constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) calculations of the effective interactions between electrons in the two frontier bands, following the approach developed by Aryasetiawan et al. and the partially screened interaction is defined as where ν GG (q) is the bare Coulomb interaction and Ω is the volume of the unit cell. The effective on-molecule interactions, namely the Hubbard U and Hund's exchange coupling J, are obtained by projecting W onto the two E g orbitals of the isolated molecule: The bare and screened local electron-electron interactions are listed in Starting from the fully relaxed electronic structures presented in the previous section we used density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) We have calculated the normal modes and find that the sharp peak in the phonon DOS at 4 meV arises from two modes with large Pb displacements (these modes also contribute to the very large dielectric constant), in agreement with the experimental observation that the peak is absent in Chevrel phase compounds without Pb ions. We have used DFPT to calculate the matrix elements g υ ij (k, p) describing the scattering of an electron at momentum p in band j to momentum k in band i by emission or absorption of a phonon mode υ at momentum k -p. The calculations were performed on a 4×4×4 grid in the Brillouin zone and then interpolated onto fine grids via electron and phonon Wannier functions following Refs. 43, 44 as implemented in the EPW code. From the matrix elements we calculate the band-resolved electron-phonon coupling function α 2 F as and the band-resolved total energy-phonon coupling constant as Band-resolved electron-phonon spectral functions and coupling constants are shown in Fig. From Fig. External torsional modes have previously been suggested to be important for superconductivity based on a molecular crystal model. To further understand physics of those phonon modes, we calculated the variation of band structure due to the atomic displacement of the mode shown in panel (e) of Fig. The normal-state self-energy due to the electron-phonon interaction was calculated in the Migdal approximation, using the one-loop diagram with non-interacting electron and phonon Green's functions and electron-phonon matrix elements obtained from our band structure. We separate the integral over the electron momentum into an energy and a fermi surface integral and focussing on the band-diagonal terms in the self energy we obtain Here, i,l label the electronic bands, and υ labels phonon modes. After analytically continuing the frequency argument z to the real axis, we compute the Atomic poitions X for each calculation are determined by X = X 0 + αu. X 0 are the equilibrium atomic positions and u is the phonon mode displacement from DFPT calculation. electron spectral function at T = 0 as Results are shown in Fig. With band-resolved electron-phonon spectral function defined in Eq. 9 and the self-energy evaluated in the Migdal approximation, we study strong coupling two-band superconductivity using the Eliashberg equations, following previous work on MgB 2 The equations may be written on the imaginary axis as where λ ij is: We estimated the Coulomb pseudopotential μ * ij within this theory via μ ij = U N i (0)N j (0). U = 0.28 eV used here is from a cRPA calculation, which gives μ ij ≈ 1.4. The Coulomb pesudopotential reduced by retardation effects leads to 52 The typical electron energy E ele is approximated by the half band width of E g bands: W/2 ≈ 0.35 eV, and the relevant phonon frequency ω ph ≈ 12 meV. (See the Bergmann-Rainer analysis below) This method yields a Coulomb pseudopotential value of μ * ij ≈ 0.24. Eq. 13 and Eq. 14 were solved on the imaginary axis and the gap functions were analytically continued to the real axis via Padé approximants, For the lower band v * lb F = 1.09 eV• Å, ξ * lb 0 = 173 Å and the higher band v * hb F = 0.85 eV• Å, ξ * hb 0 = 136 Å. The calculated coherence length is about one order of magnitude larger than the those reported in experiment. This is not necessarily a contradiction with experiment, Chevrel phase superconductors are known to be found in the dirty limit, Functional derivatives of relevant quantities are shown in Fig. At low frequencies, the functional derivatives increase linearly with frequency, and they reach a maximum at about 12 meV. This number is close to earlier suggestions based on the comparison of low frequency phonons in PbMo 6 S 8 and PbMo 6 Se 8 . III. BULK COMPOUND: ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES