In this paper, the 2D band structure of a mixed-mode metamaterial resonator array for in-plane waves is investigated. The band structure in the interior and on the boundary of the irreducible Brillouin zone as well as 1D dispersion diagrams for different propagation angles are calculated numerically and presented. Additionally, a reduced order analytical method is established to compare and approximate the band structure. The studied metamaterial, with a T-shaped cantilever beam as resonator in its square array repeating unit cells, exhibits branches with mixed P and SV waves except at exactly one angle of propagation. This paper also reports on the occurrence of avoided level crossings, which are related to the existence of exceptional points in the complex domain. A reduced order analytical approach is used that can generate partial (low branches) band structure with relatively little computational effort. The reduced order model agrees well with the numerical results for these low branches and can provide support in mode identification and band sorting. With proper adjustments in parameters, this analytical method will be applicable for other metamaterials that have similar unit cell structure. Acoustic metamaterials and phononic crystals 1 have attracted a lot of attention in the past two decades mostly because of their potential ability to manipulate waves and their unusual overall dynamic properties. These novel dynamic properties lead to many proposed applications, such as wave filtering Due to the local resonance in their periodic structure, such media exhibit frequency band gaps, within which there are no propagating waves. The determination of band structure is of prime importance as the natural first step in deriving the overall properties of metamaterials. In particular the overall dynamic properties are generally close to what one might estimate using quasi-static micromechanical methods, except near resonances and band gaps. The material properties and geometrical layouts are the main factors affecting the band structure. Claeys et al. Various methods have been developed for band structure calculation. Transfer Matrix (TM) method is widely used Beams are commonly found in locally resonant media as they could provide a compact "spring" element. Wang and Wang Wu et al. In this paper, the band structure of a resonator array for any wave with oblique in-plane propagation direction is investigated. The schematic of repeating unit cell (RUC) of the studied metamaterial is shown in Fig. The numerical simulation is performed using finite element software COMSOL. The dynamic problem of elastic waves propagating in a periodic medium can be described formally as the eigenvalue problem where ω is the angular eigenfrequency, and the real part of u(x, y, t) = U(x, y, ω)exp [-iωt] represents a harmonic displacement field at this frequency, and K and M are the stiffness and mass operators in Fourier domain, respectively. The spatial domain of this problem is reduced to a single unit cell based on Bloch-Floquet periodicity which requires the function to be periodic. Here n, m ∈ Z, and a and b are unit cell dimensions in x and y directions (in this case a = b =10 mm), respectively, and k is the wavevector. The eigenfrequencies can be obtained as functions of k by solving this system, in particular, by applying a discretized mesh and converting the operator equation above to a finite matrix over the unit cell domain. In the present study, the structure is modeled based on the material properties of VeroGray, a widely available 3D printing material (density ρ = 1161 kgm/s 3 , Young's modulus E = 2.978 GPa, and Poisson's ratio ν = 0.35). We define non-dimensionalized wavevector components k x a = Q x and k y a = Q y in x and y directions, respectively, with where θ is the propagation angle and Q is a dimensionless parameter. The 2D band structure can be obtained by solving eigenfrequencies with parametric sweep of Q x and Q y from 0 to π. The first three mode frequencies calculated along paths connecting high symmetry k points in the Irreducible Brillouin Zone (IBZ) are shown in Fig. The 3D partial band structure is shown in Fig. Figure The dispersion curves along specific directions can be obtained by fixing the propagation angle θ and plot the mode frequencies with respect to Q. the P wave acoustic branches are mixed together with SV wave optical branches. The general idea of the reduced order analytical approach is to discretize the repeating The band structure of the 1D chain model in normal incident P wave can be obtained by solving the characteristic equation based on Eqs. ( The trial displacement solutions that inherently satisfy Bloch-Floquet periodicity are: where u c 0 , u i 0 and v c 0 are the complex displacement amplitudes to be determined along with ω for each pair values of k x and k y . The relationship between forces and displacements of the RUC can be established by breaking it into elastic beams and rigid bodies. To obtain the force balance equations for the beams, one could introduce more extra dependent DOFs at reference points c and f , as shown in Fig. In addition to two primary DOFs u c and v c , it also has a rotational DOF θ c as the counter clockwise rotation angle. Point f is defined at the intersection of the T-shaped resonator beam and cell frame's horizontal wall. Point f has three dependent DOFs u f , v f , and θ f defined in positive x, y, and counter clockwise directions, respectively. The four dependent DOFs defined at reference points will also need to satisfy Bloch-Floquet conditions. In the following calculations, all structural elements are treated as Timoshenko beams where shear deformations are allowed. In certain cases (where physically expected) the axial stiffness of the beams are also included in the process. The force balance equations of a Timoshenko beam element (in plane strain conditions) with four DOFs can be expressed as: where the parameter Φ is defined as Here κ = 5/6 is the shear correction factor for rectangular cross section, E is Young's modulus of the material, L is the length of beam, A is the cross sectional area, I is the second moment of inertia, and G is the shear modulus. In Eq. ( a. Resonator effective mass and stiffness For mechanical metamaterials, the stop band location is mainly affected by the natural frequency of the resonator, which can be determined by resonator mass and its effective stiffness. The T-shaped resonator can be regarded as a rigid tip that stays on a vertical elastic beam, and its mass per unit thickness (m i = 0.1161 g/cm in the example studied here) is chosen to be the resonator effective mass. To determine an equivalent spring-mass model, consider an imaginary concentrated force F i applied at the center of the rigid tip in positive x direction as in Fig. where subscript e refers to the properties of the elastic beam under the rigid tip, u t and u b represent the displacements at top and bottom ends of the beam in positive x direction, θ t and θ b are the rotation angles, L r (= 1 mm) is the distance from center of tip mass to top of the vertical beam, and M b is the resultant moment at the bottom. Note the value of moment at top of the beam is known and given based on the moment equilibrium of the tip mass and the assumption that its moment of inertia is negligible in this problem. As will be seen in the following, the unbalanced moment induced in the beam is in fact an important and fundamental component of the unusual behavior of the system. However, the simplifying assumption of the local equilibrium for the tip appears not to limit this effect in any significant way. The kinematic relations among the DOFs are where h (= 1.5 mm) is half of the cell wall thickness. Substituting Eqs. ( where the effective resonator stiffness is: For the cell geometry studied here (assuming 1 cm unit thickness) β i ≈ 66 945.4 (N/cm)/m. b. Frame dynamics For the cross-shaped cell, it's assumed that its mass (m c = 0.638 55 g/cm for the example studied here) is concentrated at the center point c. To study the horizontal dynamics of the cell, we assume that its structure is fully elastic and the cross-sectional area A is uniform along the length between reference points by neglecting the lateral constraints at the ends of beams. The axial forces applied to the (n, m) th cell , see Fig. Note that the vertical DOF on the top and bottom of the cross shaped cell has been eliminated based on the neighboring cell DOFs; See Fig. There are also shear forces applied to the cell due to beam deformations, as shown in where with α = f, c. Note that in Eqs. ( where with α = f, c. The moments applied at the left and right sides of reference point f are denoted as M f L and M f R , as shown in Fig. All previous calculations are based on elements in the (n, m) th cell, and all the loads required for deriving dynamic equations of the RUC have been expressed. Note that the yellow line shown in Fig. the dependent DOF v f can be eliminated and expressed as The equations of motion for the three primary DOFs u c , u i , and v c can now be written as The remaining DOFs, u f , θ f , and θ c , may be eliminated using other static balance equations at the reference points: Alternatively and in general, the displacement vectors for the three primary DOFs and three dependent DOFs can be denoted as U p and U d , respectively: Combining the three equations of motion Eqs. (37) to (39) and the three balance equations Eqs. ( where K pd , K dp , and K dd are 3 × 3 stiffness sub-matrices, and D pp is the 3 × 3 diagonal dynamic stiffness sub-matrix, which includes -ω 2 M pp in addition to the structural stiffness K pp . Note that all the components in U d are assumed to be dependent, and we only need U p to describe the mode shapes fully. Hence Eq. ( where D = K pp -K pd K -1 dd K dp is the system's overall dynamic stiffness matrix. After substituting the parameters, it's easy to prove that D is Hermitian, thus having only real eigenvalues. For any given wavenumber and incident angle, the first three mode frequencies of the reduced order model can be obtained by solving the characteristic equation D = 0. Plotting the mode frequencies with respect to wavenumber Q x and Q y yields the 3D band structure of oblique propagating waves. The eigen-vectors associated with these eigenfrequencies represent the mode shapes in the reduced order model. The asymmetric nature of this unit cell has created a coupling between P and SV modes that leads to quite interesting phenomena. While it may appear that the resonators only interact with P waves, the induced moment from the motion of the head interacts with the shear wave in the cell walls. The resulting band structure, therefore, demonstrates inherent and fundamental mode mixing. The first 3 modes of the band structure for oblique in-plane waves are shown in Fig. Including this rotational DOF at the resonator head should improve the results, though. While easily doable, the 4 DOF analysis is more convoluted without adding major clarity to the physical understanding of the problem. Instead, one can introduce a correction by recalculating β i in such a way that the resonance frequency of an isolated discrete resonator, ω i = β i /m i , matches any estimate of the actual isolated resonator, i.e. with fixed boundary conditions at the root. With this correction, the band structure along paths connecting the corners of the irreducible Brillouin zone was calculated. Figure The pattern of transition in dispersion curves can be seen in Fig. As the angle increase from 60 • towards 90 • , avoided crossing, or level repulsion in band structure becomes more evident. The SV wave optical and P wave branches for 60 • incidence almost intersect each other, as shown in Fig. For instance, at 89.5 • the dispersion curves seem to have a real crossing point in Fig. However, zooming in the vicinity of the apparent crossing point indicates the opposite, as shown in the bottom right corner in Fig. In other words since k x = 0 at 90 • angle, the stiffness components D 13 , D 23 , D 31 and D 32 in Eq. ( where C 1 and C 2 are non-zero displacement components. Therefore at 90 • , the eigenvectors associated with v c 0 are completely decoupled with u c 0 and u i 0 . Such real crossing point at 90 • incidence has two degenerate eigenvalues but one can still find two associated linearly independent eigenvectors. However once the propagation angle changes from exactly 90 The correct sorting of band structure is of prime importance as pointed out elsewhere One way to identify different branches is zooming in the vicinity of apparent crossing point, as shown in Fig. In Fig. In other words, when the points are chosen not close enough to the apparent crossing point, the difference in their eigenvectors could be very small, and the simulated mode shapes could lead to incorrect sorting. To further demonstrate the changes in mode shapes around apparent crossing points, we picked the corresponding points e1', e2', e3', and e4' from the analytical result, as shown in Fig. eigenvectors at 89.5 • show that the displacement of the cell in y direction, v c 0 , changes its sign between points e1' and e2', and the change in sign also occurs for the displacement of resonator in x direction, u i 0 , between e3' and e4'. Note that we ensured to select eigenvectors, for which the dominant components of the the eigenvectors (u i 0 in the former case and v c 0 in the latter) are essentially unchanged, so the sign or phase changes in other components have physical meaning in terms of change in mode shape. The small amplitudes of the components that change signs compared to the dominant components make identifying such differences from the simulated mode shapes difficult. The third component of the 89.5 • eigenvector is not significantly affected in the transition from e1' to e2', but in the case of transition from e3' to e4', it moves one quadrant in the complex domain (sign of the imaginary part changes). These sign flips (in 89.5 • case) prove that the points e1 and e2 are not on the same branch and neither are e3 and e4, i.e. we are observing an avoided level crossing. Furthermore, for 89. A similar analysis may be performed on the mode shapes or eigenvectors calculated in the FE calculations. To demonstrate this, one can define aggregate cell and inclusion displacements by averaging the point-wise quantities over the associated domains. Then, normalized displacement eigenvector components may be defined as where ̄denotes the average numerical value, and j represents the mode number in the order of increasing frequency. Note that these three values are obviously inter-dependent and are depicted here only for clarity of presentation. Further, define amplitude and argument of these quantities as Results are plotted in Fig. This paper presents a numerical and analytical study of the band structure of an acoustic metamaterial for oblique in-plane waves. An analytical method with reduced order model is established to approximate the band structure. Dispersion curves and mode shapes for different incident angles are shown. The studied metamaterial exhibits mixed branch of P and SV wave modes except when the propagation angle is exactly 90 • . We also report on the incidence.