We propose the concept of helicity maximization applicable to structured light and obtain a universal relation for the maximum of helicity density at a given field energy density. We further demonstrate that using structured light with maximized helicity density eliminates the need of the specific knowledge of energy and helicity densities in determining the chirality of a nanoparticle. The helicity maximization concept generalizes the use of the dissymmetry factor g in chirality detection to any chiral structure light illuminating nanoparticles. Chirality is observed in a plethora of phenomena ranging from molecular structures to spiral galaxies Usually, chirality of a bulk material  is detected and characterized through circular dichroism (CD) experiments Several attempts have been made to improve chirality detection by exploiting chiral fields, e.g., standing waves, nearfields, etc. Here we employ two different excitations of a NP to detect its chirality through probing extinction powers, e.g., using optical theorem and is an appropriate measurable choice for NPs' chirality detection. Each term is defined as where " * " denotes complex conjugation. The choice of the " + " and " -" signs for discriminating the two experiments is dictated by the signs of helicity densities Therefore, chirality of a NP is detectable from the differential extinction ext P  if the energy densities of the fields in the two experiments are identical, i.e., if they fulfill the condition (5) For a reliable detection of chirality of a NP, the differential extinction ext P  should be higher than the noise level of a measuring device. It is clear from Eq. ( Moreover, we need to determine what fields offer the maximum value for helicity density h , which we refer them as "best" scenarios for chirality detection. To that end, let us denote the electric and magnetic fields by , where ê and ĥ are complex dimensionless unit vectors. This means that the two components {} ˆ possesses the maximum available helicity density attributed to its given energy density. We call fields satisfying conditions [41], Conditions ( In order to acquire an optically chiralbeam, we propose the superposition of two vortex beams propagating along the z direction, i.e., an azimuthally polarized beam (APB) with  and a radially polarized beam (RPB) with magnetic field where f  is the field profile as a function of radial  and longitudinal z positions, and  is the unit vector in the az- imuth direction  . Each beam is obtained using the super- position of two Laguerre-Gaussian beams   = and AR VV = . To verify, we depict in Fig. are optimally chiral. Here we demonstrate that appropriately engineered dielectric NAs with high refractive index, which provides electric and magnetic Mie resonances A NA with "balanced" condition ( We observe more than an order of magnitude enhancement in the local helicity density in proximity of the sphere, along the beam axis which drops to values around 2-3 at 50 nm away from the surface. This near field with enhanced helicity density has the remarkable potential to improve detection of chiral NPs . Note that the retrieval of a NP's chirality em  based on Eq. ( It is important to note that the proposed NA is achiral since we do not want to include the NA's chirality contribution to the differential extinction. Indeed, it is hard to estimate and differentiate such a contribution from the differential extinction generated by the test chiral NP. In this discussion we have neglected the feedback mechanism due to the coupling between the chiral sample and NA since generally the polarizability of extremely subwavelength NPs is weak. Next, we discuss the characterization of the NP chirality in terms of the magnetoelectric polarizability with respect to its electric polarizability. To this end, we consider the dissymmetry factor g defined as which is independent of the filed properties when optimally chiral structured light is used, and it provides exclusive information about a NP's chirality with respect to its electric property. In conclusion, we have introduced the concept of helicity maximization applicable to any structured light, including optical beams and that arising from the near field of nanoantennas. We have discovered the upper bound of helicity densityfor a given energy density, obtained when conditions 