We study magnetic textures realized in noncentrosymmetric Kondo lattice models, in which localized magnetic moments weakly interact with itinerant electrons subject to Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit couplings. By virtue of state-of-the-art numerical simulations as well as variational calculations, we uncover versatile multiple-Q orderings under zero magnetic field, which are found to originate in the instabilities of the Fermi surface whose spin degeneracy is lifted by the spin-orbit couplings. In the case with equally-strong Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit couplings, which is known to realize a persistent spin helix in semiconductor quantum wells, we discover a sextuple-Q magnetic ordering with a checkerboard-like spatial pattern of the spin scalar chirality. In the presence of either Rashba or Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, we find out another multiple-Q ordering, which is distinct from Skyrmion crystals discussed under the same symmetry. Our results indicate that the cooperation of the spin-charge and spin-orbit couplings brings about richer magnetic textures than those studied within effective spin models. The situations would be experimentally realized, e.g., in noncentrosymmetric heavy-fermion compounds and heterostructures of spin-orbit coupled metals and magnetic insulators. Over a decade noncoplanar spin configurations in metals have been gathering growing interest as a source of topological transport phenomena. In general noncoplanarity of localized spins is characterized by the spin scalar chirality, defined as S j • S k × S l for three spins spanned by sites j, k, and l. In the spin-charge coupled systems the spin scalar chirality is imprinted on conduction electrons as a fictitious magnetic field, coined as an emergent magnetic field, through the so-called Berry curvature in real space Noncoplanar spin configurations are often described by superpositions of spin helices running in different directions. These are called multiple-Q magnetic orderings. One of the latest examples is a magnetic SkX mentioned above, which can be described as a double-or triple-Q ordering There are several known mechanisms for the formation of multiple-Q orderings. For SkXs observed in noncentrosymmetric 3d-electron systems listed above, the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction described as D • S j × S k plays a crucial role, which originates in the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) under broken spatial inversion symmetry. Indeed, magnetic-field-temperature phase diagrams in those compounds including the SkX phase can be qualitatively explained by using localized spin models with ferromagnetic and DM interactions between the neighboring spins On the other hand, recent theoretical studies have proposed a distinct mechanism for the formation of multiple-Q orderings in centrosymmetric itinerant magnets Considering the above arguments, a question naturally arises; can multiple-Q orderings also show up, or if so what kind, when both the SOC and the Fermi surface instability cooperate under broken inversion symmetry? Thus it is an intriguing task to uncover magnetic orderings in noncentrosymmetric Kondo lattice models with conduction electrons subject to the SOC. Recently, this issue was addressed in the case of Rashba SOC by one of the authors and his coworker, by deriving an effective spin model by the second-order perturbation with respect to the spin-charge coupling In this work we study the noncentrosymmetric Kondo lattice model, while fully incorporating the effect of conduction electrons subject to the SOC, by virtue of a recently-developed efficient numerical simulation technique Specifically we focus on three cases on a square lattice: (i) the case with both the Rashba and Dresselhaus SOCs with equal strength (α = β = 0), (ii) the case with only the Rashba SOC (α = 0, β = 0), and (iii) the case with only the Dresselhaus SOC (α = 0, β = 0). The case (i) was discussed to stabilize a peculiar spin texture called the persistent spin helix The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the Kondo lattice model with the Rashba and Dresselhaus SOCs and derive an effective spin interactions given by the bare magnetic suscepti-bility. We also discuss a unique spin-dependent gauge transformation applicable to the α = β case as well as the exchange between α and β. In Sec. III we explain the details of the numerical simulation and variational calculations. The results are described in Sec. IV. We devote Secs. IV A-IV C to the aforementioned three cases (i)-(iii) with different types of SOCs, respectively. In these sections we discuss the magnetic orderings obtained by the simulation, comparing them with the bare magnetic susceptibility and the results of the variational calculations. Finally, in Sec. V, we summarize our results. In this paper we study a Kondo lattice model on a square lattice with Rashba and Dresselhaus SOCs. The Hamiltonian is given by Here c js (c † js ) is the electron annihilation (creation) operator at site j with spin s(=↑, ↓), and S j = t (S x j , S y j , S z j ) describes a localized spin at site j, which is treated as a classical spin with the normalized length |S j | = 1 for simplicity. σ is a vector of Pauli matrices, defined as σ = t (σ x , σ y , σ z ). t jj ′ represents the hopping amplitude of electrons form site j ′ to site j (t jj ′ = t j ′ j ), and J the spin-charge-coupling strength. The SOCs are implemented in the second term, in which g jj ′ reads Here α jj ′ and β jj ′ denote the strength of Rashba and Dresselhaus SOCs, respectively, which work on an electron hopping between the sites j and j ′ (α jj ′ = α j ′ j and β jj ′ = β j ′ j ). e jj ′ = (e x jj ′ , e y jj ′ ) is a normalized displacement vector from j to j ′ , represented as e jj ′ = (r j ′r j )/|r j ′r j | with lattice position vectors r j and r j ′ ; we denote r j = (n j , m j ), where n j and m j are integers with the unit lattice constant. In the following calculations, we consider the electron hopping processes between the nearest-neighbor (NN) sites and between the third-nearest-neighbor (TNN) sites. We denote the hopping amplitudes t jj ′ between the NN and TNN sites as t and t 3 , respectively. Likewise, we represent the Rashba (Dresselhaus) SOC α jj ′ (β jj ′ ) between the NN and TNN sites as α (β) and α 3 (β 3 ), respectively. In the following we take t as energy unit (t = 1). In the momentum-space representation the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here c ks is defined by the Fourier transform of c js as c ks ≡ 1 √ N j e -ik•rj c js , where N = L 2 is the number of sites (L: the linear dimension of the system). S q is the Fourier transform of S j defined as in which the spin normalization (|S j | = 1) leads to the sum constraint of q ρ |S ρ q | 2 = 1 (ρ = x, y, z). H 0 (k) is a 2 × 2 matrix defined as in which I is the identity matrix, and ǫ 0 k and d k are given by To get insight into the magnetic instability by the spin-charge coupling in the weak J regime, it is useful to derive an effective spin Hamiltonian by the secondorder perturbation analysis on the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( in which the bare magnetic susceptibility χ ρρ ′ q is obtained as by using the noninteracting 2 × 2 Green function G 0 (k, iω n ) = 1/(iω n -H 0 (k)+μ); ω n represents the Matsubara frequency and μ is the chemical potential. More explicitly, Eq. ( Here ǫ kτ and |kτ are the eigenvalue and eigenstate of where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. In the presence of SOC, in general, the bare magnetic susceptibility χ ρρ ′ q in Eq. ( Here we define the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of χ ρρ ′ q in Eq. ( Note that we sort the eigenvalues as λ 1 q ≧ λ 2 q ≧ λ 3 q . S ′ q is a transformed spin Fourier component, given by S q = U * q S ′ q with U q = [u 1 q , u 2 q , u 3 q ]. Note the sum constraint also holds for S ′ q as q ξ |S ′ξ q | 2 = 1. The diagonalized form of the effective spin Hamiltonian in Eq. Meanwhile, it should be noted that the generalized RKKY interactions leave degeneracy; the single-and multiple-Q orderings specified by {Q ν } and the corresponding modes S Qν ∝ (u 1 Qν ) * are energetically degenerate. Higher-order contributions play a crucial role in selecting out the lowest-energy magnetic state, as demonstrated in the absence of SOC In the case of α = β with only the NN terms (t 3 = α 3 = β 3 = 0), the Fermi surfaces have peculiar properties ). Importantly, this peculiar nature of the Fermi surfaces indicates that the SOC with α = β can be effectively taken away through a certain spin-dependent gauge transformation, which adds or subtracts half of the shift vector, Q s /2, to or from the electron momenta, depending on the spin directions where c j = t (c j↑ , c j↓ ) and This transformation adds spin-dependent gauges with the quantization axis to Here the new spin frame Sj is defined through the rotation by the amount of Q s • r j along the [110] direction on the original spin frame as (16) These analyses imply that the magnetic orderings for α = β = 0 are related to those without SOC through the sitedependent rotation in Eq. ( We also remark that the exchange between α and β leads to a simple uniform rotation of magnetic orderings. By applying a π rotation along the [110] axis in spin space for conduction electrons as given by and likewise to the spin frame for the localized spins as the original Hamiltonian in Eq. ( This indicates that the magnetic orderings for the Rashba-only case in Sec. IV B also applies to the Dresselhaus-only case in Sec. IV C through the global rotations in Eqs. ( To reveal the ground-state magnetic orderings for the Kondo lattice model with Rashba and Dresselhaus SOCs we employ a state-of-the-art large-scale numerical simulation combining the kernel polynomial method (KPM) Here we employ the modified version of the KPM-LD We perform the KPM-LD at zero temperature on the square lattice of N = 96 2 . In the KPM, we expand the density of states in a series of Chebyschev polynomials up to the 2000th order, in which 144 random vectors are chosen by a probing technique In Sec. IV A the KPM-LD is initiated from a random spin configuration, aiming at an unbiased search for the ground state. On the other hand, in Sec. IV B, we start the KPM-LD from some given ansatzes for the configuration of localized spins, because for α = 0 and β = 0 we found that random configurations often fail to converge to a homogeneous state and end up with a mixing of different ordering domains. This can be attributed to keen energy competitions of multiple magnetic orders originating in a considerable number of sharp peaks in λ 1 q [see Fig. Below we describe how we prepare the initial ansatzes used in Sec. IV B. The ansatzes we employ are single-Q helical states that maximize the energy gain of the generalized RKKY Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where u x , u y , and u z are real numbers. As mentioned in Sec. II B, multiple-Q orderings maximizing the RKKY energy gain in Eq. ( As a result, in this Rashba-only case the multiple-Q states are given by superpositions of symmetry-related helices with the spin rotation plane perpendicular to the xy-plane, which are given by Here the sum constraint ν A 2 ν = 4 holds for A ν and N represents the normalization factor so that |S j | = 1. We note that without the normalization factor N all the ansatzes described by Eq. ( In Sec. IV A we employ the periodic boundary condition as in the previous works For the spin textures obtained in the KPM-LD we calculate |S q | [see Eq. ( where the sites j, k, l, and m correspond to the bottomleft, bottom-right, top-right and top-left vertices of the square plaquette p, respectively. In the same manner as In Secs. IV A and IV B we also perform variational calculations. For given spin configurations we calculate the total energy by using the exact diagonalization of the one-body Hamiltonian and compare the values to determine the ground state. The calculations are done for the system sizes of N = 96 2 and 480 2 . q [see Eq. ( When α and β are introduced with equal strength, the spin-degenerate Fermi surfaces are split along the [ 110] direction, each of which has the uniform spin polarization parallel or antiparallel to the [110] direction. Figure where Q s is the shift vector of the Fermi surfaces shown in Fig. With the Fermi surface instabilities at these wave numbers in mind we discuss the spin textures obtained by the KPM-LD simulations. We begin with the results for J = 0.1. In the absence of SOC we obtain the noncollinear but coplanar double-Q ordering [Figs. On the other hand, when the Rashba and Dresselhaus SOCs are introduced with the equal strength of α = β = 0.2, we find a complex noncoplanar spin texture characterized with six wave vectors, as shown in Figs. While increasing J to J = 0.2 and 0.3, we find that the same ordering patterns are obtained in the KPM-LD: 2Quudd without SOC and 6Q with α = β = 0.2. The result indicates that the Fermi surface instabilities govern the magnetic textures in the weak coupling regime. For J = 0.4, however, we find that the spin texture changes into a less complex one. Without the SOC appears a simple single-Q state composed of Q 1 (or Q 2 , depending on the initial configuration), which is a collinear up-up-down-down ordering [Figs. As we mentioned in Sec. II C, the spin-dependent gauge transformation guarantees the exact mapping of the model for α = β = 0 to the SOC-free one in Eq. ( for 2Q-uudd, and for 1Q-uudd Combining the results by the KPM-LD and variational calculations, we summarize the J-α phase diagram for equally-large α and β in Fig. Case with α = 0 and β = 0 Next, we discuss the magnetic orderings in the presence of only Rashba SOC (α = 0 and β = 0). First of all, we show the Fermi surface instabilities. In this section we introduce the TNN terms with t 3 = -0.5 and α 3 = -0.5α, and set the chemical potential as μ = 0.98, following the previous study on the SOC-free case When the Rashba SOC is introduced, the spin degeneracy of the Fermi surface is lifted and accordingly the peaks in the susceptibility are split in a complicated way. Figures In the following we discuss the results of the KPM-LD simulations. Figures 6 show the simulation results for J = 0.1. As already reported in details in the previous study while 2Q-flux is found to be represented as In Fig. To summarize, we have studied magnetic orderings generated by itinerant electrons subject to the Rashba (α) and Dresselhaus (β) SOCs by means of the large-scale numerical simulations as well as the variational calculations based on the perturbation analyses. We discovered the complex multiple-Q orderings under zero magnetic field, depending on the nature of the spin-split Fermi surfaces induced by the SOCs. For the equal strength of both SOCs (α = β = 0) the exotic spin texture is unveiled in a broad range of J, characterized with as many as six wave vectors. Notably this sextuple-Q ordering shows a checkerboard-like pattern of the spin scalar chirality. In the case that only Rashba or Dresselhaus SOC exists (α or β = 0) we found another type of complex multiple-Q states, which are distinct from those expected in localized spin systems under the same symmetry. Our findings suggest that the combination of the spin-charge and spin-orbit couplings under broken spatial inversion symmetry gives rise to richer multiple-Q magnetic orders than the competition between the ferromagnetic and DM interactions in localized spin systems. Our theory would be potentially applicable to noncentrosymmetric f -electron compounds as well as heterostuctures of spinorbit coupled metals and magnetic materials.