Most research on nanocrystalline alloys has been focused on planned doping of metals with other metallic elements, but nonmetallic impurities are also prevalent in the real world. In this work, we report on the combined effects of metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities on grain boundary energy and strength using first-principles calculations, with a Σ5 (310) grain boundary in Cu chosen as a model system. We find a clear correlation between the grain boundary energy and the change in excess free volume of doped grain boundaries. A combination of a larger substitutional dopant and an interstitial impurity can fill the excess free volume more efficiently and further reduce the grain boundary energy. We also find that the strengthening effects of dopants and impurities are dominated by the electronic interactions between the host Cu atoms and the two types of dopant elements. For example, the significant competing effects of metal dopants such as Zr, Nb, and Mo with impurities on the grain boundary strength are uncovered from the density of states of the d electrons. As a whole, this work deepens the field's understanding of the interaction between metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities on grain boundary properties, providing a guide for improving the thermal stability of materials while avoiding embrittling effects. Grain boundaries play an important role in governing the mechanical, functional, and kinetic properties of a great many engineering materials, but these features are especially important for nanostructured materials Metallic dopants have also been reported to play an important role in altering the mechanical strength of grain boundaries Unfortunately, these limited number of studies do not provide a comprehensive picture of the combined effects of these two types of solutes on strengthening or embrittling effects. In this work, we report on the combined effect of a large variety of both metallic dopants (Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and Bi) and nonmetallic impurities (H, B, C, N, O, Si, P, and S) on the grain boundary energy and strength of a Σ5 (310) grain boundary in Cu. We employ first-principles simulations to study this issue at the atomic and electronic levels Grain boundary energy decreases as the atomic radius of both the dopants and impurities increases, because these atoms can more efficiently fill the excess free volume at the grain boundary. During our analysis of the mechanical effects, we divide the strengthening energy into mechanical and chemical contributions to provide a more nuanced picture of this effect. The mechanical contribution increases with increasing amounts of grain boundary expansion. However, for the majority of our samples, the main contribution of grain boundary strengthening or weakening comes from the chemical contribution, predominantly due to interactions between the d states of the dopants and the host Cu atoms. For example, the dstates interactions are weakened when the p and s states of impurities create hybrid orbitals with the d states of the dopants, leading to competition between the two types of elements. As a whole, this work deepens the field's understanding of the combined effects of metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities, which can provide a guide for tailoring the stability of a microstructure while avoiding embrittlement. While this work is motivated by the need for better nanostructured materials, alterations to the grain boundary energy and strength will also be important for coarse-grained materials. Fig. These two possibilities are illustrated in Fig. The propensity of a dopant X or an impurity Y to segregate to the grain boundary can be characterized by the segregation energy, E seg GB where E tot GB and E tot bulk are the total energies of the grain boundary and bulk models. The [m, n] represents the model contains m dopant atoms and n impurity atoms, thus the [0, 0] indicates the pure Cu model without dopant or impurity. The bulk model has the exact same dimension and number of atoms as the grain boundary model, but no grain boundary E tot bulk [m,n] is the total energy of the lowest energy bulk model. A more negative segregation energy indicates the model is more energetically stable where S is the cross-sectional area of the simulation cell (i.e., the grain boundary area). Eq. (1) and (2) contain some of the same terms and are related, with a dopant X or an impurity Y with the strong ability to segregate to the grain boundary usually significantly reducing the grain boundary energy. The strength of the grain boundary can be represented by the separation energy, E sep , which is defined as the energy needed to separate the grain boundary into two free surfaces (the lower surface and the upper surface) where E FS_lower tot and E FS_upper tot are the total energy of the lower surface and the upper surface, respectively. For the grain boundary with just one dopant or impurity, we assign that the dopant or impurity stays on the lower surface, meaning the upper surface has the same atomic configuration as the clean Cu free surface. For the grain boundary with both a dopant and an impurity, there are 48 relative positions for dopant-impurity pairs with the four substitutional sites of the dopant, the three interstitial sites of the impurity, the Near and Far configurations, and the lower and upper surface. To allow for a reasonable number of calculations, we assume that the dopant and the impurity stay on the lower surface after the separation. The free surface model was obtained using the exact same dimensions as the grain boundary model but with the upper half removed, as shown in Fig. Calculations of the free surface energies are important for these grain boundary strength calculations, so there are two important scenarios to consider. One measure of the grain boundary strength would have the dopants and impurities on the free surface stay at the lowest energy sites calculated for the grain boundary, representing a fast fracture process where no diffusion along the crack surface is allowed (denoted as "Fast"). Alternatively, one would allow the dopants and impurities to find the lowest energy sites along the free surface of the crack, which represents a slow fracture case where diffusion can and does occur (denoted as "Slow"). Both calculations were carried out, providing upper and lower bounds for the strengthening effect. A negative value of the strengthening energy means that the dopant or the impurity will enhance the grain boundary strength, while a positive value suggests a detrimental effect on strength. In both the segregation energy and the strengthening energy, negative energies would be preferred to achieve a more stable grain structure and to strengthen the boundary against cracking. Furthermore, the strengthening energy can be divided into mechanical (Emech) and chemical (Echem) contributions, which reflect the effects resulting from the structural distortion of the boundary and the electronic interaction between the host Cu and solutes, respectively System C is the grain boundary and free surface with the structural distortion caused by adding the substitutional dopant or the interstitial impurity, which is generated by removing the substitutional dopant or the interstitial impurity in system D but no further relaxation. System D is the final relaxed grain boundary and free surface with a substitutional dopant or an interstitial impurity. The path to introduce a substitutional dopant to the grain boundary can be thought of as removal of a Cu atom at the grain boundary (A → B), adjustment of the space at the grain boundary (B → C), and then finally addition of the substitutional dopant at the grain boundary (C → D). The path for an interstitial impurity is A → C → D without removing a Cu at the grain boundary. The path for adding both a substitutional dopant and an interstitial impurity is A → B → C → D. The mechanical contribution to the strengthening energy will be the difference between the separation energies in the systems B and C for a grain boundary with a metallic dopant and a grain boundary with both a dopant plus an impurity: Since there is no removal of a host Cu atom, the mechanical contribution for the grain boundary with an interstitial impurity is: The chemical contribution is then the total strengthening effect with the mechanical contribution subtracted: The segregation energies of different metallic dopants at the grain boundary are shown in Fig. then shows the calculated grain boundary energies with dopants at the site 1. All of the grain boundary energies are lower than the 880.37 mJ/m 2 value of the clean grain boundary meaning that all dopants studied here can increase the grain boundary stability. Fig. In short, dopants with larger atomic radii have an increased ability to segregate to the grain boundary and stabilize it, which is consistent with prior findings in the literature The calculated strengthening energies of grain boundaries with dopants at site 1 under the Fast and Slow fracture processes are shown in Fig. To help understand the importance of chemical effects, the density of states Since there are four substitutional sites for metallic dopants and three interstitial sites for nonmetallic impurities as shown in However, since the atomic radius of other impurities such as Si, P, and S are much larger, it is not possible to say that the Near configuration is always preferred. To this end, the segregation energies of the grain boundaries with Zr fixed at site 1 and impurities at different interstitial sites were calculated, taking care to consider both the Near and Far configurations (Fig. Next, we investigate the energetics of grain boundaries with a wider variety of dopants and impurities, no longer restricting our scope to Zr. The dopants studied are Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and Bi, while the impurities are B, C, O, and Si. B, C, O and Si are chosen because they differ greatly in the atomic radius and prefer different sites at the grain boundary. Since Fig. The segregation energies of grain boundaries with both dopants and impurities at the Near and Far configurations are shown in Fig. For example, the grain boundary energies of a sample with dopants plus the large impurity Si are significantly lower than that of grain boundaries with dopants plus the smaller impurities B, C, and O. Prior work has shown that the grain boundary energy increases with increasing excess free volume of grain boundaries in face centered cubic metals where V GB and V bulk are the total volumes of the grain boundary region and the corresponding bulk Cu, respectively. The bulk model has the same cross-sectional area, S, Previous works on Cu have also shown that the grain boundary energy decreases when increasing the interfacial coverage of dopants Fig. The values of the mechanical contributions are positive/weakening, except for a few very small negative/strengthening values for B, indicating that the mechanical contribution of impurities is generally to embrittle the boundary. As shown in Fig. where V (C) and V (B) are the total volume of the grain boundary regions in system C and B in Fig. The combined effects, which can be either synergistic or competing, of metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities on grain boundary strength are of great interest, in order to fulfill our original goal of providing a guide for finding potentially useful combinations of dopants and impurities to guide materials processing. The combined effect (E str comb ) can be studied by taking the difference between the strengthening energy of the grain boundary with both dopants and impurities (E str GB [m,n] ) and the sum of the strengthening energies of the grain boundary with single dopants (E str GB [m,0] ) and the grain boundary with single impurities (E str GB[0,n] ): A negative value of E str comb would signal that there is a synergistic effect of dopants and impurities, with the combined effect being stronger than the sum of its parts. In contrast, a positive value would signal that the dopant and impurity compete, giving an effect that is weaker than the sum of its parts. Finally, a value near zero will indicates that combined effect is very weak, meaning the total effect is simply the sum of the two contributions and there is no meaningful interaction between the two species that alters the boundary properties. First, we investigate the combined effects of Zr and impurities on the grain boundary strength in Fig. For the grain boundaries with Zr and the second period impurities B, C, N, and O, the main electronic interactions occur in the p states of impurities and the d states of Zr and Cu. The p states of impurities interact much more strongly with the d states of Zr than the d states of Cu, again indicating that Zr has the stronger ability to bond with these impurities. In addition, the main peaks of the p states for the impurities move to the lower-energy regions as the atomic number of the impurities increase, further weakening the interaction with the d states of Cu. At the same time, the overlap between the p states of the impurities and the d states of Zr are becoming stronger as the atomic number increases. In total, the interaction between the d states of Cu and Zr are weakened by the strong electronic interactions between Zr and impurities. For the grain boundaries with Zr and the third periodic impurities Si, P, and S, although Zr stays away from these impurities in the Far configuration, the electronic interaction still occurs between the s states of impurities and the d states of Zr and Cu. As the atomic number of these impurities increases, the main peaks of the s states of impurities move to the lower-energy regions and overlap more with the d states of Zr. As a result, the electronic interactions between the d states of Zr and Cu are weakened by the interactions between Zr and these impurities, again giving a weakening effect that increases with increasing atomic number. Looking back to Fig. In conclusion, the combined effects of metallic dopants (Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and Bi) and common nonmetallic impurities (H, B, C, N, O, Si, P, and S) on grain boundary energy and strength of a Σ5 (310) grain boundary is Cu was investigated using first-principles calculations. The following specific conclusions can be drawn:  The relative spatial positions of dopants and impurities are related to the atomic radii and electronegativity values. The dopants with less electronegativity than Cu prefer to bond with the impurities, as long as the atomic radii of the dopants and impurities are not extremely large.  The grain boundary energy decreases as the excess free volume of the grain boundary decreases. Therefore, a combination of a larger substitutional dopant and a larger interstitial impurity can more efficiently fill the free volume to further reduce the grain boundary energy.  The strengthening/weakening effects of dopants and impurities mainly originate from the electronic interactions with Cu. Zr, Nb, and Mo can significantly enhance the grain boundary strength because of the strong interactions between the d states of the dopants and Cu. In contrast, the strong interactions between the s/p states of the impurities and the d states of the dopants will dramatically reduce any strengthening effect. As a whole, this work deepens the understanding of the combined effects of metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities from the atomic and electronic levels, which can provide a guide on improving the stability and avoiding embrittlement of nanostructured materials. Such considerations are extremely important, as real-world nanocrystalline alloys typically contain a combination of planned or intentional dopants and unplanned or unintentional impurities. Table shows that this is in fact true for our calculations. The dopants with electronegativity values lower than the value for Cu (1.8), such as Al (1.5), Zn (1.5), Zr (1.5), Nb (1.7), and Mo (1.6), prefer to bond with impurities. In contrast, Pd (2.0), with a higher electronegativity than Cu, prefers to stay far away from the impurities. Ag and Bi have room in the interstitial site surrounded by only Cu atoms. Similarly, the atomic radius of Si (1.173 Å) is by far the largest of the impurities, meaning it will have the most trouble fitting into the