Construction of parallel logic gates at nano-scale level undoubtedly improves the efficiency of computable operations. In this work we put forward a new idea of designing two distinct logical operations simultaneously in the two output leads of a three-terminal bridge setup which on one hand is highly stable as all the results are valid for a wide range of parameter values and on the other hand easy to engineer. Our system can be reprogrammed to have all the twoinput logic gates with two operations at a time by selectively choosing the physical parameters describing the system, viz, Rashba spin-orbit (SO) interaction, magnetic flux, and Fermi energy. Finally, we explore the possible storage mechanism as well using our model. Introduction. -The logic gates are the most essential bricks of modern computers and digital electronics as their functionalities rely on the implementation of Boolean functions. These gates are usually comprised of various field-effect transistors (FETs) and metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs). So, finding of logical responses in a simple nano-scale device is a subject of intense research for better performance of computable operations. And for proper execution of such operations, wiring between individual logic gates is definitely required which limits integration densities, gives rise to huge power consumption and restricts processing speeds Though a wealth of literature knowledge has been developed in designing logic gates essentially based on molecular systems Most of the works available in literature exploit electronic charge for logical operations, but the implementation of these functional operations based on spin degree of freedom undoubtedly yields several advantages like rapid processing, much smaller energy consumptions, greater integration densities, etc. Considering all these factors, here we propose a new idea of designing 'simultaneous Boolean logic operations' using a three-terminal bridge setup (see Fig. The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. With the above brief introduction and motivation, next we illustrate our model quantum system and the theoretical prescription for the calculations. The logical operations are clearly described in a separate section. In this section we also discuss the possibilities of utilizing the setup for storage mechanism. Logical operations along with storage function is extremely important for the complete executation of computable operation and that is hopefully possible as our response is spin based. In usual charge based devices we need to transfer the information to a memory as these are usually highly volatile Model Hamiltonian and the Method. -The full bridge system described in Fig. where the summation over p (p runs from 1 to 3) is used for the three leads. The parameters ǫ 0 and t 0 describe the on-site energy and nearest-neighbor hopping (NNH) integral, respectively. For an ordered lead we can easily put ǫ 0 = 0, without loss of any generality. t 0 controls the band width (4t 0 ) of the leads. We couple the incoming lead at site 1 of the ring, for the entire analysis, whereas the other two leads are connected at two other sites of the ring (say, k and l), those are variables. The leads are coupled to the ring through the hopping parameter τ p . The TB Hamiltonian for the central system looks quite different from Eq. 1, as the ring system is subjected to Rashba and Dresselhaus SO interactions, and the magnetic flux as well. The dividing line is free from any kind of SO interaction, and since the two sub-rings are threaded by equal amount of magnetic flux, no phase factor will introduce into this segment. We write the general Hamiltonian of the central ring (CR) geometry as where c n is a column of operators formed with the fermionic operators c n↑ and c n↓ . θ = πΦ/2 is the phase factor acquired by an electron where T 1q (E) is the effective two-terminal spin selective transmission probability, and it is defined as ). To find spin dependent transmission probabilities T σσ ′ 1q we use Green's function method, and in terms of the retarded and advanced Green's functions (G r , G a ) it can be expressed as is the effective Hamiltonian of the central ring system by incorporating the effects of side-attached leads through self-energy corrections. In our prescription, positive I s means high output, while negative I s corresponds to the low output. Essential Results and Discussion. -Simultaneous logical operations: As already stated above, by selectively choosing physical parameters, viz, Rashba SO coupling, magnetic flux Φ in each sub-rings and location of the outgoing leads we can design all possible Boolean logic gates, two such gates at a time. Here we present three pairs (OR-NOR, AND-NAND, and XOR-XNOR) for a specific set of parameter values, as illustrative examples, but one can get other different pairs quite easily simply by adjusting the required variables, and thus, our system is reprogrammable. We carry out numerical calculations at absolute zero temperature, considering a 10-site system as discussed in Fig. Case I. OR and NOR operations: The setup is shown in Fig. Case II. XOR and XNOR operations: Considering the identical ring type (viz, the hybrid ring where RSOI is distributed non-uniformly) as taken in Case I, and slightly modifying the location of one of the two outgoing leads we get a pair of another two simultaneous logical operations. The setup along with the results are placed in Fig. Case III. AND and NAND operations: Finally, we consider another configuration to implement other two logic functions i.e., AND and NAND operations. Here the full circumference is subjected to Rashba SO interaction which acts as one of the two input signals, and for the other input we impose equal amount of magnetic flux Φ in each of the two sub-rings as shown schematically in Fig. Case IV. Single setup -all possible logic operations: To put more emphasis on reprogrammability, finally we search for a possible ring-lead configuration where all the two-input logic gates can be achieved. In Fig. Applicability as a storage device: Along with the above mentioned functional logical operations here we give a brief outline how such a system can be utilized for storage purposes as well. Utilization of spin orientation (↑, ↓) for storing information will be the most suitable operation Closing Remarks. -In this work we make an indepth analysis of designing simultaneous logic gates based on spin states that has not been discussed so far in literature, to the best of our concern. The significance of this proposal is that it relies on a simple tailor made geometry that can be configured to achieve different functional logical operations. Though the magnitude of spin current I s slightly change with the strengths of SO fields and magnetic flux, all the essential results, determined by the sign of I s , remain unchanged for a wide range of parameter values including bias voltage that we confirm through our exhaustive numerical calculations. Along with the logical operations, we also put forward an idea of devising this system for storage purposes utilizing the concept of spin exchange interaction. Since in this three-terminal setup, polarized spin currents are obtained at the two outgoing leads, we can in principle store two bits by imposing two free magnetic sites, which yields higher storage capacity. Thus, both logic functions and storage mechanism can be implemented in a single device, circumventing the use of additional storage device as usually considered in charge based systems, which no doubt brings significant impact to hit the present market of nanotechnology and nanoengineering. Finally, we end our discussion by pointing out that this proposal of simultaneous Boolean logic operations can be generalized to have more complex parallel logic operations by adding more output leads and re-programmed the system by the external factors. * * * First author (MP) would like to acknowledge the financial support of University Grants Commission, India (F. 2 -10/2012(SA-I)) for pursuing her doctoral work. i 's (i = x, y, z) are the usual Pauli spin matrices where σ z is diagonal.