Layered perovskites A 3 M 2 O 7 are known to exhibit the so-called hybrid improper ferroelectricity. Despite experimentally confirmed cases (e.g. nonmagnetic M =Ti and Sn), the ferroelectricity in magnetic Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 remains a puzzle. Here, the structural, ferroelectric, magnetoelectric, and optical properties of Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 are systematically investigated. Switchable polarization is directly measured, demonstrating its ferroelectricity. In addition, magnetoelectric response is also evidenced, implying the coupling between magnetism and ferroelectricity. Furthermore, strong visible light absorption is observed, which can be understood from its electronic structure. Its direct and appropriate band gap, as well as wide conducting bands, makes Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 a potential candidate for ferroelectric photoelectric applications. The so-called 327-type Ruddlesden-Popper perovskites with generic chemical formula A 3 M 2 O 7 (A: rare earth or alkaline earth, M : transition metal) have been attracting great research attentions since the prediction of hybrid improper ferroelectricity in 2011. In this category, the first predicted two materials are Ca 3 Ti 2 O 7 and Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 . The crystal structure was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu-K α radiation from 207 K to 673 K. Using the GSAS Rietveld program, In the following, the low T polar A2 1 am structure is studied to verify its multiferroicity. The XRD pattern at 207 K is shown in Fig. To measure the dielectric and ferroelectric properties, the sample was polished into thin plate with typical thickness of 0.20 mm and area of ∼ 7.06 mm 2 . The gold electrodes were deposited on the top/bottom surfaces. The dielectric constant ε under different frequencies are measured as a function of T using HP4294A impedance analyzer, as shown in Fig. The T -dependent ferroelectric P was measured using the pyroelectric current method. In detail, the sample was first poled under a poling electric field from 300 K to 2 K. Then the electric field was set to zero, and the sample was electrically short-circuited for several hours at 2 K in order to exclude possible extrinsic contributions (e.g. trapped charge during the poling process). Then the pyroelectric current (I pyro ) was collected by heating the sample at different rates of 2, 4 and 6 K/min, as shown in Fig. Under the poling field 10 kV/cm, the integrated pyroelectric ∆P is about 2500 μC/m 2 from 60 K to 2 K for the polycrystalline sample. And the integrated pyroelectric ∆P is also independent on the warming rates. The pyroelectric curves are also measured under the positive and negative poling electric fields. The antisymmetrical pyroelectric curves upon the positive/negative poling fields indicate the reversibility of ∆P , as shown in Fig. In addition to the pyroelectric measurement, the ferroelectric hysteresis loops have also been measured using the improved Positive-Up-Negative-Down (PUND) method, which can deduct the extrinsic contribution from leakage and capacitance to some extent. The PUND loop at 5 K is shown in Fig. The magnetic susceptibilities (χ's) as a function of T under the zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) modes were measured under a small magnetic field 500 Oe by the superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (SQUID) (Quantum Design, Inc.), as shown in Fig. In the original theoretical work, the spin-lattice mediated magnetoelectric coupling was predicted, which might lead to electric-control of M . Recently, photovoltaic effects in ferroelectric (or polar) materials have attracted considerable attentions. However, as stated before, Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 is not very insulating, which is disadvantage for ferroelectric measurement but may be advantage for photovoltaic current or other photo applications. To characterize the optical properties of Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 , the UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectrum was measured at room T with a Cary 4000 -5000 -6000i UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer in the 200 -2500 nm wavelength range. The reflectance spectrum was further converted to absorbance with the Kubelka-Munk function. To further understand the optical properties, a calculation based on density function theory (DFT) is performed. Although an early DFT calculation had been done for Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 , they used the pure generalized gradient approximation (GGA) without U , which leaded to an unrealistic too small band gap (∼ 0.3 eV). The DFT band structure shown in Fig. Then, the light absorption spectra are calculated from the imaginary part of the dielectric constant, In summary, the physical properties of Ca 3 Mn 2 O 7 have been investigated, including its structural property, magnetism, ferroelectricity, magnetoelectricity, and optical property. Measurements of dielectric constants and structure suggest possible ferroelectric T C around 240 K, although the relaxor like behaviors are found in a quite wide temperature range. The ferroelectric polarization is measured at low temperature by the pyroelectric method as well as the PUND method, the later of which can give the hysteresis loops of electric-polarization. Furthermore, the net magnetization of weak ferromagnetism is evidenced, which can be modulated by electric field beyond the ferroelectric coercive field. Finally, the strong light absorption has been confirmed in both experiment and DFT calculation, implying potential ferroelectric photoelectric applications. 