Although the direct or indirect nature of the bandgap transition is an essential parameter of semiconductors for optoelectronic applications, the understanding why some of the conventional semiconductors have direct or indirect bandgaps remains ambiguous. In this Letter, we revealed that the existence of the occupied cation d bands is a prime element in determining the directness of the bandgap of semiconductors through the s-d and p-d couplings, which push the conduction band energy levels at the X-and L-valley up, but leaves the Γ-valley conduction state unchanged. This unified theory unambiguously explains why Diamond, Si, Ge, and Al-containing group III-V semiconductors, which do not have active occupied d bands, have indirect bandgaps and remaining common semiconductors, except GaP, have direct bandgaps. Besides s-d and p-d couplings, bond length and electronegativity of anions are two remaining factors regulating the energy ordering of the Γ-, X-, and L-valley of the conduction band, and are responsible for the anomalous bandgap behaviors in GaN, GaP, and GaAs that have direct, indirect, and direct bandgaps, respectively, despite the fact that N, P, and As are in ascending order of the atomic number. This understanding will shed light on the design of new direct bandgap light-emitting materials. Whether a semiconductor has a direct or indirect bandgap is of fundamental importance to its optoelectronic applications They are essential materials for lasers, light emitting diodes (LEDs) and other photonic devices In spite of the extensive utilizing of semi-empirical and first-principles methods to correctly reproduce the experimentally measured band structures for semiconductors, the simple nearest-neighbor tight-binding (TB) theory is more straightforward to gain insight into the formation of the band structures because of its intuitive simplicity Lack of fundamental understanding of the mechanism controlling the indirect bandgap nature of Si might be the main reason for the difficulty of developing Si-based direct bandgap materials. Here, we reveal that the occupied cation d bands, which were neglected in previous models of the TB approach We at first examine the nature of bandgaps of all conventional group-IV elemental, and group III-V and group II-VI compound semiconductors, which are the semiconductors of practical interest for information technology The relative energy positions between the Γ-valley, X-valley, and L-valley in the lowest conduction band determine the direct or indirect nature of bandgap in ZB semiconductors since the VBM occurs exclusively at the Γ point in all group II-VI, group III-V, and group IV semiconductors. As given in Table I To illustrate the effect of the occupied d orbitals on the nature of bandgap, we examined the energy level shifting of the CB Γ-, X-, and L-valley caused by the s-d and p-d coupling due to the existence of the occupied d shells, which were neglected previously, as schematically shown in Fig. These demonstrate that besides s-d and s-p couplings, the bond length also play role in determining the nature of bandgap. Semiconductors having larger lattice prefer to become more direct in the bandgap. Following the above discussion, we would expect the bandgap of GaN to be indirect since the bond length of GaN is much smaller than GaP and GaAs. However, GaN is a classical direct gap semiconductor. Fig. In summary, we have presented a unified theory for understanding the direct or indirect nature of bandgap in group II-VI, group III-V, and group IV semiconductors unambiguously. k-point G(k) CBE(k) VBE(k) s p d Γ T d Γ 1