Electrons and photons offer complimentary strengths for information processing. Photons are excellent for communication, while electrons are superior for computation and memory. Cognition requires distributed computation to be communicated across the system for information integration. We present reasoning from neuroscience, network theory, and device physics supporting the conjecture that large-scale cognitive systems will benefit from electronic devices performing synaptic, dendritic, and neuronal information processing operating in conjunction with photonic communication. On the chip scale, integrated dielectric waveguides enable fan-out to thousands of connections. On the system scale, fiber and free-space optics can be employed. The largest cognitive systems will be limited by the distance light can travel during the period of a network oscillation. We calculate that optoelectronic networks the area of a large data center (10 5 m 2 ) will be capable of system-wide information integration at 1 MHz. At frequencies of cortex-wide integration in the human brain (4 Hz, theta band), optoelectronic systems could integrate information across the surface of the earth. Intelligent systems are characterized by the ability to incorporate a wide variety of stimuli into a coherent concept of the world It has been argued that neurons are uniquely suited to performing the differentiated processing and information in-tegration across space and time required for cognition (see discussion in Ref. Many of the required neuronal functions can be performed with manufacturable electronic devices Biological neurons are excellent for computation, but communication via ionic conduction along axons is slow. This slow communication limits the total size of the neural system which can participate in synchronized oscillations at a given frequency, and therefore limits the total number of neurons that can be incorporated into a cognitive system Based on graph theory metrics, we argue that even modestly sized networks of a few hundred thousand neurons require arXiv:1809.02572v1 [cs.ET] 7 Sep 2018 neurons to make a thousand synaptic connections on average. Already at the scale of networks of a few hundred thousand neurons, light provides significant advantages in communication. For large-scale systems comparable to the human brain, the advantages are more important. By considering the fundamental limit imposed by the light cone in conjunction with an estimate for artificial synapse area, we estimate the total number of synapses which can participate in a synchronized transient neuronal ensemble. We find that systems with ten billion times the number of synapses as a human brain may be possible. At these enormous scales, system power consumption is likely to be dominated by the production of light, so signaling with the fewest number of photons possible will reduce power density and total system power consumption. We argue that superconducting optoelectronic circuits are advantageous for enabling massive scaling with tractable power consumption. We close with speculation regarding the limits of cognitive systems using light for communication. Neural systems represent information in the firing rate and relative timing of neurons. A given neuron can represent a limited subset of all possible stimuli, and clusters of neurons form transient assemblies that temporarily synchronize to form a consensus interpretation of a given input. The information from many assemblies must be communicated up the cognitive hierarchy in a bottom-up manner, and feedback must also be provided from higher cognitive centers to local neuronal ensembles in a top-down manner to provide information transfer across the system. For communication to be efficient across the network, each node must be able to send and receive information to and from many other nodes. In the language of network theory To identify networks useful for cognition, we need to analyze connectivity. An important network metric related to connectivity is the degree distribution. The degree of a node refers to the number of connections (synapses) it forms with other nodes in the network. The degree distribution refers to the statistical distribution of the degrees of all the nodes in the network. We consider two degree distributions that are pertinent to information processing in neural systems. A random network To investigate the potential for efficient information integration in neuronal assemblies of various sizes, we investigate the relation between the number of neurons in the network and the number of connections made by the neurons for Gaussian and power-law degree distributions. For the Gaussian degree distribution of a random network, the average degree of a node in the network, k, is related to the total number of nodes in the network, N tot , and the average path length, L, by the relation k = exp{[ln(N tot ) -γ]/ L + 1/2} Figure The connectivity requirements of neurons have been widely appreciated for quite some time, and the majority of neuromorphic engineers working with CMOS systems decide not to design neurons with such a large number of direct connections. Direct wiring would introduce large capacitance and resistance, which would slow response times and require too much current and power. Instead, virtual connections are achieved by assigning addresses to neurons, and shared communication lines route synaptic events between neurons based on addresses in a synaptic routing table. When multiple events request access to the shared communication lines, the events are queued, and latency related to the number of neurons on the bus and their firing frequencies is introduced. Communication over shared lines is referred to as time multiplexing, and it is a common and powerful technique with CMOS hardware across multiple computing domains. The speed of semiconductor devices mitigates limitations in connectivity Time multiplexing signals with address-event representation has achieved some of the most impressive neuromorphic systems to date Neurons in a physical system without charge-based parasitics can achieve direct fan-out to thousands of synaptic connections, avoiding the need for time-multiplexing necessitated by shared communication lines. By using photons rather than electrons for communication across multi-planar routing structures Communication appears promising in emerging integratedphotonic systems In addition to spatial and graph metrics, there are many considerations at the level of devices, circuits, and architecture that are necessary to assess utility. Neuronal devices and circuits must achieve excitatory and inhibitory connections with dendritic processing to maximize utilization of the frequency domain. For very large neural systems, unsupervised learning is required for scalability, so a variety of synaptic plasticity mechanisms are required to enable memory retention and learning in the presence of dynamically varying stimuli. Networks and systems must achieve small-world graph metrics and information processing across interconnected modules to enable efficient exchange between sub-processors. Optoelectronic neurons and networks designed with these criteria in mind have been presented in Refs. We have argued that electronics are excellent for performing the synaptic, dendritic, and neuronal operations required by cognitive systems, and also that light is advantageous for enabling direct fan-out to thousands of connections, thereby circumventing the trade-offs introduced by shared electronic communication lines. The advantage in communication at the chip scale results from the absence of charge-based parasitics, but for communication across large scales (across a wafer, between wafers in a module, or between multi-wafer modules in a massive cognitive system), the speed of light plays a central role in facilitating the highest performance neuronal operation. As discussed in Sec. I, neural systems integrate information through transient synchronized oscillations across a multitude of spatial and temporal scales. To anticipate very large cognitive systems, we consider the number of neurons and synapses that can be integrated in a transient synchronized oscillation at a given frequency. We refer to an ensemble of neurons capable of synchronizing as the neuronal pool. Consider two neurons, each of width w, separated by a distance d, as shown in Fig. n 1 may induce n 2 to spike within a single period of oscillation. We take the value of d which saturates the inequality of Eq. 1 to define the maximum diameter of the neuronal pool. One may argue that to establish synchronization, n 1 must induce n 2 to spike, and this spike from n 2 must also propagate to n 1 , causing n 1 to spike again during the next period of the oscillation cycle. This model would decrease d by a factor of two. One may also argue that n 1 could produce a spike train at frequency f , and this spike train could induce n 2 to produce a spike train of the same frequency at a later time, independent of their spatial separation. In the context of cognitive processing, the delayed pulse train from n 2 is not conducive to efficient information integration if it is delayed beyond a single oscillation period. Much like networks with short path length are necessary for efficient information integration across space, signaling with delay shorter than a single period of oscillation is necessary for information integration across time. For this reason, we consider the diameter of the neuronal pool to be set by the distance signals can propagate within a single period of oscillation. It is not the diameter of the neuronal pool that is of primary interest, but rather the number of neurons (or synapses) that can integrate information within the pool. To estimate this quantity, we must account for the size of a neuron, labeled w in Fig. Note that when we refer to the neuronal pool, we do not refer to the number of neurons which are synchronized at a given moment, which is a quantity that depends on the network graph and dynamical state. In this calculation, we refer to the total number of neurons that could potentially synchronize based on the reach of communication. Let us check the validity of Eq. 2 with numbers from the human brain. Cortex in mammals is a two-dimensional sheet. When removed from the skull, it can be unfurled flat on a surface. Therefore, we model signals propagating within a plane, and take n = 2 for this analysis, although it may be possible to construct artificial cognitive systems fully utilizing three spatial dimensions. The area of the human cerebral cortex is 0.095 m 2 To assess the performance of a neural system using light for communication, we must estimate the size of optoelectronic neurons. Such a spatial estimate requires an assessment of the size of the neurons themselves as well as the space occupied by routing waveguides, analogous to white matter in the brain. This analysis is conducted in Ref. To compare two hardware platforms, we consider spatial scaling in terms of the size of a synapse rather than a neuron. Neurons many have any number of synapses, and therefore may span a wide range of sizes, whereas the size of synapses will depend less on the degree of the neuron to which they are connected. In particular, we wish to compare neurons leveraging photonic communication to the human brain. Denoting the photonic and biological hardware platforms with superscripts, Fig. we find To be concrete, we consider the size of superconducting optoelectronic neurons, as described in Ref. Here w refers to the size of a synapse, not a neuron, as discussed above. If we assume each of the 1.6 × 10 10 neurons in the human cerebral cortex has 10 4 synapses . The neuronal pool enabled by light-speed communication can contain ten billion times the number of synapses as the pool enabled by ionic signal propagation along biological axons. Signaling at the speed of light brings a tremendous advantage in this regard, an advantage made more significant in networks spanning a volume rather than an area. This simple scaling analysis does not take into account factors that may be significant for very large systems, such as volume required for liquid helium flow for cooling or the volume of white matter occupied by optical fibers carrying signals between large modules. Suppose these factors introduce a quadratic error, and the correct scaling is the square root of the 10 10 estimate. We would still be considering a system with 10 5 times the number of synapses as the human brain, and orders of magnitude faster network oscillations. We can calculate the area of the neuronal pool as a function of the frequency of oscillations, as shown in Fig. On the small scale of a chip, photonic communication enables dense local clusters of optoelectronic neurons by direct signal fan-out. On the large scale of multi-modular systems, photonic communication enables information integration across massive cognitive systems by communicating at the fastest velocity in the universe. The strengths of electronics for computation and photonics for communication indicate that the largest cognitive systems will be optoelectronic. Once optical communication is employed, communication velocity is not likely to be the factor which limits network size in the near term, as it appears to be for biological systems. When we are discussing networks as big as data centers, power consumption becomes the center of attention. Assuming communication requires creation and destruction of a photon, it is not possible to send optical signals with less energy than a single photon. We therefore conjecture that neurons communicating to their synaptic connections with order one photon will achieve the highest energy efficiency. One must consider which frequency of photons are best suited for this application. Because the energy of a photon and its wavelength are inversely proportional, optoelectronic circuits face a power/area trade-off. It may be possible to develop circuits based on microwave photons to achieve extreme energy efficiency. However, for integrated circuits, the long wavelength of microwave photons may make dense integration of highly connected chip-and wafer-scale networks difficult. Alternatively, ultraviolet photons could be employed to reduce the device footprint. In this case, materials are less conducive to integrated fabrication, and photon production requires an undesirable amount of energy. At present, it appears that nearinfrared photons (λ ≈ 1.5 μm) strike a balance between size and energy efficiency. Additionally, based on the ubiquity of near-infrared light sources (including silicon-based Superconducting single-photon detectors As we have argued, neurons with many long-range connections are important for information integration across a cognitive system. In the context of an optoelectronic hardware platform, consider a massive node with 10 6 synaptic connections spanning multiple regions of the network. Suppose 10 photons per firing event must be sent to each synapse to overcome loss and noise. A pulse of 10 7 photons consumes a picojoule at λ = 1.5 μm. Even with a poor photon production efficiency of 10 -3 , this massive, long-range neuron could synchronize vast neuronal ensembles across multiple processing areas at 1 MHz with with 1 mW of device power. This large node would address an order of magnitude more synapses than the largest long-range neurons in the human brain. The use of superconductors contributes to energy efficiency by enabling communication with single photons, but superconductors require cryogenic operation, which is inefficient. Is there a net gain in energy efficiency? For large systems, the answer is likely yes. To operate at liquid helium temperature, 4.2 K, approximately one kilowatt of cooling power is required for each watt of device power. Cryogenic operation of sources can gain two orders of magnitude in efficiency While the arguments related to communication and energy efficiency lead us to conjecture that superconducting optoelectronic networks will be uniquely suited to achieving large-scale cognitive systems, we emphasize that room-temperature neural systems will also benefit from the strengths of optoelectronic integration. Operation by humanoid organisms in an earthlike environment necessitates that at least some portion of the system operate in an ambient environment. The advantages of using light for communication across cognitive systems lead us to anticipate hybrid cognitive systems with high-speed, highefficiency cognition occurring in cryogenic modules, and information integration to room temperature with optical signals over fiber. The advantages of light for communication will be paramount for enabling high-bandwidth, low-latency signaling between modules in a massive cognitive system, spanning cryogenic and ambient environments. How large can optoelectronic cognitive systems be? As we see in Fig. It appears possible for an asteroid belt to form the nodes and light to form the edges of a solar-system-scale intelligent network. Would this turn the entire solar system into a single cognitive module? Probably not. Asteroids can be separated by billions of meters, so light-speed communication delays may be several seconds or longer. For cognitive systems oscillating from 1 kHz to 20 MHz, such delays would cause individual modules to operate as separate cognitive units. Light-speed communication between these modules would be analogous to spoken words between humans, and the asteroid belt would form a community of cognitive entities. What types of computations might these systems conduct? Allow us to speculate. Superconducting technologies are capable of digital logic From neuroscience we know that a variety of neuronal processors and assemblies send information up the cognitive hierarchy, while neurons and systems of neurons at higherlevels of hierarchy send feedback across the network to close processing loops and inform local clusters of the consensus being established by the entire cognitive system. Large neurons with massive connectivity are crucial for network information integration, and for the fastest convergence to a network consensus, neurons across large regions must be able to drive each other to fire within the period of a network cycle to efficiently share information across space and time. Electronic circuits are excellent for local, synaptic, dendritic, and neuronal processing. Photonic circuits are excellent for dense, local connectivity, as well as long-range communication. These arguments lead to the conjecture that tremendous gains in cognition will be enabled by advances in optoelectronic hardware. This is a contribution of NIST, an agency of the US government, not subject to copyright.