We extend a phase-field/gradient damage formulation for cohesive fracture to the dynamic case. The model is characterized by a regularized fracture energy that is linear in the damage field, as well as non-polynomial degradation functions. Two categories of degradation functions are examined, and a process to derive a given degradation function based on a local stress-strain response in the cohesive zone is presented. The resulting model is characterized by a linear elastic regime prior to the onset of damage, and controlled strain-softening thereafter. The governing equations are derived according to macro-and microforce balance theories, naturally accounting for the irreversible nature of the fracture process by introducing suitable constraints for the kinetics of the underlying microstructural changes. The model is complemented by an efficient staggered solution scheme based on an augmented Lagrangian method. Numerical examples demonstrate that the proposed model is a robust and effective method for simulating cohesive crack propagation, with particular emphasis on dynamic fracture. In recent years diffuse crack approaches have become increasingly popular for predicting crack propagation in engineering materials. This is largely due to their potential for capturing the evolution of complex crack patterns without the need for algorithmic crack-front tracking methods. There has been a proliferation of modeling techniques developed around a variational formulation of, most commonly, a Griffith-type description of fracture. In this manuscript, we take an alternative approach and develop a phase-field model of dynamic fracture that approximates a cohesive type of response. Critically, our model extends the work of Phase-field models for fracture rely on the regularization of a sharp crack surface by means of an elliptical functional. In In fact, it bears emphasis that most materials are not perfectly brittle in the Griffith sense, but display some ductility after reaching their ultimate strength. Often, there exists a process zone in the vicinity of the crack tip. This region is typically characterized by small-scale yielding, micro-crack initiation, growth and coalescence, as graphically depicted in Figure In addition to this restriction, there are clear disadvantages to phase-field models based on a Griffith description of fracture. It is well known that the regularization length is intrinsically tied to the material properties, e.g. see An extension of the variational formulation of brittle fracture to cohesive fracture has been considered in With particular regard to the gradient damage model from In this contribution, we explore the fundamental properties of dynamic cohesive fracture in a phase-field setting. The particular choice of the crack surface density functional will be motivated and various degradation functions are derived and examined. We examine the issue of convergence of these types of models as the regularization length scale is reduced, while maintaining sufficient numerical resolution. While some evidence of mesh insensitivity has previously been demonstrated in The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 a phase-field/gradient damage formulation is presented that is particularly well-suited for cohesive fracture mechanics. Special attention is given to the elastic and dissipation functionals, after which the governing equations are derived using macro-and microforce balance theories. The section concludes with a discussion on the crack driving forces and the stiffness degradation function. Section 3 provides some analysis for the model described in Section 2. Some of the fundamental properties of the method are illustrated by means of a one-dimensional analysis. We then present a process for deriving degradation functions that give rise to particular stress-strain behaviors in the process zone, with an emphasis on linear decay. Finally, we discuss some aspects concerning the regularization of crack topologies and the issue of Γ-convergence. Section 4 discusses the finite element implementation of the proposed formulation. The augmented Lagrangian method for enforcing irreversibility is reviewed and the coupled problem is formulated by means of the Galerkin method. The numerical formulation is completed by the definition of a robust solution scheme based on operator splits. Section 5 provides a series of numerical experiments under quasi-static and dynamic loading conditions. Finally, a summary and concluding remarks are presented in Section 6. We now define a phase-field/gradient damage formulation for dynamic cohesive fracture in elastic solids under small-strains and iso-thermal conditions. The theory is set up around materials for which a Griffith's description of fracture is no longer justified due to the size of the fracture process zone. The governing equations are obtained following macro-and microforce balance theories, which have been commonly applied in the development of phasefield theories. The theory developed here incorporates irreversibility by introducing suitable constraints on the fracture evolution. Consider a body B ⊂ R n (with n ∈ {1, 2, 3}) with external boundary ∂B with ∂B t ∩ ∂B u = ∅, ∂B t ∪ ∂B u = ∂B and an internal discontinuity boundary Γ as shown in Figure We assume that the damage field acts only to degrade the tensile resistance of the body and that crack propagation is prohibited under compression. Following where {ε a } a=1...n sd are the principal strains and {n a } a=1...n sd the principal strain directions. The positive and negative operators • + and • -are defined in accord with The decomposition of the strain makes it possible to decompose the strain energy density ψ 0 into tensile and compressive contributions. We restrict attention to isotropic linear elasticity, and define these strain energy densities by where λ s > 0 and μ s > 0 are the Lamé coefficients. We assume that the total potential energy Ψ of a body B consists of bulk and fracture contributions. In accordance with an energetic description of fractured bodies, its total free energy can be written as where G c was introduced as the critical fracture energy per unit area and Γ equals the unknown fracture surface. As in where ψ bulk is the degrading elastic bulk energy and γ L the crack surface density functional. To account for a tension-compression asymmetry, the elastic bulk energy is frequently decomposed as where g(d) is a stiffness degradation function. The degradation function is assumed to be a monotonically decreasing function of damage, with g(0) = 1 (initial damage) and g(1) = 0 (complete loss of stiffness). Explicit forms of this function are provided in Section 2.3. With respect to the energetic contribution from the crack surface, we propose the use of the following crack surface density functional: in which the regularization length scale L is introduced. We note that, in contrast to the commonly employed phase-field approximiation from It will be demonstrated that such an approximation is central in the development of a phase-field description of cohesive fracture. We suppose the microstructural changes, governed by the physics of the underlying problem, act to enforce a crack irreversibility condition that can be expressed as the inequality ḋ ≥ 0, ( where the superposed dot denotes a differentiation with respect to time. We follow the approach outlined in da and a microscopic force balance where ψ denotes a combined strain energy density and fracture energy density, given by and β ≥ 0 is a kinetic modulus. The right-hand side of ( In particular, π r vanishes for ḋ > 0 and is given by the left-hand side of (11) for ḋ = 0. Given a positive kinetic modulus β, the damage only increases if the left-hand side of ( We now turn our focus to the kinetic modulus β. In where the Cauchy stress tensor is given by The strong form of the governing equations is complemented by the following boundary conditions where ū and t are the prescribed boundary displacements and surface tractions, respectively. Additionally, we supplement (13) with initial conditions (S : IC) for both the displacement field and the damage field. As a final remark in this subsection, we note that the formulation for quasi-static fracture can be retrieved by simply omitting the inertial term in (13) 1 . The evolution equation for the damage, (13) 2 allows for the construction of a threshold level of the tensile strain energy before the onset of damage. As a means to trivially satisfy this equation for tensile strain energies below the threshold, we employ a crack driving force given by where we have introduced ψ c as the critical fracture energy per unit volume of material where σ c is the critical tensile strength and E the Young's modulus. Alternative motivations for such functions can be found in the work of The utility of this crack driving force as a threshold for damage initiation is discussed further in Section 3.1. The formulation is completed by the definition of a stiffness degradation function. In this paper, we are concerned with two particular functions, which hereafter we refer to as the quasi-linear and quasi-quadratic degradation functions. The quasi-linear and quasi-quadratic degradation functions are both rational functions of the damage field, with the numerator being either a linear function of damage or a quadratic function of damage, respectively. Each of the functions has an associated upper bound on the regularization length scale that can be used in conjunction with it. The quasi-linear degradation function is given by where m ≥ 1 is a constant. This function and the associated bounds on m and the regularization length L are derived in Section 3.2. The quasi-quadratic degradation function follows the work of where p is a shape parameter. The dependence of both degradation functions on the constant m and shape parameter p is graphically depicted in Figure In the present work, we require that The justification for this choice is provided in Section 3.1. This leaves only the shape parameter p to be defined in (21). In the remainder of this paper, unless otherwise noted, we set p = 1. In general, different choices of the shape parameter p will give rise to different fracture responses, and influence the load-deflection response of the structure as well as the fracture evolution. A thorough examination of this effect is beyond the scope of this manuscript, and we refer the reader to the discussions in The constraints on the regularization length L and shape parameter p that go along with ( We now provide some analysis of the model described in Section 2. We begin by examining a simple onedimensional problem. We then provide the derivation of the quasi-linear degradation function. Finally, some aspects concerning the regularization of crack topologies and the issue of Γ-convergence are discussed. To illustrate the fundamental properties of our formulation, we begin by studying a particular boundary value problem. Consider a one-dimensional bar subjected to a uniaxial tensile load. A symmetrical solution for the localization band is expected in a domain of interest B = [-L; L]. Without a loss of generality, this point of symmetry is taken at center of the bar, i.e. x = 0. We assume a non-negative strain-field and ignore inertial effects. Under these assumptions (19) simplifies to with σ = g(d)Eε, where E denotes Young's modulus. Provided that the strain ε and damage d are monotonically increasing functions of time at every point in the domain, D can be written as We begin our analysis by considering the situation before the onset of any damage in the bar. In such a configuration, the damage d = 0 everywhere, and the stress is spatially constant and below the critical stress, i.e. σ ≤ σ c . Under these conditions (24) 2 and (25) simplify to In order for this equation to be satisfied, the two terms must balance. This is trivial, provided that We note that, given the choice of m in ( (1 -d) 2 requires the use of a particular value of ψ c for this constraint to be satisfied. We turn now to considering the onset of damage and the post-critical behavior. If we want damage to begin when σ = σ c , we can effect this by setting which relates the critical fracture energy per unit volume ψ c to the tensile strength σ c . At the onset of damage and beyond, ( A solution for the damage field can be found by making use of the fact that the stress across the bar is constant and multiplying (29) with dd dx , to obtain Because of symmetry about x = 0, (30) is integrated from x to L for positive values of x, and from -L to x when x is negative. Since we have specified the crack to be centered at x = 0, we require the damage field to have a maximum at x = 0. From this requirement, we obtain where a is given by By definition, substitution of the homogeneous solution d hom into (31) yields a zero damage gradient. For a fully developed crack, i.e. σ = 0 and d hom (0) = 0, (31) reduces to and by applying the boundary conditions d(0) = 1 and d(L) = 0, we find as the solution that satisfies the specified boundary conditions. We note that this regularization is different from what is traditionally used in the phase-field modeling of brittle fracture. The different ultimate damage distributions are compared in Figure For a fully developed crack we can deduce from (30) that this differential equation reduces to: with d(x) the ultimate damage distribution. This reduces (35) to which effectively demonstrates that (8) indeed constitutes a crack surface density functional, in the phase-field for fracture sense. The same line of reasoning was presented in the gradient damage framework of Up to this point in this Section, the only conditions that have been placed on the degradation function concern its slope at the onset of damage. In this subsection, we demonstrate how a desired stress-strain behavior in the damage zone can be effected through a particular choice of the degradation function. Attention is focused on obtaining a relatively simple, linearly decaying traction-separation law in the damaged region. Such a response is common in standard cohesive methods for fracture, see e.g. A general discussion on the requirements of a degradation function can be found in the work of We consider the local response (i.e. within the localization band) in a one-dimensional system, and assume that all fields are spatially uniform. In this setting, the stress-strain relationship simplifies to The critical stress σ c at which damage initiates can be associated with a critical strain ε c through σ c = Eε c . Assume that the desired stress-strain relationship in the post-critical regime is given by the following linear decay where ε f denotes the final strain at which the stress vanishes. This contrasts to most other phase-field approaches in which the stress vanishes only in the limit as ε → ∞. Combining ( As the elastic regime is overstepped in this simplified one-dimensional setting, (24) 2 reduces to Inserting the strain (41) into this local evolution equation, we obtain a nonlinear ordinary differential equation for the degradation function of the form where α 1,2 are constants which depend on ε c , ε f , E, G c and L. It is easy to show that the quasi-linear degradation function ( As the critical strain is naturally accounted for by fixing the critical strength, we are left to determine the final strain ε f , which is reached when d = 1. In that case, (42) becomes which by means of inserting (20), reduces to For this model to have a clear physical interpretation, it is obviously required that m ≥ 1. This constraint can be rewritten in terms of an upper bound on the regularization length scale L, given by In case the damage has reached unity and the stress has dropped to zero, the "opening displacement" within the damage band can be approximated as This quantity which has dimensions of displacement does not depend on the regularization length scale. This is consistent with the desire to asymptotically approach a cohesive model with a known maximum opening displacement. As the damage localization must occur over a smaller length as L → 0, the average strain over this localization zone must increase to compensate. To confirm that the post-critical stress-strain behavior matches (40), a series of numerical experiments are conducted in Section 5. While the above derivation was employed to extract a linear decay of the stress-strain behavior in the localization band, more complex constitutive relationships can obviously be obtained by following a similar procedure. Finally, we note that the form of the resulting quasi-linear degradation function (20) differs markedly from the quasiquadratic function (21) as d → 1. In particular, the slope does not vanish as complete damage is approached. An unfortunate consequence of this feature is that there is no means to constrain the damage from exceeding unity, and we will find the need to prevent the overshoot in our discrete formulation. We now investigate the approximations of the fracture energy that are employed by the proposed cohesive model. Our investigation follows the work described in where D p is a prescribed form of the driving force. We consider two separate boundary-value problems. In the first, the prescribed driving force is set to D p = 1, and the Dirichlet constraint is enforced on the damage field along the sharp crack surface. A standard approach is to generate a finite-element approximation to the solution of ( In the second boundary value problem, we replace the Dirichlet boundary condition ( In the following numerical example, the model problem from Miehe et al. ( are then calculated as a post-processing step of the boundary value problem ( In Figure We now discuss the numerical discretization of the evolution equations ( A now standard approach to enforcing the irreversibility constraint ḋ ≥ 0 is to replace the crack driving function D in ( over the full temporal history s ∈ [0, t]. In the following, we briefly review the augmented Lagrangian method described in which is approximated as where λ ∈ L 2 (Ω) are the Lagrange multipliers and γ ∈ R >0 is a penalty kernel. An iterative scheme for solving this constrained optimization problem is described in Section 4.3. We note that the first penalty term in (53) enforces the monotonicity constraint (19) 3 on the damage field, while the second prevents the damage field from exceeding unity. While we have not found the second condition to be necessary with the quasi-quadratic degradation function, we have found it to be essential with the quasi-linear degradation function. Additional comments to this effect are provided in Section 5. To approximate the solution to the energy functional from (53) using a finite element method, we employ a finite element discretization as follows. The admissible function spaces U for the displacements, D for the damage field, and Λ for the Lagrange multiplier field are defined as respectively, while the associated weighting spaces are given by Next the differentiation of ( as well as Where the bilinear forms A 1 (u, v) and A 2 (d, w) were introduced for the displacement field and damage field problems, and (•, •) denotes the L 2 inner product on Ω. Following a standard Galerkin method, the problem is recast in finite-dimensional subspaces and similarly In this work, standard finite elements are used along with full integration. In particular, we employ bilinear quadrilateral elements to approximate the displacement and damage fields. The Lagrange multiplier is also approximated with bilinear quadrilateral elements. We note that in the phase-field literature, it is common to introduce a small regularization parameter η ≈ 0 which provides a lower bound on the tensile stresses as the damage reaches unity, as in We now describe an efficient solution procedure based on a staggered solution scheme for the successive update of the damage and displacement fields. In the first part of the algorithm, an outer loop is considered on the update for the damage evolution equation and the explicitly calculated Lagrange multipliers, while the displacement field is held fixed. A new damage field is obtained once the algorithm converges within a predefined tolerance R d . The second part of the algorithm then holds this damage field fixed while considering the elastodynamics problem, which is advanced using an explicit algorithm based on the central difference time integration scheme. As is standard with explicit algorithms, we employ a lumped mass matrix. We note that this approach is distinct from that of Algorithm 1 Staggered solution scheme in the time interval [t n-1 , t n ]. Choose λ 0 = λ n-1 , γ ∈ R d>0 , and let k = 0 repeat Solve the nonlinear damage equation using a Newton-type scheme and initial guess λ 0 Update the Lagrange multipliers We now present the results from a series of representative numerical experiments designed to demonstrate the ability of the proposed approach to capture pertinent aspects of cohesive fracture processes. The goal of these examples is threefold: (i) to numerically verify the convergence properties of the proposed formulation with respect to the regularization length as well as to provide insight into its interpretation in a multidimensional setting; (ii) to examine various options at imposing irreversibility, as discussed in Section 4.1; and (iii) to demonstrate the performance of the regularized cohesive model for benchmark problems in quasi-static and dynamic fracture. In our calculations, we rely on meshes that are sufficiently refined to capture the variation in the damage field around crack surfaces. Unless specified otherwise, we use element sizes of h e = L/10 as a rule of thumb. We also rely on the quasi-quadratic degradation function ( Consider a one-dimensional bar with a reduced cross sectional area in the middle, subjected to a tensile load F applied to the right end, as shown in Figure Numerically demonstrating convergence towards a cohesive zone formulation for a vanishing regularization length is a non-trivial task. To ensure the equilibrium solution is captured accurately at every load step, we depart slightly from the algorithm described in Section 4.3 and implement a monolithic solution scheme for this problem. A path-following constraint was introduced to control the loading process, as in The influence of the regularization length on the force-displacement curve and damage profile is shown in Figure Next we study the impact of the softening shape parameter p on the constitutive response. For a fixed regularization length, an increasing value for this parameter leads to a more rapid decay of the stress in the early stages of the strain-softening process, as demonstrated in Figure We now study the same one-dimensional problem, but using the quasi-linear degradation function ( We now investigate two benchmark problems, which have become canonical in the phase-field for fracture literature. Consider a square plate with an initially horizontal edge crack extending to the middle of the specimen, as shown in Figure First we apply a vertical displacement to the complete top edge, as demonstrated in Figure We now examine a problem first proposed by The material parameters are chosen to be representative of concrete, namely E = 30 GPa, ν = 0.2, G c = 0.1 N/mm and σ c = 3 MPa. The corresponding size of the fracture process zone is FPZ ≈ 333 mm. The analysis was performed for two different values of the cohesive shape parameter, namely p = 1 and p = 15. The finite element mesh is refined along the expected crack path. The force-displacement curves for this problem are shown in Figure We now consider a classical benchmark problem in cohesive fracture mechanics, the three-point bending (TPB) test. Consider the problem indicated in Figure The material parameters are chosen as E = 32 GPa, ν = 0.25, σ c = 4.15 MPa, and G c = 0.16 N/mm. The regularization length is set to L = 5 mm. The length of the fracture process zone is FPZ ≈ 149 mm, which is fairly large relative to the overall dimensions of the beam. The mesh is refined in the center of the beam where the crack is expected to propagate. We examine the influence of the quasi-linear and quasi-quadratic degradation functions on the constitutive response. It is emphasized that the former function requires additional penalization to prevent the approximation to the damage field from exceeding unity, as discussed in Section 4.1. Figure We now examine a standard benchmark problem in dynamic fracture that has been extensively investigated in previous works, including The material parameters are set to E = 32 GPa, ν = 0.2, G c = 0.003 N/mm, σ c = 3.08 MPa, and ρ = 2450 kg/m 3 . The corresponding dilatational, shear and Rayleigh wave speeds are v d = 3810 m/s, v s = 2333 m/s and v R = 2125 m/s, respectively. The characteristic length of the fracture process zone is approximately FPZ ≈ 10mm. The regularization length is set to L = 1.25 mm. The computation is performed on a uniform mesh with spacing h e = L/10. The damage field at selected time steps is shown in Figure This particular problem also lends itself to an investigation of the impact of the various strategies for enforcing the irreversibility constraint. In Figure We now focus on a second benchmark problem in dynamic fracture, namely models of the experiments by The experiments of The maraging steel used in the original experiments is modeled using the following material properties: E = 190 GPa, ν = 0.3, G c = 22.2 N/mm and ρ = 8000 kg/m 3 . This leads to dilatational, shear and Rayleigh wave speeds of v d = 5654 m/s, v s = 3022 m/s and v R = 2803 m/s, respectively. The cohesive strength has a value of σ c = 1.733 GPa. To avoid the use of a fairly small regularization length, a frequently adopted strategy in the phase-field community is to lower the effective strength of the material to facilitate a computational analysis, as in The damage field at selected times during the simulation is shown in Figure In order to demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed method for simulating fragmentation problems, we consider a thick cylinder subjected to an impulsive internal pressure, as shown in Figure The material parameters are E = 210 GPa, ρ = 7850 kg/m 3 , and ν = 0.30. This leads to dilatational, shear and Rayleigh wave speeds of v d = 6001 m/s, v s = 3208 m/s and v R = 2971 m/s, respectively. Given the critical strain of 0.5 % provided by To introduce a stochastic element to the simulations, we construct a spatially-varying Young's modulus field according to where Ē is the mean value of the random field; ξ(θ) the uncorrelated Gaussian random variable and λ i , ψ i (x) the set of eigenvalues and basis functions associated with the Fredholm equation of the second kind, respectively; and n is the number of basis functions. We construct the spatially varying Young's modulus field shown in Figure We now hold the regularization length and spatially varying Young's modulus field fixed, and examine the fracture patterns predicted by our simulations over a sequence of increasingly refined meshes. Table The final damage fields for each mesh are shown in Figure Finally, Figures In this work, we have extended a phase-field/gradient damage model, based on the work of Our work departs from that of The current manuscript gives rise to several areas for future investigation. First and foremost, we highlight that no calibration of the degradation and/or corresponding strain-softening parameters was conducted in this work. It is anticipated that such an approach, possibly supported by data-driven optimization methods, could further reduce any discrepancies between simulations and experimental observations. Secondly, we mention the extension of some of the basic elements of a cohesive fracture based phase-field description to an anisotropic setting. Such an extension is expected to be non-trivial, with particular regard to the calculation of the effective properties along given material directions.