Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is an analytical surface characterization tool which can reveal a sample's topography with high spatial resolution while simultaneously probing tip-sample interactions. Local measurement of chemical properties with high-resolution has gained much popularity in recent years with advances in dynamic AFM methodologies. A calibration factor is required to convert the electrical readout to a mechanical oscillation amplitude in order to extract quantitative information about the surface. We propose a new calibration technique for the oscillation amplitude of electrically driven probes, which is based on measuring the electrical energy input to maintain the oscillation amplitude constant. We demonstrate the application of the new technique with quartz tuning fork including the qPlus configuration, while the same principle can be applied to other piezoelectric resonators such as length extension resonators, or piezoelectric cantilevers. The calibration factor obtained by this technique is found to be in agreement with using thermal noise spectrum method for capsulated, decapsulated tuning forks and tuning forks in the qPlus configuration. Dynamic scanning probe microscopy is a surface characterization technique where a sharp tip is attached to the end of an oscillating probe and acts as a sensing element to map the surface topography up to picometer resolution. [1][2][3][4] With the advent of dynamic scanning probe techniques, quantitative measurement of local sample properties became popular. [5][6][7][8] To extract quantitative information about the surface and to modulate the tip-sample separation in a controlled way, properties of the oscillating probe such as excitation frequency, excitation amplitude, frequency shift due to tip-sample interaction, phase difference between the excitation signal and the oscillation signal, quality factor, and oscillation amplitude have to be known. 9- 13 While the excitation frequency and the amplitude are directly controlled by the operator, the resonance frequency shift, phase difference, and quality factor are measured by well-established measurement electronics. 2,14 Among these dynamic properties, the oscillation amplitude requires determination of a calibration factor between the electrical readout and the mechanical oscillation amplitude. The knowledge of the oscillation amplitude is important to quantitatively and even qualitatively interpret frequency shift measurements ('small amplitude' vs. 'large amplitude' approximations). 9-13 Accurate knowledge of the oscillation amplitude is key to determine the tip-sample interactions laws from frequency shift data and, as recently demonstrated, needs to be known to determine if it is even in principle possible, i.e. a mathematically well-posed problem. 15 Many techniques exist to determine the oscillation amplitude, including thermal excitation, As Figure The mechanical oscillation of the tuning fork's prongs in turn induces an oscillating charge on the surface of the tuning fork, which is collected with electrodes. The time-varying charge is measured as an electric current which is converted by a transimpedance amplifier to voltage and typically demodulated with a lockin amplifier. The lock-in outputs the phase between the excitation signal and the oscillation signal in degrees (j) and oscillation amplitude, Vreadout, in volts. In the absence of a tip-sample interaction, the dynamics of the probe can be expressed as a dampedharmonic oscillator. Equation 1 describes the total energy of a harmonic oscillator: 25 In equation 1, Aosc is the mechanical oscillation amplitude and k is the equivalent spring constant of the probe. We calculated the spring constant by using finite element methods (see supplemental information for details). The total mechanical energy of a balanced tuning fork is equal to -. /01 , as there are two oscillating prongs. The energy dissipated per second can be calculated by ! 2(33 × 7 8 , where 7 8 is the resonance frequency of the oscillating probe. To keep the oscillation amplitude constant, this mechanical power loss is compensated by the electrical power, Pcompensation, supplied by the external circuit such as ! 2(33 × 7 8 = : $;"<#'3&=(;' . Equation 3 shows the average electrical power input to compensate dissipated energy: In equation 3, > 2?(@# is the amplitude of the sinusoidal excitation voltage and A " is the current induced by the mechanical oscillation and E is the phase of A " with respect to > 2?(@# . The phase, E, is equal to zero at the resonance frequency, and equation 3 reduces to + , > 2?(@# A. The total measured current is equal to where G is the gain of the measurement setup (see supplemental information for details). It is important to notice that Iout is the sum of A " and the current that passes through the stray capacitance. Equation 4 allows a linear fit of the mechanical amplitude in Ångströms to the electrical signal in volts: . In Equation with the thermal excitation technique (see supplemental information for details). As summarized in Table Figure Since the change in 7 8 can easily be traced by a frequency sweep, the change in Z can be used to quantify the change in spring constant of the sensor, in particular in the qPlus configuration. As an example, the calibration factor, Z, of a qPlus sensor (2.70 Å/mV, Figure In addition to calibration of the gain, we calibrated the phase shift due to the measurement electronics and the circuitry. As Figure SI 3 summarizes, we used parallel plate air gap capacitor, which is assumed to be an ideal capacitor with a 90° phase shift between its current and voltage, to calibrate the phase, j. Figure SI 3b reveals that the phase (blue curve) evolves with the frequency. We calibrated the phase to 90° at 32,767 Hz and fitted a first order polynomial (red, dashed curve) to calculate the variation of the phase as a function of frequency. According to the equipartition theorem, thermal noise induces the excitation of the cantilever beam. Current induced by mechanical oscillation in the tuning fork is expressed by: % & = (/* (SI 1) In equation SI 1, ( is the amplitude of the electrical voltage across the tuning fork, while Z is the equivalent impedance of the tuning fork. Yexian Qin and R. Reifenberger, Review of Scientific Instruments 78, 063704 (2007). Jeffrey L. Hutter and John Bechhoefer, Review of Scientific Instruments 64, 1868 (1993).