It is well established that the spin-orbit interaction in heavy metal/ferromagnet heterostructures leads to a significant interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI), which modifies the internal structure of magnetic domain walls (DWs) to favor Néel over Bloch type configurations. However, the impact of such a transition on the structure and stability of internal DW defects (e.g., vertical Bloch lines) has not yet been explored. We present a combination of analytical and micromagnetic calculations to describe a new type of topological excitation called a DW Skyrmion characterized by a 360 • rotation of the internal magnetization in a Dzyaloshinskii DW. We further propose a method to identify DW Skyrmions experimentally using Fresnel mode Lorentz TEM; simulated images of DW Skyrmions using this technique are presented based on the micromagnetic results. Introduction.-The discovery of a large Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI) Here, we present a manifestly different type of topologically protected magnetic excitation called a domain wall (DW) Skyrmion, which has previously been considered under field-theory context Analytical calculations.-We choose Cartesian coordinates such that the DW normal is along x and the film normal is z (Fig. where t F is the film thickness, A is the exchange stiffness, i = x, y, z, D is the DMI, M s is the saturation magnetization, and K = K u -μ 0 M 2 s /2 is the effective perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with K u the intrinsic magneto-crystalline anisotropy. The last term represents the demagnetization energy approximated in the thin-film geometry To solve for m = m(x, y), we parameterize the magnetization vector in spherical coordinates as m = {sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ}. ( In the absence of DMI (D = 0), minimizing the free energy leads to a standard soliton profile: θ = 2 arctan exp(x/λ) and φ = ±π/2 with ± representing a Bloch wall of either chirality. Adding a strong DMI will overcome the demagnetization energy, leading to Néel walls with either φ = 0 or π. Here we choose D > 0, thus φ = π at y = ±∞. As φ changes, VBLs (Figure where φ(y) is the azimuthal angle of the in-plane component of m and q(y) denotes the deviation of the DW center from its location in a straight homochiral DW without a VBL or DW Skyrmion; q(y) and φ(y) are two collective coordinates to be solved by minimizing the total energy. We have neglected a possible y-dependence of λ, which is expected to become significant only for large DMI. Inserting Eqs. ( where √ AK are two dimensionless parameters characterizing the strengths of the DMI and the demagnetization energy relative to the DW energy 4 √ AK. In typical ferromagnets, ξ and η are small so we only keep linear order terms for these parameters in Eq. ( Minimizing the free energy calls for two Euler-Lagrange equations. The first one δ q E = 0 yields q -ξ sin φ -η sin 2φ = C where the constant C can be determined by the boundary conditions. At y → ±∞, we have q → 0 and φ → -arccos(ξ/2η), thus C = 0. Including the other equation δ φ E = 0, we arrive at two coupled nonlinear differential equations -λ 2 φ = ξ(sin φ + q cos φ) + η(sin 2φ + 2q cos 2φ), ( Since Eq. ( and where λ s = λ/ √ 2η is an exchange length along y at the critical point β = 1 and the + (-) sign represents the solution with positive (negative) topological charge Q. The critical condition β = 1 is where the Néel wall is formed at y → ±∞ and a DW skyrmion with Q = ±1 is formed at the center. At this value, φ/2 → ± arctan y/λ s and q/λ s → 4η(y/λs) 2 1+(y/λs) 2 . For β < 1, only a partial DW Skrymion with 1/2 ≤ |Q| < 1 exists and φ(±∞) = ±[πarccos(β)]. For β = 0, Eqs. ( which sets a minimum DMI strength to form a full DW Skyrmion. To characterize the impact of DMI on the DW Skyrmion energy, ∆E (i.e. the energy cost of creating a DW Skyrmion inside a DW), we normalize by the VBL energy, ∆E VBL . which is plotted in Fig. The size of an arbitrary Skyrmion can now be defined as the area enclosing a certain percentage of the topological charge. Normalized plots of topological charge density are shown in Fig. As experimental Fresnel-mode Lorentz TEM images do not offer explicit directional information regarding the magnetic induction, phase reconstruction is typically employed using the Transport of Intensity Equation (TIE) to calculate the integrated in-plane magnetic induction As mentioned previously, Néel walls do not display magnetic contrast in the absence of a sample tilt in Fresnel mode imaging. When a tilt is applied to the sample, an in-plane component emerges from the perpendicular induction of neighboring domains giving rise to contrast at a Néel wall. This too is observed in our calculated Fresnel mode images (Figure FIG. tion, which will be useful for confirming the presence of a DW Skyrmion experimentally. The corresponding in-plane magnetic induction maps (Figure In summary, we have introduced a new kind of topological magnetic excitation called a DW Skyrmion characterized by a 360 • transition of the internal magnetization within a Dzyaloshinski DW and defined by a topological charge of ±1. The DW Skyrmion analysis presented here builds off prior work on VBLs in much the same way the recent surge in Skyrmion research is rooted in decades of research on magnetic bubble memory. The static properties were calculated both analytically and micromagnetically with excellent agreement on the resulting size, energy, and profile. Although open questions remain about their thermal stability and dynamic properties, DW Skyrmions provide an alternative strategy for leveraging topological protection in magnetic systems with a strong interfacial DMI. The reconfigurable nature of the DWs that host these excitations could open the door to new kinds of memory and computing schemes based on topological charge. To this end, we have proposed an experimental methodology to unequivocally image DW Skyrmions using Fresnel mode Lorentz TEM to support future work in this area.