A metamaterial approach is capable of drastically increasing the critical temperature, T c, of composite metal-dielectric superconductors as demonstrated by the tripling of T c that was observed in bulk Al-Al 2 O 3 core-shell metamaterials. A theoretical model based on the Maxwell-Garnett approximation provides a microscopic explanation of this effect in terms of electron-electron pairing mediated by a hybrid plasmon-phonon excitation. We report the first observation of this excitation in Al-Al 2 O 3 core-shell metamaterials using inelastic neutron scattering. This result provides support for this novel mechanism of superconductivity in metamaterials. Recent theoretical [1-3] and experimental connection between electromagnetic metamaterials and superconductivity research stems from the fact that superconducting properties of a material may be expressed via its effective dielectric response function  eff (q,), and the critical temperature, T c , of a superconductor is defined by the behaviour of  eff  -1 (q,) near its poles Here, we report on the use of inelastic neutron scattering to provide the first experimental evidence of an excitation that does not exist in pure Al and corresponds to the metamaterial pole of the engineered inverse dielectric response function responsible for the T c enhancement in this material. We also identify the microscopic physical origin of this additional metamaterial pole as coming from a hybrid plasmon-phonon mode which arises in a composite metal-dielectric metamaterial. The hybrid character of this mode enables efficient inelastic neutron scattering from its phonon component, which is observed in the experiment. The direct observation of plasmon-phonon modes in Al-Al 2 O 3 ENZ core-shell metamaterials using inelastic neutron scattering provides strong support of this novel plasmon-phonon mechanism of superconductivity in composite metal-dielectric ENZ metamaterials. The theoretical model of superconductivity in ENZ metamaterials is based on the paper by Kirzhnits et al. where V C =4e 2 /q 2 is the Fourier-transformed Coulomb potential in vacuum, and  eff (q,) is the linear dielectric response function of the superconductor treated as an effective medium. The critical temperature of a superconductor in the weak coupling limit is typically calculated as where  is the characteristic temperature for a bosonic mode mediating electron pairing (such as the Debye temperature  D in the standard BCS theory) where V C is the unscreened Coulomb repulsion, and the angle brackets denote average over the Fermi surface. Now this formalism will be applied to a composite metaldielectric metamaterial. Following where k is the inverse Thomas-Fermi screening radius, (q) is the dispersion law of a phonon mode, and  is the corresponding damping rate. The zero of the dielectric response function of the bulk metal (which occurs at =(q) where  m changes sign) maximizes the electron-electron pairing interaction given by Eq.( A superconducting metallic "matrix" with dielectric "inclusions", which forms a composite metal-dielectric metamaterial, is now considered. We will assume that the permittivity  d of the dielectric does not depend on (q,) and stays positive and constant. According to the Maxwell-Garnett approximation where n is the volume fraction of metal ( may be written as For a given value of the metal volume fraction n, the ENZ conditions ( 0 (at the phonon frequency =(q)of the superconducting metal), and around According to Eq.( Indeed, Eqs.(4,7) allow us to predict the location of the additional pole with respect to the phonon frequency (q). Neglecting the unknown value of  in Eq.( This leads to the following expression for the ratio of the additional pole and the regular phonon frequencies: The dielectric constant for Al 2 O 3 in the long wavelength infrared range is  d ~2.25. Using the ratio of the inverse Thomas-Fermi radius to the Fermi radius for aluminium k/k F =1.17 tabulated in [12], and assuming q=2k F , the  ratio given by Eq.( To search for the existence of this additional excitation, which should occur at frequencies lower than the phonon frequencies of aluminium, an inelastic neutron scattering experiment was performed. To prepare the samples, commercial (US Research Nanomaterials) 18 nm diameter aluminium nanoparticles were oxidized under ambient conditions. Upon oxidation, an approximately 2 nm thick layer of Al 2 O 3 is formed on the surface of aluminium nanoparticles The inelastic neutron scattering experiments were performed at the NIST Center for Neutron Research using triple-axis spectrometers BT-7 Chopper Spectrometer The results from the inelastic neutron scattering measurements at T = 5 K are shown in Fig. This peak is also consistent with unexplained extra spectral weight seen at low energy in the  2 F() extracted from the tunnelling conductance of granular Al films that is absent in pure Al films Several mechanisms were proposed to explain this enhancement but none has proven to be satisfactory. Our observations provide potential explanation for the enhanced T c in granular aluminium thin films. Now we discuss the microscopic physical origin of these additional excitations. According to Eq. ( For non-planar interfaces of aluminium nanoparticles the plasmon resonance occurs at slightly different points. However, Eqs. (7, 10) clearly relate the additional pole of the inverse dielectric response function  eff -1 of the metamaterial to the plasmon resonance at metal-dielectric interfaces. Since this additional plasmon resonance of the metamaterial structure may exist only in the vicinity of the metal phonon at = (q) (where  m changes sign), the proper name of this resonant excitation should probably be chosen as a "hybrid" plasmon-phonon resonance. Unlike regular plasmons in metals (which typically occur in the visible and infrared frequency ranges) the hybrid plasmonphonon mode in metal-dielectric composite metamaterials occurs near the frequency range of conventional phonons. This means that hybrid plasmon-phonons are coupled to lattice vibrations via the lattice polarizability, which enables their detection via inelastic neutron scattering. Based on Eqs. which may be simplified as if both charges are located very close to the interface, so that r 1 =r 2 =r. The  2 =- 1 condition, which maximizes the electron pairing interaction, corresponds to the dispersion law of surface plasmons propagating along the interface (see Eq. ( The values of  eff due to each pole in Eq. ( where  m "=Im( m ). Therefore, using Eq.( where  m for the parent superconductor is determined by Eq. ( Therefore, near this pole Assuming the known values T cbulk = 1.2 K and  D = 428 K of bulk aluminium Eq.( are shown in Fig. At first glance, the strength of the observed additional peak at ~15 meV in the inelastic neutron scattering data in Fig. It would also be inappropriate to compare the size of the observed anomaly in the GPDOS with the van Hove singularity for the transverse acoustic phonons in the phonon density of states around 20 meV, where these phonons become dispersionless at the zone boundary. Typically, it is difficult to see any effect in a phonon density of states measurement since the effect only occurs in a small region of (Q,E), no matter how strong the coupling is, as the GPDOS averages everything. The fact that we do see an anomaly is interesting and requires quite strong coupling. 