The low-energy physics of systems with spontaneously broken continuous symmetry is dominated by the ensuing Nambu-Goldstone bosons. It has been known for half a century how to construct invariant Lagrangian densities for the low-energy effective theory of Nambu-Goldstone bosons. Contributions, invariant only up to a surface term -also known as the Wess-Zumino (WZ) terms -are more subtle, and as a rule are topological in nature. Although WZ terms have been studied intensively in theoretically oriented literature, explicit expressions do not seem to be available in sufficient generality in a form suitable for practical applications. Here we construct the WZ terms in d = 1, 2, 3, 4 spacetime dimensions for an arbitrary compact, semisimple and simply connected symmetry group G and its arbitrary connected unbroken subgroup H, provided that the d-th homotopy group of the coset space G/H is trivial. Coupling to gauge fields for the whole group G is included throughout the construction. We list a number of explicit matrix expressions for the WZ terms in four spacetime dimensions, including those for QCD-like theories, that is vector-like gauge theories with fermions in a complex, real or pseudoreal representation of the gauge group. Spontaneous breaking of a continuous global symmetry is a fascinating phenomenon that dramatically affects the physics in the quantum realm. Its most striking consequence is the presence of gapless modes -the Nambu-Goldstone (NG) bosons -in the spectrum which, in absence of other gapless degrees of freedom, dominate the low-energy physics of the system. Another, related consequence is the fact that spontaneously broken symmetry is not realized by unitary operators on the Hilbert space of physical states of the system. By the same token, transformations induced by the spontaneously broken generators of the symmetry group G are realized nontrivially even on the space of fields, through nonlinear functions of the NG fields. The latter feature presents a challenge to model building. In general, the action of the lowenergy effective theory, formulated in terms of the NG degrees of freedom, must preserve the symmetry properties of the underlying microscopic theory Quasi-invariant Lagrangians appeared first in high-energy physics in connection to chiral anomalies through the work of Wess and Zumino It was first shown by Numerous physical applications require understanding of not only the dynamics of the NG bosons, but also of their interactions with external fields or of the correlation functions of the corresponding broken Noether currents. Such questions are most conveniently addressed by coupling the action to a set of gauge fields for the generators of the group G. It is known that in odd-dimensional spacetimes, gauging of the WZ terms is straightforward, whereas in even-dimensional spacetimes, it faces a geometric obstruction, related to the chiral anomaly. In general, only the unbroken subgroup H can be gauged without violating the invariance of the action. In spite of abundant literature on the subject, a sufficiently general expression for gauged WZ terms that would at the same time be explicit enough and ready-made for applications, seems to be missing. Existing results for gauged WZ terms are in most cases either limited to chiral symmetry groups of the type found in QCD (see, for instance, refs. The aim of the present paper is to fill this gap in the literature. In order to keep the text concise, we do not provide any computational details; the methodology is explained in ref. We do not spell out our results as explicit Lagrangians, but rather using the language of differential forms which can then be easily translated, see section 2.3 for a basic dictionary. In addition to the obvious advantage of making the expressions more compact, this also underlines their multi-faceted use. For instance, the same WZ 3-form can describe a topological action in two spacetime dimensions and a topological current in four spacetime dimensions. Apart from the moderate use of differential forms, the only mathematical background required for utilizing our results for practical calculations is some standard Lie algebra and group theory and rudiments of topology, along with the usual coset construction of effective Lagrangians. Following the analysis of ref. The starting point of Witten's construction of the WZ terms is the assumption that the NG fields of the theory, represented collectively by the matrix U(x), satisfy a boundary condition that effectively allows the d-dimensional spacetime to be compactified to the sphere S d . Suppose in addition that the d-th homotopy group of the coset space G/H is trivial, π d (G/H) = 0. Accordingly, the pull-back U * ωd gives the corresponding d-dimensional Lagrangian density. If ωd itself is G-invariant, then ω d+1 is also necessarily G-invariant. Nontrivial WZ terms therefore stem from such closed forms ω d+1 that are G-invariant, whereas the corresponding ωd is not. These forms define precisely the cohomology of the coset space G/H. In section 3 below, we outline the classification of the cohomology generators ω d+1 up to degree 5. The more physical d-forms ωd can be deduced therefrom by means of eq. ( As indicated by the proportionality symbol in eq. ( Following largely the notation of ref. The generators of the unbroken subgroup H will be denoted as T α,β,... , whereas the broken generators as T a,b,... . According to the coset construction where g ∈ G and h ∈ H. We will right away consider local g, that is, assume that the symmetry is gauged. Although h in eq. ( As the next step, we introduce the Lie-algebra-valued Maurer-Cartan (MC) 1-form, where θ ≡ U -1 dU and Ā ≡ U -1 AU. Herein, A is the 1-form gauge connection of G, which under a g ∈ G transforms as It follows that the MC form is invariant under the left action of G on U. Under the right action of H, it transforms as θ h -→ h θh -1 + hdh -1 . Since the second term on the right-hand side of this transformation rule belongs to the Lie algebra of H, it is convenient to split the MC form into the broken and unbroken components, The V-part behaves as a gauge connection of H and gives rise to the field-strength 2-form While the gauged MC form is essential for the general construction of WZ terms, the ungauged versions of the above-defined objects will also be needed. These are naturally defined by The gauge connection of G gives rise to the field-strength 2-form It is easy to check that the MC form θ satisfies the MC structure equation Invariant Lagrangians can now be built out of the covariant building blocks φ, W and F, which are all G-invariant and transform linearly under the adjoint action of H. Their covariant derivatives can be constructed using the gauge connection V. Left G-invariance of the Lagrangian follows trivially from the G-invariance of all the basic building blocks. Right H-invariance, on the other hand, imposes nontrivial constraints. In general, it requires that the indices of the building blocks of a given operator be contracted by a coefficient that is an invariant tensor under the adjoint action of H. As already mentioned, our main results are presented as the differential forms ω d+1 and ωd in eq. ( where in the last relation μνρ... stands for the Levi-Civita tensor in d dimensions. Note also that our fundamental commutation relation ( Having put together all the required notation, we will now simply list all the independent cohomology generators of degrees 2 to 5 that are primitive, that is, cannot be obtained as a product of generators of lower degree. These accordingly generate all the independent WZ terms in spacetime dimension one to four via eq. ( Finally, note that in case the group G is actually not gauged, the corresponding ungauged WZ terms can be recovered by simply setting A → 0 and F → 0 everywhere. There are no additional WZ terms in the ungauged case. The nontrivial cohomology generators of degree 2 can be parameterized by a set of constants c α , which are required to be invariant under the adjoint action of H, For compact Lie groups, there is one such a constant for every U(1) factor of H. The corresponding closed gauge-invariant 2-form reads In this case, one can readily obtain the corresponding 1-form, which directly gives the WZ contribution to the effective Lagrangian in one dimension, This result appeared previously in ref. In this case, the nontrivial cohomology generators are associated with constant symmetric G-invariant tensors d AB that vanish on the unbroken subgroup, that is, satisfy d αβ = 0. The corresponding gauge-invariant 3-form reads This form is, however, in general not closed, but rather satisfies The fact that the derivative dω 3 only depends on the background gauge field indicates that in its absence, ω 3 generates a well-defined WZ term. The symmetry can, however, not be fully gauged. In other words, the WZ term in two spacetime dimensions is anomalous. Thanks to d αβ = 0, it is nevertheless possible to gauge at least the unbroken subgroup H while preserving closedness of ω 3 . To gain deeper insight into the anomalous nature of the WZ 3-form ω 3 , it is convenient to switch to a matrix notation. Recall that simple compact Lie groups have a unique G-invariant symmetric tensor d AB given by the Cartan-Killing form on their Lie algebra. The most general invariant tensor d AB for a semisimple group G can then be expressed as d AB = j d j tr j (T A T B ), where the sum runs over all simple factors of G, the trace tr j is done over the j-th simple component of G, and d j is a set of coefficients only constrained by the requirement that d αβ = 0. Introducing the shorthand notation we can then rewrite eqs. ( Up to a sign, dω 3 is nothing but the second Chern character, and as such can be expressed as a derivative of a Chern-Simons (CS) 3-form, The form ω 3 + ω CS 3 is now closed and thus gives rise to a well-defined action in two spacetime dimensions and the CS 3-form satisfies δω CS 3 =d dA . Being itself a closed form, this is given by a derivative of a 2-form, which in turn determines the anomaly of the corresponding two-dimensional theory To find an explicit expression for the two-dimensional version of the WZ term, ω2 , is a more subtle problem. Namely, it turns out impossible to write ω2 in the product basis built out of the MC 1-form with constant coefficients. This reflects the topological nature of the NG boson interactions, generated by the WZ term. What can be given as a simple two-dimensional expression is the gauge-field-dependent part of the WZ term, defined by One can in other words construct a 2-form ω2A such that d ω2A = ω 3A . Unlike the ω1 of eq. ( Here and in the following, we use the and ⊥ symbols to indicate the unbroken and broken components of elements of the Lie algebra of G, respectively. The 3-forms ( Here the independent cohomology generators are parameterized by a matrix m αβ , which is required to be a constant symmetric tensor, invariant under the adjoint action of H, that is, it satisfies a constraint analogous to eq. Just like in the case of the degree-2 cohomology, this form can easily be written explicitly as a derivative of a 3-form, directly corresponding to a Lagrangian density in the three-dimensional physical spacetime, ω3 = m αβ θα d θβ This result appeared previously in ref. In this case of most interest, the independent cohomology generators are parameterized by constant symmetric G-invariant tensors d ABC that vanish on the unbroken subgroup, that is, satisfy d αβγ = 0. The tensor d ABC is unique up to an overall scale for every simple compact Lie group. In fact, nonzero d ABC only exists for SU(N) with N ≥ 3, including SO( As in the case of the degree-3 cohomology, this form is actually not closed, which hints at a geometric obstruction to gauging the WZ term, related to an anomaly in the underlying microscopic theory. Thanks to d αβγ = 0, it is nevertheless possible to gauge the unbroken subgroup H while maintaining the closedness of ω 5 . Should gauge fields for the whole group G be included, we can proceed as in the degree-3 case and note that the right-hand side of eq. ( The form ω 5 -ω CS 5 is then closed and thus gives rise to a well-defined action in four spacetime dimensions. This four-dimensional theory suffers from an anomaly, though, which is given by an analogue of eq. ( It is now possible to give a closed four-dimensional expression ω4A for the gauge-field-dependent part of the WZ term, defined similarly to eq. ( and d ω4A = ω 5A . The 5-form ω 5A can be integrated using transgression methods The ungauged version of the 5-form (26) appeared previously in ref. The MC form θ is a universal building block for the construction of invariant actions. It is, however, not always the most convenient one due to the complicated transformation properties of the NG variable U, given by eq. ( The gauged MC form then effectively translates into a covariant derivative of Σ through where the covariant derivative of Σ takes a very simple expression thanks to the linear transformation properties of Σ, and we introduced a shorthand notation for the action of the automorphism R, A R ≡ R(A). An analogous relation to eq. ( valid for symmetric coset spaces. The broken and unbroken components of various Lie-algebravalued objects can be projected out using the automorphism R. In the following, we will focus on the cohomology generators of degree 3 and 5, which were demonstrated above to have a simple matrix form. The case of degree-2 and degree-4 generators is somewhat more complicated due to the mere H-invariance of the associated coefficients. We refer the reader to ref. The 2-form ω2A ( Likewise, for the 4-form ω4A (31) we find where F R ≡ R(F). In principle, an equivalent result written in terms of covariant derivatives of Σ can be obtained from the expression for ω4A in terms of φ. We choose not to spell out such a result here, as it is in no way simpler than eq. ( The construction of WZ terms in ref. At first sight, it seems as if nothing changed by the presence of the unbroken spectator symmetry. The coset space keeps its original structure, G/H, and the corresponding NG fields are completely insensitive to the spectator symmetry. A gauge field A s for U(1) s does not enter at all the cohomology generators on G/H, listed in section 3. However, it does give rise to an extra closed invariant 2-form, This can, in fact, be naturally incorporated in eq. ( In the more familiar Lagrangian language, this amounts to a WZ term proportional to A s μ j μ , where j μ is a topological current generalizing the Goldstone-Wilczek current of ref. With the special choice G = SU(N), this coset space plays a prominent role in QCD, or generally in QCD-like theories with quarks transforming in a complex representation of the gauge group. However, the results spelled out below hold equally well for any compact simple G satisfying the assumptions on the topology of the coset space. This coset space is symmetric thanks to the automorphism that swaps the corresponding generators of G L and G R . The conditions d αβ = 0 and d αβγ = 0 require that, up to an overall rescaling, the • operation ( We introduce the notation (T L,A , T R,B ) for the generators of the G L × G R symmetry group, where both entries in the parentheses now run over the generators of G. With a slight abuse of notation, the linearly transforming matrix variable (32) can be denoted as (Σ, Σ -1 ), where Σ ∈ G. where DΣ ≡ dΣ + A L Σ -ΣA R is implied by eq. ( . This expression agrees with classic results available in the literature, taking into account that the 4-form may be varied by adding a derivative of a 3-form without changing the action: ω4A agrees, up to an overall normalization factor, with refs. Finally, let us comment on our assumption on the triviality of π d (G/H) for the current case of the (G L × G R )/G L+R coset space. Since this coset space has the same topology as G itself, the situation is very simple for d = 2 where π 2 (G) = 0 for any compact connected Lie group The behavior of quark matter under strong magnetic fields has been subject to intensive investigations Let us start with the case of two light quark flavors, where the full chiral symmetry group is SU(2) L × SU(2) R and its unbroken subgroup SU(2) L+R . Since the fully symmetric symbol d ABC vanishes for SU(2), the primitive WZ term ω 5 is now absent. It is, however, possible to construct a degree-5 cohomology generator using the spectator baryon number symmetry U(1) B , as explained in section 3.6. We start by noting that the operator of electric charge in the quark flavor space, Q = diag( The total gauge potential of the system can then be cast as This indicates that there is a non-primitive degree-5 cohomology generator, corresponding to a WZ term in four spacetime dimensions, given via eq. ( where ω 3 is constructed using the matrix gauge field AI 3 . To carry out this construction, we need an expression for ω 3 valid for chiral coset spaces, which follows from eq. ( Upon translating this from the language of differential forms and restricting the gauge field to AI 3 , this leads to the gauge-invariant expression for the Goldstone-Wilczek current, which agrees with ref. the form ω4A then simplifies to ω4A → tr - This corresponds to the Lagrangian density where now ). The non-primitive generator again follows from eq. ( The corresponding contribution to the anomalous Lagrangian density is simply A B μ j μ . Both of the above results for QCD with three quark flavors agree with ref. These coset spaces appear for instance in the study of QCD-like theories with quarks in a real or pseudoreal representation of the gauge group, both in the context of strong interaction physics where Σ 0 is a fixed real unitary matrix, characterizing the ground state of the system. In the real case, Σ 0 is symmetric, whereas in the pseudoreal case, it is antisymmetric. It can be chosen for instance in the block form Both coset spaces are symmetric and the corresponding automorphism takes the form Recalling that G = SU(2N) is simple, there is a unique G-invariant tensor d AB , given up to an overall factor by tr(T A T B ). This, however, does not vanish on the unbroken subgroup. Hence for the SU(2N)/SO(2N) and SU(2N)/Sp(2N) coset spaces, there is no nontrivial cohomology generator ω 3 of degree 3. Thanks to G being simple and unitary, there is likewise a unique G-invariant tensor d ABC for any N ≥ 2, corresponding in the angular bracket notation We thus obtain This agrees with the result for the SU(2N)/Sp(2N) coset space, previously published in refs. As the results listed in section 3 show, there is an important conceptual difference between the even-and odd-degree WZ terms. The even-degree ones, given by eqs. ( The odd-degree WZ terms ( The WZ forms ωd are in general obviously only defined up to adding either a derivative of a (d -1)-form or a gauge-invariant d-form, since the corresponding (d + 1)-form ω d+1 then belongs to the same cohomology equivalence class. In case of the WZ forms ω d+1 with even d, there is, however, an additional ambiguity due to the appearance of the Chern-Simons form. The latter is only defined by the second relations in eqs. ( The above-mentioned ambiguity naturally disappears when only unbroken generators are gauged and the odd-degree WZ forms are closed without adding the CS form. In this case, the anomaly is absent. As is common in effective field theory, the symmetry-based differential-geometric methods employed here fix the nonlinear dependence of the WZ terms on the NG fields, but leave a set of low-energy couplings a priori undetermined. These have to be fixed either by experiment or by matching the effective theory to the underlying microscopic theory. In the case of most physical interest, that is, the WZ term ω4 with a simple symmetry group G, this amounts to fixing a single normalization factor. This can be done conveniently by evaluating the contribution of a single selected operator that couples anomalously the NG fields to the gauge fields for the group G, such as the operator responsible for the two-photon decay of the neutral pion in QCD. Alternatively, one can fix the overall normalization by evaluating the anomaly functional in terms of the gauge field alone and using eq. ( See ref. We mostly omit the ∧ symbol in products of forms. Thus, for instance, V2 is a shorthand notation forT α T β θα ∧ θβ = 1 2 [T α , T β ] θα ∧ θβ = 1 2 f γ αβ T γ θα ∧ θβ . The coefficients d j can now of course differ from those appearing in eq. (17). In ref. 5-form is constructed as ω 5 (U, A) -ω 5 (1, A). This 5-form differs from ω 5 (A) -ω CS 5 by a derivative of a 4-form depending on the gauge fields only, implying a different representation for the anomaly. This notation is motivated by the conventions commonly used in the chiral perturbation theory of QCD. To compare our results, one has multiply the gauge fields in ref. Ref. This is consistent with the fact that the coset space U(N)/U(N -1) is topologically equivalent to S 2N-1 , and that any n-sphere S n is known to only possess nontrivial de Rham cohomology generators of degrees 0 and n. The latter is unique and corresponds to the volume form on the sphere.