Cerium-hexaboride (CeB6) f-electron compound displays a rich array of low-temperature magnetic phenomena, including 'magnetically hidden' order, identified as multipolar in origin via advanced x-ray scattering. From first-principles electronic-structure results, we find that the antiferroquadrupolar (AFQ) ordering in CeB6 arises from crystal-field splitting and yields band structure in agreement with experiments. With interactions of p-electrons between Ce and B6 being small, the electronic state of CeB6 is suitably described as Ce(4f 1 ) 3+ (e -)(B6) 2-. The AFQ state of orbital spins is caused by an exchange interaction induced through spin-orbit interaction, which also splits J=5/2 state into Γ8 ground state and Γ7 excited state. Within the smallest antiferromagnetic (111) configuration, an orbital-ordered AFQ state appears during charge self-consistency, and supports the appearance of 'hidden' order. Hydrostatic pressure (either applied or chemically induced) stabilizes the AFM (AFQ) states over a ferromagnetic one, as observed at low temperatures. The nature and first-principles description of felectron materials is a considerable challenge and a highly debated topic in condensed-matter physics. The simultaneous presence of itinerant s-p-d states and partially occupied localized f -states and their interaction in rareearth materials give rise to a rich variety of phenomena, and remain a serious test for electronic-structure theories. Crystal structure & valency: CeB 6 possesses a unique simple-cubic structure (space group P m 3m) comprised of Ce 3+ ions separated by B 6 octahedra, see Fig. CeB 6 has been investigated intensively at low temperature due to its unusual properties such as AFQ ordering, the Kondo effect (which makes the localized Ce moment vanish due to coupling of Ce and B moments), and the Ruderman-Küttel-Kasuya-Yoshida (RKKY) interaction (which arranges the moments of the AFM Ce with the moments of itinerant electrons of B). From the band structure of CeB 6 , Fig. The 4f state in Ce ions with stable valency has the orbital freedom in addition to the spin. The ground state multiplet due to the spin-orbit interaction splits into the crystalline electric field state by the multipolar Coulomb potential. As shown in the level splitting, in the f 1 configuration, Γ 8 is lower than Γ 7 . In Fig. In AFQ CeB 6 , the 4f -electrons are localized, having an orbitally degenerate level in the crystalline electric-field ground state. As shown in Fig. From the axial interaction with B-p states, the Ce-f states (f xyz and f z(5z 2 -3r 2 ) ) are modified and produce a weak electric quadrupolar ordering with (nearly) degenerate localized states. The charge distributions on Ce1 and Ce2, in Fig. In summary, we have provided direct electronic insight to the presence of antiferro-quadrupolar (AFQ) ordering in CeB 6 . The crystal-field splitting, controlled by spin-orbit coupling, yield electronic dispersion and constant energy surface below E F ermi (electron and hole pockets) that agree fairly well with those observed from ARPES, highlighting the importance of spin-orbit coupling in f -block systems. Furthermore, our calculations reveal that dispersion around Γ is strongly renormalized, as indicated by highly increased density of states there, which are observed as hot-spots in ARPES. The competition between FM and AFM states is sensitive to pressure (both applied and chemically induced), which alters the hybridization between flat 4f -bands and low-lying dispersive 5d-bands. Finally, with a recent finding of topologically insulated phase in SmB 6 , a search for topological insulator phase with magnetically active sites in CeB 6 may be warranted. 