Detailed understanding of the role of single dopant atoms in host materials has been crucial for the continuing miniaturization in the semiconductor industry as local charging and trapping of electrons can completely change the behaviour of a device. Similarly, as dopants can turn a Mott insulator into a high temperature superconductor, their electronic behaviour at the atomic scale is of much interest. Due to limited time resolution of conventional scanning tunnelling microscopes, most atomic scale studies in these systems focussed on the time averaged effect of dopants on the electronic structure. Here, by using atomic scale shot-noise measurements in the doped Mott insulator Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x , we visualize sub-nanometer sized objects where remarkable dynamics leads to an enhancement of the tunnelling current noise by at least an order of magnitude. From the position, current and energy dependence we argue that these defects are oxygen dopant atoms that were unaccounted for in previous scanning probe studies, whose local environment leads to charge dynamics that strongly affect the tunnelling mechanism. The unconventional behaviour of these dopants opens up the possibility to dynamically control doping at the atomic scale, enabling the direct visualization of the effect of local charging on e.g. high T c superconductivity. Charging effects by defects and impurities have long been recognised as the leading cause for 1/f noise in conducting devices Real-time detection of charging and de-charging at time-scales on the order of the single electron tunnelling rate (τ ), which for typical currents (I) of a few hundred pico ampere is in the nanosecond range (τ = e/I), is complicated as cable and stray capacitances limit the bandwidth of conventional STMs. A measurement of fluctuations in the current due to the discreteness of the electron charge, or shot-noise, on the other hand, is directly sensitive to changes in the tunnelling dynamics due to local charging effects -even if these are on the time-scale of the tunnelling process. This is because depending on the exact process, local charging can lead to ordering or bunching of electron tunnelling. This results in a reduction (F < 1) or enhancement (F > 1), respectively, of the current noise, which for random (i.e. Poissonian, F = 1) tunnelling is given by S I = 2eIF , where S I is the shot-noise power spectral density, e the electron charge, I the current and F the Fano factor A typical constant current image of cleaved Bi2212 is shown in Fig. Could the defects with excess, or super-Poissonian, shot-noise be charging and de-charging dopant atoms? To investigate them in more detail we first focus on their shape and spatial location. As the images in Fig. Although most of the noisy defects we observe on Bi2212 show a modest decrease in differential conductance, a few actually display negative differential conductance (NDC). Instead of a point-like spatial appearance in the centre of a square of four Bi atoms as shown in Fig. The question is how oxygen dopant atoms, which are located at the same xy-location within experimental error, can manifest themselves so dramatically differently. One important clue comes from the current dependence of the defects. In semiconductor systems, a strong dependence of the differential conductance on the setup conditions (i.e. current) is known to be caused by the electric field from the tip that locally bends the bands up-or downwards at the surface, i.e. tip induced band bending (TIBB) A consequence of the reduced tunnel barrier for dopants close to the surface due to TIBB is an increase in the rate of ionization. Therefore, for higher setup currents at the same voltage, the average time the dopant is positively (strictly speaking less negatively) charged due to an electron tunnelling to the tip will increase, reducing the differential conductance to lower -or even negativevalues and increasing the effective bunching, all in agreement with our observations. Additionally, TIBB is known to produce an energy dependent halo around charged dopants in semiconductors like GaAs and InAs Although the general behaviour of the differential conductance -a dip preceded by an increase -and appearance of super-Poissonian noise is very reminiscent of resonant tunnelling in a double barrier structure Could our observations, instead of the result of charge dynamics at oxygen dopants, somehow be caused by an artefact of the tip, sample contamination, the AC circuitry we use to measure the shot-noise, or local heating? To exclude tip effects, we have used tungsten and Pt/Ir tips, both giving identical results. Furthermore, intentionally damaging either tip material has no effect other than reducing the spatial resolution (see Supplementary Information section V). Multiple as-grown, as well as annealed samples have been studied, all showing similar behaviour, ruling out sample contamination or unusual inhomogeneous samples as culprit. With our ability to completely disconnect our AC circuitry without changing tunnelling conditions, we confirmed that the defect in Fig. To summarize, by combining scanning tunnelling microscopy and shot-noise measurements, we resolve atomic scale defects where the current noise is strongly enhanced and the differential conductance reduced -for some defects even negative. These noisy defects most likely constitute a subset of the oxygen dopant atoms that are introduced to turn the Mott insulator Bi2212 into a high temperature superconductor, dopants that were unaccounted for in previous scanning probe studies. The locally enhanced current noise and reduced differential conductance is expected for charging and de-charging on time scales of the tunnelling process due to weak coupling of these dopants to the CuO charge reservoir, resulting in local potential fluctuations that strongly affect the dominant tunnelling channel(s). Given the similar xy-location, the exact details of the local environment plays a key role in the charge dynamics of oxygen dopants and their effect on the tunnelling process. Their unconventional behaviour, in particular of the defects with negative differential conductance, can in principle be utilised to dynamically control the doping at the atomic scale, enabling direct visualization of the effect of local charging on e.g. high T c superconductivity. High quality Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x single crystals were grown at the University of Amsterdam using the floating zone technique. Both as-grown samples with a T c ∼ 90 K and samples annealed for 5 days at 450 • C under 20 mbar oxygen pressure with a T c ∼ 81 K were studied. The samples were mechanically cleaved in cryogenic vacuum at T ∼ 20 K and directly inserted into the STM head at 4.2 K. Etched atomically sharp and stable tungsten tips, and mechanically cut Pt/Ir tips were used, both with energy independent density of states. Differential conductance measurements throughout used a standard lock-in amplifier with a modulation frequency of 429.7Hz. STM and simultaneous noise measurements were performed with the home-built setup and MHz circuitry described in Ref. [16]. A bandpass filter followed by a Herotek DZM020BB diode was used to integrate the noise amplitude spectral density in the 100 kHz -5 MHz frequency range. Lock-in measurements of the noise at the LC cable resonance of 1 MHz gave identical results. All presented measurements were recorded at T = 1.8 K. The signal-to-noise for this particular measurement is set to be able to resolve changes in the slope of a factor of ∼5. This can be greatly improved upon by longer averaging or point spectroscopy, see Ref.