Several spin-orbit effects allow performing spin to charge inter-conversion: the spin Hall effects, the Rashba effect, or the spin-momentum locking in topological insulators. Here we focus on how the detection of this inter-conversion can be made electrically, using three different cross-shaped nanostructures. We apply these measurement configurations to the case of the spin Hall effect in Pt, using CoFe electrodes to detect and inject spins. Both the direct and inverse spin Hall effect can be detected, with a spin Hall signal up to two order of magnitude higher than that of nonlocal measurements in metallic lateral spin valves, and with a much simpler fabrication protocol. We compare the respective signal amplitude of the three proposed geometries. Finally, comparison of the observed spin signals with finite element method calculations allows extracting the spin Hall angle and the spin diffusion length of Pt. Spin current manipulation is at the core of spintronics. Recently, spin-orbit interaction (SOI) in nonmagnetic materials has been exploited to create and detect the spin currents. For instance, the spin Hall effect (SHE) and its inverse Direct SHE (DSHE) allows converting a charge current into a transverse pure spin current (PSC), a flow of spin angular momentum without net charge flow. The relationship between the produced PSC (Js), the charge current (Jc) and the spin polarization of electrons (s) can be written J S = ħ e Θ SHE J C × s A lot of techniques have been devoted to SHE detection, such as the FM-based spin pumping/spin torque Among electrical methods, non-local techniques which exploit abilities of ferromagnets for injecting and detecting spin current in lateral spin valves (LSV) Electrical devices which can produce high spin signals are thus of prime importance not only for basics research but also for applications. Recently, a simple F/N bilayer device with two ferromagnetic electrodes probing directly the spin accumulation induced by the SHE of an underneath metallic nanowire with strong SOC has been proposed to achieve large spincharge inter-conversion signals The samples have been fabricated by conventional e-beam lithography, e-gun deposition, and lift-off processes on the thermal oxidized SiO2/Si substrate. The chosen materials are Co60Fe40 and Pt, as they are archetypal ferromagnetic and SHE materials. Their magnetic and spin transport properties have been previously characterized As expected for ISHE and DSHE, the obtained signals have similar amplitude when changing the measurement configuration, as expected by their reciprocal relation. We believe that the small offset resistance can be explained by the slight misalignment between the different electrodes, as seen in the SEM image in Fig. The results illustrated in Figs. Figures As shown in Figures 3, these cross nanostructures allow studying the spin signal using other probe configurations, as depicted in the insets, with the voltage and current leads circulating by pairs around the sample. This type of measurement has been used in experiments involving Topological Insulators Note that the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) The device presented in Fig. Figure The distribution of the applied charge current in Fig. 