We discuss the dynamical polarization, plasmon dispersion, relaxation time, and the Friedel oscillation of screened potential of the two-dimension Dirac and threedimension Weyl system (which are gapped) in the low-energy tigh-binding model. The results, like the Fermi wavevector, Thomas-Fermi wavevector, and longitudinal conductivity are obtained in different dimensions. Some important conclusions are detailedly discussed in this paper, including the screening character under short or long range Coulomb interaction, and the longitudinal conductivity in two-or threedimensions. The longitudinal conductivity in optical limit is distinguishing for the case of two-dimension system and three-dimension system. The density-dependence (including the carrier density and the impurity concentration) of the Fermi wavevector, dc conductivity, and the relaxation time are discussed. Specially, for the doped Weyl system, the pumped carrier density due to the chiral anomaly origin from electromagnetic response is controlled by the internode relaxation time which has also been analyzed. Our results is helpful to the application of the Dirac or Weyl systems as well as the study on their low-temperature characters. In this paper, we discuss the dynamical polarization, plasmon model, screened potential of the charged impurities, and the relaxation time in the presence of the impurity of the twodimension Dirac materials (like the silicene and MoS 2 which both with hexagonal and buckled lattice structure and strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC)) and the three-dimension Weyl material. The dynamical polarization is a renormalization of the Coulomb interaction between carriers √ n i with n i is the impurity concentration) in Weyl semimetal is shorter than that in the Dirac semimetal, e.g., for the Weyl semimetal Eu 2 Ir 2 O 7 which with Fermi velocity v F = 4 × 10 5 m/s and slower than in the silicene (whose Fermi velocity is v F = 5.5 × 10 5 m/s), the internode charge relaxation time is nearly 25 fs which is much longer than that in silicene (nearly 18.2 ps). The chirality effect of the Dirac materials can be shown in the interband or intraband scattering matrix element which describe the overlap of the eigenstates as shown in the noninteracting (inreducible) or interacting expression of the dynamical polarization where t inter is the strength of the interlayer hopping. γ = 2k F /(πΠ(q, 0) ) (γ ∼ v F for the monolayer silicene or graphene with large carriers density) is inversely proportional to the static polarization function In both the Dirac or Weyl semimetal, the Berry curvature together with the induced anomalous velocity term requires either the broken time-reversal invariance or the inversion symmetry , where τ z denote the pseudospin degree of freedom, α and β are the terms related to the time-reversal invariance and inversion symmetry, respectively, i.e., α stands the distance between the K-point to the Weyl nodes in momentum space where E ⊥ is the perpendicularly applied electric field, a = 3.86 is the lattice constant, μ is the chemical potential, ∆ = 0.46 Å is the buckled distance between the upper sublattice and lower sublattice, σ z and τ z are the spin and sublattice (pseudospin) degrees of freedom, respectively. η = ±1 for K and K' valley, respectively. M s is the spin-dependent exchange field. λ SOC = 3.9 meV is the strength of intrinsic spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and λ R 2 = 0.7 meV is the intrinsic Rashba coupling which is a next-nearest-neightbor (NNN) hopping term and breaks the lattice inversion symmetry. λ R 1 is the electric field-induced nearest-neighbor (NN) Rashba coupling which has been found that linear with the applied electric field in our previous works respectively, where s = ±1 is the electron/hole index. The Dirac-mass here is related to the band gap by the relation ∆ = 2|m D |. For the monolayer MoS 2 which also has the outstanding properties about the unconventional Quantum Hall effect and spin Hall effect like the silicene, and with a higher buckled structure (angle θ = 40.7 o ) than silicene, the low-energy Dirac Hamiltonian reads where m 0 is the free electron mass, and λ SOC = 0.08 eV, t 0 = 1.68 eV, a = 2.43 Å . We show in Fig. In long-wavelength limit (and low-energy), the quasiparticle excitation has support the types of Fermions in condensed matter system As we have discussed where the value of Dirac-mass here can be controlled by modifying the indices η or s z . Here the maximum and minimum band gap-dependent Dirac mass can be obtained through the Eq.( where we restrict the M s = 0.0039 eV here as usual and apply λ R 2 = 0.012E ⊥ . Thus we know that the gap difference between the maximum gap and minimum gap is as large as The factor v F in the above expressions of the plasmon dispersion is in fact required by the long-wavelength plasmon dispersion in all dimensions √ πn with n the charge carrier density per unit two-dimension volume and k (2) F = 4πn/g s g v , through this we can see that ω p ∝ n 1/4 in monolayer silicene but ω p ∝ n 1/2 in bilayer silicene. While for the Weyl semimetal, the Fermi wavevector is k where the later term is due to the chiral anomaly. In such case, due to the existence of midgap Landau level, the Adler-Bell-Jackiew anomaly occur (2) For the parabolic energy dispersion systems (like the bilayer islicene or the few-layer black phosphorus), the long-wavelength behavior of the plasmon model can be obtained by solving where we simpliy view the unit area of the two-dimension sheet as A = 1, and then the plasmon dispersion (in gapped case) can be written as where here with m the mass related to the intralayer or interlayer hopping. through this we can see that ω p ∝ n 1/2 in bilayer silicene and 2DEG, For the Weyl semimetal, the plasmon frequency in long-wavelength limit can be approximately solved from The Reǫ(ω) in fact has a logarithmic dependence on the frequency, with[5] the latter term within the bracket (imaginary) also appear in the dielectric function of the Kane Fermions which is similar to the results of Refs. In the presence of the short-range impurity (with δ-term, i.e., the scattering reads V s (r) = V (q)δ(r -r imp )) in the noninteracting approximation (which in fact has high accuracy in lowtemperature case), the momentum relaxation rate (impurity scattering rate) can be obtained by the first Born approximation, where the impurities scattering potential after the Fourier transformation is V 2 = 2πe 2 ǫ 0 ǫ √ q 2 +k 2 s with the screening wave vector k s = 2πe 2 Π(q, ω)/(ǫ 0 ǫ) which is polarization-dependent. G(q, ω) is the the retarded lattice Green's function where Σ(ω) is the self-energy matrix and indeed can also be omitted here due to the noninteracting assumation. Here the self-energy as well as the vertex correction origin from the electron interaction can in fact be ignored due to the low-energy assumation, in which case that the disorder is dominates in low-energy transport but not the electron interaction Similarly, the relaxation rate in three dimension undoped Dirac or Weyl system can be obtained as where the impurities scattering potential after the Fourier transformation is with the screening wave vector k s = 2πe 2 Π(q, ω)/(ǫ 0 ǫ) which is polarization-dependent. The denisty of state in Fermi level here becomes 2π 2 γ 3 (γ ∼ v F here). Here we note that, due to the large charge density, we have 1 τ 2 ∼ n 2 and 1 τ 3 ∼ n 3 . For the long-range impurity (with long-range Coulomb interaction), the screening wave vector (k s ) in the above screened Coulomb interaction V 2 or V 3 can be replaced by the Thomas-Fermi wavevector: ǫǫ * πΠ(q, 0) 2 for the two-dimension bilayer Dirac system, and q 2 T F = 4πe 2 D 3 F /(ǫǫ * E F ) for three-dimension Weyl system where θ is the angle between the wave vectors before and after scattering, U(q) = e 2 2ǫǫ * √ q 2 +k 2 s is the Fourier transform of the U(r) = e 2 e -ks 4πǫǫ * . The factor (1-cosθ) only exist in the presence of the dominating elastic backscattering and the δ-impurity-term here can be preserved for long-range impurity as a result of the low-temperature. It appear here as a standard factor i . For such case (in zero temperature limit), the static (dc) conductivity is related to the impurity concentration and the mean-free path: h k F in three-dimension Weyl system, here the Fermi wavevector k F for each system has been presented above. For the dominating interband elastic scattering in gapless case, the above expression becomes For the case of finite temperature T together with the electron interactions and the unscreened Coulomb interaction, the scattering rate becomes 1/τ ∼ α 2 max[ε, T ][35], i.e., it's temperature-and quasienergy-dependent (in fact it's also chemical potential-(doping) and frequency-dependent) except at the zero energy Dirac-point with large compressibility (and thus with the minimal conductivity) and electronic phase separation where α 1 is a dimensionless constant, note that here n = n i is the carrier density. For the three-dimension Weyl semimetal in the presence of the Donor impurities, the transport collision rate due to impurity scattering is In Fig. in the optical limit (q → 0), the above expression becomes the optical conductivity which can be verified by the Kubo formula The electron-density-deviation induced by the impurity is δn = ). Within the RPA in static limit, the screened potential of the charged impurities which determined by the charge density as well as the position reads i(e -iqr -e iqr ) qr where α = e 2 / v F ǫ is the fine structure constant which has a close definition with the r s : The ratio of the Coulomb interaction to the kinetic energy. J 0 (qr) is the zeroth Bessel function of the first kind. Ze is the charge of the impurity. The static polarization here reads[ for 0 < μ < m D , and for μ > m D . Through the first four lines of the above expression of the polarization at large wave vector (momentum) q and short distance, the screened static Coulomb potential φ(r) ∼ Ze ǫǫ * r , which implies a simply logarithmic decay with the increase of distance, while in long-distance regime (r ≫ k -1 F ), the screened potential decrease more faster as ∼ r 3 The Friedel oscillation is dominates in the short-range Coulomb interaction while the Thomas-Fermi contribution is dominates in the long-range Coulomb interaction for 2DEG (the same as the parabolic system, like the bilayer silicene), and for the three-dimension Weyl semimetal. As we mentioned above, the massive (gapped) twodimension Dirac-system as well as the 2DEG and the parabolic system decay as r -2 for large distance, for massless (gapless) three-dimension Dirac or Weyl semimetal, the Friedel oscillation decay as r -4 due to the chirality effect which supress the back scattering in q = 2k F even in the low-temperature. While for the parabolic system with both the Rashba-coupling and the Dresselhaus-coupling in unequal strength (thus with the broken SU(2) symmetry), the doubly singularities occur We discuss the dynamical polarization, plasmon dispersion, relaxation time (or transport time for the large distance case) as well as the longitudinal conductivity, and the Friedel oscillation of screened potential of the two-dimension Dirac and three-dimension Weyl system. The results, including the Fermi wavevector, Thomas-Fermi wavevector, longitudinal conductivity, and the density of states in Fermi level between different dimensions are compared. Some important conclusions are also detaily discussed in the text, including the screening character under short or long range Coulomb interaction. The model for which the calculations based on is the low-energy tight-binding model as described in the Sec.2, i.e., the results in this paper is for the low-temperature and low-energy case and it's thus possible to carrying out a logarithmic self-energy correction to the relaxation time as we discussed in the text. The difference between the longitudinal conductivities in serversal systems is also been discussed. Our results is helpful to the application of the Dirac or Weyl systems as well as the study on their low-temperature characters. The longitudinal conductivity of two-dimension Dirac system in q ∼ ω space (a), and in long-wavelength limit (q → 0)(b). We set here μ < m D (we have present the reason in Ref. 