We report on the near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy of hybrid organic-inorganic resists. These materials are nonchemically amplified systems based on Si, Zr, and Ti oxides, synthesized from organically modified precursors and transition metal alkoxides by a sol-gel route and designed for ultraviolet, extreme ultraviolet and electron beam lithography. The experiments were conducted using a scanning transmission X-ray microscope (STXM) which combines high spatial-resolution microscopy and NEXAFS spectroscopy. The absorption spectra were collected in the proximity of the carbon edge (~ 290 eV) before and after in situ exposure, enabling the measurement of a significant photo-induced degradation of the organic group (phenyl or methyl methacrylate, respectively), the degree of which depends on the configuration of the ligand. Photo-induced degradation was more efficient in the resist synthesized with pendant phenyl substituents than it was in the case of systems based on bridging phenyl groups. The degradation of the methyl methacrylate group was relatively efficient, with about half of the initial ligands dissociated upon exposure. Our data reveal that the such dissociation can produce different outcomes, depending on the structural configuration. While all the organic groups were expected to detach and desorb from the resist in their entirety, a sizeable amount of them remain and form undesired byproducts such as alkene chains. In the framework of the materials synthesis and engineering through specific building blocks, these results provide a deeper insight into the photochemistry of resists, in particular for extreme ultraviolet lithography. Extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography is set to become the next generation lithography process for high volume manufacturing of semiconductor devices. Hybrid organic-inorganic resists were synthesized by sol-gel chemistry: hydrolysis and condensation reactions occur at temperature T < 200 °C ('chimie douce') according to methods described elsewhere. Organic group NEXAFS experiments were conducted at the PolLux beamline First, NEXAFS spectra of the pristine samples were acquired while scanning the defocused beam over a 1 μm long strip of resist, so as to prevent undesired exposure of the material itself. Afterwards, selective exposure of the material was done on an approximately round shape area of about 1 μm diameter. For this purpose, as EUV light of 13.5 nm wavelength is not covered by the energy range of Pollux, the photon energy was set to 500 eV. This energy was chosen because it does not match any known resonance of the material. The identification of the position and intensity of the features of the absorption spectra was carried out by fitting a combination of mathematical functions to account for the physical mechanisms of soft X-ray absorption in the resist. Based on established literature of NEXAFS studies of organic compounds in the proximity of the carbon edge, the following phenomena were considered: I) photoexcitation of a K-shell electron to unoccupied π* or σ* molecular orbitals; II) photoexcitation of a K-shell electron to continuum states above the ionization potential (IP); and III) decreasing absorption in the extended structure (energy E > IP). The fitting function f(E) of the photon energy thus consisted of a combination of: 1) sum of up to 9 symmetric Gaussian functions; 2) one normal cumulative function centered at an energy equal to the ionization potential; and 3) an exponentially decaying term for the extended region: where the A i and σ i terms account for the heights and widths of the Gaussians, the μ i terms account for the position of the Gaussian peaks, σ c accounts for the continuum states, and A and σ account for the magnitude and slope of the exponentially decaying term, respectively. The nonlinear least-squares fitting of f(E) to the experimental data was carried out by the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. The goodness of the fit was guaranteed by iterating the algorithm until a coefficient of determination R 2 of 0.975 or better was achieved for the fitting of each experimental spectrum. Initial guesses for the location of the peaks of the Gaussian components were put in by visual inspection of the data. Finally, the ionization potential of the exposed samples was set equal to the IP value previously extracted in the unexposed condition. The measured optical density (O.D.) of the resist films and the fitting functions to the data, before and after exposure, are shown in Fig. The NEXAFS spectra (Fig. The NEXAFS spectrum of sample S3 shows several characteristic features in common with that of poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA), again indicated by the white line in Fig. To clarify how the exposure of a hybrid organic-inorganic resist proceeds, i.e. what changes occur in the carbon environment, we associate the variation of optical density of specific resonances of the NEXAFS spectra to changes in the phenyl bridged (S1), phenyl pendant (S2) or methyl methacrylate (S3) organic groups. We consider both the π* C=C resonance (285 eV) and one of the benzene resonance (293.5 eV) as markers for samples S1 and S2, while the π* C=O resonance (288.5 eV) is taken as the most relevant in the case of sample S3. Because the organic group can dissociate in a variety of ways upon exposure, the total amount of organic component needs to be accounted for. To this purpose, the unnormalized optical density at 350 eV (i.e. at energy well beyond any other resonance of the carbon edge) is taken as a marker for the total carbon content of the film. The experimental values of all these indicators are listed in Table After exposure, the signature of benzene in sample S1 (bridging phenyl) was preserved more markedly than it was in sample S2 (pendant phenyl). Quantitatively (Table In the case of the methyl methacrylate ligand of sample S3, a sizeable degradation of the methacrylate group occurred in more than half of the double carbon-oxygen bonds initially present in the material. However, the remaining strongly bonded carbon did not decrease as much as expected (-15 %) and only one third of the initial carbon atoms were lost after exposure. As in the case of the phenyl pendant (S2), this observation suggests that not all of the dissociated methacrylate groups were desorbed. Based on the structure of the resist, it is thought that the release of oxygen occurs by dissociation of the carbon-oxygen bond, In summary, NEXAFS is a viable a tool for the study of chemical changes in hybrid organic-inorganic resists. Based on established works from literature, we verified the chemical composition of the organic part as containing specific groups (either phenyl or methyl methacrylate). Exploiting the high chemical selectivity of this technique, we tracked the changes in the organic component upon exposure, regardless of the contribution of the inorganic glassy network. It was found that exposure to soft X-rays is effective in dissociating the organic groups similarly to what happens in EUV and electron beam lithography. However, the outcome of the dissociation is not always the desired complete detachment and desorption of the organic group. We used the relative intensity of the doubly bonded carbon resonance, of the doubly bonded carbon-oxygen resonance and of the benzene ring as signatures of the chemical changes in the organic part of the material. Interestingly, the dissociation efficiency of the organic ligand was found to be dependent on its chemical configuration and several different dissociation pathways are possible. The persistence of strongly bonded C=C in the exposed material is a finding of interest to lithographers who wish to achieve pattern transfer by physical etching. These results provide insight into the mechanism by which hybrid organic-inorganic resists work, which can open new opportunities for their chemical synthesis for performance improvement.