A ferroelectric is a material with a polar structure whose polarity can be reversed by applying an electric field 1,2 . In metals, the itinerant electrons tend to screen electrostatic forces between ions, helping to explain why polar metals are very rare The structure of a polar material effectively contains an arrow, that is, an axis along which the two directions are physically distinguishable. This is necessary for the existence of a spontaneous electric polarization. Of the 32 three-dimensional crystal classes, the ten having a polar axis are known as the pyroelectrics, because heating them changes any electric polarization along this axis to produce a voltage. When Anderson and Blount introduced Several ferroelectric insulators have been found to maintain ferroelectric characteristics in ultrathin films The 1T′ structure (Fig. Similar bistability was seen in all bilayer devices (see Extended Data Fig. Figure We can infer δE t by applying a bias V W to the WTe2 and measuring the change δV = d t δE t required to produce the same change in G gr , as shown in Fig. In Fig. We also made a simpler device with no top hBN and monolayer graphene directly encapsulating bilayer WTe2. It exhibited highly reproducible hysteresis in the conductance, visible up to 300 K (see Extended Data Fig. We also investigated the effect of the gate-induced charge doping, defined by en e = ε hBN ε 0 (V t /d t + V b /d b ). The quantity n e would be the areal density of added electrons if the material were a simple metal. In Figs. At low temperatures (Fig. Ferroelectricity adds another ingredient to the intriguing combination of QSH edges, correlation effects and superconductivity already seen in this atomically thin topological semimetal. Although the QSH behavior and superconductivity are restricted to the centrosymmetric monolayer while the ferroelectricity occurs only for two or more layers, it is possible that these diverse phenomena are connected in ways which may also be relevant to understanding the properties that emerge in the 3D limit, including extreme and anisotropic magnetoresistance Preparation and characterization of WTe2 devices. We measured devices with four different layouts: (1) WTe2 with graphite gates above and below (M1, B1, B4, T1); (2) bilayer WTe2 with monolayer graphene as top gate (B2); (3) a bilayer WTe2/graphene heterostructure (B3); and (4) a monolayer graphene device gated by few-layer WTe2 (F1). In the following, we describe fabrication of the first type; the others are similar. First, graphite and hBN crystals were mechanically exfoliated under ambient conditions onto substrates consisting of 285 nm thermal SiO2 on highly p-doped silicon. Graphite flakes 2-6 nm thick were chosen for top and bottom gates and 5-30 nm thick hBN flakes (a layered electrical insulator free of trapped charges and dangling bonds) were chosen for the top and bottom dielectric Estimation of the electric polarization. We use the following simplified model to estimate the spontaneous polarization of the bilayer WTe2 from the measurements in Fig. where E t is the electric field in the hBN (equal on both sides because the bilayer is neutral) and E i is the field between the two charge sheets. Since the top graphene and the center of the bilayer are both at zero potential, 2E t d t + E i d = 0 . (2) From ( The change in E t when the polarization reverses is then . With d t ≈ 10 nm and d ≈ 1 nm, the first term in the denominator dominates so δE t ≈ P/(ε 0 d t ) and thus P ≈ ε 0 d t δE t = ε 0 δV . In reality, the ratio of d t to d b could be up to about 1:3, the conductors have finite compressibility, and the polarization charge is more spread out, which taken together will introduce an extra numerical coefficient of order unity. Removing parallel (parasitic) conduction through the graphene in device B2. In device B2 the graphene extends over regions with no WTe2 underneath so that it acts as a uniform gate for the entire WTe2 sheet. The quantity that we call G gr is the result of the following measurement, which maximizes sensitivity to just a central region of graphene above the WTe2. First, we ground two opposing contacts to the graphene and measure only the current that flows from the biased contact to the one opposite, as shown in Fig. In Extended Data Fig. Using Extended Data Fig. Extended Data