We propose to use logarithmic spiral resonators for efficient absorption of microwaves. By combining their scale invariant geometries and Fabry-Perot-type resonances stemming from the fundamental TM mode, we realize a microwave metasurface with broadband absorption performance. The metasurface comprises logarithmic spiral resonators backed with a metallic surface and it can absorb > 95% of incident microwave energy within the frequency range of 6 GHz -37 GHz. We discuss the physics underlying the broadband absorption and the crucial role of vortex energy flow. The study opens a new direction of electromagnetic wave absorption by employing the scale invariance of Maxwell equations. The absorption of electromagnetic waves has continuously drawn attention due to various applications such as stealth, reduction in radiation exposure, and solar energy related technologies. Since the advent of metamaterials [1-3], a large number of studies have been carried out to explore the possibility of absorbing electromagnetic waves by using metamaterials Consider the source-free Maxwell equations in vacuum: , where  is an arbitrary scaling factor. The scale invariance indicates that the electromagnetic response of a system remains unchanged under the scaling of both geometric dimensions and wavelength. In materials with weak dispersion, this invariance can be approximately maintained. Under this condition, it is possible to design a metamaterial with broadband properties (e.g. absorption) deriving from the scale invariance of its unit cell geometry. In contrast, the broadband properties of conventional metamaterials usually derive from multiple structures with different geometric dimensions, which induce electromagnetic resonances at different frequencies. We will show that metamaterials with a scale invariant unit cell geometry can kill two birds with one stone: they can not only achieve broadband absorption of electromagnetic waves, but also maintain a small thickness as the result of a space coiling feature. We consider the two-dimensional metamaterial unit shown in Fig. (grey region). The copper film has a thickness of 0.1 mm. The spiral can be viewed as transformed from a tapered parallel-plate (TPP) waveguide through space coiling. Under TM polarization, the TPP waveguide has a fundamental mode that has no cutoff frequency, which is similar to the normal parallel-plate waveguide. Figure 1 SS , where S11 and S22 are the S-parameters. The length of the waveguide along x direction is ~21 mm. The width of the left and the right openings is 0.01mm and 3.4 mm, respectively. We consider port excitation at the right opening. The variation of the waveguide's width induces impedance mismatch and hence Fabry-Perot-type resonances, which accounts for the peaks in the absorption spectrum in Fig. . We notice that when the dielectric loss  is large, the absorption can approach 100% in a wideband. However, the TPP waveguide is bulky. In contrast, the logarithmic spiral is geometrically compact and its scale invariance should give rise to similar absorption property at different frequencies. Figure , which is calculated by full-wave simulations using COMSOL marked by the dashed line) as in the case of 0.2   at f = 6.7 GHz. Since large ACS must be accompanied by large scattering cross section (SCS), the LSR has a large extinction cross section as shown in Fig. We now employ the strong absorption of the LSR to build a metasurface (i.e. thin-layer metamaterial) microwave absorber. This is achieved by arranging the LSRs into a onedimensional array with period a = 7.83 mm on a copper substrate, as shown in Fig. If we optimize the LSR metasurface by using graded-index lossy dielectric as the filling material, we can further broaden its absorption bandwidth. Figure where R is the reflection coefficient The metasurface absorber in Fig. To further understand the critical role of scale invariance in the broadband absorption, we performed a comparative study where the metasurface is constructed with ASRs. The ASR has a geometry that is not scale invariant, as shown by the inset in Fig. As the dielectric loss  is increased, the ACS first grows and then decreases. The maximum absorption, i.e. the single channel theoretical upper limit /2  , is achieved at the normalized frequency ~ f = 0.0246 c/D in the case of 0.004 , where c is the speed of light in vacuum. . Figure We note that the performance of the LSR metasurface depends on the values of  and  . The constant  controls the size of the spiral and determines the working frequency of the metasurface. The constant  controls how "compact" the spiral is and determines the mode density (i.e. number of resonances per frequency interval) of the LSR. When  takes an appropriate value, the corresponding mode density results in broadband matching of the metasurface impedance with vacuum impedance and therefore significantly improves absorption. Some metamaterials constructed with fractal structures can also absorb electromagnetic waves within a broadband of frequencies Here in the LSR metasurface, electromagnetic energy flows from the outer layer of the LSR (corresponding to large vortex) to the inner layers (corresponding to smaller vortices), and is eventually absorbed in the center due to material loss. The similarity between the two completely different physical systems indicates the critical role of vortex flow in the energy dissipation of classical systems. In conclusion, we provided a general recipe for designing broadband electromagnetic wave absorbers by combining scale invariant geometry and no-cutoff TM guided mode. Following the recipe, we designed a metasurface by using LSRs which can achieve high absorption of incident microwave within a broadband of frequencies. The critical role of scale invariance is verified through a comparative study with ASR metasurface. The results may be extended to high frequency regime for the absorption of visible light. The related physics may also be applied to the absorption of other classical waves such as sound. 