We study the magnetic field induced superconductor-metal transition (SMT) in ultrathin crystalline Pb films. By performing ultralow temperature transport measurement, the divergent critical exponent as an indication of quantum Griffiths singularity (QGS) is observed when approaching zero temperature quantum critical point. Distinctively, the phase boundary of SMT exhibits an anomalous behavior in low temperature regime that the onset critical field decreases with decreasing temperatures, which distinguishes our observation from earlier reports of QGS in various two-dimensional superconductors. We demonstrate that this observed anomalous phase boundary has its origin from the superconducting fluctuations in ultrathin Pb films. Our findings reveal a novel aspect of the QGS of SMT in two-dimentional superconducting systems with anomalous phase boundary. As a paradigm of quantum phase transition (QPT) superconductor-insulator/metal transition (SIT/SMT) has been widely investigated in two-dimensional (2D) superconductors over the past thirty years Recently, crystalline 2D superconductors offer a new perspective to explore unprecedented quantum phenomena To confirm the anomalous QGS in ultralow temperature regime, we measured 4-ML sample down to 60 mK in a dilution refrigerator MNK 126-450 system (Leiden Cryogenics BV). We then investigate the anomalous QGS in 3.5-ML Pb films. Other mechanisms can also give rise to an anomalous phase boundary. Firstly, a strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI) will bend down the critical field at low temperatures in Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg(WHH) theory In summary, the magnetic field induced SMT is systematically studied in ultrathin crystalline Pb films by ex situ transport measurements. Surprisingly, the phase boundary of SMT exhibits an anomalous behavior in low temperature regime that the onset critical field decreases with decreasing temperatures, which can be quantitatively explained by the effect of superconducting fluctuation. Furthermore, the critical exponent of SMT diverges when approaching zero temperature quantum critical point, indicating the existence of anomalous QGS of SMT in 2D superconducting system showing reentrant superconducting behaviors. were carried out right after the growth of sample, so the exposure time to atmosphere is shorter and the sheet resistance is smaller compared to the data from PPMS (Fig. 