Reliable models of the thermodynamic properties of materials are critical for industrially relevant applications that require a good understanding of equilibrium phase diagrams, thermal and chemical transport, and microstructure evolution. The goal of thermodynamic models is to capture data from both experimental and computational studies and then make reliable predictions when extrapolating to new regions of parameter space. These predictions will be impacted by artifacts present in real data sets such as outliers, systematics errors and unreliable or missing uncertainty bounds. Such issues increase the probability of the thermodynamic model producing erroneous predictions. We present a Bayesian framework for the selection, calibration and quantification of uncertainty of thermodynamic property models. The modular framework addresses numerous concerns regarding thermodynamic models including thermodynamic consistency, robustness to outliers and systematic errors by the use of hyperparameter weightings and robust Likelihood and Prior distribution choices. Furthermore, the framework's inherent transparency (e.g. our choice of probability functions and associated parameters) enables insights into the complex process of thermodynamic assessment. We introduce these concepts through examples where the true property model is known. In addition, we demonstrate the utility of the framework through the creation of a property model from a large set of experimental specific heat and enthalpy measurements of Hafnium metal from 0 to 4900K. High quality thermodynamic property models are the key to calculating numerous other properties and predicting complex material behaviors. Researchers construct these models through a process called assessment Over the past several decades, researchers have developed approaches for the quantification of uncertainty in thermodynamic property models. The challenges involved in the calculation of phase diagrams (CALPHAD) have driven many of these efforts. CALPHAD requires the selection and calibration of models for the Gibbs energies of relevant phases from disparate experimental and computational sources Through these procedures, researchers fit empirical model forms to limited and often conflicting datasets. Both frequentist While the previously described efforts made significant progress in evaluating uncertainty of thermodynamic properties, a general framework for model selection, calibration and uncertainty quantification is lacking. Bayesian statistical methods have the potential to address each of these elements in an elegant and self-consistent manner. Researchers in a number of fields have employed comprehensive Bayesian modeling approaches to great effect, with particular success in the cosmology community This Bayesian framework naturally accommodates ancillary methods to address issues commonly seen in real computational and experimental data, including the presence of outliers, systematic errors and inaccurate error bars. Our novel approach optimally leverages specific heat and enthalpy data (as well as entropies and Gibbs free energies if available) to construct self-consistent thermodynamic models. One major advantage of this approach versus previous attempts is that it does not incur the errors associated with the conversion of all data to the same property basis (e.g. fitting and then differentiating enthalpy data to convert to specific heat). Furthermore, the framework can naturally incorporate the relative weighting of various datasets and provides significant insight into the relative importance of each dataset to the model. We demonstrate the strengths of the framework through the construction of a thermodynamic property model for Hafnium metal from a diverse collection of experimental measurements of heat capacity and enthalpy for the alpha, beta and liquid phases. Hafnium metal is a good candidate for this study as the available measurements exhibit the previously mentioned issues due to the difficulty of obtaining Hafnium samples without Zirconium content, the potential for oxygen contamination, and the extreme temperatures at which the beta and liquid phases are stable (Hafnium melts at ∼2500K and vaporizes at 4900K) In developing the thermodynamic property models we investigate model forms that are effective across the entire temperature range. In the low temperature regime we utilize the Einstein and Debye models of specific heat to account for quantum effects. At higher temperatures, both polynomial models and the segmented regression model developed by Roslyakova et al. In Section 2.1 we introduce Bayes' Theorem and statistics. In Section 2.2 we describe some modern statistical sampling techniques which will be used in this paper. In Section 2.3 we discuss the model's robustness to outliers. In Section 2.4 we describe the weighting applied to different datasets and in Section 2.5 we outline how thermodynamic consistency is enforced in the model. We provide example problems to highlight the application of each method. In Appendix A, we present a simple example of fitting a linear model to noisy data. Bayes' theorem states that given some data, D, and a model, M, the probability density function of the model parameters, Θ, called the Posterior distribution, is given by, where P (D|Θ, M) is the Likelihood which describes the conditional probability of the data given the model and associated parameters. P (Θ|M ) is the Prior and describes our previous beliefs or knowledge about the model parameters (e.g. ranges from previous experiments or physical restrictions on the parameter values). P (D|M ) is the marginal Likelihood or Evidence and describes the probability of the data being generated by the model. A characteristic of Bayesian statistics that differentiates it from the frequentist approach is that both the parameters and the data are assumed to be random variables and we can make probabilistic statements of certainty given a single realization of the data. This has important implications in the interpretation of Bayesian probabilities. The quantities which we want to evaluate are moments of the probability function (e.g. means, variances and higher order moments) which require integrating over the Posterior probability. For many problems this is difficult to evaluate and so the solutions are obtained using numerical methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) An accurate determination of the Posterior probability enables us to measure their moments as well as uncertainty intervals (or credible intervals in the Bayesian vocabulary) for the model response. One advantage of the Bayesian framework is that uncertainties have intuitive explanations; for example, a one standard-deviation interval for a parameter of interest contains ∼68% of its probability distribution (assuming Gaussian distributed variables). In the remainder of this work, the 2.5 th and 97.5 th percentile bounds form the 95 th percentile uncertainty intervals, and the best fit parameters and model predictions are given by the 50 th percentile levels of the quantities of interest. Bayesian statistics also provides a strategy for model selection via the marginal Likelihood. The marginal Likelihood is the denominator of Eq. ( where Ω Θ represents the complete parameter space. Note that by integrating over the parameters in the model we are able to compare Bayesian Evidences for two distinct models in a meaningful way, even if they contain different numbers of parameters. This ratio of the Bayesian Evidence for two models is called the Bayes Factor and is given by where M A and M B are the two models under consideration Analytical methods to evaluate the Posterior probability are only available for a small subset of problems and in practice numerical sampling approaches are employed for this task. The most common and historically important sampler is the Metropolis-Hastings (M-H) algorithm In this work, we discuss two state-of-the-art samplers that improve on the M-H algorithm: kombine It is important to note that the researcher must monitor MCMC-based methods such as kombine to ensure that the walkers effectively traverse the Posterior distribution and that subsequent jumps are not overly correlated In contrast to other Monte Carlo based approaches, nested sampling In contrast to the M-H and kombine algorithms, MultiNest requires little supervision, proceeding until the estimated marginal Likelihood reaches a maximum within some pre-specified tolerance we employ the open source python implementation of the MultiNest algorithm, pymultinest It is common practice in the development of thermodynamic property models to identify outliers and remove them from the analysis. This may be a reasonable approach in many cases, especially when the questionable data points or sets have known sources of error or capture different physical phenomena. In other cases, however, we may not know the reasons for the discrepancy, and we risk ignoring relevant physics or uncertainty in the property of interest by removing the data. In the following section, we present an approach to incorporate datasets with potential systematic errors. In the previous example, we assume a Normal distribution for the Likelihood. While this is a reasonable assumption when each datum represents the mean of multiple data points, it does not necessarily hold in all cases. The use of a distribution with higher probability density in the tails, such as Student's-t distribution have a better chance of robustly accommodating outliers. The probability density function of Student's-t distribution is given by where ν is the degrees of freedom and Γ is the gamma function. Gelman et al. suggest that it is appropriate to either select a reasonable value for the degrees of freedom, ν, or to include it as a parameter in the Bayesian analysis if finding the specific form of the error's distribution is important In this section we introduce a technique in Bayesian inference when multiple datasets of varying quality are available. Several problems often arise in this situation. Firstly, journal articles may report errors for individual datasets, but these are not always reliable and must be independently evaluated. Secondly, some datasets may exhibit systematic errors where their mean behavior significantly deviates from the true trend. In a method introduced by Lahav et al. The hyperparameters for each dataset are incorporated into the Likelihood function as follows. Consider we have N datasets, each with t data points, we write the Likelihood as where ε i j is the reported error (expressed as 1 standard deviation) of data point x i j from dataset D i and α i is the hyperparameter for dataset D i . N (x|a, b) Denotes the probability density of a x for a Normal distribution with mean a and variance b. Note that while the reported errors for points within a data set may vary, we assign a single hyperparameter for each dataset. A small value for the hyperparameter increases the effective errors of the dataset and implies that the reported errors underestimate the true errors, while the inverse is true when the hyperparameter is large. Furthermore, a value of unity for the hyperparameter implies that the reported errors are accurate and that no rescaling is required. An alternate interpretation of the hyperparameter is as a measure of the relative importance of each dataset, with a low value indicating that the associated dataset has been de-emphasized in the analysis as compared to its original weighting. We define an Exponential Prior for each hyperparameter. The principal reason for this selection is that the Exponential distribution, with a rate of unity, has a mean of one, which is consistent with the initial expectation that the errors for each dataset have been properly reported. We present an example problem to demonstrate the advantages of this approach in Appendix C. The basic thermodynamic properties of materials, including specific heats, enthalpies, entropies and Gibbs free energies are of great utility to the scientific community. These quantities are connected by thermodynamic relationships that must be considered in the construction of thermodynamic property models. For example, the specific heat of a material is the derivative of the enthalpy with temperature. Material property databases generally report thermodynamic property models in the form of polynomial relationships for room temperature and above, in mathematical forms that include a common set of parameters These parameters are typically obtained through a regression of experimental or computational information for a specific quantity. Sometimes all available data sets are leveraged by converting them to a common quantity. Conversions between quantities may be performed by direct differentiation and integration of the raw quantities or by first fitting models to the data followed by differentiation or integration. Unfortunately, such conversions are subject to unavoidable errors. In this work, we propose a novel method to simultaneously utilize all available thermodynamic information (without conversion) to construct a common thermodynamic property model family for all quantities. Specifically, we express the overall Likelihood as the product of Likelihoods for each original quantity (and associated property model) and define priors for the parameters. By specifying a single prior distribution for each parameter common to multiple property models, we ensure that the final model family will be thermodynamically consistent and optimally leverage diverse thermodynamic information. We illustrate these concepts in the remainder of this section using synthetic datasets of specific heat and enthalpy. Firstly, we generate 100 synthetic data points each for specific heat and enthalpy. The specific heats and enthalpies are equally spaced in the 1K -75K and 300K -1800K temperature ranges, respectively. We select these non-overlapping regions of measurement for specific heat and enthalpy to demonstrate that the Bayesian framework can capture robust representations of both quantities when data does not cover the entire temperature range for each quantity. We generate synthetic data for the enthalpy, H and specific heat, C p , via Eq. (6a) and Eq. (6b), respectively, where R is the gas constant and the true model parameters are defined as follows: θ = 150K, a = 6 × 10 -3 J/mol.K, b = 7 × 10 -7 J/mol.K 2 and c = -5 × 10 3 J/mol. We add Gaussian noise with a standard error of 5000J/mol. to the enthalpy values. We add Gaussian noise to the specific heat values that scales linearly with the magnitude to a maximum of 3J/mol.K at 75K. Note that the model form of the specific heat in Eq. ( As mentioned previously, we define our Likelihood as the product of the individual Gaussian Likelihoods for the enthalpy and specific heat, i.e., where D represents the data, Θ is the set of parameters, {θ, a, b}, D H,i are enthalpy data and D Cp,i are specific heat data. At first, we initialize priors conservatively to cover the entire parameter ranges. We then iteratively narrow the priors to include the bulk and tails of the posterior distribution. The final priors for the four parameters are given as follows, The Posterior probability is then evaluated using the MultiNest sampler with 800 live points. We carry out two different analyses. Firstly, we perform separated analyses where the models for specific heat and enthalpy do not share parameter values. Both Posterior distributions are simultaneously evaluated using MultiNest to obtain the combined marginal Likelihood for enthalpy and specific heat. The Likelihood expression for this analysis is identical to Eq. ( Figure We find it informative to visually inspect the posterior distributions for both analyses. Figure In this section we employ the Bayesian framework and methods introduced in the previous sections for the development of a thermodynamic property model for the alpha, beta and liquid phases of Hafnium. In Section 3.1 we give an overview of Hafnium. In Section 3.2 we discuss how the data was collected and any corrections which were applied. In Section 3.3 we present our analysis methods and in Section 3.4 the model selection criteria are presented. Our main results are given in Section 3.5. Hafnium (Hf) is a tetravalent transition metal, commonly found in zirconium minerals. It is a good absorber of neutrons, which makes it a good material for control rods in some nuclear energy applications. For a review of the development of hafnium and comparison with other pressurized water-reactor control rod materials, see We have collected all available specific heat and enthalpy data of Hafnium metal for the alpha, beta and liquid phases from the published texts, correcting for Zirconium content and temperature scale when appropriate When available, we also collect the reported measurement errors. If errors were not reported, we assume +/-5% absolute error bounds. This is a conservative, but not unreasonable estimate. We convert errors to standard uncertainty (+/-1 standard deviation) according to the GUM guidelines We perform corrections to account for differences in temperature scale standards The maximum change in specific heat or enthalpy due to Zirconium content is 1.7% for any dataset. We construct thermodynamic property models for the three phases of Hafnium metal via the framework introduced in Sec. 2. As demonstrated in Sec. 2.5, we can use a Bayesian framework to analyze the specific heat and enthalpy measurements in concert to ensure thermodynamic consistency and to optimally leverage the raw experimental measurements. We employ a Student's-t distribution with 2 + 1 × 10 -6 degrees of freedom for the Likelihood to correctly account for outliers, and utilize the approach of Sec. 2.4 to optimally rescale the reported errors. We select Uniform prior distributions for the model parameters (except for the hyperparameters of Sec. 2.4 for which Exponential prior distributions are used) to simplify the process of restricting parameter values to physically realistic domains. We use the MultiNest algorithm to sample the Posterior distributions because it outperforms the kombine sampler on time to solution when the number of parameters included in the Bayesian analysis becomes large (23 parameters for the most complex model). We use 800 live points in the MultiNest analysis. We have verified that no significant changes occur in the marginal Likelihood or Posterior distribution mean and uncertainty intervals when the number of live points is increased to 1600 The specific Prior distributions chosen can affect the final Posterior distribution and the marginal Likelihood. Consequently, we take measures to consistently refine the Prior distributions for each model to ensure reliable estimates of these quantities. For each model of interest, we first select wide prior distributions which are guaranteed to encompass the expected parameter ranges. We perform the Bayesian analysis to obtain the initial Posterior distribution (note that due to the wide Posteriors, the MultiNest algorithm tends to require additional time to reach a solution). Following this we refine the prior boundaries to encompass the Posterior mean and 5 standard deviations on either side (assuming a Normal distribution). When the value of a parameter is subject to some physical or mathematical constraint, the constraint is prioritized (for example, the Debye temperature must be greater than zero). In Sec. 3.5, we investigate the effect of this approach on the marginal Likelihood and Posterior distribution of the final model in more detail. A critical aspect of the assessment is the identification of a potential set of model formulations. Model identification for the alpha phase requires the most care as the models have to be reasonable at cryogenic temperatures where quantum effects dominate. In this work, low temperature physics is captured by the Einstein and Debye formulations, where θ E and θ D are the Einstein and Debye temperatures, respectively. Unfortunately, Eq. (9b) cannot be evaluated analytically, so in this work we employ Simpsons integration with 100 equally-spaced points to evaluate the integral. Polynomial expressions (not including the constant term) are added to the lowtemperature models to capture high-temperature properties We employ the family of increasing order polynomials given by Eq. ( Given a set of appropriate thermodynamic property models for specific heat and enthalpy for each phase, we apply the Bayesian framework to compute the entropy and Gibbs free energy for all phases. Due to the difficulty of analytically integrating the Debye relationship, the change in entropy in each phase relative to the lower transformation temperature, T trans , was numerically computed according to the following relationship: The entropy associated with each phase transformation is simply given by where H trans is the enthalpy of transformation. The entropy at any temperature is given by the entropy relative to the lower phase transformation temperature (e.g. T α→β for the beta-phase) plus the lower temperature cumulative relative entropies and entropies of transformation. The Gibbs free energy is computed according to the following relationship: Table As mentioned previously, we carry out two stages of analysis; firstly using broad unrestrictive priors to identify high probability regions of parameter space (stage A), followed by a subsequent analysis with tighter priors (stage B). We demonstrate that this does not impact model selection, as we find that the rank-ordering of the models is identical before and after tightening the priors. As an example, we examine the effect of narrowing the priors for the selected alpha-phase model. Changing the priors increases the log marginal Likelihood from -641.1 to -623.1. In contrast, the Posterior distributions change little between the stages A and B, with the maximum relative errors in mean and standard deviation for any parameter in the Posterior distribution limited by 1% and 5%, respectively. Figure Table (13a) through Eq. (13f) as well as for the hyperparameters which rescale the errors for each experimental dataset. In Fig. Figures Based on Fig. Figure An artifact of this discrepancy is that the hyperparameters for the low temperature datasets are close to zero. For example, the mean value of the marginalized hyperparameter for Kne1963 is 0.004, implying that errors were under-reported. Since these hyperparameter values result from model inadequacy, they do not necessarily represent errors in the experimental dataset with respect to the true thermodynamic properties. what is reported by other authors (250K) Figures 6a and 6b compare our results for entropy and Gibbs free energy for all phases against the assessments of HSC Chemistry and Arb2014. The results of the three assessments appear to be reasonably close in the alpha and beta regimes, with differences in slope and vertical placement becoming more apparent at high temperatures. To further investigate the differences between the three assessments, we present the percentage differences between the HSC Chemistry and Arb2014 results and our model in Fig. Deviations between our model and the Arb2014 assessment in Cp reach 8% for the beta-phase due to the constant behavior of the Arb2014 model. Discrepancies are even larger in the liquid-phase for both HSC Chemistry and Arb2014. Finally, we evaluate the effect of removing individual datasets on the Bayesian analysis. For each phase, we evaluate an equal number of models as the number of relevant datasets. Each iteration, we remove a single dataset and perform the Bayesian analysis. We directly employ the model forms of Eq. ( The thermodynamic assessment of Hafnium metal shows that our single framework directly accepts raw, experimental measurements of specific heat and enthalpy, and uses them to simultaneously calibrate models, produce evaluation metrics and provide uncertainty intervals for the parameters and model predictions. Furthermore, the framework can naturally account for tasks that are typically restricted to experts, such as managing outliers, rescaling inaccurate error bars, weighting datasets and finding consistency among multiple datasets expressed via different quantities. Through examination of the Posterior distributions, we can provide both model parameter uncertainties as well as model comparison using Bayes Factors. In this work we introduce a Bayesian framework for the selection, calibration and quantification of uncertainty of thermodynamic property models. We present the Bayesian framework in detail, and describe modifications to address common data issues in thermodynamic assessment including the presence of outliers, systematic errors, inaccurately reported errors and inconsistencies between thermodynamic quantities. Enabled by cutting-edge numerical sampling algorithms, the framework simultaneously performs these tasks in a single analysis. We accompany the framework and modifications with example problems that clearly demonstrate each method and its benefits. Perhaps most critically, the Bayesian framework provides the researcher with a clear and self-consistent method to perform assessment. Data sets, irrespective of the thermodynamic quantity measured, can be incorporated into the framework without modification, which then determines the best weights and parameters given the model. Our confidence in the best fitting parameters are described by the Posterior distributions. We culminate the study with an assessment of the thermodynamic properties of Hafnium metal from 0 to 4900K through three distinct phases. The resulting models are broadly effective over a wide range of temperatures and come with parameter and prediction uncertainty intervals. We find that the Debye In the first step of the Bayesian analysis we select a set of potential models. One of the strengths of this framework is that models of any form with different numbers of parameters may be compared. In this example, we select polynomials of order N represented as follows, where i is the exponent of x and indexes the model parameter vector. Next, we define the Likelihood and priors on the model parameters. We assume independence of the data points and write the Likelihood as the product of the individual Gaussian Likelihoods for each data point, where i indexes each data point and ε is standard error parameter, which is included in the Bayesian analysis and captures the standard deviation of the data generation process. Note that, in practice, the product is replaced by a summation of log-Likelihoods; this alleviates the issues of arithmetic underflow and overflow that are common when multiplying large sets of probability densities. Priors are chosen based on the best available knowledge about the parameters and the relationships between parameters. In this simple example we select uniform priors as follows, Likelihood for both models we find a values -2.6 for the model with hyperparameters and -323.2 without. In this case the Bayes Factor favors the model with hyperparameters. Note that the measured values were extracted from tables or from figures using the free online WebPlotDigitizer utility Note that we use a threaded version of MultiNest which utilizes all cores on a single E5-2695v4 processor on the Bebop cluster at Argonne National Laboratory. The majority of the analyses run to completion within 3 hours on the compute cluster.