The one dimensional model for the dynamic of hydrogen in lithium niobate is explained by adopting Morse potential. The diffused hydrogen substitutes Lithium and it makes bonding with one oxygen atom of a facet of oxygen-triangle. The bonds will be stretched to set up anharmonic vibration. The damped anharmonic oscillation is derived to explain the dynamics of hydrogen as an impurity. The thermal fluctuation is studied by Fokker Planck equation has an important role to determine the diffusion constant for substitutional hydrogen. The hydrogen diffusion constant and relaxation time are calculated to support the proposed theory and existing experimental results. The concentration of substitutional hydrogens is studied with the help of Boltzmann distribution. The ferroelectrics such as lithium niobate (LiNbO3) and lithium tantalite (LiTaO3) are promising materials in the field of applied physics. These have important applications The presence of diffused hydrogen in LiNbO3 can be monitored using infrared (IR) absorption Ferroelectric materials such as LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 show a nonlinear hysteresis in which coercive field (Ec) decreases with the smooth increase of Li concentration (mole %) Diffusion of hydrogen as an impurity in LiNbO3 is two types. Some diffused hydrogen atoms are employed to substitute Lithium and able to form bonding with oxygen atom of facet of oxygen triangle. These diffused hydrogen atoms are called substitutional hydrogen. Another type is interstitial hydrogen atoms which are small size and commonly observed in metal, semiconductor. Interstitial diffusion coefficient is larger than substitutional diffusion coefficient. Probability of substitutional hydrogen among the diffused hydrogen atoms in LiNbO3 changes with temperature. The Morse potential is appropriate to describe the fundamental energies of transition and higher vibrational transition of OH molecules. So Morse potential is used to study the damped anharmonic oscillation of OH bond in LiNbO3. The diffusion coefficient of substitutional hydrogen is determined from non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation. The damping constant as well as relaxation time is yielded from diffusion coefficient. Solution of Fokker Planck equation is Boltzmann distribution that predicts roughly percentage of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 at different temperature. A part of the diffused hydrogen atoms are responsible to substitute the lithium and this substitutional hydrogen atoms are able to form OH bonds. The formation of OH bonds are considered first in ground state then absorb energy and get excited to higher energy level. So absorption spectra are speculated in LiNbO3. The stretching mode frequency of vibration of OH ions in LiNbO3 are in the range between 3200 cm -1 and 3700cm -1 . In oxide crystal, hydrogen ion occupies oxygen side. The substitutional hydrogen impurities in LiNbO3 are located between two oxygen atoms of a facet of one oxygen triangle. The hydrogen forms OH bond with the oxygen and it is not co-linear with the O-O bond. Actually, OH bond line slightly deviates from O-O bond line in oxygen plane perpendicular to c-axis and it makes angle θ (= 10.2 °)22 with the O-O bond in ferroelectric phase. The H + is bound to one of the O 2-neighbors of a lithium vacancy (V Li ). The impurity hydrogen shows localized vibration which is in the frame work of an anharmonic oscillator model. In anharmonic oscillator model the potential energy will be Morse potential: (1) where D is the potential depth, r o is the O-H bond length with lowest potential energy and a be the stretching constant inverse of the length. The substitutional hydrogen is in the vicinity of ith lithium vacancy at the position Q is shown in Fig. where p i = μη i ̇ and μ = m H m o /(m H + m o ) is the reduced mass of substitutional hydrogen. The symbols m o and m H are atomic mass of oxygen and hydrogen respectively. By considering the anharmonic vibrational energy (4) Here γ OH is the damping constant. To investigate substitutional diffusion coefficient of hydrogen, we have introduced white noise in the proposed model by including Langevin force in equation (5) The Langevin force μΓ(t) is assumed to be a Gaussian random process with δ correlation. The equation ( To obtain the Fokker Planck equation, the above equation ( The substitutional hydrogen moves with velocity v i along OH bond. The quantity Γ(t) is the rapidly fluctuating random term. The average value of Langevin force is zero (< Γ(t) >= 0) and considering white noise The Fokker Planck equation corresponding to equation ( Here w(η i , v i , t) is the distribution function in position and velocity space, K B is the Boltzmann constant. The different participating variables of equation ( where From equation ( The equilibrium distribution indicates ∂w ∂t ̅ = 0. Under this condition the equation ( The solution of equation ( 2 ) , ( After evaluating the integral ∫ e μω o 2 and the remaining integral may be written as ∫ e . Applying these results in equation ( With the use of equations ( This is the Boltzmann distribution equation. Where the vibrational energy levels are written as The substitutional hydrogen makes OH bond that is initially considered to be in ground state having energy E o for n = 0. The percentage of substitutional hydrogen atoms are that of OH bonds which are calculated by multiplying 100 with the probability w given in equation ( where (1 -e -η i ̅̅̅ ) 2 . The distribution function w(η i ̅ , v i ̅ , t ̅ ) can be expressed as With the use of equations ( Now we introduce the new parameter θ by the following expression With this new parameter θ the non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation ( The solution of this equation is given by Using ρ and θ from equations ( ). Next, dropping the non-dimensional parameters the equation ( ). The substitutional hydrogen atoms are participated in the process of the formation of OH bonds. The formation of OH bonds are distributed in such way that strongly depends on velocity of substitutional hydrogen and time as indicated in equation The diffused hydrogen in LiNbO3 produced two types of impurity defects: substitutional and interstitial. The substitutional hydrogen which substitutes lithium and forms OH bond with the oxygen of a facet of oxygen-triangle neighbors of a lithium vacancy in oxygen plane perpendicular to c-axis. On the other hand, the interstitial hydrogen which is commonly found in metal and semiconductor. The diffusion coefficient of interstitial hydrogen is greater than substitutional hydrogen since the size of the interstitial hydrogen is smaller than substitutional hydrogen Introducing white noise in Fokker Planck equation is employed to explain the thermal fluctuation. The expression of diffusion coefficient is derived from the non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation for LiNbO3. The experimentally reported value of diffusion coefficient is 2.1 × 10 -12 cm 2 /s The concentration profile of hydrogen due to substitution of lithium before annealing is about 90% or more. Upon annealing for 1hour this level drops to nearly 50% In the present article we have studied analytically the diffusion coefficient, relaxation time and percentage of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 from damped anharmonic oscillation model by using Morse potential. The variation of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 with temperature is agreed with the reported experimental values. The variation of substitutional hydrogen with velocity and time is derived from Fokker Planck equation and it has been presented graphically. 