We have systematically studied the evolution of magnetic properties, especially the coercivity and the remanence ratio in the vicinity of the Verwey transition temperature (TV ), of high-quality epitaxial Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO (001), MgAl2O4 (MAO) (001), and SrTiO3 (STO) (001) substrates. We observed rapid change of magnetization, coercivity, and remanence ratio at TV , which are consistent with the behaviors of resistivity versus temperature [ρ(T )] curves for the different thin films. In particular, we found quite different magnetic behaviors for the thin films on MgO from those on MAO and STO, in which the domain size and the strain state play very important roles. The coercivity is mainly determined by the domain size but the demagnetization process is mainly dependent on the strain state. Furthermore, we observed a reversal of remanence ratio at TV with thickness for the thin films grown on MgO: from a rapid enhancement for 40-nm-to a sharp drop for 200-nm-thick film, and the critical thickness is about 80 nm. Finally, we found an obvious hysteretic loop of coercivity (or remanence ratio) with temperature around TV , corresponding to the hysteretic loop of the ρ(T ) curve, in Fe3O4 thin film grown on MgO. Magnetite (Fe3O4) is one of the most important transition-metal oxides and is being actively investigated due to its rather unique and interesting set of electrical and magnetic properties, such as the high Curie temperature (858 K), relatively high saturation magnetization, small coercivity field The magnetic properties of bulk Fe3O4 have been widely studied in the past several decades In this work, we systematically investigate the evolution of magnetic properties with temperature of highquality epitaxial Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO (001), MgAl2O4 (MAO) (001), and SrTiO3 (STO) (001) substrates. Rapid changes of magnetization, coercivity, and remanence ratio were observed at TV , which are in agreement with the behaviors of resistivity versus temperature [ρ(T )] curves for different thin films. Especially, the thin film grown on MgO was found to exhibit quite different magnetic behavior from that on MAO and STO, in which the domain size and the strain state take the dominate role. The coercivity is mainly determined by the domain size but the demagnetization process is mainly related to the strain state. The small domain size and high strain state lead to large coercivity and incoherent reversal of magnetization, respectively. Furthermore, a very interesting reversal of remanence ratio with thickness, from a rapid increase for 40-nm-to a sharp drop for 200-nm-thick film, at TV was noticed for the thin films grown on MgO, and the critical thickness is about 80 nm, which might be greatly related to interface effect of the thin films. At last, a clear hysteretic loop of coercivity (or remanence ratio) with temperature around the TV , corresponding to the loop of the ρ(T ) curve, was observed in Fe3O4 thin film grown on MgO. Fe3O4 thin films were grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber with a base pressure in the 1 × 10-10 mbar range. High-purity Fe metal was evaporated from a LUXEL Radak effusion cell at temperatures of about 1250 •C in a pure oxygen atmosphere onto singlecrystalline MgO (001), MgAl2O4 (001) (MAO), and SrTiO3 (001) (STO) substrates. These substrates were annealed for two hours at 600 •C in an oxygen pressure of 3 × 10-7 mbar to obtain a clean and well-ordered surface structure before the Fe3O4 deposition. Standard samples were grown using an iron flux of 1 °A/min, an oxygen background pressure of 1 × 10-6 mbar, and a growth temperature of 250 •C We have recorded the time development of the crystalline structure during the films growth. In Fig. In order to clarify the chemical state of the iron oxide, the wide scan with binding energy from 1200 to-18 eV and Fe 2p core level XPS spectra were in situ recorded for 200-nm-thick Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO (001), MAO (001), and STO (001), as shown in Figs. Furthermore, the strain state of the Fe3O4 thin films was also studied by XRD measurements. Figure ] and MAO Having investigated the microstructural characterization of the 200-nm-thick Fe3O4 thin films grown on different substrates, we then measured the transport properties of these samples. The resistivity as a function of temperature ρ(T ) for the 200-nm-thick Fe3O4 films grown on MgO (001), MAO (001), and STO (001) are presented in Fig. As shown in the above sections, the microstructural characterization and the transport property measurements indicate the high quality of our Fe3O4 thin films. We began the investigation of magnetic properties of Fe3O4 thin films grown on different substrates. shows two peaks at TV+ and TV-, which are nearly consistent with those from ρ(T ) curves in Fig. After studying the temperature dependence of magnetization for different thin films, we then focused on the change of magnetic properties as a function of magnetic field at different temperatures. In this process, the system was first zero-field-cooled from 300 to 30 K and then the magnetic hysteresis loops M(H) at different constant temperatures were measured with temperature warming up from 30 to 300 K. The in-plane (H// along the [100] direction) M(H) curves at different temperatures for 200-nmthick Fe3O4 film on MgO are shown in Fig. Oe-1 with largest FWHM of 310 Oe is found for 122 K (= TV+). It is clear that the reversal of domains with applied magnetic field is slowest and steps across the largest field range at Verwey transition, and the relatively gradual reversal of magnetization for 121 K (<TV+) is due to the much larger monoclinic magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant For comparison, the in-plane magnetic behaviors of 200-nm-thick Fe3O4 film grown on MAO shown in Fig. To further understand themagnetic properties in Fe3O4 thin films, we investigated the evolution of out-of-plane (H⊥ along [001] direction) magnetic properties with temperature for Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO (001), MAO (001), and STO (001). The Fe3O4 films grown on these three substrates have very good perpendicular anisotropic properties at different temperatures. Similarly, the out-of-plane results also show an obvious variation of some magnetic parameters at TV . As the out-of-plane Mr is very small, the change of these values is not very sharp, especially for the films on MAO and STO, around TV . The normalized magnetic hysteresis loops for in-plane and out-of-plane cases in an applied field of 50 kOe at 50 and 300 K, respectively, of 200-nm-thick Fe3O4 film on MgO is shown in Fig. The rapid change of HC with temperature across TV can be easily understood. As with the abrupt enhancement in magnetocrystalline and magnetostriction constants when Fe3O4 transforms from cubic (Fd3m) to monoclinic (Cc) structure, the value of the dominating monoclinic magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant is about 10 times greater than the cubic anisotropy constant K1, and thus a sharp increase of HC is noticed at TV [see Figs. It has been reported that the Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO have a large density of APBs It is obtained from Fig. show fully strained and fully relaxed states, respectively; the same thickness of film grown on a larger mismatch STO (001) should appear as fully relaxed also It is clear that the 40-nm thin film exhibits the incoherent reversal of domains like that in Fig. Therefore, it can be confirmed that the strain state significantly influences the magnetic properties in Fe3O4 thin films. Furthermore, we found that the in-plane Mr/MS of the film on MgO is smaller than that on MAO or STO [see Figs. To more comprehensively understand the magnetic behaviors in Fe3O4 thin films, we also investigated the magnetic properties of 40-nm-and 80-nm-thick films on MgO (001); the films on MgO are all fully strained (we thus do not need to consider the influence of strain state) and the HC and Mr/MS for three thicknesses as a function of temperature are plotted in Figs. 12(a) and 12(b), respectively. As can be seen all the samples exhibit very sharp jump of HC at their Verwey transitions, respectively. The value of HC obviously reduces with increasing thickness below or above TV due to the great increase of average domain size from 33 nm for 40-nm-to 98 nm for 200-nm-thick Fe3O4 film, while the demagnetization behaviors are nearly the same for three samples because of the same strain state. It is observed that the change of Mr/MS at TV is different for three samples. An obvious increase and decrease of Mr/MS is seen for 40-nm-and 200-nm-thick films, respectively, whereas the 80-nm-thick one has a special behavior, which presents the decrease of Mr/MS below TV , like that of the 200-nm film, but a sharp increase of Mr/MS at TV , similar to that of the 40-nm one, and then remains nearly constant above TV . The absolute difference of Mr/MS below and above TV is much smaller than that of 40-nm or 200nm-thick films. Therefore, it is very interesting that we actually find a clear reversal of Mr/MS from increase to decrease jump at TV with increasing thickness, and the critical thickness is about 80 nm. At high temperature, the easy axis is towards the [111] direction for bulk magnetite Finally, we note that the ρ(T ) curve of Fe3O4 thin film grown on MgO at the Verwey transition shows a big hysteresis (∼4 K) (see Fig. The HC and Mr/MS as a function of temperature in the vicinity of TV are plotted in Figs. To summarize, we have systematically investigated the evolution of magnetic properties with temperature in high quality epitaxial Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO (001),MAO (001), and STO (001) substrates. We observed rapid variations of magnetization, HC, and Mr/MS at TV , which are consistent with the behaviors of ρ(T ) curves for the thin films on different substrates. In particular, we found quite different magnetic behaviors with temperature for the thin films on MgO from those on MAO and STO, in which the domain size and the strain state play very important roles. The HC is mainly determined by the domain size but the demagnetization process is mainly dependent on the strain state. The small domain size and high strain state result in large coercivity and incoherent reversal of magnetization, respectively. The minimum of HC at 130 K can be seen for the films on MAO and STO, similar to that of the single-crystal bulk, due to the fully relaxed state, but the smallest HC is found at 300 K for the films on MgO. Furthermore, we found a smaller remanence ratio for the film grown on MgO than that on MAO and STO, which is induced from the tensile strain effect. Moreover, we observed a very interesting reversal of remanence ratio at TV with thickness for the Fe3O4 thin films grown on MgO: from a rapid enhancement for 40-nm-to a sharp drop for 200-nm-thick film, and the critical thickness is about 80 nm; the interface effect should play a very important role in this phenomenon. Finally, a clear hysteretic loop of HC (or Mr/MS) with temperature around TV , corresponding to the loop of the ρ(T ) curve, was seen in Fe3O4 thin film grown on MgO. Our work will give a more comprehensive understanding of magnetic behaviors in Fe3O4 thin films. 