The energy absorption and impact attenuation of low density polyurea (PU) foams (140 -220 kg/m 3 ) is presented. The stress-strain behavior, energy absorption, cushioning efficiency, and energy return (resilience) are measured at a quasi-static strain rate using an Instron load frame. In addition, the low velocity impact attenuation of the polyurea foams at 5 J and 7 J impact energies were investigated according to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) test methods F1976. The polyurea foams were then compared with widely used ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) and thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) foam technologies at similar densities. The PU foams displayed a 5 % increase in cushioning efficiency and 30 % greater energy absorption over TPU and EVA foams under quasi-static compression. Under impact testing, PU foams resulted in a reduction of up to 28.6 % and 36.9 % in peak transmitted impact forces when compared to EVA and TPU foams of the same thickness (20 mm) at 5 J and 7 J, respectively. These properties should allow these materials to have a wide range of cushioning/impact applications, especially in protective body and headgear systems. Elastomeric foams are widely used for impact management in several mechanical, civil, and aerospace structures as well as in personal protective gears Cushioning and impact attenuation in particular, are matters of energy management. The goal is to accommodate the impact energy while maintaining the load at or below a (acceptably low) threshold level. A superior cushioning material or system is one that that absorbs more energy at the same load, or absorbs the same energy at a lower load. Today, foams are used in practically every industry. Despite their ubiquity and maturity, there are still areas where improvements in the foam technology can be made, especially those that pertain to impact applications Motivated by these goals, in previous communications, we presented a polyurea (PU) based viscoelastic foam that became increasingly more efficient at absorbing energy than plastic type foams under high strain rates, similar to those found in ballistic applications (> 2000 s -1 ) The purpose of this paper is to investigate the cushioning and impact attenuation properties of low density open-cell polyurea foams, according to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) test methods F1976 Open-cell polyurea foams were fabricated by mixing modified Methylene Diphenyl Diisocyanate compound (Isonate 143L MDI; Dow Chemical) with oligomeric diamine (Versalink P1000; Air Products) with a 1:4 ratio. Polyureas of this stoichiometry are known to have behaviors within the viscoelastic regime The density of the foam was controlled by adjusting the amount of air and frothing. Foam core samples were cut from the center of the manufactured blocks, free of voids, defects, and top/bottom skins. The dimensions and weight of the samples were measured within 1 %, as indicated in ASTM F1976. Sample densities of 140 ± 1.4, 170 ± 1.6, 200 ± 1.1, and 220 ± 1.2 kg/m 3 were prepared using the same polyurea mix with a density of 1070 kg/m 3 . Hereinafter these samples are referred to as PU140, PU170, PU200, and PU220, respectively. These densities were chosen because they fall within the range used in athletic footwear and body protection equipment Figure Low strain rate (≤ 10 -1 s -1 ) compression tests were conducted using an Instron Micro-Tester (Model 5942) equipped with a 2 kN load frame. For these tests, disc samples of 28 mm nominal diameter and 10 mm thickness were cut from a large molded block. Samples were then compressed under stroke-control with a constant cross-head velocity of 24 mm/min. This yielded a constant strain rate of 0.04 s -1 . Force-displacement data obtained from the machine was converted into the stress-strain data using the sample dimensions. For each density, three specimens were tested. The plots presented here represent the average of data obtained from these experiments. Impact tests were carried out using an Instron DynaTup (Model 8250) drop-weight impact tester. Specimens of 75 x75 x 20 mm sections were placed on a 45 mm-diameter flat force plate and impacted using an 8.5 kg balanced mass attached to a 75 mm-diameter flat stainless steel indenter head, as per ASTM F1976 standards. Impact tests were carried out at 5 J and 7 J energies under ambient (23 °C) conditions. The impact energy was varied by changing the drop height of the indenter head. The transmitted force was measured using a force transducer (Kistler Instruments, Model 9041A) with a full scale output of 90 kN, sensitivity of 4.3 pC/N, and a threshold < 0.01 N. The displacement of the sample was measured by tracking the impactor as it contacts the sample during impact using high speed photography (Olympus i-Speed 3 camera with capabilities of 150,000 fps and a recording time of 5 seconds). For each impact test, three specimens were tested. The plots presented here represent the average of data obtained from these experiments. A schematic of the experimental set-up is shown in Figure Cushioning and impact attenuation is an energy management problem. The goal is to accommodate an impact, quantifiable as an energy input, in a manner that minimize the consequent loads and maintains them below a "safe" threshold level. Thus, the properties of cushioning materials can be described in terms of: (i) Cushioning capacity: an index of the amount of energy that a cushioning material or system can usefully accommodate and is often expressed as the energy capacity per unit volume (energy absorbtion-W) of a material and (ii) Cushioning performance: a measure of the load outcomes produced by an impact, expressed in terms of absolute force, pressure or acceleration. The cushioning capacity and performance of real cushioning systems are finite and constrained. All real materials have a are finite in thickness and have a useful compression limit that is somewhat less than that thickness. At compression levels beyond the useful limit, the material "bottoms out" and the stiffness of the system approaches infinity. To assist in this selection process, the energy absorption (W) for various foams is plotted as a function of the stress so that the user can select foam with the maximum energy absorption capabilities for the selected threshold stress. The energy absorption in this paper was determined by calculating the area between the loading and unloading stress-strain curves. Another way to assist in this selection process is to plot the cushioning efficiency (CE) of the foam, defined as the energy-load ratio, W/σ. For a cushioning material, when expressed in geometry independent terms (strain energy density per unit stress) the ratio varies between zero and one. Efficiency generally increases up to the onset of densification, then declines at higher strains. Therefore, it can approximate the densification strain, the limit of energy absorbtion (W), and the limit of the threshold stress. The optimal material will generally be one that has the highest cushioning efficiency in the range of loads and impact energies it will experience in the application. It is important to measure W and CE under the prevailing temperature and strain rate conditions in service as both of these parameters greatly influence the underlying stress-strain characteristic of the foam material. Furthermore, the outcome of an impact test is the peak impact shock (force) or g-max score (acceleration, g). Lower peak impact values indicate less impact shock and hence more impact attenuation. In addition, the impact cushioning effiency can also be calculated by taking the ratio of the theoretically minimum g-max to the g-max score measured under identical impact conditions. The theoretically minimum possible g-max score for an ideal cushioning system is the impact energy divided by the thickness of the material and the mass of the impactor. Another impact parameter of interest is the energy return of the foam during impact, the percentage of the input energy that is returned and not dissipated. This is calcuated by taking the ratio of the area under the unloading part of the force-displacement curve obtained during the impact and divide it by the area under the loading curve. Higher values indicate greater "rebound" under the specific impact conditions. This parameter is a good indication of how resilient (or responsive) the foam system is. Lastly, the peak deflection of the foam during impact is also recorded as it is an indication of how compliant the foam is and how much design space is required when using this foam. The optimal foam under identical impact condictions is therefore one which minimizes the peak shock loading (higest impact efficiency), while exhibiting the highest energy return and the least compression. In this paper we present the stress-strain characteristics, cushioning parameters (cushioning efficiency as a function of stress, strain, and energy absorption), and impact properties (peak transmitted force and impact cushioning efficiency) for the PU foam material and compare their performance with widely used EVA and TPU foams. The variation in the experimental data shown in Figures Figure ( Figures 6 and 7 shows the average force-time curves at an impact energy of 5 J and 7 J using an 8.5 kg weight following ASTM F1976, respectively. Loading rates of 55 s -1 and 65 s -1 for the 5 J and 7 J impact test were measured, respectively. The peak transmitted forces for the PU foams are well below those that EVA and TPU specimens transmit, thus, resulting in higher impact efficiencies. For example, at a 5 J impact energy, PU170 results in a peak force of 0.60 kN while EVA and TPU foams had an average peak force of about 0.85 kN. This represents a 28.6 % reduction in the amplitude of the force that is transmitted to the asset. Additionally, at the 7 J impact, the PU foams show a reduction in impact force of up to 36.9 % when compared to TPU and EVA foam materials. Thus, at higher energy impacts, polyurea foams display an increasing impact attenuation capability over current EVA and TPU foam technologies of similar densities while exhibiting similar deflections (Table The cushioning characteristics and impact attenuation of low density polyurea (PU) foams (140 -220 kg/m 3 ) were presented. The stress-strain characteristics, cushioning efficiency, and energy return (resilience) were measured at a quasi-static strain rate. PU foams displayed higher energy absorption capacity and higher cushioning efficiencies than widely used EVA and TPU foams. In addition, the impact attenuation of the polyurea foams at 5 J and 7 J impact energies were investigated according to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) test methods F1976. Under impact testing, PU foams resulted in a reduction of up to 28.6 % and 36.9 % in peak transmitted impact forces when compared to EVA and TPU foams of the same thickness (20 mm) at 5 J and 7 J, respectively. These properties should allow these materials to have a wide range of cushioning/impact applications, especially in protective body and headgear systems.