Approaching a quantum critical point (QCP) has been an effective route to stabilize superconductivity. While the role of magnetic QCPs has been extensively discussed, similar exploration of a structural QCP is scarce due to the lack of suitable systems with a continuous structural transition that can be conveniently tuned to 0 K. Using inelastic X-ray scattering, we examine the phonon spectrum of the nonmagnetic quasi-skutterudite (CaxSr1-x)3Rh4Sn13, which represents a precious system to explore the interplay between structural instabilities and superconductivity by tuning the Ca concentration x. We unambiguously detect the softening of phonon modes around the M point on cooling towards the structural transition. Intriguingly, at x = 0.85, the soft mode energy squared at the M point extrapolates to zero at (-5.7 ± 7.7) K, providing the first compelling microscopic evidence of a structural QCP in (CaxSr1-x)3Rh4Sn13. The enhanced phonon density-of-states at low energy provides the essential ingredient for realizing strong-coupling superconductivity near the structural QCP. The emergence of superconductivity near a quantum critical point has inspired intensive research on the role of quantum fluctuations on stabilizing new phases. While the temperature-tuning parameter phase diagrams constructed for a wide range of superconductors share qualitative similarity Approaching structural instabilities has been another promising route to enhance superconductivity. This concept has been applied to materials such as A15 compounds The nonmagnetic quasi-skutterudite superconductors (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 and (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Ir 4 Sn 13 have recently been identified as promising systems for realizing a SQCP. The end compound Sr 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 , with a space group of P m 3n at room temperature Nevertheless, microscopic evidence for the existence of a SQCP has thus far been missing. The feature associated with the structural transition in a range of experimental probes is weakened when approaching the putative SQCP. In (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 with x = 0.75, which is still quite far away from the SQCP, the structural tran- sition can no longer be identified in specific heat In this Rapid Communication, we investigate the lattice dynamics in (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 with four calcium concentrations using inelastic X-ray scattering (IXS). We discover that, at x = 0.85, the soft mode energy squared at the M point extrapolates to zero at (-5.7 ± 7.7) K. Thus, the collapse of an energy scale is detected, providing the first microscopic evidence for the existence of a SQCP in this series. Our data offer a natural explanation for the observation of low Θ D and the strong-coupling superconductivity in the vicinity of x = 0.9. Single crystals of (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 were obtained by the Sn flux method as described in Ref. To understand the evolution of the phonon modes, we first examine Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 (x = 1) at 300 K. In Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 , the room temperature P m 3n cubic struc- ture remains stable down to the lowest temperature The complex unit cell, with 40 atoms in each structural unit, gives a large number of phonon branches. We find that the peaks contributed by phonons with energy higher than ∼8 meV highly overlap in energy space within our resolution. However, the main purpose here is to track the evolution of low-energy excitations, and hence a complete resolution of high energy modes is beyond the scope of the present study. By plotting the energies of the two peaks with lowest energies along the Γ-M direction, as shown in Fig. Next, we investigate the lattice dynamics on approaching structural instabilities. Previous density functional theory calculations for Sr 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 and Sr 3 Ir 4 Sn 13 Close inspection of the spectra in Fig. The energy squared of this soft mode (E 2 soft ) in x = 0.75 is plotted against temperature in Fig. soft mode below T * : the soft mode hardens again and reaches 2.4 meV at 70 K, which is ∼60 K below T * , as shown in Supplemental Material For all samples studied, we additionally performed Xray diffraction measurements at M to probe the superlattice intensity using the same spectrometer. The temperature dependence of the superlattice intensity at M is shown in Figs. where q is the wave vector measured from M and ∆ is the energy of the soft mode at M. As there is no significant difference between the two dispersions in both directions, data in both directions are fitted by a single curve. The In x = 0, which is far from the SQCP, the soft phonon mode has significantly hardened by the time superconductivity sets in Recently, strong-coupling superconductivity and linear-in-T resistivity were also reported in Bi-III, which has an incommensurate host-guest structure, accompanied by "built-in" phason modes The IXS data reported here provide key spectroscopic evidence for the collapse of an energy scale when the second-order phase transition temperature is tuned to 0 K. Therefore, (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 provides another example in which the principle of quantum criticality can guide the search of superconductivity or the optimization of superconducting properties. Note that quantum critical behavior associated with structural transition has also been studied in ferroelectric materials In summary, we have probed the lattice dynamics in (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 with IXS measurements. Far away from structural instabilities, there are low-lying phonon branches with weak dispersion at ∼ 5-8 meV with no obvious dependence on temperature and chemical pressure. However, our data reveal another phonon branch which is more dispersive, and exhibits strong dependence on temperature and chemical pressure. In particular, in x = 0, 0.5, and 0.75, we found that the soft phonon mode at M can be completely softened close to the temperature where the superlattice intensity begins to grow, signifying its relevance to structural instabilities. For x = 0.85, the energy squared of this phonon mode extrapolates to zero at (-5.7 ± 7.7) K, indicating that the composition is located very close to or at the SQCP. The analysis of the dispersion relation around M reveals the existence of low-lying phonon modes, which offers a natural explanation for the low Debye temperature, the maximized T c as well as the enhanced electron-phonon coupling strength near the SQCP. Therefore, (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 is a rare quantum critical system in which manifestations of phonon softening on electronic, thermal, and superconducting properties can be investigated systematically.