Topological superconductors have shown great potential in the search for unique quasiparticles such as Majorana fermions. Combining nontrivial band topology and superconductivity can lead to topological superconductivity due to the proximity effect. In this work, we used first principle calculations to predict that rock-salt phases of VC and CrC are superconducting with topologically nontrivial states. The phonon dispersions of these transition metal carbides displayed no imaginary frequencies, which suggests dynamic stability. Additionally, the presence of soft acoustic phonon bands supports the existence of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductivity in rock-salt VC and CrC. Therefore, these transition metal carbides are practical candidates for studying topological superconductors and their associated Majorana bound states. Quantum computing has gained interest in recent years due to its potential to disrupt many different fields including biology One way to observe these MBSs is with topological superconductors (TSC). MBS exist in the normal core of quantum vortices as well as on the boundaries of magnetic domains in TSCs. Therefore, studying MBSs in TSCs may help advance the creation of practical quantum computers Recent work has successfully brought together the two fundamental aspects of TSCs in a single material, the topological nature of the band structure and superconductivity. Materials such as Au 2 Pb 12,13 , CaSn 3 In this study, we use first-principle calculations to determine the electronic band structure of the superconductors VC, CrC, NbC, and TaC. We show that VC and CrC are potential candidates for studying topologically superconductivity by calculating their Z 2 topological invariants. In addition, the phonon band structures were calculated to show the stability and superconductivity of these materials. Afterwards, we discuss methods of synthesizing VC and CrC. Thus, both of these compounds are promising candidates for studying topological superconductors and their associated MBSs. Our methods for our first principle calculations can be found in Section II. We present and discuss our results on the topological superconductivity of VC and CrC in Section III. Finally, our conclusion is found in Section IV. The density functional theory In strongly correlated systems such as superconductors not explained by the BCS theory of superconductivity, either DFT+U or dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) is used, since GGA and local density approximation (LDA) are generally not accurate enough We used the high-symmetry points Γ (0, 0, 0), X (0, 0.5, 0.5), L (0.5, 0.5, 0.5), W (0.25, 0.75, 0.5), U (0.25, 0.625, 0.625), and K (0.375, 0.75, 0.375) shown in Figure DFPT is mainly used to compute the derivative of the electronic energy of a system with respect to certain perturbations. Vibrational, dielectric, and piezoelectric properties can be calculated through the use of DFPT We investigated the properties of various transition metal carbides including VC, CrC, TaC, and NbC. First, we conducted total energy convergence tests on each of their energy cutoffs and k-point grids. Then, we performed relaxation on their lattice parameters. Afterwards, the band structures, densities of states (DOS), and partial densities of states (PDOS) with and without SOC were calculated. We compared our band structures without SOC to other studies, since previous research generally did not include relativistic effects in their calculations. The Wilson loops and Z 2 topological invariants were calculated for each material as well. We calculated the phonon dispersions of each compound to determine their stability. Finally, we discussed recent advances in the synthesis of VC and CrC. We performed BFGS optimization on the lattice parameters of each materials primitive cell. Since the atoms in rock-salt structures are fixed due to high symmetry, we used a potential residual tolerance of 10 -12 Ha as our stopping criteria for the self-consistent field cycles during relaxation. Table III compares experimental determined lattice parameters with our theoretically calculated lattice parameters. Our GGA parameters were in very good agreement with experimental values. The lattice parameters calculated with LDA were underestimates as expected. The reduced atomic coordinates of the rock-salt structure are (0, 0, 0) and (0.5, 0.5, 0.5). Both atoms in the rock-salt structure can serve as inversion centers. Figure The band structure of NbC without SOC is depicted in Figure Figure The Wilson loop method can also be used to calculate the Z 2 topological invariant of both centrosymmetric and noncentrosymmetric structures with no direct band gap closures. Figure Advances in synthesizing both VC and CrC have been made in recent years. In 2015, the mechanochemical combustion method was used to synthesize VC nanopowders In summary, we have used first-principle calculations to theoretically predict the presence of topologocially nontrivial band structures in VC and CrC. The SOCinduced gapping in each of these material's band structures suggests nontrivial band topology. Additionally, the Wilson loops for each material were calculated. Both VC and CrC had nonzero Z 2 topological invariants while NbC and TaC had Z 2 topological invariants of 0. We also calculated the phonon band structures of VC and CrC and found that both materials were dynamically stable since they displayed no imaginary frequencies. Moreover, the softening of acoustic modes present in the phonon dispersions confirms their superconductivity. Therefore, VC and CrC display great promise as platforms for future research in the field of topological superconductivity. : Each compound's converged kinetic energy cutoff and k-point grid for the GGA and LDA pseudopotentials a a Reference 42. b Reference 43. c Reference 44. d Reference 45.