We have performed high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy of the quasi-onedimensional (1D) topological superconductor candidate Tl2Mo6Se6 consisting of weakly-coupled Mo3Se3 chains. We found a quasi-1D Fermi surface arising from a Dirac-like energy band, which is associated with the nonsymmorphic screw symmetry of the chains and predicted to trigger topological superconductivity. We observed a significant spectral-weight reduction over a wide energy range, together with a tiny Fermi-edge structure which exhibits a signature of a superconductinggap opening below the superconducting-transition temperature. The observed quasi-1D Dirac-like band and its very small density of states point to an unconventional nature of superconductivity in Tl2Mo6Se6. The interplay between low dimensionality and superconductivity is one of the central issues in condensedmatter physics. The reduction of dimensionality triggers the rearrangement of lattice, charge, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom, leading to the competition or cooperation among various ordered phases as well as phase fluctuations. Since these rich properties and their interplay often give rise to unconventional superconductivity beyond the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, low-dimensional electron systems are a fertile playground for the research of exotic superconductivity. Wellknown examples of low-dimensional superconductors include quasi-two-dimensional (2D) copper oxides and iron pnictides/chalcogenides which show superconductivity at unexpectedly high temperatures Among known quasi-1D superconductors In this Rapid Communication, we report highresolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 single crystal. By utilizing energy-tunable photons from synchrotron radiation, we obtained definitive evidence for the formation of a quasi-1D Fermi surface (FS) originating from the linearlydispersive Dirac-like band. We also observed a significant suppression of the density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level (E F ) which coexists with superconductivity. We discuss the implications of our observations in relation to the superconducting and topological properties. High-quality Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 crystals with T c = 6.3 K were grown from elemental Tl shot (purity 99.99%), Mo powder (purity 99.999%), and Se powder (purity 99.999%) To discuss the valence-band (VB) structure, we performed ARPES measurements along the Γ Ȳ cut (parallel to the Mo 3 Se 3 chain) of the surface BZ with hν = 50 eV [Figs. To see more clearly the electronic states near E F , we mapped out the band structure in the 3D bulk BZ. In Figs. The observed quasi-1D electronic structure shows a reasonable agreement with band structure calculations A hallmark of a quasi-1D electron system appears in the spectral line shape. Figures 3(a) and 3(b), a quasiparticle peak is not well defined at the k F point, indicating a marked suppression of spectral weight in the normal sate [also see Fig. Finally, we discuss implications of the present results in relation to the superconductivity in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 . Our ARPES measurements show that the starting point for understanding the superconductivity in the present system is a quasi-1D electronic structure with a very small DOS at E F . It is surprising that, although the BCS theory predicts that T c decreases with the suppression of DOS (since T c is proportional to exp[-1/DOS(E F )V ] where DOS(E F ) is the DOS at E F and V is the interaction potential), our sample shows a relatively high T c value of 6.3 K. In this regard, the parameter V in the BCS equation is not likely to be the cause of the high T c , because V is essentially governed by the Debye energy which in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 is expected to be no larger than 27 meV reported for an isostructural compound K 2 Cr 6 As 6 The unconventional pairing could be playing a role in determining the shape of the DOS in the superconducting state. It has been reported that the gap anisotropy or nodes exist in various quasi-1D superconductors such as organic superconductors and metallic-chain-based systems It is also remarked that the observed Dirac-cone-like band has been predicted to be responsible for the timereversal-invariant topological superconductivity. The presence of a Dirac-cone-like band, which is protected by a nonsymmorphic screw symmetry interchanging the two sublattices A and B [Fig. In conclusion, we have presented high-resolution ARPES results on Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 superconductor. We revealed a linear band dispersion near the BZ corner, in agreement with the presence of Dirac cones protected by nonsymmorphic screw symmetry. The observed Diraclike energy band shows a quasi-1D characteristic such as the formation of nearly-flat FS sheets and a power-lawlike suppression of the DOS upon approaching E F . We also observed a signature of an unusual DOS shape in the superconducting phase. These results lay the foundation for understanding the superconducting and topological properties of Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 .