We study oscillations in quantum cascade lasers due to traveling electric field domains, which are observed both in simulations and experiments. These oscillations occur in a range of negative differential resistance and we clarify the condition determining whether the boundary between domains of different electric field can become stationary. Quantum Cascade Lasers (QCLs) The formation of stationary electrical field domains in QCLs has been observed experimentally by the characteristic saw-tooth structure of the current-bias characteristics In order to simulate domain formation, we assume that the sheet electron density n i of each module is essentially confined in a narrow region before the thickest barrier. This is confirmed by our non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) simulations as shown in Fig. which assumes that the current density is essentially proportional to the electron density n i in the injecting module and is reduced by a backward current from thermal excitations in the receiving module i + 1. This expression is normalized by the sheet doping density N d = 3.25×10 10 cm -2 per module, so that the homogeneous current is recovered for n i = n i+1 = N d . Then the continuity equation provides where N = 276 is the number of modules. e is the positive elementary charge and we redefine the sign of electric field and current density, so that their signs match the forces and velocity of carriers, respectively. In Eq. ( with a phenomenological boundary conductivity σ, as justified for the Gunn diode in Ref. and Poisson's equation where r = 13 is the average relative dielectric constant. For fixed bias U , this model has been applied for QCLs in Here C QCL = r 0 A/(N + 1)d is the geometrical capacitance of the QCL structure with A = 0.144 mm 2 and C p is an additional parallel capacitance, which we actually set to zero here. The set of equations (1,2,5) can be viewed as the discretization of a drift-diffusion model combined with Poisson's equation (as appropriate for the Gunn effect Here, the drift velocity v(F ) and the diffusion coefficient D(F ) are given by respectively, which satisfy the Einstein relation in the linear regime for low fields. This allows for analytic insight into the dynamics of wave-fronts For the first plateau, the simulations provide actually oscillatory behavior as shown in Fig. Such oscillations are generic for extended systems with NDC and have been well-studied for the Gunn Diode and superlattices where j min is the minimum current in the NDC region. A slightly stronger bound has been proven in Eq. ( A thorough proof for the stability of stationary domains under this criterion had been provided in Based on the homogeneous current-field relations in Fig. The experimental data displayed in Fig. Concomitant oscillations of the total current (QCL plus voltage probe) measured at the load resistor were also observed and are displayed in Figs. The experimental observation of oscillations within the second NDC region of Fig. Fig. Fig. We demonstrated both by simulations and experimentally, that oscillating electric field domains are possible in QCLs. Stationary domains are favored by high doping, a large peak to valley ratio j peak /j min in the NDC region and a small excess charge between the domains as quantified by Eq. Financial support from the Swedish Science Council (grant 2017-04287) and Nanolund is gratefully acknowledged. Tim Almqvist did the simulations and Emmanuel Dupont the measurements presented here. The numerical codes were developed by Tim Almqvist, David Winge, and Andreas Wacker, who also guided the work. All the authors were involved in the preparation of the manuscript and approved the final version.