The experimental exfoliation of layered group-IV monochalcogenides -semiconductors isostructural to black phosphorus-using processes similar to those followed in the production of graphene or phosphorene has turned out unsuccessful thus far, as if the chemical degradation observed in black phosphorus was aggravated in these monochalcogenides. Here, we document a facile dissociation of water by these materials within ten nanoseconds from room-temperature Car-Parrinello molecular dynamics calculations under standard temperature and pressure conditions. These results suggest that humidity must be fully eradicated to exfoliate monolayers successfully, for instance, by placing samples in a hydrophobic solution during mechanical exfoliation. From another materials perspective, these two-dimensional materials that create individual hydrogen ions out of water without illumination may become relevant for applications in hydrogen production and storage. Water molecules have an intrinsic electric dipole of 1.84 Debye 1 that can receive a significant kinetic feedback from materials with large spatial charge inhomogeneities such as polar binary compounds known as group-IV monochalcogenide monolayers. As each of the three atoms on a water molecule negotiate their best placement with a material that produces inhomogeneous electric fields and also moves about at finite temperature, they strongly accelerate/decelerate and gain/loose kinetic energy past their 6.1 electron-Volt (eV) (70,000 K) energy barrier, to produce an unexpected splitting of hydrogen bonds. The discovery -which will be discussed in what follows-implies a facile chemical degradation, and may explain why it is apparently harder to preserve exfoliated samples of these materials than it is to maintain phosphorene in its original chemical and crystalline composition after exfoliation. Group-IV monochalcogenides But a fundamental problem lingers unaddressed: layered group-IV monochalcogenides are isostructural and isoelectronic to black phosphorus, which exfoliates down to monolayers. Black phosphorus becomes degraded by photo-oxidation at atomistic defects and at edges, In a second work, the reaction pathways for physisorbed oxygen dimers on pristine GeS, GeSe, SnS and SnSe monolayers were contrasted with the pathway on phosphorene, to conclude that none of these 2D materials splits O 2 . Towards that goal, spin-polarized Car-Parrinello (ab initio) molecular dynamics 57 calculations under the NPT ensemble (with a constant number of particles and target ambient pressure and room temperature) Envision a black phosphorus or group-IV monochalcogenide monolayer just created, and place oxygen dimers or water molecules 8 Å near the monolayer at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, to emulate the chemical interaction of these monolayers with proximal non-polar or polar molecules in the dark and under ambient conditions. The kinetics is uncovered by tracking energy-related and geometrical quantities such as the instantaneous pressure P (t), temperature T (t), configurational (DFT) energy U (t), interatomic distances and angles throughout the molecular dynamics evolution. The geometrical variables illustrated in Figures , and the orientation of the water dipole given in terms of the polar angles (θ(t), φ(t)) defined such that the dipole orientation points from the negative to the positive net charge. The oxygen dimer possess an intrinsic magnetic dipole moment of 2μ B , where μ B is the Bohr magneton, that cannot interact with these non-magnetic 2D materials. The dimer will be employed to test whether the electric dipole of molecules interacting with these 2D materials plays a role on their splitting; it has a simpler structure than that of water -it is symmetric with respect to the vector joining the two oxygen atoms-and due to its heavier mass it has to understand the interaction among a dimer and phosphorene, and nine group-IV monochalcogenide monolayers. P , T and U stabilize as the simulation goes on, and provide trends to compare the evolution of water against later on. The angle θ is close to 90 • for GeS, GeTe, SnTe, PbSe, and PbTe, implying a horizontal orientation. Nevertheless, θ shows larger fluctuations in phosphorene, GeSe, SnS, and SnSe, so the oxygen dimer rotates out of plane in the dynamical evolution involving these materials. The horizontal placement of the oxygen dimer does not imply the formation of bonds to the 2D materials if φ is largely fluctuating too. Notice PbSe, where φ evolves largely over time, even when θ and Replacing the oxygen dimer by a water molecule, we contrast the interaction of a polar molecule and these materials against the behavior of the non-polar oxygen dimer. In Figure As for Pb-based monolayers, and as seen in Figure The degradation of group-IV monochalcogenide monolayers is fundamentally different from that of phosphorene: the intrinsic in-plane electric dipole -responsible for the ferroelectric behavior of these materials-attracts and splits water molecules even in the absence of structural defects or edges, and without the need for illumination, resulting on the chemical compromise and degradation within nanoseconds. The degradation hereby unveiled is more aggressive than that reported for black phosphorus, in which degradation requires the additional presence of structural defects or edges, and illumination. Our findings are in stark contrast with the conclusion that GeS, GeSe, SnS, and SnSe are chemically stable in an aqueous environment and under ambient electrochemical conditions. Previous observation is established on a stronger footing in Figures We extract the kinetic energy relative to the center of mass motion to determine whether its magnitude is large enough to break molecular bonds (details are given in the Supporting Information). Figure The kinetic energy gained by water in Figure Fluctuations on the kinetic energy of hydrogen atoms on the water molecule in these NPT calculations can turn much larger than the thermal, mean kinetic energy (0.03 eV). Such an extreme build-up of the relative kinetic energy of the hydrogen atoms originates as the three atoms in the water molecule negotiate their best placement around the monochalcogenide monolayers. Unable to dock in these materials as a single molecular unit, they first break to create free radicals that dock soon afterwards, compromising the chemical stability of the 2D materials. Movies that highlight the interaction of water with these 2D materials for a tenth of the entire evolution are provided as Supplementary Information. Possibility to protect group-IV monochalcogenide monolayers from degrading We speculate that the facile degradation discovered here is behind the difficulty in exfoliating monolayers of group-IV monochalcogenides, and suggest employing non-polar and hydrophobic solvents removable by sonication to overcome the chemistry hereby demonstrated. This may help provide a rationale for the synthesis of these materials from -hydrophobic-solutions. We also propose that other simple polar molecules, such as those listed in Table We discovered a dissociation of water molecules on group-IV monochalcogenide monolayers driven by abrupt local changes on the potential energy that the three constituent atoms of moving polar water molecules negotiate with. The steadfast breaking of water may be behind the difficulty to create ultrathin monochalcogenides from mechanical exfoliation that remain stable in between exfoliation and characterization. Conversely, the detailed study of the interaction of these materials with water may uncover a new energy material platform for the direct capture of hydrogen out of water in atom-thick membranes. The lower and upper walls are kept fixed in the NPT evolution by an in-house modification to the dynamics.f routine. A sampling of 2 × 2 × 1 k-points was used, with a precision in the electronic density of 10 -3 . A real space grid with a 150 Ry cutoff was employed. No unexpected safety hazards were associated with the reported work. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: A discussion of the water density in our simulations, a zoom in of the variables shown in The authors declare no competing financial interest. permits a classification of trends from the relative separation of oxygen atoms in the dimer to the 2D materials, despite of the identical initial placement, that is emphasized by the shading in Figure 4: GeSe, SnSe, SnSe, SnTe, and PbS are farthest away from the dimer and shown without shading. In fact, one sees in GeSe, SnS, and SnSe a sudden approach visible by sharp downward peaks that is aborted. Phosphorene, GeS, PbSe and PbTe have distances d O 1 and d O 2 oscillating in between 3.00 and 2.35 Å, and emphasized with a yellow shading. Finally, GeTe, whose d O 1 and d O 2 are as short at 1.86 Å, is shown with brown shading. None of these 2D materials in pristine form broke oxygen dimers and without the help from illumination within the simulation time. a 