Interpretation of "thermal hardening" phenomenon at high strain rate has recently become a critical problem in shock wave physics. In this letter, this problem is addressed from a viewpoint of dislocation generation, and a novel conclusion is gained that forest hardening induced by homogeneous nucleation (HN) results in thermal hardening behavior in a BCC metal significantly, apart from phonon drag mechanism. Through numerical simulations with a dislocation based crystal plasticity model, we have reproduced the experimental results quantitatively and predicted a thermal hardening behavior in other BCC metals, i.e., Mo, at higher temperature. Strength of a metal is usually regarded as thermal softening since the strength vanishes above the melting temperature 12 . However, thermal hardening phenomenon has been widely observed in shock loading experiments, and has recently become a critical problem in shock wave physics 3 . It was observed experimentally in shock loaded FCC and HCP metals that the typical features of the velocity profiles, including both the Hugoniot Elastic Limit (HEL) spike and the HEL minimum, present thermal hardening phenomenon 4567 . The HEL, also known as dynamic strength 8 , marks the onset of shock induced plasticity. Regarding to BCC metals, most BCC metals still present thermal softening behaviors 9101112 except V and the ferromagnetic metal Fe. In particular, the HEL spikes of V present temperature insensitivity, while the HEL minimums present thermal hardening at elevated temperature. In conventional conceptualization, the extraneous strength stems from dislocation motion. For example, thermal softening behaviors observed at moderate strain rates are attributed to thermally activated dislocation motion 13141516171819 , while thermal hardening behaviors of FCC metals subjected to high strain rates are attributed to phonon drag 20 . As opposed to dislocation motion, dislocation generation has also been regarded as the main contributing factor of the strength as strain rate increases. In particular, F-R sources and cross-slip are common dislocation generation mechanisms at moderate strain rates 21 , while homogeneous nucleation has long been proposed as a likely mechanism responsible for the generation of dislocations at high strain rates 22232425 . Obviously, thermally activated homogeneous nucleation will predict a thermal softening behavior, like AAZ model did Above all, we are still confused with the thermal hardening behavior of BCC V. Is phonon drag responsible for the thermal hardening behavior in BCC V? In this letter, we show that forest hardening induced by homogeneous nucleation (HN) results in the thermal hardening behaviors in a BCC metal significantly, while thermal softening behaviors are mainly due to the temperature effect of Peierls stress through a dislocation based crystal plasticity constitutive model. This thermal hardening mechanism proposed in this letter quite differs from existing theories, and has also been proved to be suitable for other BCC metals. material) In this model, dislocation mobility is controlled by Peierls stress and phonon drag, and dislocation generation is controlled by homogeneous nucleation and multiplication. In classical picture, Peierls stress marks the transition from thermally activated glide of dislocations below Peierls stress and phonon drag mechanism above Peierls stress Firstly, let's neglect the temperature dependent dislocation generation, i.e., HN, to check out whether temperature dependent dislocation mobility is responsible for the temperature dependent behaviors of the dynamic yield strength in BCC metals. As shown in FIG. In this letter, temperature dependent dislocation generation is attributed to homogeneous nucleation. HN occurs when applied stress approaches the nucleation strength. The nucleation strength of a metal is about G/15 Subsequently, we calculated the velocity profiles using a model with thermally activated HN considered, as shown in FIG. Though forest hardening plays the same role as the Peierls stress does on plastic deformation, their temperature effects on dislocation mobility happen to be opposite to each other. As temperature increases, rapid decrease of Peierls stress contributes to thermal softening of the dynamic yield strength, while increase of the foresting hardening contributes to thermal hardening of that. Based on the Kuhlmann-Wilsdorf theory It seems to us that this thermal hardening mechanism is also suitable for FCC metals. Using this model, we simulated the temperature dependent response of weak shock wave loaded FCC metals. However, the simulated results indicate that this mechanism doesn't influence the profile evolution significantly (see the supplemental materials). We attributed to this difference between FCC and BCC metals to different dislocation mobility. Lower viscosity of FCC metals makes it easier for a dislocation to slip, and higher dislocation velocity. More energy is dissipated via dislocation slip, while less is dissipated via dislocation nucleation. Thus HN is not significant, neither does the forest hardening. Based on above analysis, it's expected that the thermal hardening phenomenon could also be observed in other BCC metals at higher temperature, at which the Peierls stress vanishes and forest hardening resistance dominates the CRSS. To do such a simulation, the saturation dislocation density 