This paper studies the lubricating properties of graphene on randomly rough Au surfaces in sliding nanofriction using molecular dynamics. It is shown that the friction and the consequent heat dissipation decrease more than an order of magnitude in the presence of graphene. The performance of graphene nanoribbons as lubricants is, however, limited because of detachment and displacement at the interface. Sliding contacts lubricated with a stretched graphene sheet exhibit low friction, but possibly also low structural stability. This suggests that the graphene-substrate adherence could be crucial for the lubricity of two-dimensional materials on rough metal surfaces. Friction is an unavoidable factor in mechanical systems. Metal-metal contacts, in particular, often exhibit strong adhesion and therefore high friction, leading to increased energy consumption, fast wear, and ultimately reduced lifetimes in mechanical components. Graphene, a monoatomic layer of carbon, is considered to hold great promise to reduce wear and friction by lubricating metal surfaces Recently, Egberts et al. performed nanofriction experiments by sliding a Si atomic-forcemicroscopy (AFM) tip over a graphene-covered Cu surface, and reported that the friction force can be reduced by a factor ranging from 1.5 to 7.0 It is thus important to develop new microscopic test systems to address these issues and bridge the gap between microscopic investigations and macroscopic experiments. Here a novel set of quasi-three-dimensional molecular dynamics (MD) simulations is carried out to study friction between graphene-lubricated Au surfaces with random roughness in the nanoscale. Au is chosen for testing because of its chemical inertness, easy experimental synthesis We start by compressing two Au films against each other. Both of them are infinite (or more specifically periodic) in the plane normal to the compression direction, with a period of about 42.6 nm. The films exhibit two-dimensional random surface profiles that are generated by a method and based on a discrete Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm It is also apparent that friction decreases approximately by an order of magnitude in the case of full coating with a graphene sheet (SLG curve), but only by about 20% in the case of GNRs. These contrasting lubricating behaviors are rather striking since the total initial surface coverages are similar in both cases. The fragmented structure of GNRs is responsible for the deficient lubricity. Detachment and displacement of GNRs at the interface are observed when sliding occurs; therefore a part of the Au surface remains unprotected from direct Au-Au adhesion as shown in the right panel of Fig. Moreover, in Fig. It would be straightforward to discuss the lubrication performance in terms of the friction coefficient. However, since the contact between bare surfaces is strongly adhesive, the conventional Amonton's law remains barely applicable because of the negative normal load due to shear in a displacement-control scheme. This results in so-called "negative coefficients of friction" as observed in experiments on chemically modified graphite where σ is the shear stress, A stands for the contact area and μ is the coefficient of friction. For the bare and GNR-coated samples, the normal load is mostly measured to be negative as shown in Fig. However, one can measure the slope of F x versus F y curves in Fig. FIG. Fig. Graphene exhibits remarkable lubrication performance on rough Au surfaces. The heat dissipation is lowered by more than an order of magnitude and the wear is significantly reduced by graphene lubricants. The friction coefficient is found to decrease from in the presence of SLG, stretched SLG and DLG, and the effect increases in this order. Energetic analyses suggest that higher structural stability can be expected from better graphenesubstrate adherence. In contrast, detachment and displacement of graphene nanoribbons can be observed at the interface, causing the lubrication performance to be largely hindered when those are substituted for continuous graphene.