Corrosion of Si, C, and SiC in fluoride salt has been studied by ab initio molecular dynamics. The standard dissolution potential for Si is found to be smaller (easier to corrode) than that of C. The dissolved Si attracts F -ions and forms SiF6 2-, whereas the dissolved C species forms neutral CF4 molecules. A swapping mechanism is identified for the initial corrosion stage, where Si first comes to the surface and then is dissolved, leaving behind chain-and ring-like C structures. A strategy to suppress SiC corrosion is also discussed based on Be doping, including avoiding Be2C formation. Due to its excellent high temperature mechanical properties, outstanding thermophysical/chemical properties, and low activation to neutron-induced radioactivity Recently, behavior of SiC in fluoride salt was investigated by Gu et al. using a combination of scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy techniques. The authors reported that SiC does corrode in the salt, and the corroding surface becomes depleted in Si content. This result suggests that Si might have been dissolved into the salt, resulting in the formation of a carbon-rich surface To address the above questions, here we use ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations within the framework of density functional theory (DFT). We focus on the FLiBe salt, which is considered to be a primary coolant or fuel salt in MSR. A comparison to behavior of SiC in another commonly used salt, FLiNaK, is also included in the discussion part of this paper. We choose 3C-SiC(001) as a representative surface to investigate the dissolution mechanism of Si during corrosion. We consider surfaces with both Si-and C-termination and with p(2×1) surface reconstructions, which are known to be stable One should note that while standard potentials for Si and C solids are useful to calculate in order to understand corrosion of SiC, corrosion behaviors of Si and C in molten salts are interesting in their own right for fields such as chemical processing technology and device applications In another example, the electrochemical exfoliation of cathodically charged graphite materials in molten salt has been proposed as an efficient approach for economic and environmentally sustainable production of high quality graphene-derived nanostructures To prepare a model of a molten salt, we first create a cell containing 98 atoms with a eutectic composition of BeF2-2LiF (56 F atoms, 28 Li atoms, and 14 Be atoms). Positions of atoms are random, and they are chosen using Packmol code Projector-augmented-wave (PAW) potentials The SiC(001) surfaces are represented by a symmetric slab with 13 layers and 8 atoms per layer along the (001) direction, with two identical free surfaces at both ends. Periodic boundary conditions are employed in all three spatial directions. The vacuum region with ~15.1 Å is filled with the pre-relaxed molten salt atoms. Previous calculations have confirmed that the size effects for SiC(001) surfaces can be negligible when the slab is larger than 11 layers with a 12.5 Å vacuum region All computations are performed with a cutoff energy of 500 eV for the plane wave basis set and with spin-polarized conditions. The integration over the Brillouin zone is performed using the Γ point for AIMD simulations, and the 3×3×1 kpoint mesh is used for the subsequent energy minimization. Motivated by experimental work at high temperatures (around 1000 K) To model the electrochemical dissolution reactions in the fluoride salt we build on the approach described by Nam, et al. ./01 (3) Since there are no electrons gained or lost in this reaction, it is possible to determine its free energy based on DFT calculations. Specifically, the reaction Gibbs free energy of reaction in Eq. (3) can be written as ∆G = 〈EAXF ; ./01 B〉 -〈E(salt)〉 -μAX %&' B -n 2 8 μ(F : ) + ∆C I (4) where 〈EAXF ; ./01 B〉 is the ensemble average of the total internal energy of the product, XFn, dissolved in the salt. 〈E(salt)〉 is the ensemble average of the total internal energy of pure salt. μAX %&' B is the chemical potential of Si or C species in SiC at the temperature where the potential is being measured, μ(F : ) is the chemical potential for fluorine gas at the temperature of the calculation and 1 atm pressure. ∆C I is the entropy correction term, describing the change of entropy of the product, XFn, from its standard state (e.g., for SiF4 the standard state would be that gas phase at standard temperature and pressure) to the dissolved one. ∆C I is taken to be the same as the change in entropy of the standard state to the stable phase of the corrosion products at the temperature of the simulation and one atmosphere (e.g., for simulation of SiF4 at 1000K this would be the gas phase of SiF4 at 1000K and one atmosphere) μ .O0&P (T) = μ .O0&P (0 K) + AH(T) -H(0 K)B -TAS(T) -S(0 K)B (5) μ .O0&P (0 K) is the reference state of solid from our published DFT calculations The thermodynamics of Be addition will play an important role in this work as it can buffer the salt and potentially interact with SiC. Specifically, we will need a model for dissolution of Be metal as neutral Be (Be 0 ) in the salt. To build this model we note that the change in Gibbs free energy for neutral Be 0 dissolved in the salt phase, Be ./01 K , can be calculated as μABe ./01 K B -μABe XY1/0 B = 〈EABe ./01 K B〉 -〈E(salt)〉 -μABe XY1/0 B -T∆S (6) where μABe ./01 K B and μABe XY1/0 B are the chemical potential of Be 0 species in the salt and metallic phase, respectively. 〈EABe ./01 K B〉 is the ensemble average of the total internal energy of dissolved Be 0 species in the salt, which can be obtained in our AIMD simulations as discussed in Sec. 2.2. ∆S is the entropy for the dissolution of Be 0 species into the salt. Based on the Raoult's law, it is estimated as ∆S = -k ] lnAC `Ya ./01 B (7) where k ] is the Boltzmann constant, and C `Ya ./01 is the mole fraction of dissolved Be 0 species in the salt. A parallel formalism to Eq. ( 100%, and ni is number of moles of species i). We will also be interested in the reaction of Be with C in the SiC to form solid Be2C through the reaction 2Be ./01 The Gibbs free energy of reaction in Eq. ( The standard potential for solid dissolution in salt is an important thermodynamic factor that determines how the material is dissolved in salt. Here, we calculate the standard potential for dissolution of silicon, graphite, and SiC in fluoride salt, and we compare the results with the experimentally measured salt potential. The results are shown in Fig. In addition to the calculations of standard potentials, we have used AIMD simulations to identify configurations of species dissolved in the salt (details of calculations can be found in Sec. 2.2). For Si species, we found that the dissolved Si 4+ cation interacts six F -anions and forms SiF6 2-, in which six anions form an octahedron around the central Si 4+ cation with Oh symmetry, and the Si-F bond length is around 1.70 Å (see Figs. The calculated values of the standard potential for dissolution of SiC can be used to consider how to control the salt potential in applications in order to suppress the dissolution. As shown in Fig. In the above thermodynamic calculations, we found that corrosion of SiC in fluoride salts dissolution proceeds by dissolution of Si species. However, it remains to be determined by what mechanism Si can preferentially dissolve from a binary covalent material such as SiC and whether this mechanism is kinetically accessible to typical experiments. Here, we analyze corrosion mechanisms of SiC using AIMD simulations for both C-and Si-terminated SiC(001) surfaces. The (001) surface is one of the most energetically stable surfaces in SiC In order to better understand the salt-surface interaction, the electronic structure for Cterminated surface is investigated. The partial charge density of surface states with energies 1.5 eV below the Fermi level is shown in Fig. In order to study bonding states of atoms at the salt/SiC interface, we have analyzed the difference in charge densities between the salt/SiC system and isolated salt and SiC surface. In the latter two cases, we have frozen the ionic structures and only relaxed the electronic structures. From Fig. Structural evolution of the atoms during the interactions of fluoride salt and C-terminated SiC(001) has been studied by running AIMD at 1000 K and 2000 K for 10 ps. The high temperature is expected to accelerate the reaction within the AIMD time scale. We find that multiple F atoms are adsorbed near the surface and forms bonds with Si atoms in the subsurface layer. The strong interactions between F and Si elongate the Si-C bond, especially along the <111> direction, from 1.85 Å to 2.15 Å, and in some cases even break these Si-C bonds. Meanwhile, the bond lengths for Si-F decrease from 1.84 Å to 1.70 Å. Finally, some Si atoms (red color in Fig. In order to be able to observe in AIMD simulations how swapping mechanism leads to dissolution, we have created a more corrosive environment by adding additional F atoms into the salt, as shown in Figs. Bonding on the Si-terminated SiC(001) surface is qualitatively different from that on the previously discussed C-terminated surface. As shown in Fig. However, due to the high electronegativity of F atom, it is likely that at times longer than our AIMD time scale, additional F atoms near the surface might cleave the Si-C bonds and lead to degradation of the Si-terminated surface. A similar trend has been reported based on experiments in ZrO2 According to our thermodynamic calculations, corrosion of SiC in fluoride salt occurs first through dissolution of Si species with increasing potential. The calculated value of standard potential for Si dissolution allows us to consider how low a salt potential might be needed to thermodynamically suppress corrosion of SiC. One common strategy for reducing the salt potential is to add Be metal to the salt, which as shown in Sec. 3.1, may stabilize the Si species in SiC. However, it is important to consider if the introduction of beryllium species might simultaneously induce the production of solid metal carbides, of which the most stable is assumed to be Be2C The above results suggest that it is at least in theory possible to reduce the salt potential with Be additions to suppress the corrosion of SiC in fluoride salt without precipitating out metal carbides by controlling the concentration of dissolved Be 0 species in the salt to be lower than ~ 10 -14 mol% for C-rich condition, and ~ 10 -12 mol% for Si-rich condition. Note that in the above arguments we have assumed that controlling the salt potential to below the standard potential of Si species would prevent Si dissolution. However, if the concentration of dissolved Si species, for example Si 4+ species, in the salt is lower than 1 molar, the potentials of Si dissolution would be lower than the standard potential. If we somewhat arbitrarily set the tolerable concentration for the dissolved Si 4+ species in the salt in the order of 1 ́10 -10 molar, then the potential to stabilize that concentration is around -4.05 V on the basis of the Nernst equation ./01 is ~ 5.8 ́10 -3 mol%. This value of C `Yl ' ./01 might be expected to correlate with slow dissolution kinetics, but it is large enough that it could correspond to significant C loss. However, this value is a worst-case prediction that would be greatly reduced when consider C pulled from Si-rich SiC and could be reduced by reducing Be content. Finally, for comparison, we have also calculated the standard potentials for SiC dissolution in another commonly used fluoride salt, FLiNaK (46 mol% LiF, 42 mol% KF, 12 mol% NaF). Calculations were carried out using the same procedure as for FLiBe. As shown in Fig. In summary, the corrosion behavior of SiC in fluoride molten salts has been investigated by ab initio molecular dynamics simulations based on density functional theory. The standard potentials for the dissolution of SiC in fluoride salt have been determined. It is found that the potential of Si species is smaller than that of C species, suggesting that the Si species would be much easier to dissolve into the salt than the C species. We have also identified the configurations of the dissolved Si species and found the following: (i) the dissolved Si 4+ prefers to form SiF6 2-with Oh symmetry, in which six anions surround the central Si 4+ cation in octahedral configuration, and the Si-F bond length is around 1.70 Å; (ii) the dissolved Si 2+ and Si 3+ form SiF3 -(C3v symmetry), and SiF4 -(C2v symmetry), respectively, with bond lengths around 1.66 -1.73 Å. These results suggest that as Si species dissolves into fluoride salt, it prefers to attract additional F -ions and to form anion clusters. For C species, owing to the high standard potential, only few C 4+ species may dissolve into the salt. When dissolved C atom forms a neutral CF4 molecule with Td symmetry i.e., one C 4+ cation occupies the center of the tetrahedral structure, and four F -ions are located at each vertex. The C-F bond lengths for these configurations are around 1.33 Å. We have also elucidated the mechanisms of SiC corrosion in fluoride salt. For a C-terminated surface, we found a swapping mechanism that brings subsurface Si atoms to the surface, which is a necessary step for Si dissolution and for formation of C-rich layer during corrosion. For Siterminated surface, we found that anions form a passivation layer and no dissolution is observed on the time scales of AIMD simulations. 