We propose an efficient method to numerically evaluate Z4-indices of Möbius/hourglass topological phases with glide symmetry. Our method directly provides Z4-indices in the lattice Brillouin zone while the existing method requires careful observations of momentum dependent Wannier charge centers. As applications, we perform systematic computation of Z4-indices for Möbius materials, CeNiSn and UCoGe. In particular, our analysis elucidates that UCoGe shows strong Möbius superconductivity for the Au-or B3u-representation whose topology has not been fully characterized. Furthermore, obtained phase diagrams reveal novel topological gapless excitations in the bulk which are protected by nonsymmorphic glide symmetry. We observe these gapless excitations with glide symmetry by doping holes into the superconducting phase of the B1u-or B3u-representation. 1. Derivation of Eq. (B3) In the last decade, topological perspective on condensed matter systems has been rapidly developed along with the material realization of topological insulators and superconductors Remarkably, the notion of topological phases has been extended to topological crystalline insulators/superconductors It has turned out that large variety of topological phases exist in materials thanks to the complexity and diversity of their crystal structure. Among them, topological crystalline phases with nonsymmorphic symmetry show intriguing behaviors This remarkable discovery urges us to search a new series of topological insulators/superconductors. After the proposal of Möbius topological insulators/superconductors, realization of a Z 4 -Möbius insulator with glide symmetry is reported for KHgX (X = As, Sb, Bi) Under this background, we propose an efficient method directly providing Z 4 -indices both for Möbius insulators of class AII and Möbius superconductors of class DIII. Specifically, with extending the method proposed by Fukui et al. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we show how to numerically compute the Z 4 -indices efficiently in the lattice BZ. In Sec. III, we apply our method to CeNiSn which belongs to symmetry class AII. We also compute the Z 4 -index by the method based on WCCs in order to show the efficiency of our method. In Sec. IV, we apply our method to superconductivity for UCoGe which belongs to symmetry class DIII. In Sec. V, we give a short summary. In Refs. 32 and 33, the lattice version of topological indices is defined in order to characterize topological insulators with local symmetry. By extending this method, we introduce the lattice version of Z 4 -indices for class AII and class DIII. The high efficiency of our method in the lattice BZ allows us to systematically analyze the topology of the Hamiltonian for Möbius materials. In the following, for each symmetry class, we introduce a lattice version of the Z 4 -index after a brief review of the Z 4 -index. Three-dimensional system of class AII Firstly, let us review the Z 4 -index for threedimensional systems of class AII whose BZ is cubic. Consider a topological insulator whose Hamiltonian H(k) satisfies the following constraint, with Here, Θ denotes the time-reversal operator. k denotes the momentum for three-dimensional systems, k := (k x , k y , k z ). -π ≤ k μ ≤ π with μ = x, y, z. The glide operator flips the momentum as k → gk := (k x , -k y , k z ). For k y = 0 or π, the Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized with glide symmetry. The eigenvalues of G(k) are g ± (k) = ±ie -ikx/2 . Let H ± denote the block-diagonalized Hamiltonian with the eigenvalue g ± . The topological structure of this phase is characterized by the Z 4 -index defined as 25 In Fig. with μ, ν = x, y, z. s = I, II labels each Kramers pair. A + (k) denotes the Berry connection for occupied states, i.e., A + (k) : In a similar way as Eq. (2c), the Berry curvature F yz is defined with occupied states of the Hamiltonian H. We note that the Z 4index Eq. (2a) is independent of the gauge choice modulo four. The problem here is how to evaluate the integrals with a set of wave functions which are not defined smoothly for the BZ. In general, numerical simulations do not provide the smooth wave function. In this section, we show how to compute the Z 4index (2a) with a set of wave functions which are not smooth in the BZ. We suppose that the system satisfies Eq. (1). Firstly, we discretize the momentum as the set of corresponding eigenvectors for occupied states. We note that numerically obtained eigenstates are not necessarily smooth in the BZ because a gauge transformation is randomly applied for each point in the BZ, where V (k) denotes a unitary matrix. Even when the wave functions are not smooth in the BZ, the Z 4 -index can be computed with a proper gauge choice (see below). In order to compute the Z 4 -index, we extend the approach proposed by Fukui et al. where 0≤k x(y) ≤π,kz denotes summation for 0 ≤ k x(y) ≤ π and -π ≤ k z ≤ π. Here, the Berry connection and the Berry curvature are defined as with and μ, ν = x, y, z. ∆k x := ∆k(1, 0, 0). ∆k y := ∆k(0, 1, 0). ∆k z := ∆k(0, 0, 1). We note that A +μ and F +μν are obtained with the occupied states of H + . F yz (k) denotes the Berry curvature obtained with the occupied states of H in a similar way as Eq. (6b). The topological index ( and for k = (π, 0, 0), (π, 0, π), (π, π, 0), and (π, π, π), In Fig. The above two facts indicate that computing the topological index (5) with the gauge choice (7) Blue planes denote the domain of integration. Green planes denote the glide-invariant planes. In the region denoted by thick red lines, the gauge is fixed as Eq. ( Two-dimensional systems of class DIII Let us consider superconductivity described by the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian with Θ (C) denotes the operator of the time-reversal (particlehole) symmetry. The system is two-dimensional. k = (k x , k y ). -π ≤ k x(y) ≤ π. The glide plane is parallel to the system, and thus, the glide operator does not flip the momentum. The eigenvalues of the matrix G(k) are given by g ± (k) := ±ie -ikx/2 . The Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized with glide symmetry. Let H ± denote the block-diagonalized Hamiltonian with the eigenvalue g ± (k) := ±ie -ikx/2 . The topological structure of this phase is characterized by the Z 4 -index defined as In Fig. Lattice version of the Z4-index for symmetry class DIII In this section, we show how to compute the Z 4 -index θ with a set of wave functions which are not smooth in the BZ. We suppose that the system satisfies Eq. (8). First, we discretize the momentum (k x , k y ) = (-π + i x ∆k, -π + i y ∆k), (10) with i x , i y = 0, 1, • • • , N -1, and ∆k = 2π/N . N is an even integer. Suppose that we have the block-diagonalized Hamiltonian ) be the set of corresponding eigenvectors for occupied states. We again stress that numerically obtained eigenstates are not necessarily smooth in the BZ. Even when the numerically computed states are not smooth in the BZ, the lattice version of the Z 4 -index can be computed with a proper gauge choice (see below). The lattice version of the Z 4 -index is defined as Here, the Berry connection and the Berry curvature are defined as with (1, 0). ∆k y = ∆k(0, 1). The topological index (11) is well-defined only under the following gauge fixing: for k x = π and -k y < 0, and for k = (π, 0) or (π, π), In Fig. The above two facts indicate that computing the summation in Eq. (11) with the gauge choice (13) yields the Z 4 -index of class DIII. We note that a Z 2 -index characterize the topology when CG(k) = G(-k)C holds. The lattice version of the Z 2 -index is introduced in Appendix E. Reference 28 has proposed that CeNiSn can be a Möbius Kondo insulator in three dimensions. In this section, we demonstrate that the lattice version of the Z 4 -index (5) efficiently characterizes the topology of the Möbius topological Kondo insulator by the comparison with the results of the previous study. We also obtain the Z 4 -index by computing WCCs in order to demonstrate the efficiency of our method. The unit cell of CeNiSn includes four Ce atoms each of which is coupled with a Ni atom. We label these Ce atoms by a1, a2, b1, and b2. In Ref. 28, the following effective model, of which the BZ is cubic, has been proposed to describe a Möbius Kondo insulator with a-glide symmetry (see Sec. III B): with and V BA = 0 s y t 3 s y e iky -t 3 s y t 4 s y e iky -t 4 0 τ , (14l) Here, the constant t (l=c,f ) i (i = x, y, z) denotes the hopping for each direction. μ l(=c,f ) represents the energy level of c-and f -electrons. The matrix t i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) is defined as respectively. a, b, α, β, and γ are real numbers. λ i , ρ i , τ i , and s i (i = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices. λ i 's act on the space spanned by c-and f -electrons. ρ i 's act on the space spanned by sites 1 and 2. τ i 's act on the space spanned by sites a and b. s i 's act on the spin space. Here, we discuss the symmetry protecting the topology of the Z 4 -index. This system preserves the time-reversal symmetry. The corresponding operator is given as satisfying Θ 2 = -1. K is the operator of complex conjugation. Thus the symmetry class of this system is AII. In addition, the Hamiltonian preserves a-glide symmetry G xy whose operator is defined as where Thus, the Hamiltonian satisfies the condition (1). Employing the lattice version of the Z 4 -index, we characterize the topology of the system. The result is shown in Fig. In Fig. at the surface of the system 28 , while Fig. However, a careful observation of WCCs elucidates that the Z 4 -index takes θ 3 = 1 in this region (for details, see Appendix F), which supports our result. Here, we discuss the efficiency of our method. As discussed in Appendix F, one needs to examine the flow of WCCs to obtain the Z 4 -index for a given set of parameters. This means that in order to obtain a phase diagram of a realistic model, one needs to perform the procedure of the Appendix F for every point in the phase diagram, which is a hard task. We also note that even around the transition points our data converge for 64 × 64 × 64 k mesh while the convergence would become worse around the transition point when the method based on WCCs is employed. In the above sense, we can conclude that the efficiently is significantly improved by our method. In the next section, we systematically analyze the topological superconductivity for UCoGe. Reference 29 has proposed that UCoGe under pressure is the first promising candidate of Möbius superconductors with the Z 4 -index taking two. In that paper, a simplified representation of the Z 4 -index has been derived for the zone face of the three-dimensional BZ by using additional symmetry of the crystal. In addition, the strong and weak indices have been discussed upon a certain assumption In this section, by applying the lattice version of the Z 4 -index [Eq. ( To compute the topology of the superconductivity in UCoGe, we employ the effective model proposed in Ref. 29. The unit cell of the system is shown in Fig. with Here, s's, σ's, and η's are the Pauli matrices acting on the spin space, the sublattice space (1, 2), and the sublattice space (a, b), respectively. We define the matrix H 0 := H hop + H ASOC Since we are interested in topological superconductivity, we consider the following BdG Hamiltonian We define τ 's as the Pauli matrices acting on the Nambu space. There are several cases of the pairing potential ∆(k) allowed by the symmetry group of UCoGe, P nma. Under this symmetry, the four representations of oddparity pairing are allowed. The details are summarized in Table In order to see which topological indices characterize topology of the system for each paring potential in Table I, we discuss the symmetry class and the crystal symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian (20a). Let us start with the local symmetry. Because the Hamiltonian preserves the time-reversal symmetry with Θ 2 = -1 and the particle-hole symmetry with C 2 = 1, the symmetry class is DIII. Thus, the system can be characterized with the three-dimensional winding number W 3 (i) Time-reversal symmetry-The Hamiltonian (20a) satisfies the time-reversal symmetry: For sgn(g) = 1 (-1) the paring potential is even (odd) under the transformation of g. with (ii) Particle-hole symmetry-The Hamiltonian (20a) satisfies the particle-hole symmetry: with As well as the local symmetry, the BdG Hamiltonian preserves the space group symmetry P nma. In order to describe the spatial symmetry, let us consider the symmetry transformation g acting on the Nambu space. When the BdG Hamiltonian preserves the symmetry, it satisfies Here U (g, k) is a unitary matrix satisfying where sgn(g) takes 1 for the even paring and takes -1 for the odd paring. In Table (iii) a-glide symmetry-The BdG Hamiltonian preserves the a-glide symmetry (g = G xy ) which is described as Under the transformation, the momentum k is mapped to G xy k := (k x , k y , -k z ). Thus, the system has two a-glide invariant planes, k z = 0 and Eqs. (8d) and (8e) are satisfied so that one can define Z 4 -indices, θ a (0) and θ a (π). If the paring potential is aglide-even [sgn(G xy ) = 1], Eqs. (E1a) and (E1b) are satisfied so that one can define Z 2 -indices, ν a ± (0) and ν a ± (π). Computation of Z 2 -index is explained in Appendix E. (iv) n-glide symmetry-The BdG Hamiltonian preserves the n-glide symmetry (g = G yz ) which is described as Under the transformation, the momentum k is mapped to k ′ := (-k x , k y , k z ). Thus, the system has two n-glide invariant planes, k x = 0 and k x = π. For n-glide-odd superconductivity [sgn(G yz ) = -1], one can define Z 4indices, θ n (0) and θ n (π). For n-glide-even superconductivity [sgn(G yz ) = 1], one can define Z 2 -indices, ν n ± (0) and ν n ± (π). (v) Reflection symmetry-The BdG Hamiltonian preserves the reflection symmetry (g = R y ) which is described as Under the transformation, the momentum k is mapped to R y k := (k x , -k y , k z ). We note that for reflection-even superconductivity [sgn(R y ) = 1], the winding number in three dimensions W 3 is fixed to zero (see Appendix H). (vi) Inversion symmetry-The BdG Hamiltonian preserves the inversion symmetry (g = I) which is described as Under the transformation, the momentum k is mapped to Ik := (-k x , -k y , -k z ). We note that for parity-odd superconductivity [sgn(I) = -1], the value (-1) W3 is governed by the topology of Fermi surfaces We perform the numerical calculations with setting the parameters as follows: for the normal part and for the pairing potential. We note that for μ = 0.55 the model imitates the cylindrical Fermi surfaces of UCoGe The obtained results for μ = 0.55 indicate that the topological superconductivity of the A u -, B 1u -, or B 3urepresentation is characterized by the Z 4 -index with θ = 2, which is consistent with the results obtained in Ref. 29. Furthermore, our analysis away from μ = 0.55 elucidates that Z 4 -indices at the zone face and zone center predict novel gapless excitations in the bulk. These gapless excitations are protected by difference of two topological indices, as is the case for Weyl superconductors In the following we start with an overview of the obtained results. After that we move on to the details for each case of pairing potentials. We compute topological indices, W 3 , θ's, and ν's for glide-odd and glide-even superconductivity. The results for μ = 0.55 are summarized in Table TABLE II. Topological indices for each case of pairing symmetry. For our system, we have seen that Z2-indces, ν's, take the same value for the plus and the minus sector; ν a + (kz) = ν a -(kz) for kz = 0, π and ν n + (kx) = ν n -(kx) for kx = 0, π. a-glide n-glide Au (0, 0, 2)o (0, 1, 0)o B1u (0, 0, 2)o (0, 1, 0)e B2u (0, 0, 1)e (0, 1, 0)e B3u (0, 0, 1)e (0, 1, 0)o Following the above generic argument, we discuss the strong topological superconductivity for UCoGe (see Table gapped: θ(0) + θ(π) = W 3 (mod 2). In other words, topologically protected gapless excitations appear in the bulk when the parities of two values, θ(0) + θ(π) and W 3 are incompatible with each other. Topological indices as functions of μ for each case of paring symmetry are summarized in Fig. In the following, we discuss the above results in details. Firstly, we discuss topology of superconductivity with the B 3u -representation. After that we address the other cases of paring symmetry. The paring potential of B 3u -representation is even (odd) under the a-(n-) glide transformation, respectively. Thus, we discuss each case separately. (i) n-glide symmetry-As seen in Table (ii) a-glide symmetry-As seen in Table As seen in Table (i) a-glide symmetry-Fig. (ii) n-glide symmetry-In a similar way to the previous case, we discuss the topology protected by n-glide symmetry, which is characterized by W 3 , θ n (0), and θ n (π) as mentioned above. Fig. As in the case of a-glide symmetry, changing chemical potential does not yield the topological gapless phases. (i) a-glide symmetry-As seen in Table Figure (ii) n-glide symmetry-Table As seen in Table (i) a-glide symmetry-Figure (ii) n-glide symmetry-Figure In this paper, we have proposed an efficient method to compute the Z 4 -indices with glide symmetry which is applicable both for Möbius topological insulators and Möbius topological superconductors. The former (latter) ones belong to class AII (class DIII), respectively. The advantage of our method over the existing method based on WCCs is that the former one directly provides the Z 4indices while the latter one requires careful observations of complicated momentum dependent WCCs. This ad-vantage allows us to systematically analyze the topology of systems. As an application, we have performed systematic computation of the Z 4 -index for CeNiSn which is proposed as a three-dimensional Möbius Kondo insulator of class AII. The obtained phase diagram basically shows nice agreement with the results obtained by the previous study. The difference from the previous study is the following. Our efficient method has elucidated that topological index for -35 < μ c < -21 takes the same value as that for -76 < μ c < -60, even though the number of surface Dirac cones is different between these two regions. This is because the topological state θ = 1 is identical to the one with θ = -3 which hosts three Dirac cones at the surface. Furthermore, we have applied our method to superconductivity of UCoGe whose topology with glide symmetry had not been fully characterized. Specifically, our direct computation of Z 4 -indices both at the BZ center and at the BZ face has elucidated that UCoGe shows strong Möbius superconductivity of the A u -or B 3urepresentation. We stress that our numerical method is applicable regardless of the position in the BZ and the additional crystalline symmetry in contrast to the analytic formula proposed in Ref. 29. Thanks to this advantage the Z 4 -index for the BZ center is firstly computed with-out any assumption. Furthermore, the obtained phase diagrams discover novel gapless excitations in the bulk which are topologically protected by the glide symmetry; the difference of Z 4 -indices at the BZ face and the BZ center requires the gapless excitations in the bulk as the difference of the Chern number does for the Weyl superconductivity. We have observed this type of gapless excitations with glide symmetry by doping holes into the superconducting phase of the B 1u -or B 3u -representation. For 0 < l < N/2, Eq. (B3) can be proven as follows. Firstly, we note that the following relation holds because of Eq. (B1b): for 0 < l < N/2 (i.e., -π < k l < 0), where U Θ denotes the unitary part of the time-reversal operator satisfying Θ 2 = -1, i.e., Θ := U Θ K. For ordinary time-reversal invariant insulators, U Θ is given as U Θ = is y ⊗ 1l with the Pauli matrix s y acting on the spin space and the identity matrix 1l. By using the above relation, we have which results in Eq. (B3) for 0 < l < N/2. For l = 0, N/2, Eq. (B3) can be proven as follows. Firstly, for l = 0, N/2, we can find with iτ y transforming the two states as follows: with n = 0, 1, • • • , dimH + /4-1. The above relation holds because of the gauge choice (B1c). By making use of Eq. (B10a), we can prove Eq. (B3) for l = 0. A straightforward calculation yields which results in Eq. (B3) for l = 0. In a similar way, we obtain which results in Eq. (B3) for l = N/2. We note that det(iτ y ⊗ 1l) = 1 holds. Therefore, we obtain Eq. (B3) for 0 ≤ l ≤ N/2. Thus, we have The summation in the above equation is taken for the closed path which results in an integer multiple of 2π. Therefore, we can see quantization of the index θ to an integer. Appendix E: Z2-index for glide-even superconductivity Consider glide-even superconductivity whose BdG Hamiltonian satisfies Eqs. (8a-8c) and the following relations The topological structure of this phase is characterized by the Z 2 -index defined as 25 which is identical to the Z 2 -index for one-dimensional topological superconductivity of class DIII. This topological index can be computed in a similar way as the case of Z 4 -index. The lattice version of this index is defined as with the gauge choice, Eq. (13). By employing the lattice version of the Z 2 -index, we have obtained ν ± shown in Fig. When the glide sector preserves the inversion symmetry and the pairing potential is parity-odd, the topological structure is governed by the dispersion relation ǫ α of the normal state: Here (k x , k y ) = (π, 0) and (π, π) are time-reversal invariant momenta. At these points, we can observe Kramers degeneracy ǫ 2α = ǫ 2α+1 . The symbol 2α denotes taking product for one of each Kramers pair. In this section, by computing WCCs, we show that the Z 4 -index takes θ = 1 for the topological Kondo insulator (14a) at μ c = -30. Since the glide symmetry defined in Eq. ( We note that the glide operator does not flip the momentum for k z = 0, π, and thus the Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized into the plus and the minus sector of the glide operator. The WCC corresponds to polarization of each orbital and is represented as the integral of the corresponding Berry connection (see below) We plot WCCs with blue dots for the plus sector of the Hamiltonian H + in the region between X and Γ and between Z and M. The red dots represent WCCs obtained from the Hamiltonian H including the plus and the minus sector. By sweeping k x along Γ → X, we can evaluate the contribution of the second and the third terms of Eq. (F1). Along this path, we can see that one of the WCCs shows a jump from -0.5 to 0.5, resulting in the contribution -2 to θ 3 . By sweeping k x along Z → M, we can evaluate the contribution of the fourth and the fifth terms of Eq. (F1). At the Z point we can see that summing up the WCCs for the plus sector yields 0.5, resulting in the contribution -1 to θ 3 . We can see that the contribution from the other region is zero. Thus, in total, we obtain θ = -3, which is consistent with θ = 1 (mod 4). Here, X, Γ, Z, and M points represent (kx, kz) = (π, 0), (0, 0), (0, π), and (π, π), respectively. For kz = 0, π, the Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized with the glide symmetry. In these regions, the blue dots represent the data obtained for the plus sector of the glide, while the red dots represent the data obtained for the full Hamiltonian without the block-diagonalization. These data are obtained for 160 × 160 × 160 k mesh. For coarser k mesh, the fine structure along the Γ-Z line cannot be captured. In a similar way, we obtain θ = 1 for μ c = -70. By sweeping k x along Γ → X, we can evaluate the contribution of the second and the third terms of Eq. (F1). At the Γ point, the one of WCCs takes 0.5, resulting in the contribution of 1. We can see that contribution from the other region is zero. Therefore, we can conclude that for μ c = -30 or -70, the topological index takes θ = 1, which is consistent with the results obtained by the lattice version of the Z 4 -index (5) (see Fig. Appendix G: Classification of paring potentials at glide invariant lines In Sec. IV C 2, and IV C 4 we have seen the appearance of robust point nodes protected by topological properties. As briefly explained in those sections, one can complementarily understand the emergence of the topological gapless points by analyzing possible paring symmetry of Cooper pairs for a high symmetry line/plane of the BZ. For instance, suppose that the Cooper pairs of the B 3urepresentation are forbidden along a high symmetry line. In this case, the bulk gap, whose paring potential is the B 3u -representation, should become zero, resulting in robust gapless excitations. These gapless modes are nothing but the ones discussed in Sec IV C 2. In the following, we see the details by performing classification of possible paring potentials along high symmetry lines of the BZ. The results are summarized in Table The classification of paring potentials along a high symmetry line is carried out in the following steps 1. Obtain the little group M k mapping the momentum as k → gk = k for the high symmetry line. 2. Calculate the irreducible representation (IR) of the Bloch state γ k by using Wigner's criterion with We note that an additional integrand arises from the first term in the last line of Eq. (H4a). This additional term, however, does not contribute to the winding number because the additional term results in boundary terms which are zero due to periodicity of the BZ. This can be seen by the following straightforward calculation. Up to the prefactor, the additional term is written as with H := H(k ′ ). Here we have used the relation {Γ, H} = 0. Therefore, we can see that Eq. (H3) holds, indicating that W 3 is fixed to zero. In a similar way, we can show that the winding number W 3 is fixed to zero for the glide-even superconductivity. We note that topology of superconductivity described by H i,o(e) (i = 2, 3) is protected by glide symmetry. In particular, topological surface states of H 2,o or H 2,e are protected by the strong index while those of H 3,o or H 3,e are protected by the weak index. Therefore, surface states of topological superconductivity H 2,o or H 2,e are robust against disorder if glide symmetry is preserved on average