Fluid-driven elastomeric actuators (FEAs) are among the most popular actuators in the emerging field of soft robotics. Intrinsically compliant, with continuum of motion, large strokes, little friction, and high power-to-weight ratio, they are very similar to biological muscles, and have enabled new applications in automation, architecture, medicine, and human-robot interaction. To foster future applications of FEAs, in this paper we present a new manufacturing method for fast and precise scalable production of complex FEAs of high quality (leak-free, single-body form, with <0.2 mm precision). The method is based on 3d moulding and supports elastomers with a wide range of viscosity, pot life, and Young's modulus. We developed this process for two different settings: one in laboratory conditions for fast prototyping with 3d printed moulds and using multi-component liquid elastomers, and the other process in an industrial setting with 3d moulds micromachined in metal and applying compression moulding. We demonstrate these methods in fabrication of up to several tens of two-axis, three-chambered soft actuators, with two types of chamber walls - cylindrical and corrugated. The actuators are then applied as motion drivers in kinetic photovoltaic building envelopes. Soft robotics is a rapidly growing field offering novel actuators Among soft actuators, one of most popular types are fluid-driven elastomeric actuators (FEAs). These actuators contain fluidic pathways within their soft bodies. When they are filled up with pressurised fluid (gas or liquid), the surrounding elastic material expands, leading to a change of the outer shape of the actuator. Depending on the geometry of fluidic pathways and shape of the actuator, as well as on the pressurisation method (inflation or deflation), different output motion paths can be obtained, such as expansion, contraction, bending, or twisting Even though several methods for manufacturing of FEAs exists, they are of limited suitability for scalable production due to either high process complexity, long total fabrication time, difficulties in achieving leak-free actuators, or limited support for different types of elastomers. To strengthen future applications of soft robotics (e.g. soft-robotic driven adaptive solar facades In this paper we present a new manufacturing method for soft actuators that is suitable for fast and precise scalable production of complex FEAs of high quality (leak-free, single-body, with <1 mm precision). This method is based on 3d moulding, where outer walls of an FEA and internal voids (fluidic pathways) are formed in a single casting process. The outer mould consists of several parts that can be easily disassembled, while internal voids are created by pulling out the mould parts. In that, the elasticity of elastomers enables pulling out of the three internal mould parts. The advantages of this method are: (i) speed - a single casting method with the total production time of approximately one hour per actuator, (ii) quality of the actuators -single-body (no gluing or bonding required), leak-free, and precise (<0.2 mm) actuators, and (iii) a wide range of supported elastomers in terms of viscosity, pot life, and Youngs' modulus. We call the method shortly Quick-cast. We developed this process for two different settings: one for fast prototyping in laboratory conditions with 3d printed moulds and using multi-component pourable elastomers, and the other process in an industrial setting with 3d moulds micromachined in metal and using compression moulding. We demonstrate these methods in fabrication of up to several tens of two-axis, three-chambered FEAs, with two types of chamber walls -cylindrical and corrugated. We tested them in terms of pressuredeflection characteristics and motion repeatability. The actuators are then used as motion drivers in two real-world building-scale prototypes of kinetic photovoltaic envelopes, with 50 modules at ETH Zurich Hoengerberg Campus We developed the Quick-cast manufacturing method from the need to fabricate a large number (>100) of two-axis three-chambered single-body FEAs, called SoRo-Tracks (Fig. We considered two geometries of internal voids: cylindrical and corrugated. The cylindrical is simpler in terms of design complexity and it was the very first intuitive design to test the method. The corrugated design has more complex geometry, offers much more design parameters (e.g. ribs geometry, walls thicknesses), and therefore requires more effort to obtain a well performing actuator. In the design of bending actuators, it is important to maximise the forces acting on bottom and top discs of the actuator and minimise the radial expansion of rubber. This would maximise the bending moment of the actuator. Also, it is preferable that the actuator stays in the linear region of rubber elasticity during inflation as then it allows for implementation of open-loop (sensorless) control, instead of sensor-based closed loop control. In our case, the ribs are very precisely designed in 3d in such a way that the inner ribs have thinner walls than the outer ones, and therefore they unfold to the outside, increasing the distance between the outer ribs. The outer ribs have a rather high thickness preventing overall radial expansion of the chamber, and therefore maximising the bending moment. In this way, we avoid large expansions of the rubber and the corrugated SoRo-Track actuator functions in the linear region (Fig. We defined the following process properties as important for the scalable production in an industrial setting: (i) achieving leak-free actuators, (ii) number of manufacturing steps, (iii) steps complexity, (iv) required gluing / bonding step, (v) total fabrication time, (vi) precision, (vii) supporting wide range of elastomers, and (ix) possibility to base it on an already established industrial process. In the following text we review the state-of-the-art methods in terms of these properties. At macro scale (cm to m), moulding and direct 3d printing of soft materials are the most popular manufacturing techniques, due to the fact that elastomers can be processed as liquids -multi-component elastomers that harden over time, with the pot life from min to hours. A typical moulding technique is a 2d moulding process (a layup process) where a part of the actuator containing the fluid pathways is moulded first, and then it is glued to another, stiffer elastomer or fabric, forming networks of pneumatic channels, PneuNets To overcome the drawbacks of the 2d moulding process, a 3d moulding technique using wax cores has been proposed Besides moulding techniques, direct 3d printing of soft materials offers advanced possibilities, such as varying elastomer parameters across the actuator volume and achieving higher geometrical complexity In terms of manufacturing methods suitable for scalable production, only one method has been proposed in the literature to the best of our knowledge. This process is based on a standard industrial process, rotational casting, where uncured elastomer is casted as a hollow structure in a closed mould We aimed for developing a manufacturing method based on 3d printed moulds as it allows for quick prototyping and testing of soft actuators. After the soft actuator and its mould was modelled in Rhinoceros ® (Step A), it was 3d printed from Nylon on a laser sintering system EOS P396 (Step B). The details of the mould are presented in We mixed the two elastomers in a 3:1 ratio and added 15% of the catalyst (resulting Shore A index 30). After pouring, the mixture was degassed to remove the trapped air-bubbles (Step 2). Then, the curing of elastomer was done in an oven at 75oC for about 20 min (Step 3). This is much faster than curing at the room temperature, which takes several hours. Finally, the mould is disassembled in two steps (Step 4). First, the two parts forming the outer shape of the actuator are taken apart. Second, the inner cores are pulled out of the soft actuator (Fig. A.3 and A.5). Pulling out of the hard cores is possible due to the large elongation at break of elastomers (in this case it is around 500%;; may be up to 1000%, e.g. of EcoflexÔ 00-50 from Smooth-On, Inc.). To allow for easer pulling out of the inner cores, we were slightly inflating the chambers. The total fabrication time of a single actuator, including the mould assembling, takes approximately one hour. To Fig. The Quick-cast method in laboratory conditions was adapted to industrial setting, in order to obtain the industry-quality actuators, with repeatable characteristics over a large number of samples. We found compression moulding to be a suitable process, which allows for both multi-component elastomers (e.g. ELASTOSIL ® M4601 and ELASTOSIL ® VARIO 15/40) and rubbers (e.g. Neoprene and EPDM) to be used. We only tested this method with rubbers. Because of that, the mould is heated up to 350oC and the uncured rubber is injected under pressure into the metal mould (Step 1). After curing at this elevated temperature for 20 minutes (Step 2), the mould is cooled down and taken apart (Step 3). The disassembling of the mould happens in the same way as in the process in laboratory conditions. First, the outer moulds are separated, and then the inner cores are pulled out. As Neoprene has higher hardness (Shore A 35) compared to the hardness of the ELASTOSIL ® VARIO mixture (Shore A 30) that we used in the laboratory conditions, it was much harder to remove the cores from the corrugated actuator. Therefore, we decided to take them out on the other side through a slightly larger opening (radius 4 mm on the top, rather than 1.75 mm on the bottom), and then those small holes were closed actuators made in laboratory from ELASTOSIL ® VARIO 15/40 with the mixture ration 3:1 (resulting hardness Shore A 30). The second batch consists of corrugated actuators manufactured under industrial conditions from Neoprene rubber (hardness Shore A 35). Our goal with these tests is to compare the actuators within each batch among each other to see what degree of performance similarity can be achieved. All the tests were done using the pneumatic control system and inertial measurement unit as orientation sensor, as described in The pressure-deflection behaviour of cylindrical actuators manufactured in laboratory conditions is shown in Fig. Regarding the differences among the actuators within the same batch, we can see that there is a significant spread in the obtained pressure- deflection curves (22%-26% difference in pressure change for 7%-23% in achieved angles). One reason for this is in manual preparation of ELASTOSIL ® VARIO 15/40 mixture for each actuator before pouring. The second reason is in the insufficient precision of the 3d printed nylon mould, hence small offsets in the fixation of the inner cores during mould assembly, as well as a slight bending of the metal rods on which these cores are mounted. These metal rods are rather thin (3 mm stainless steel rod) and they bend during the manual pulling out of the inner cores (Fig. One of the actuators from each batch is randomly chosen for testing the repeatability of motion (Fig. two-axis three-chamberd (SoRo-Track) actuator made of ELASTOSIL ® VARIO in laboratory conditions and of corrugated actuator made of Neoprene in industrial conditions. We tested the manufacturing of SoRo-Track actuator using some the state-of-the-art methods (PneuNets Based on our review of the state-of-the-art methods provided in Section 2.2 and based on the results of our Quick-cast method, we provide the summary of the comparison in Table Overall, our method shows comparable or advanced performance across all features besides one (geometrical complexity of fluidic pathways), where it shows moderate performance. Our method shows advance performance in terms of number of steps (reduction to a single step), precision, and total fabrication time (reduction from one working day to one hour). In terms of the geometrical complexity of fluidic pathways, our process has certain limitations defined by the materials properties and certain geometrical parameters of fluidic pathways. The difference between the radius of the entrance of the fluidic pathways and the maximum radius of the fluidic pathways at any point, should not be larger than the elongation at break of a soft material. Given that the elongation at break of soft materials is in the range of 100% to 1000%, this may not be a critical limitation. The elongation at break is inversely correlated with the elastomer hardness. This means that for stronger soft actuators (with higher elastomer hardness), the elongation at break is getting smaller. A designer of a soft actuator would need to check if the design satisfies this limitation before fabricating the actuator. PneuNets In summary, we demonstrated a new manufacturing method for scalable production of complex, industrial grade FEAs. Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, Quick-cast offers advantages in terms of: (i) speed (total fabrication time of one hour, compared to typical fabrication time of one working day, 8h, of other methods), (ii) quality of the actuator (leak-free, single-body, with < 1 mm precision), and (iii) the range of supported elastomers in terms of viscosity, pot life, and Young's modulus. We developed this process for two different settings: for laboratory conditions with 3d printing moulds for fast prototyping and using multi-component rubbers, and for industrial setting with moulds micromachined in metal and using compression moulding. We showed the application of those methods in the scalable manufacturing of the two-axis, three-chamber FEA actuator SoRo-Track. These actuators are then applied as motion drivers in adaptive solar building facades. We tested two batches of two types of actuators, with cylindrical and corrugated chamber walls, in terms of pressure-deflection and repeatability of motion. The industrial process showed advantages over the laboratory process in terms of repeatable performance over a large number of samples - the pressure-deflection curves overlap very well for 10 actuators, randomly selected from a batch of more than 50. The only potential limitation of our approach is in the maximal achievable geometrical complexity of the fluidic pathways. The difference between the radius of the entrance of the fluidic pathways and the maximum radius of the fluidic pathways at any point, should not be larger than the elongation at break of a soft material. The elongation at break is inversely correlated with the elastomer hardness, which means that for a stronger soft actuator (with higher elastomer hardness), the elongation at break is smaller. Given that the elongation at break of soft materials is in the range of 100% to 1000%, this may not be a critical limitation. In the paper we demonstrate the scalable production of two-axis three-chambered FEA called SoRo-Track. The short manufacturing time of the Quick-cast method here allowed for rapid scalable manufacturing of large number (>100) of these actuators and has enabled the construction of several real-world building-scale prototypes of Adaptive Solar Façades 