The electronic structure of cerium oxide is investigated here using a combination of ab initio one-electron theory and many-body physics, with emphasis on the nature of the 4f electron shell of cerium ions. We propose to use the hybridization function as a convenient measure for the degree of localization of the 4f shell of this material, and observe that changing the oxidation state is related to distinct changes in the hybridization between the 4f shell and ligand states. The theory reveals that CeO 2 has essentially itinerant 4f states, and that in the least oxidized form of ceria, Ce 2 O 3 , the 4f states are almost (but not fully) localized. Most importantly, our model points to that diffusion of oxygen vacancies in cerium oxide may be seen as polaron hopping, involving a correlated 4f electron cloud, which is located primarily on Ce ions of atomic shells surrounding the vacancy. Cerium oxide, or ceria, is a material famous for its ability to easily change oxidation state of Ce ions depending on their local chemical environment. As a result it is a suitable choice for a variety of applications, from oxygen storage in three-way catalytic convertors to fuel cells. Experimental and theoretical research on ceria has been very active for a few decades 1-3 . One of the main theoretical challenges in describing ceria-based materials is the proper description of f-electron orbitals, bands, and their occupation. This has resulted in many publications related to the valence and f-electron configuration However, the results of an optical absorption experiment 4 appeared to impose a limit of at most 0.05 localized f-electrons in CeO 2 favoring a purely f 0 electronic configuration. A problem with reaching a full understanding of the electronic structure of ceria, is that it becomes increasingly difficult to implement more sophisticated approaches to treat both, the most and least oxidized forms of cerium oxides, consistently. It should nevertheless be noted that there are attempts to do it with help of the so-called LDA+U (local density approximation plus Hubbard's onsite Coulomb repulsion U) Majority of the practically useful properties of CeO 2 , the most oxidized form of ceria, which crystallizes in the cubic fluorite structure, are related to the oxygen transport via an oxygen vacancy hopping mechanism. Though the oxygen vacancies in pure stoichiometric CeO 2 are formally absent, they are, of course, present in small amounts in a thermodynamic equilibrium. Further, oxygen vacancies can be introduced in pure ceria and that is in fact an important part of technological applications of ceria. This is done by chemical doping or by changing external oxygen pressure, so the content of oxygen vacancies can be in principle increased up to 25 %. The latter corresponds to the least oxidized state of ceria, Ce 2 O 3 , that can be created on the same fluorite lattice as CeO 2 (the so-called C-form of Ce 2 O 3 ) but whose ground state is another structure with trigonal symmetry. What is most peculiar from the theoretical point of view is the fact that creation/annihilation of oxygen vacancies in ceria is coupled to a purely quantum process of localization/delocalization of the 4f electrons on cerium ions. That has been studied in numerous publications and the relation to technologically important properties of ceria was in particular described in Ref. 17. The description of the electronic structure of ceria with oxygen vacancies and the degree of localization/delocalization of the 4f electrons has been a controversial issue and there are still different points of view (see, for example Ref. 18). Here we study, by density functional calculation in combination with elements from Anderson's impurity model, the local changes in the electronic structure or more precisely in the degree of localization of the 4f state that will occur during the CeO 2 ⇔Ce 2 O 3 transition. We demonstrate that the changes due to vacancy formation are quite long ranged and already a single vacancy (1 out of 64 O atoms in a 96 atom supercell) has significant impact, especially on the Ce neighbors. We also suggest that the physical interpretation of the transition from a delocalized to a fully localized behavior of the 4f shell needs to be modified, and that the 4f states of Ce 2 O 3 have a higher degree of delocalization than it was previously assumed. From the results presented here, a picture also emerges, where diffusion of oxygen vacancies in ceria may be seen as polaron hopping, involving a correlated 4f electron cloud. The electronic structure of the Ce oxides has been obtained from density functional theory employing the full potential linear muffin-tin orbital (FPLMTO) code RSPt. To study the change of the localization of the 4f states in Ce during the transformation from CeO 2 to Ce 2 O 3 and vice versa a 96 atom cubic supercell (2 × 2 × 2 CeO 2 cubic unit cells) with one oxygen vacancy has been used. In case of the supercell the k-point integration has been restricted to the Γ-point and l max was chosen to be 6 due to computational restrictions. However, a comparison between l max 8 and 6 has been made for the primitive CeO 2 cell revealing no significant differences in the results. The geometry for the reference systems has been taken from the ICS data base A measure for the trend in degree of itinerancy can be obtained from Anderson's impurity model, where the hybridization function (∆(E)) stands out since it describes the degree of mixing between the 4f states and ligand orbitals, primarily on oxygen atoms. To be specific, the hybridization function can be calculated from the Dyson equation where G 0 is the site projected Green's function, calculated from density functional theory. H in Eq. 1 corresponds to the hybridization-free impurity Hamiltonian with the quantum impurity energy E QI . We have calculated the hybridization function ∆(E) using the implementation in the RSPt code. A. Comparing CeO 2 and Ce 2 O 3 In a previous big data study Even though the vacancy is a local defect, it influences the whole system. The hybridization function of all Ce atoms in the simulation cell decreases compared to the one for pure CeO 2 , see Fig. We have presented a quantum mechanical analysis of the nature of the 4f states of CeO 2 and Ce 2 O 3 , extracting data typically used in many-body physics, with help of density func-tional theory without any adjustable parameters. In accordance with Ref. 28, we argue that the strength of the hybridization function reveals critical information about the degree of itinerancy versus localization of the 4f shell of these two forms of cerium oxide. We find that for CeO 2 , the large strength of the hybridization correlates with the naturally itinerant electron states of this compound, while for Ce 2 O 3 we find a much weaker hybridization function which is consistent with more localized electron states. However, we find that for this phase of cerium oxide the 4f states are less localized compared to e.g γ-Ce and other Ce systems with well established localized 4f states. 