The performance of kesterite thin-film solar cells is limited by a low open-circuit voltage due to defect-mediated electron-hole recombination. We calculate the non-radiative carrier-capture cross sections and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination coefficients of deep-level point defects in Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 (CZTS) from first-principles. While the oxidation state of Sn is +4 in stoichiometric CZTS, inert lone pair (5s 2 ) formation lowers the oxidation state to +2. The stability of the lone pair suppresses the ionization of certain point defects, inducing charge transition levels deep in the band gap. We find large lattice distortions associated with the lone-pair defect centers due to the difference in ionic radii between Sn(II) and Sn(IV). The combination of a deep trap level and large lattice distortion facilitates efficient non-radiative carrier capture, with capture cross-sections exceeding 10 -12 cm 2 . The results highlight a connection between redox active cations and 'killer' defect centres that form giant carrier traps. This lone pair effect will be relevant to other emerging photovoltaic materials containing ns 2 cations. 1 In a semiconductor subject to above-band-gap illumination, the lifetime of charge carriers is determined by the kinetics of electron-hole recombination processes: radiative, Auger, and trap-assisted recombination. In this work, we argue that defects in semiconductors involving heavy post-transition metals are likely to act as fast non-radiative recombination centers because not only due to their deep nature but also the large lattice distortions that accompany a change in oxidation state. As a representative case, we study the native point defects in CZTS containing multivalent ions of Sn and Cu. Through analysis of carrier capture rates from first-principles, we find that the dominant non-radiative recombination centers (V S , V S -Cu Zn and Sn Zn ) are associated with Sn 5s 2 lone-pair configurations. They produce deep donor levels due to the Sn double reduction, and the recombination processes involve large structure distortions because of the change in the ionic radius of Sn during the carrier capture. We expect to find similar behaviour for other lone pair cations including Bi and Sb. The phenomenon of carrier capture in semiconductors via multiphonon emission has been extensively studied following pioneering work by Huang and Rhys, When an electron is captured, the donor becomes neutral (D 0 ) and relaxes to a new equilibrium geometry by emitting multiple phonons as shown in Fig. Recently, approaches have been developed for first-principles calculations of capture rates within a certain set of approximations. where m α and ∆R α,i are the atomic mass and the displacement along the direction i from the equilibrium position of atom α, respectively. The vibrational wave function of excited (ξ im ) and ground (ξ f n ) states, and associated frequencies ω i and ω f were obtained by solving the one-dimensional Schrödinger equation for potential energy surfaces around the equilibrium geometries. The capture coefficient is given by where V , g and W 2 if are the volume of supercell, the degeneracy factor and the electronphonon coupling matrix element of initial and final states, respectively. w m is the occupation number of the excited vibrational state ξ im , and ∆E corresponds to the difference in energy of excited and ground states. The Coulomb interaction at temperature T between a carrier with charge q and a defect in a charge state Q is accounted by the Sommerfeld factor s ; where k B is the Boltzmann constant. E R = m * q 4 /(2h 2 ε 2 ) is an effective Rydberg energy where m * and ε are an effective mass of the carrier and a low-frequency dielectric constant, Valence band respectively. For an attractive center, Z = Q/q is negative, while Z is positive for a repulsive center. Based on the principle of detailed balance, the steady-state recombination rate R via a defect with electron capture cross section σ n and hole capture cross section σ p is given by 16,17 where Here, n, p and N t denote concentrations of electrons, holes and defects, respectively. n 1 and p 1 represent the densities of electrons and holes, respectively, when the Fermi level is located at the trap level. The thermal velocities of electrons v th,n and holes v th,p are calculated from the effective masses in the electronic band structure. C n and C p are the capture coefficients for electron and hole, respectively. The atomic and electronic structure of defects were calculated from first-principles within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) We calculated the formation energy ∆E f orm (D q ) of a defect D in the charge state q which is given by 32 where E tot (bulk) and E tot (D q ) are the total energies of a bulk supercell and a supercell containing the defect D q , respectively. In the third term on the right-hand side, μ i and n i are the chemical potential and number of atoms i added to the supercell, respectively. E F is the Fermi level, and E corr is a correction term to account for the artificial electrostatic interaction due to periodic boundary conditions. A challenge to achieving high efficiency from kesterite thin-film solar cell is to synthesize homogeneous CZTS without unintentional formation of secondary phases. Under S-poor conditions, which could be realized by annealing in a low sulfur partial pressure, the most dominant native defects are Cu Zn and Zn Cu antisites which are shallow and responsible for the p-type behaviour with a Fermi level close to the valence band (see Fig. Previously, we have shown that V S can act as an efficient non-radiative recombination center in CZTS. In (V S -Cu Zn ) 0 , the electronic wave function is localized around the Sn 5s lone-pair orbital similar to that of V 1+ S (Fig. We further find that optical excitation is not required for hole capture by the V S -Cu Zn complex. As a stronger Coulomb force binds the negatively charged acceptor Cu 1 - Zn , the formation energy difference between Sn(III) and Sn(IV) is reduced in the V S -V Cu complex (Fig. ). Accordingly, the reduced barrier for hole capture facilitates carrier recombination without optical excitation. The subsequent electron capture process will be fast due to the negligible energy barrier (see Fig. Activation by passivation: It has been suggested that donor-acceptor complexes passivate deep donors in kesterite CZTS In Fig. Zn is an order of magnitude higher than that of Sn 2+ Zn (Fig. Under S-rich conditions, the formation of V S and V S -Cu Zn is strongly suppressed (see Fig. The heavy post-transition metals (elements in groups 13, 14, 15 and 16) often exhibit oxidation states two less than the group valency, referred to as the inert-pair effect. The inert-pair effect is explained by the insufficient screening by d 10 electrons resulting in the s 2 lone-pair electrons tightly bound to the ion. Deep defect nature: We find that the inert-pair effect of Sn makes deep defects, consistent with the previous theoretical studies. Large lattice distortion: Sn also produces defects with large distortions during carrier capture. Electron addition or removal from V S , V S -Cu Zn and Sn Zn are followed by the oxidation or reduction of Sn and are therefore accompanied by large structure change. We find, in the Sn-related defects in CZTS, large lattice distortion quantified by Huang-Rhys factor S 1. Emergence of deep defects induced by the formation of lone pairs has also been reported in CIGS. Extrinsic dopants of Bi and Sb are deep in CuInSe 2 due to the lone-pair s 2 states. While Sn reduction captures electrons, in lone-pair compounds whose cations, such as Tl(I), Pb(II) and Bi(III), have occupied s 2 in the stoichiometric structure, the oxidation of cations could capture holes. Several EPR measurements show that Pb(III) is responsible for the hole traps in lead halides. (2) defects with large lattice distortions. The first type can be directly related to the transition metal impurities with partially filled d orbitals (e.g. Ni in GaP). While a simple vacancy center was suggested as a candidate for the second-type, 18 a wide variety of vacancies are not recombination centers in photovoltaic materials (e.g. V Cu is a shallow acceptor in CZTS, and V I is a shallow donor in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 .) Because of the strong interaction between impurities and host materials, it is difficult to find a general trend of the properties of defects in the absence of detailed calculations. On the other hand, we find that the inert lone-pair of Sn is the origin of the large cross-section of an wide range of defects and not significantly altered by a specific configuration or an electronic state of the defect. Thus, we speculate that the inert-pair effect could likely cause killer centers with the ability to act as giant carrier traps in a broad range of semiconductors. Many photovolatic materials with band gaps close to the theoretical optimum of 1.3-1.5 eV The lone-pair effect associated with Sn is responsible for both the deep defect levels and large lattice distortions that facilitate rapid electron-hole recombination in the semiconductor Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 . By employing a first-principles approach to predict the defect levels, concentrations, and capture rates, we can distinguish between active and inactive defect centres. For a material grown under S-poor conditions, V S , V S -Cu Zn and Sn Zn act as dominant recombination centers, while Sn Zn limits the minority carrier lifetime under S-rich conditions. We propose that a similar mechanism could responsible for the low performance of other emerging photovoltaic compounds. We emphasise the need for further experimental and theoretical investigation of defects in semiconductors composed of heavy post-transition metals to further evaluate the general role of the inert-pair effect on the non-radiative electron-hole recombination process.