The non-trivial geometry encoded in the Quantum Mechanical wavefunctions has important consequences for its single-particle as well as many-body dynamics. Yet, our understanding of how the geometry of the single-particle eigenstates are manifest in the characteristics of a many-particle system is still incomplete. Here, we demonstrate how the single-particle Berry curvature modifies the fluxoid quantization of a two dimensional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductor, and discuss the experimental scenarios where this anomalous quantization is expected to be realized. The realization that the Hilbert space of a quantum mechanical system can be endowed with a nontrivial geometry resulted in the discovery of a plethora of novel phenomena both in single-and many-particle quantum systems. The geometric considerations associated with single-particle wavefunctions have led to the discovery and classification of non-interacting topological insulators (TI's) In this Letter, we demonstrate a clear connection between the non-trivial geometry of a two-dimensional (2D) single-particle band structure and the response properties of a weakly interacting system. To this end, we consider a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductor The fluxoid quantization originates from the fact that deep inside a bulk superconductor, the overall phase of the order parameter is constant. In conventional superconductors, this overall phase has contributions from two sources: the external electromagnetic vector potential and the U (1) phase of the order parameter. Hence, the fluxoid quantization can be understood as the total screening of the electromagnetic vector potential by the phase of the order parameter field We consider the simplest model for a 2D normal state which has a rotationally symmetric dispersion and a nontrivial Berry flux enclosed by the Fermi surface. The Hamiltonian for the massive Dirac model is where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the vector of Pauli matrices, 1 is the identity matrix, and f † i,k (f i,k ) are the creation (annihilation) operators for particles with momentum k and spin or pseudo-spin label i. In the following, we let |c(k) and |v(k) denote the eigenvectors of H 0 (k), which correspond to conduction and valence bands, respectively. The single-particle Hamiltonian is parametrized by (i) , with 2δ characterizing the minimum energy gap between the conduction and valence bands, (ii) the Fermi velocity v F , which is taken to be unity for the rest of the Letter, and (iii) the chemical potential μ, which we set to lie in the conduction band. We note that the single-particle Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The massive Dirac model in Eq. (1) exhibits non-trivial geometry for both the conduction and valence band. The non-trivial geometry can be understood as a result of the the Berry connection at momentum k where θ k ≡ arccos δ √ δ 2 +k 2 and e φ is the unit vector in the azimuthal direction. Most importantly for this work, the where k F denotes the Fermi momentum. The normal state described by the Eq. ( where V n,m k1,k2,k3,k4 < 0 for all {k i }, and V n,m k1,k2,k3,k4 ∝ δ k1+k2,k3+k4 ensures momentum conservation. For BCS superconductivity, the only relevant degrees of freedom are th zero momentum Cooper pairs consisting electrons on the conduction band Fermi surface where here φ k is the azimuthal angle of the k. In the context of our work, the most remarkable feature of the projected interaction in Eq. ( ) , are redistributed with respect to the coefficients V (l) kF of the bare interaction. For example, in the massive Dirac model in Eq. ( where we used the constraints (V nn kF ) (l) = 0 and U (l) kF = 0 for even l arising from the fermionic anti-commutation relations obeyed by operators f m,k , f † m,k and c k , c † k , respectively. In general, when the bare interaction potential has multiple partial wave components, the coefficients The redistribution of the partial-wave components can be understood as a direct consequence of the non-trivial Berry phase inclosed in the single-particle Fermi surface. Eq. ( where |0 is the electronic vacuum of the conduction band. The BCS ansatz parametrizes the expectation value of the Cooper pair BCS|c Given the BCS gap equation ∆ k = k U kk F k , the expectation value F k can be written as | under the constraint that the Cooper pair wavefunction in a given (pseudo-) spin representation is anti-symmetric. Naively, one could conclude from the above discussion that the expectation value of the many-body angular momentum operator is l 0 n c , where we defined the number of condensed pairs as n c ≡ k F k . However, a more careful calculation shows that this conclusion is incorrect in the presence of the non-trivial Berry curvature. The expectation value of the relative angular momentum operator is (see Supplementary Material) We observe that the expectation value of the angular momentum operator is shifted with respect to the naive guess above by twice the angular momentum associated with φ B (k F ) in Eq. ( Equivalently, the angular momentum of the Cooper pair is given by the eigenvalue of the covariant derivative in momentum space, D φ = -i∂ φ + 2φB(kF) 2π . This result can be intuitively understood by considering the analogy between the single-particle wavefunctions on the Fermi surface enclosing the Berry flux φ B , and the wavefunctions of a particle on a ring which encloses a magnetic flux Φ Mag (see Fig. What are the physical effects of the fractional angular momentum expectation value of the Cooper pairs? We show that one interesting consequence of the fractional angular momentum is its effect on the orbital currents. We calculate the orbital current contribution in the Ginzburg Landau (GL) free energy from the microscopic model using the formalism of functional integrals (Supplementary Material) where ρ s ≡ |∆| 2 is the superfluid density for an isotropic superconductor, m * is the mass of the Cooper pair, A e.m. (R) is the electromagnetic vector potential, and θ(R) is the U (1) phase of the order parameter. We omit the k F dependence of the Berry flux for simplicity. Taking the variation of the free energy with respect to A e.m. , we find that the supercurrent including the effect of a variation in the relative orientation of the Cooper pair is While the first and the second term in the above expression can be attributed to the charge and mass currents in a conventional superconductor, respectively, the third term contains the effect of the Berry flux enclosed in the Fermi surface. We note that because the normal state has a rotationally symmetric (isotropic) Fermi surface, the energy associated with the orbital currents goes to zero for configurations where the wavelength of the variation is taken to infinity. The form of the orbital current contribution in Eq. ( where C denotes a path around the vortex core, and we assumed that the distance between any point on C and the vortex core is much larger than the effective London penetration length where p, q ∈ Z denote the winding numbers of the U (1) phase and the orientation angle φ k of the Cooper pairs along the contour, respectively. The minimal magnetic flux Φ min enclosed in the vortex core in a superconductor on a band with non-trivial Berry curvature is given by setting q = 1 and p = -l 0 : Given that 2φ B can be interpreted as the Aharanov-Bohm phase acquired by the Cooper pair wavefunction as the orientation of the pair is adiabatically rotated by 2π, the configuration with q = 1 corresponds to a vortex with fractional flux quantum Φ min that is stable due the screening of the electromagnetic field by the Aharanov-Bohm phase [see Fig. where I c is the critical current of each junction and φ j denotes the phase difference between the two sides of the j th Josephson junction. When the thickness of the superconducting regions connecting the two Josephson junctions is much larger then the penetration length, we can define a contour C for which Eq. ( where the winding numbers p, q ∈ Z have the same meaning as in Eq. Maximizing the driving current, we obtain where we neglected the self-inductance of the superconducting loop (i.e., Φ = Φ ext ). The value of the winding number q in Eq. ( The effects discussed above will also be present if each electron comprising the Cooper pair can be described by a separate massive Dirac Hamiltonian with the same Berry flux enclosed by each Fermi surface. Such systems include (v) a graphene monolayer on a hexagonal anti-ferromagnetic substrate For systems (i), (ii), and (v) above, the effects discussed above can be in principle observed by inducing a superconducting gap via proximity effect to a conventional s-wave superconductor. However, this strategy is not viable for systems which do not break timereversal (TR) symmetry [(iii) and (iv)] since proximity effect only allows pairing between zero total momentum Cooper pairs, and the K and -K valleys in (iii) and (iv) carry opposite Berry curvature. Consequently, the superconducting gap in (iii) and (iv) should be opened via intrinsic attractive In conclusion, we have demonstrated a direct relation between a non-trivial single-particle Berry phase and the modification of the fluxoid quantization in a BCS superconductor. A natural extension of our treatment is to include the effects of anisotropy and disorder. We also emphasize that our approach to combine the projected many-body position operators and with a mean field ansatz can be applied to other weakly correlated systems consisting of excitons 