A novel concept of membrane process in thermal-driven system is proposed for water desalination. By means of molecular dynamics simulations, we show fast water transport through graphene galleries at a temperature gradient. Water molecules are driven to migrate through nanometer-wide graphene channels from cold reservoir to hot reservoir by the effect of thermal creep flow. Reducing the interlayer spacing to 6.5 Å, an abrupt escalation occurs in water permeation between angstrom-distance graphene slabs. The change from disordered bulklike water to quasi-square structure have been found under this extremely confined condition. This leads to a transition to subcontinuum transport. Water molecules perform collective diffusion behaviors inside graphene channels. The special transport processes with structure change convert thermal energy into motion without dissipation, resulting in unexpected high water permeability. The thermal-driven system reaches maximum flowrate at temperature variance of 80 K, corresponding to the quantity at pressure difference up to 10 5 bar in commercial reverse osmosis processes and 230 bar in pressure-driven slip flow. Our results also reveal the movement of saline ions influenced by thermophoretic effect, which complement the geometry limitation at greater layer spacing, enhancing the blockage of ions. This finding aims to provide an innovational idea of developing a high-efficiency desalination technology able to utilize various forms of energy. The shortage of water resources have been highly severe in recent years due to ever-increasing global population, rapid industrialization and expanding urbanization. Nowadays, the blooming of advanced materials in nanoscale applied in desalination brings many chances to get out of the dilemma. In the present work, we propose a new concept of membrane process for water desalination in thermal-driven system, through performing molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. It may help to develop an innovative method for high-efficiency desalination, which is able to utilize various forms of energy. The molecular structure is shown in Figure Here, j, η, ρ, and Ts is the internal degree of freedom, viscosity, density, and temperature of fluid molecules, respectively. We consider the averaged velocity um along the whole channel to assess the comprehensive thermal creep flow, which is defined as: Here, L is the length of the channel and T0 is the temperature of the channel entrance. The explanations of thermal creep flow in detail have been expounded in Supplementary Information Section 1 (Figure To elucidate the thermal-driven creep flow inner graphene channel, a passage with d-spacing of 12 Å is investigated through the thermostatic system, with cold reservoir at 293 K and hot reservoir at 323 K. Figure To give a further insight into the flow characteristics, we investigate the thermal creep flowrate at different temperature gradient by setting series of temperature difference from 40 K to 80 K (Figure shows distinctive flow characteristics compared to others. The flowrate through the narrowest graphene channel greatly exceeds that beyond 6.5 Å and it increases linearly without decays even at larger temperature difference. All above prove that the thermal creep flow is strongly related to the spacing inner graphene channels, and it is important to figure out the size effects on water flowrate. In graphene channels with d-spacing larger than 9 Å, where a continuum description of mainstream flow is still valid, we found that the flowrate monotonically decreases with increasing layer spacing (Figure Å, which suggests a transition to subcontinuum transport (Figure When the layer distance dwindle to the extent which only can hold mono-layer water molecules, the structure of water shows significant difference compared to others. The first peak of g(O-O) curves in dspacing of 6.5 Å is much higher than that beyond, and another peak occurs after the first peak. As portrayed in the snapshots of Figure What's more, the collective diffusion behaviors do not predominate in x direction through the surpassing diffusion coefficient in y direction beyond 310 K (Figure indicate that the ordered quasi-square structure is sensitive to temperature, and it gets collection at low temperature while collapse at high temperature. In the thermal-driven system with ΔT = 30 K, water Thermophoretic effect on ions. In pressure-driven system, ions filtration is usually dependent on the geometry designation of pores or channels on membranes, which should be smaller than the size of hydrated ions. The hydration radii of some monovalent salt ions (like Na + and K + ) are always at subnanometer, so most 2D materials have to downsize the d-spacing between laminations at the value not exceeding 0.8 nm to obtain an acceptable salt rejection. Saline water can be considered as the fluid mixture of several large particles (hydrated ions) around many tiny particles (water molecules). When the system is exerted in a temperature gradient, the large particles receive imbalanced collisions from tiny particles in hot sides and cold sides with different momentum. The comprehensive result is a thermophoretic force applied to large particles (saline ions), which get a drift along the negative temperature gradient. It is reverse to the direction of water flow. Thus, there is an additional thermophoretic effect to help impeded ions besides geometry filtration in thermal-driven system. To explicitly indicate the dynamic motion of ions affected only by thermophoretic force, we construct the saline water reservoir at the same ionic concentration. For graphene channel with layer distance of 6.5 Å, smaller than size of hydrated ions, it presents the ability of blocking saline ions absolutely (Figure As for larger d-spacing of 12 Å, the ionic concentrations of Na + and Cl -declines in hot reservoir (permeation side), and in contrast, those increase in cold reservoir (feeding side) during the whole process of thermal-driven flow. It proves that water in hot reservoir can be purified even on the weak effect of geometry. To explore the motions of ions inner graphene channel, we track the trajectories of some representative ions for 10 ns. It can be seen that ions hesitate in the gallery and finally migrate from hot reservoir to cold reservoir. It is because that two external forces, viscous stress by relative shift of water flow and thermophoretic force by temperature gradient, are both exerted to saline ions. At temperature difference corresponding to 30 K, the major factor is the thermophoretic effect, resulting in the ionic motion from hot side to cold side. Comparisons with pressure-driven flow. Finally, we make a comparison of water flowrate between thermal-driven system and pressure-driven system. According to MD results, graphene channels under temperature gradient exhibit remarkable permeability of water molecules, with a flowrate of 732 ~ 18402 L/cm 2 /day. This quantity corresponds to the infiltration capacity of existing commercial membranes at the pressure difference of 10 4 to 10 5 bar, as shown in the blue arrows of Figure All we have done is to provide a new idea of developing a high-efficiency desalination technology able to utilize various forms of energy. Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Molecular model is shown in Figure Period boundary conditions are utilized in the in-plane x and y directions. In z direction, both sides of system are bounded by rigid pistons to apply pressure with same value and opposite direction. It aims to guarantee the water molecules totally entrance into the channel between graphene lamellas. Each saline water reservoir contains 4000 water molecules and 40 pair of Na + and Cl -(with the concentration of 0.56 M). The two graphene laminates in channel have the width of 3 nm in y directions, and we consider five sets of interlayer spacing between two laminates, corresponding to 6.5 Å, 9 Å, 12 Å, 17 Å, and 22 Å. Simulations are firstly performed in the NVT ensemble lasting 500 ps for relaxation. After that, the system is switched to the NVE ensemble, and two specific regions at the opposite ends are thermostatic to perform a temperature gradient through the whole system. To avoid the spurious effect on water molecules entering into the channel, the thermostatic regions are set to begin at the position 4 nm away from the channel entrance, till the edge of the simulated box. The temperature differences between hot and cold reservoirs range from 30 K to 80 K at interval of 10 K, within the limits of 280 K to 350 K. Langevin thermostat is utilized to control the temperature of hot and cold water reservoir in our simulations. The time step to integrate the equation of motion is 0.5 fs. Simulations of thermal-driven flow are implemented after equilibration at average temperature of cold water and hot water using the Nosé-Hoover thermostat with a damping time constant of 50 fs. The number of water molecules and ions from two reservoirs are recorded every 5 ps to get converged results, and last for a sufficiently long time (20 ns) for data collection. The rigid simple point charge effective pair (SPC/E) model is used to describe the potential of water molecules. The interactions between water molecules and carbon atoms in graphene is considered as parameters σc-o = 0.319 nm and εc-o = 4.063 meV, which predicts a water contact angle for graphene corresponding to the value measured experimentally. The van der Waals interactions are truncated at 1.2 nm, and the long-range Coulomb interactions are computed by utilizing the particle-particle particle-mesh (PPPM) algorithm. All potential parameters are given in Table All MD simulations are employed using the large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator (LAMMPS) package The temperature field plays a significant role in flow for large Knudsen numbers, which is defined as the ratio of the molecular mean free path λ and the characteristic length of the flow L, to characterize the degree of rarefaction. According to the rarified gas theory, a net flow can be induced along a temperature gradient on a diffusely reflecting wall. It is known as thermal creep flow. To analyze the problem in a simplified picture in Figure the velocity u is dependent on the molecular temperature near the surface, which is related to the position in channel along temperature gradient. Thus, the averaged velocity um is introduced to assess the comprehensive effects on the thermal creep flow, defined as: 