Nonreciprocal microwave devices play several critical roles in high-fidelity, quantum-nondemolition (QND) measurement schemes. They separate input from output, impose unidirectional routing of readout signals, and protect the quantum systems from unwanted noise originated by the output chain. However, state-of-the-art, cryogenic circulators and isolators are disadvantageous in scalable superconducting quantum processors because they use magnetic materials and strong magnetic fields. Here, we realize an active isolator formed by coupling two nondegenerate Josephson mixers in an interferometric scheme. Nonreciprocity is generated by applying a phase gradient between the same-frequency pumps feeding the Josephson mixers, which play the role of the magnetic field in a Faraday medium. To demonstrate the applicability of this Josephson-based isolator for quantum measurements, we incorporate it into the output line of a superconducting qubit, coupled to a fast resonator and a Purcell filter. We also utilize a wideband, superconducting directional coupler for coupling the readout signals into and out of the qubit-resonator system and a quantumlimited Josephson amplifier for boosting the readout fidelity. By using this novel quantum setup, we demonstrate fast, high-fidelity, QND measurements of the qubit while providing more than 20 dB of protection against amplified noise reflected off the Josephson amplifier. The capability to perform fast, high-fidelity, singleshot, quantum nondemolotion (QND) measurement of qubits is a critical requirement for the operation of quantum computers In response to the immense challenge of eliminating these magnetic-based nonreciprocal devices, which severely hinder the scalability of superconducting quantum processors, a wide variety of viable alternative nonreciprocal schemes have been proposed and realized recently . Examples of these schemes include: Josephson traveling-wave parametric amplifiers Here, we introduce a new Josephson-based isolator, which is devoid of magnetic materials and strong magnets. The new device is fully compatible with superconducting circuits and can be integrated on chip. It breaks reciprocity by generating artificial gauge-invariant potential for microwave photons by parametrically modulating the inductive coupling between two modes of the system and achieves unidirectional transmission of prop-agating signals by creating constructive and destructive wave-interference between different paths in the device. The new isolator has two key differences, compared to other Josephson-based, microwave-controlled circulators realized recently Furthermore, here we take the additional crucial step of putting the new isolation scheme to the test in a quantum setup. More specifically, we couple it to a superconducting qubit in a fast, high-fidelity measurement setup and demonstrate that indeed it provides active protection to the qubit against unwanted noise coming from the output chain. Results Nonreciprocity mechanism. To elucidate the basic idea behind the reciprocity-breaking mechanism of the new isolator, we qualitatively compare in Fig. The MPIJIS relies, in contrast, on different physics. In Fig. The device. The MPIJIS realized in this work is shown in Fig. The transmission amplitude varies between 0 (no conversion) and 1 (full conversion). Since this process is unitary, the reflection and transmission amplitudes satisfy the condition |r| 2 + |t| 2 = 1. Another crucial property exhibited by H 3wave is the pump-phase-dependent nonreciprocal phase shift imprinted on signals undergoing upconversion from mode a to b (φ p ) versus downconversion from b to a (-φ p ). This nonreciprocal phase shift is outlined in Fig. the two JPCs, ±φ, where φ ≡ φ 1 -φ 2 is the phase gradient between the two pumps feeding the two mixers and reflection parameters, In the special case in which the JPCs are operated in the 50 : 50 beam splitter point, i.e., t = 1/ √ 2, and the applied pump phase difference is φ = -π/2, we obtain, by substituting in Eqs. (1), (2), total isolation of signals transmitted from port 2 to 1, S 12 = 0, and vanishing reflections off ports 1 and 2, S 11 = S 22 = 0. Whereas, for signals transmitted from port 1 to 2, we obtain almost unity transmission |S 21 | = 2 √ 2/3 0.94, which is equivalent to about 0.5 dB loss in signal power. A detailed calculation of the scattering matrix of the MPIJIS as well as key measurement results are presented in the Methods section. It is worth noting that the same isolator circuit presented in Fig. ferometric nonreciprocal devices, relates to the mode of operation of the coupled JPCs. Here, the JPCs are operated in the frequency conversion mode with no photon gain It is also worth noting that the dual purpose of the present device, i.e., it can be operated as a directional amplifier or isolator by changing the pump frequency, amplitude, and phase is similar to other nonreciprocal Josephson devices reported recently aging can be found in the Methods section. Following the directional coupler, which transmits the output readout signal with minimal attenuation, we incorporate the MPIJIS and a quantum-limited Josephson amplifier (i.e., JPC), separated by a cryogenic circulator. The circulator is crucial, in this case, for three reasons: (1) it separates the weak readout signal input on the JPC from the am-plified reflected output signal; (2) it preserves, to a large extent, the readout fidelity of the output signal due to its relatively low insertion loss (< 1 dB); and (3) it partially protects the qubit (by about 15 -18 dB) against vacuum noise amplified in reflection by the JPC. Qubit measurements. Figure To quantify the backaction effect on T 2E corresponding to the different configurations, we note that because 1/T 2E = 1/2T 1 + 1/T φ and T 2E < 2T 1 , it follows that, in our case, the qubit coherence time is limited by dephasing, where T φ is the dephasing time. One dominant dephasing mechanism in a qubit-resonator system operating in the dispersive coupling regime, such as ours, is photon shot noise in the resonator mode, which causes the qubit frequency to fluctuate due to the AC Stark effect Based on the results of Fig. In conclusion, we have introduced and realized a new isolator device, which does not rely on magnetic materials or strong magnetic fields and is fully compatible with superconducting quantum circuits. The new isolator is comprised of two coupled, nondegenerate, threewave Josephson mixers embedded in an interferometric scheme. The nonreciprocal response of the device is controlled by the phase gradient of the same-frequency mi-crowave drives feeding the two Josephson mixers. Such a microwave-signal control could enable fast switching of the isolation direction on the fly with a time scale on the order of 15 ns, which is mainly limited by the inverse dynamical bandwidth of the device. The realized isolator exhibits isolation in excess of 20 dB, a dynamical bandwidth of 11 MHz, insertion loss of about -1.8 dB in the forward direction, signal-power reflections off its input and output ports below -10 dB, and a maximum input power of -108 dBm. Furthermore, we have validated the applicability of this isolation scheme for quantum measurements by incorporating it into a superconducting qubit measurement setup, which includes a transmon coupled to a fast cavity, Purcell-filter, custom-made, broadband, superconducting directional coupler, and a quantum-limited, Josephson parametric amplifier. Using this novel setup, we have demonstrated fast, single-shot, high-fidelity, QND measurements of the quantum state while providing active protection of the qubit against amplified noise originated by the Josephson parametric amplifier. Owing to its numerous desired properties, an optimized version of this Josephson isolator may play a pivotal role in scalable quantum architectures. Methods MPIJIS theory. To calculate the scattering parameters of the MPIJIS and demonstrate its isolation operation, we use the effective signal-flow graph exhibited in Fig. where 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 is a dimensionless pump amplitude. The lower bound ρ = 0 corresponds to the case of no applied pump in which the JPC is off and acts as a perfect mirror, whereas the upper bound ρ = 1 corresponds to the case of full frequency conversion mode between ports a and b. By inspection where φ ≡ φ 1 -φ 2 . As we show below, it is this phase difference between the modulation phases of the two pumps feeding the two parametric active devices (i.e., the JPCs), which induces the nonreciprocal response of the MPIJIS phase acquired by signals at frequency f 2 , propagating along the short transmission line between the two JPCs, is 2πk in each direction, where k is an integer. In our device, the electrical length of the short transmission line is designed to give a phase of about 2π at f 2 . It is straightforward to verify that the scattering matrix of Eq. ( Next, we derive the scattering matrix for the whole device, defined by ports 1, 2, 3, 4, which take into account the signal flow through the 90 whose matrix elements are given by, ( Note that [S] is unitary because [s] is unitary and the 90 • hybrid is a unitary device. One prominent property seen from Eqs. ( By substituting the scattering parameters of the inner device listed in Eq. ( where φ s ≡ φ 1 + φ 2 . In what follows, we examine a few special cases of interest and outline a few important properties of the device. Without applied pump, i.e., t = 0, the MPIJIS scattering matrix reduces into This result shows that when the device is off, the MPI-JIS is transparent for propagating signals and effectively behaves as a lossless transmission line with an added reciprocal phase shift of π/2 for transmitted signals within the bandwidth of the 90 • hybrid. In the special case, where the MPIJIS is on and the phase difference between the pumps is φ = -π/2, the scattering matrix can be written in the form where Σ ≡ g + h, ∆ ≡ g -h, and Frequency (GHz) In the derivation of Eq. ( When α = β = 1/ √ 2, φ = -π/2, and the JPCs are biased at the 50 : 50 beam splitter working point, the MPIJIS scattering matrix becomes A graphical representation of the scattering parameters of Eq. ( where χ s are the bare response functions of modes a and b (whose inverses depend linearly on f 1 and f 2 ): The measurement is taken using a spectrum analyzer over a broad frequency range 1 -11 GHz. The black (blue) curve represents the spectrum measured at the output of the MPI-JIS port, while the MPIJIS is off (on). The blue curve is measured while operating the MPIJIS at the same working point as in Fig. Ground board Interposer Cutout FIG. Since the applied pump frequency satisfies the relations b of Eq. ( Obviously, this generalization holds under the assumption that the bandwidth of the 90 • hybrid is much larger than the dynamical bandwidths of the JPCs, which is generally the case because transmission-line-based hybrids exhibit bandwidths of a few hundreds of megahertz In Fig. where the last equality holds because the scattering matrix is unitary and S 22 = 0. We also assume here that the dominant noise entering the system is vacuum noise. Using these relations, we obtain for the noise factor NF = (S 2 /N 2 )/(S 1 /N 1 ) = |S 21 | 2 . Alternatively, NF can be expressed in terms of the number of noise-equivalent photons added by the MPIJIS to the input n add , where Characterization measurements of the MPIJIS. In Figure and |S 22 | 2 , respectively. When the MPIJIS is off, both transmission parameters are close to unity (≈ 0 dB) and the reflection parameters are suppressed (below -10 dB), which is consistent with the MPIJIS being transparent for transmitted signals between ports 1 and 2 in the off state. When the MPIJIS is operated in the forward direction (Fig. Furthermore, we measure the maximum input power which the MPIJIS can handle on resonance at a given isolation (e.g., 20 dB), above which it saturates. The measurement result taken for the MPIJIS operated in the backward direction (same working point as Fig. Finally, we present in Fig. The directional coupler chip is fabricated with a singlelayer optical lithography process using sputter-deposited Nb metal on a 3-inch, high-resistivity, float zone silicon substrate. Native oxide is removed from the substrate in situ with an Ar plasma immediately prior to deposition. The photoresist mask is then patterned on the surface of the Nb and the coplanar gaps are etched with SF 6 plasma using laser-reflection endpoint detection. The photoresist mask is stripped in hot solvents. Finally, a protective coat of resist is applied before the wafer is diced into dies. The Purcell filter is implemented using a SF 6 subtractive dry etch of 200 nm thick niobium sputtered on a 4 × 10 mm 2 sapphire substrate. IARPA under contract W911NF-10-1-0324, and to the development of the pogo-pin packaging by IARPA under contract W911NF-16-1-0114-FE. Contribution of the U.S. Government, not subject to copyright. Author Contributions B.A. designed the isolator device, performed the experiment, and analyzed the data. N.B. designed the Purcell filter and the PCBs, O.J. designed the device package, coils and mounting brack-ets, S.O. designed and simulated the directional coupler, A.D.C. assembled the qubit measurement setup, M.B., V.P.A., R.E.L. fabricated the devices, X.W. performed preliminary characterization of the directional couplers, D.P.P. designed and provided the package for the directional coupler, J.M.C. supervised the project. B.A. wrote the paper with input and contributions from the other authors.