High-temperature electrolysis (HTE) is a promising technology for achieving high-efficiency power-to-gas, which mitigates the renewable curtailment while promoting decarbonization by transforming wind or solar energy into fuels. Different from low-temperature electrolysis, a considerable amount of the input energy is consumed by auxiliary equipment in an HTE system for maintaining the temperature, so the studies on systematic energy description and parameter optimization of HTE are essentially required. A few published studies investigated HTE's systematic optimization based on simulation, yet there is not a commonly used analytical optimization model which is more suitable for integration with power grid. To fill in this blank, a concise analytical operation model is proposed in this paper to coordinate the necessary power consumptions of auxiliaries under various loading conditions of an HTE system. First, this paper develops a comprehensive energy flow model for an HTE system based on the fundamentals extracted from the existing work, providing a quantitative description of the impacts of condition parameters, including the temperature and the feedstock flow rates. A concise operation model is then analytically proposed to search for the optimal operating states that maximize the hydrogen yield while meeting the desired system loading power by coordinating the temperature, the feedstock flows and the electrolysis current. The evaluation of system performance and the consideration of constraints caused by energy balances and necessary stack requirements are both included. In addition, analytical optimality conditions are obtained to locate the optimal operating states without performing nonlinear programming by further investigating the optimization method. In the case study, a numerical case of an HTE system is employed to validate the proposed operation model and optimization method, 1 Faraday constant G T, p Molar Gibbs free energy at condition (T, p) The integration of renewable generation sources is faced with formidable challenges because of their undesirable intermittence caused by uncontrollable factors Plenty of studies on P2G's operation and dispatch in the energy supply system have been conducted, such as As mentioned before, a full investigation inside the HTE system is required for its further implementation in existing power systems and its integration with renewable energy facilities. The fundamentals of this topic are internal characteristics of HTE stack, such as electrolysis theories, cell models and stack configurations. These points have long been well supported by many published works. A one-dimensional HTE model considering overvoltages and internal balances was developed by Based on the fundamental model of HTE stack, some studies further discussed the parameter impacts and optimization on the stack performance. Reference For low-temperature electrolysis, the operation analyses of cells or stacks may also work in terms of system operation. Unfortunately, this is not true for HTE systems due to the nonignorable power consumptions of auxiliaries. That is to say, the studies aimed at systematic energy description and parameter optimization beyond stack are also essentially required for HTE systems. The problem is that there exist trade-offs in selecting operating parameters between the favors of stack and auxiliaries: Pursuing higher stack performance with higher temperature and larger feed flow rates leads to higher energy consumption in auxiliaries inevitably. Despite the extensive research conducting modeling, experiments and parametric analyses at the level of HTE cells or stacks, there are only a few studies of systematic modeling and optimization at HTE system level, where the coordination of auxiliaries' power consumptions based on system efficiency must be considered. Based on an HTE system model calibrated by cell experiments, reference Nevertheless, the above studies for HTE system optimization were usually based on a complex simulation model with plenty of equations and professional softwares. Compared with such approaches of simulation model, an analytical optimization model of the HTE system has the following advantages: 1) The physical constraints can be interpreted concisely and explicitly, which is beneficial to an intuitive understanding. 2) The results and conclusions obtained analytically can be more generic than those drawn from a simulation case. 3) It can be easily developed into an integration model for an HTE system to participate the power grid analysis and operation as a P2G node. To the best knowledge of the authors, however, there is not an analytical model that is commonly used to optimize HTE system performance with comprehensive coordination of auxiliaries in the published literature. On purpose of realizing the aforementioned advantages, an analytical operation model of the HTE system that includes various auxiliaries is concisely developed in this paper from a generic energy flow model to maximize the hydrogen production. Moreover, a discussion of the optimal operating states at various system loading powers, including the maximum production point (MPP) and submaximum production point (SMPP), is also presented. Both the operation model and the optimization principles are validated with a numerical example. This paper will hopefully offer theoretical instructions for the local control of HTE systems and provide a foundation for the integrated modeling and analysis of P2G nodes in the power grid with high renewable penetration. In summary, this paper makes the following main contributions: 1) By introducing the feed factors, an HTE system energy flow model is proposed to formulate the system efficiency and the operating constraints, providing a basis for the coordination of temperature and feed factors with electrolysis current. 2) A concise operation model (37) of the HTE system is then presented to solve the trade-offs of temperature and feed factors to obtain the optimal operating states (SMPP and MPP), where the maximum hydrogen production given a desired system loading power can be achieved and the system capacity is simultaneously extended. 3) An optimization method based on optimality conditions is analytically investigated for SMPP and MPP searching to avoid nonlinear programming. Based on the fundamentals, such as typical system structures and classical electrochemical theories, this section introduces the challenge of selecting appropriate state parameters to operate an HTE system safely and efficiently. The general structure of an HTE system is illustrated in Fig. The HTE stack is typically formed by connecting a number of HTE cells in series, each with tens of channels on the side.The typical structure of a single planar coflow HTE cell is shown in Fig. The overall electrolysis reaction is well known as whose molar enthalpy increase ∆ r H T can be expressed by where ∆ r G T, p and ∆ r S T, p are the molar changes of Gibbs free energy and entropy of reaction where U th is approximately 1.48V at 25 • C and 1.29V at 800 • C. Here n e = 2 is the number of moles of electron exchanges of reaction (1), and F is Faraday constant. The HTE cell releases excess heat during operation when U cel > U th , works only with an external heat source when U rev < U cel < U th , and does not perform electrolysis when U cel < U rev . In addition to U rev , which provides the necessary Gibbs free energy, additional overvoltages are required for practical electrolysis to overcome kinetic barriers These additional overvoltages U act , U con and U ohm are called activation overvoltage, concentration overvoltage and ohmic overvoltage, respectively. According to the Nernst equation, U rev can be further formulated as (5) where R is the molar gas constant, and the expansion of U rev (T ) is included as (A.5) in Appendix A. The activation overvoltage U act denotes the desired voltage to meet the activation energy at both electrodes, which is generally described by the Butler-Volmer equation where i el is the local value of the electrolysis current density, and i ex,ca (or i ex,an ) is the cathode (or anode) exchange current density calculated by (6b) from the corresponding pre-exponential factor Γ ex,ca (or Γ ex,an ) and activation energy ξ ca (or ξ an ). The concentration overvoltage U con reflects the voltage compensation of U rev due to the concentration losses during the component diffusion between the TPB and channel bulk p H2O p H2O,TPB p 0.5 O2,TPB p 0.5 O2 where σ ele , σ ca and σ an are electrical conductivities of electrolyte, cathode and anode, while L z,ele , L z,ca and L z,an are their geometric thicknesses, as shown in Fig. The steady-state performance of a given HTE cell depends on the electrolysis current density i el , the temperature T and the feedstock partial pressures p according to (4)- The selection problem of an HTE system's temperature and feed flows is illustrated in Fig. There has to be an operating state in these trade-offs that optimizes the system hydrogen production. A comprehensive system model that quantitatively describes the system performance and the operating constraints in terms of temperature and feed flows is required to locate the optimal HTE operating states. With the purpose of performing quantitative parameter analysis at the system level, this section proposes an energy flow model that explicitly describes the power sources and sinks of a steady-state operating HTE system and the constraints among them with primary state parameters, including the temperature and the feed flows, as illustrated in Fig. The macroscopic energy balance equation given by First, regarding the furnace as the object volume (shown as Object 1 in Fig. Here, h( w, p, T ) denotes the specific enthalpy of the mixture flowing in the furnace, which can be calculated with h ca = mix ca (H T ) and h an = mix an (H T ). The first term on the right side of ( The second term is the net outflow of enthalpy of the gas mixture, whose enthalpy increase is partially (P rea ) caused by the chemical reaction of (1) and partially (P war ) by gas warming. P dis denotes the net dissipation of heat by means of conduction and radiation. The power sources (P fur and P el ) and sinks (P kin , P rea , P war and P dis ) listed above are depicted for Object 1 in 4. Second, regarding the preprocessing part as the object volume (shown as Object 2 in Fig. Analogously, the energy sinks of Object 2 include kinetic energy increase P kin,pre and non-convective heat dissipation P dis,pre , and the enthalpy increase consists of two parts: the vaporization-induced part (P vap ) and the warming-induced part (P war,pre ). The power sources (P pum and P pre ) and sinks (P kin,pre , P vap , P war,pre and P dis,pre ) listed above are depicted for Object 2 in 4. Equations ( To present an explicit energy flow model that provides the required efficiency evaluation and operating constraints for later optimization analysis, further formulations and break-downs ( The reactants' partial pressures p have noticeable impacts on U cel , as shown in ( O 2 generated by electrolysis at where w ca,s1 (or w an,s1 ) denotes the mass flow rate of cathode (or anode) gas mixture at furnace inlet (position l s1 ), and ω H2O,s1 (or ω O2,s1 ) represents the mass fraction of H 2 O in stream w ca,s1 (or O 2 in stream w an,s1 ). N is the total number of channels in the stack and can be calculated by N = N cel N cha . These two feed factors are dimensionless parameters denoting the normalized mass flows. When π ca = 1 (or π an = 1), the H 2 O (or the O 2 ) fed into the system is exactly the amount of H 2 O consumption (or O 2 production) that occurred in the HTE stack. Apparently, π ca > 1 and π an ≥ 0 must be fulfilled for HTE operation. 1 πca is actually the steam utilization ratio of an operating HTE system. As mentioned in Section 2.1.1, ω H2O,s1 and ω O2,s1 are specific fractions to guarantee a protective gas environment at the cathode; thus, only w ca,s1 , w an,s1 and I cha are variables in Thanks to the information of both current and feed flows included in feed factors π, the detailed gas pressure distribution can be analysed. In fact, with the inlet composition fixed, the outlet composition ratios of HTE stack are determined by π based on the mass transport continuity of gases (see (B.6)-(B.9) in Appendix B). Then the lumped pressure values p at a steady state can be obtained as Note that χ represents the molar fraction of a specific gas, and λ ∈ (0, 1) is a constant selected through a parametric study to calculate the lumped pressure p from p s3 and p s4 in the manner of (B.10a). The above equations ( A detailed derivation of ( P rea and P war in the enthalpy-increment term of ( where L y,cha is the channel width as shown in Fig. Note that c ca,T = mix ca (C T ) and c ca,T = mix an (C T ) are isobaric specific heat capacities of cathode and anode mixtures, which can be calculated from gas properties listed in Table Here, a lumped model based on ( On purpose of formulating P rea in (13c) and P war in ( At the same time, an experimental relationship T s2 ( T ) is employed to substitute T s2 in (13c) and ( where k is a constant that is slightly greater than 1, as estimated by measurements. Now, we can substitute ( P war (I cha , T , π) N I cha ( M H2O c ca,TH,s1 n e F ω H2O,s1 π ca + 0.5M O2 c an,TH,s1 n e F ω O2,s1 Note that U rea ( T ) and U war ( T , π) are equivalent voltages defined to represent P rea and P war , respectively, in a manner of electric power like (15b). The explicit formulations of functions U rea ( T ) and U war ( T , π) are already included in In practical HTE operation, the mixture velocities v ca , v an barely change within the furnace. P dis is also relatively negligible with good lagging casing, a polished material (emissivity lower than 0.1), and an operating temperature under 1000 • C. Thus, it can be obtained from (9) that This balance equation Similar to Section 3.3, the combined enthalpy increase caused by vaporization and prewarming in where h vap is the vaporization enthalpy of H 2 O, and the specific heat capacity of liquid water listed in Table Note that U vap ( π) and U war,pre ( π) are equivalent voltages defined to represent P vap and P war,pre , respectively. The explicit formulations of these two functions are given by ( In other words, the power input of the pump group and the preheater mostly contributes to the feedstock warming, including the vaporization of water. According to where T com is the compressor's inlet temperature and p com is the outlet pressure of hydrogen product. Apparently, P com is proportional to the logarithm of the pressure ratio pcom pca,s2 and the flow rate of the gas being compressed, which is exactly the net production rate of hydrogen by electrolysis N I cha neF . Again, an equivalent voltage U com can be introduced to represent P com as shown in (26b). For the compressor sector, the energy sinks such as enthalpy increase and heat dissipation are not discussed because neither of them contribute to the effective product (HHV of H 2 as mentioned later in Section 3.6) of the HTE system. These sinks are also not included in Fig. In total, the total power consumption P sys of such an HTE system is P war,pre + P vap + P rea + P war + P com (27b) based on the energy flows described in ( Regarding the system efficiency for energy conversion, the higher heating value (HHV) of H 2 combustion, 286kJ/mol, is generally employed for evaluating yield according to where w H2 | s2 s0 = w H2,s2 -w H2,s0 represents the net H 2 production (in mass rate) of the HTE system. U th (T amb ) (approximately 1.48V) in ( In fact, as mentioned for (13b), the temperature dependence of ∆ r H T is quite weak, except that the vaporization enthalpy h vap must be compensated: ∆ r H Ts2 + 40.66 (unit: kJ/mol) h vap . Therefore, the system efficiency can be reformulated as M H2 P sys = P rea + 1 πca P vap P sys Based on the above energy flow model, this section proposes a steady-state operation model of the HTE system to discuss locating the optimal operating states that maximize the hydrogen production with coordinated parameters. This optimization is supposed to play an important part in the practical system control strategy. According to the energy flow model Fig. where U fur is an equivalent voltage defined as: The equivalent voltages above are more intuitive than the power rates because they are normalized values regardless of the electrolysis load and capacity. To ensure that no stack damage will be caused by inadequate temperature or an excessive temperature gradient, the following temperature constraints are necessarily set: where T min is the minimum local temperature for HTE operation and (dT /dl) max is the maximum acceptable temperature gradient where the measured U fur,min ( π) can also be theoretically derived from T min in a similar manner as U war,pre ( π) in According to ( U rea ( T ) + U war ( T , π) ≥ U cel (I cha , T , π) + U fur,min ( π) (37c) Tmin ≤ T ≤ Tmax (37e) Note that Tmin and Tmax in (37e) are defined as This nonlinear programming model ( The solutions I * cha , T * , and π * represent the suggested setpoints of the power converter, the electric furnace, and the pump groups (or mass flow controllers), respectively. By implementing these solutions in practical operation to coordinate the condition parameters T , π and I cha , the maximum hydrogen yield of the HTE system can be achieved. Although the aforementioned operation model ( For this subsection, let us consider only the optimization of I cha and T , assuming fixed π, which leads to the submaximum production point (SMPP). Based on the energy balance principle, we intersect a source curve and a sink curve to study the steady-state operating point and its parameter sensitivity in the following analyses. The constraint (37c) can be illustrated in U -T plots, as shown in the upper plots of Fig. Based on (37b), we can calculate the value of P sys using the intersection point obtained with the aforementioned U -T curves to locate a corresponding intersection point in P -T plots, as shown in the lower plots of Fig. The SMPP curve in Fig. The projection of the entire SMPP curve on the P axis provides the acceptable range of system loading P sys , which can be calculated by as depicted in Fig. In this subsection, let us include the optimization of π as well to locate the maximum production point (MPP). Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions are employed in combination with the results of the aforementioned SMPP analysis to select the trade-off decision π * of feed factors π. At the end, an MPP curve as shown in Fig. For an MPP with T * > Tmin , such as MPP 2 , MPP 3 and MPP 4 in Fig. 1) On the middle-piece MPP curve ( T * ∈ ( Tmin , Tmax ), such as MPP 2 in Fig. In fact, However, 2) When T * reaches its upper limit of Tmax , such as MPP 3 and MPP 4 in Fig. For an MPP with T * held at Tmin because of insufficient P sys , such as MPP 0 and MPP 1 in Fig. The above optimality conditions to locate MPPs are summarized in Table If P sys < P sys,min , then electrolysis at I cha,min and Tmin cannot be maintained as a steady state, even with controllable gas flows. If P sys > P sys,max , then the system power consumption can still be increased by increasing π; however, it is meaningless because the maximum yield of H 2 has been achieved. If a desired loading P sys within [P sys,min , P sys,max ] is given by grid regulation considering the renewables, then an MPP with coordinated T * and π * can be obtained based on the above analysis, as shown in Table To conclude, the system optimization of hydrogen yield at various loading conditions requires proper coordination of the temperature and the feed flows; this process can be described as a three-piece MPP curve in Fig. In this section, an operation model of an HTE system is constructed as a numerical case study. The model is first verified with a benchmark model in COMSOL and then analyzed in terms of SMPP and MPP strategies using the results of the numerical optimization, based on which the optimality conditions in Table By employing the cell parameters in Simultaneously, we construct a refined HTE 3D-model in COMSOL with the same parameters as shown in Table Note that πan is fixed at 0. 5.2.1. Locating SMPP and MPP at Specific Load Fig. Within the feasible region, each point denotes a system operating state, whose operating conditions (such as cell voltage U cel , cathode stream feed rate w ca,s1 and energy allocations on different units) and efficiency performance can be depicted by corresponding contours. For example, we can know from the left plot of Fig. By extending Fig. density i el reaches its minimum 0.1A/cm 2 and maximum 0.9A/cm 2 at loads of 19.30kW and 188.02kW, respectively. Based on the method described in Fig. The locus of cell status at these operating states are depicted in Fig. Fig. The optimality conditions of Table According to Table Fig. Another analytically obtained optimality condition in Table With these validated conditions, nonlinear programming of (37) can be replaced by solving a set of equations during SMPP or MPP implementation to ensure reduced computational cost for the local controller of an HTE system. To demonstrate the effects of proposed method in practical scenarios, we implement the SMPP α and MPP strategies under a 24-hour (from 0:00 to 24:00) dynamic power input as shown in Fig. The simulated results are depicted in Fig. Fig. As discussed in Section 4 and Section 5, some useful principles of controlling operating parameters can be obtained from model Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference To sum up, a concise operation model ( In Section 5.3, the proposed SMPP and MPP strategies are implemented to improve the H 2 production from dynamic power input, and their beneficial effects on the HTE system are validated as expected. However, it should be noted that our paper is aimed to present a optimization of steady-state performance of an HTE system. Both our energy flow model of Fig. Nevertheless, the proposed operation model If we want to describe HTE behavior precisely under fast fluctuations of power input, however, a refined dynamic model considering the multi-scale dynamics of temperature (response time of minutes), gas flow (response time of seconds) and electrolysis current (response time of milliseconds) is necessarily required In this paper, a lumped operation model of an high-temperature electrolysis system with auxiliaries was explicitly developed from a comprehensive energy flow model and verified by a refined 3D-model in COMSOL. The sub-maximum production point and maximum production point operating strategies were then proposed to coordinate energy consumptions of various auxiliaries and maximize hydrogen yield by optimizing the temperature and the feedstock flow rates. The proposed strategies have proved to be quite effective in increasing the energy conversion efficiency at a specific load as depicted in Fig. As the basis of local control of high-temperature electrolysis plants, this study is expected to provide a basis for further studies on dynamic coupling and economic dispatch or scheduling of high-temperature power-to-gas implementations within the power grid. = RT (which is also employed for HTE modeling in Based on definition (11), I cha neF in the third term of (B.2) can be rewritten as: (B.9) Here, we reach a useful conclusion according to (B.6)-(B.9): with the inlet composition fixed, the outlet composition ratios of the HTE system are determined by feed factors π. This is how π influences p and thus the electrolysis status and the system performance. Now that the outlet fractions (B.6)-(B.9) are obtained, we can calculate the lumped pressures p required for cell voltage evaluation U cel ( īel , T , p ) in (15a). For example, the lumped value of hydrogen partial pressure p H2 , which is calculated in a geometric mean manner due to the logarithmic form in * * , π * ) at SMPPs and MPPs * Units: *