Biochar pore space consists of porosity of multiple length scales. In direct water holding applications like water storage for plant water uptake, the main interest is in micrometre-range porosity since these pores are able to store water that is easily available for plants. Gas adsorption measurements which are commonly used to characterize the physical pore structure of biochars are not able to quantify this pore-size range. While pyrogenetic porosity (i.e. pores formed during pyrolysis process) tends to increase with elevated process temperature, it is uncertain whether this change affects the pore space capable to store plant available water. In this study, we characterized biochar porosity with x-ray tomography which provides quantitative information on the micrometer-range porosity. We imaged willow dried at 60 • C and biochar samples pyrolysed in three different temperatures (peak temperatures 308, 384, 489 • C, heating rate 2 • C min -1 ). Samples were carefully prepared and traced through the experiments, which allowed investigation of porosity development in micrometre size range. Pore space was quantified with image analysis of x-ray tomography images and, in addition, nanoscale porosity was examined with helium ion microscopy. The image analysis results show that initial pore structure of the raw material determines the properties of micrometrerange porosity in the studied temperature range. Thus, considering the pore-size regime relevant to the storage of plant available water, pyrolysis temperature in the studied range does not provide means to optimize the biochar structure. However, these findings do not rule out that process temperature may affect the water retention properties of biochars by modifying the chemical properties of the pore surfaces. Pyrolysis biochars are carbon-rich porous materials produced by heating biomass in the absence of oxygen. Porosity and pore size distribution of biochar depend on the raw material selection and process conditions (e.g., type of pyrolysis device, heating rate, maximum temperature and holding time at maximum temperature). Application of biochars to soils can alter and improve soil physical and chemical properties, such as hydraulic properties including hydraulic conductivity and water retention capacity (e.g. Refs. Physical characteristics of biochars are often studied by gas adsorption techniques accompanied by the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) modelling to determine the specific surface area Numerous studies have concluded that elevated pyrolysis temperature leads to increased BET specific surface area (see, e.g., Biochar structure is summarized in the model proposed by Gray et al. It is thus likely that feedstock selection is of major importance when one is interested in water holding applications of biochar such as soil amendments. Cellular structure of the feedstock accounts for major part of pore volume and these pores typically are in the size range capable to store readily plant-available water. Pyrogenetic pores are increasingly created with elevated process temperature, but water in these pores is too tightly bound to be available for plants and the total volume of these pores is low. However, it is not clear if process temperature contributes to water holding also by altering the physical pore characteristics, e.g. due to shrinkage in the pore size Characterization of porosity development during pyrolysis is still mostly based on indirect measurements and conceptual models rather than on direct evidence. In this paper we report results of an imaging study where micrometre-scale porosity of biochars is directly imaged with x-ray computed microtomography. The three-dimensional image analysis results obtained for willow biochars pyrolysed in different temperatures are compared against gas adsorption measurements. Further information about biochar porosity is obtained with helium ion microscopy (HIM), which is a novel imaging technique within the family of scanning beam microscopes. HIM results in images with very high resolution and large field of depth, thus giving accurate information of sub- micrometre porosity. HIM also allows for direct imaging of non-conductive samples as the beam induced charging can be neutralized with an electron flood gun. These imaging techniques allows us to get direct evidence on the significance of process temperature on the porosity that is relevant in applications based on water holding capacity of biochar and also more generally in any application relying on the micrometre-range porosity of biochar (e.g. microbial habitats In a previous study One of the segments was only dried and three segments were in addition pyrolysed in varying temperatures. Pyrolysis was carried out with a bench-scale batchtype pyrolysis device with maximum sample size up to 500 g. The device has external electric heating system programmed to elevate temperature at speed of approximately 2 • C min -1 . The actual temperature was measured inside the pyrolysis vessel. The device is equipped with water jacket cooler and gasbag for gas collection. Before processing, the air tightness of the device was checked and the system was thoroughly flushed with excess of N 2 to secure oxygen-free conditions. The holding time at peak temperature was 90 min to guarantee complete charring. The peak temperatures measured inside the pyrolysis chamber were 308, 384 and 489 • C. Yields for biochar and liquid fractions in different process temperatures were weighted and gas volume at room temperature was measured using a gas meter (Ritter). The samples that were used in the imaging were placed in crucibles and buried within the bulk sample (300 g). Purpose of this setup was to ensure that the sample segments could be traced after pyrolysis, and that comparisons between the segments are meaningful. After pyrolysis the samples for x-ray tomography were taken from the segments. Sample size in x-ray tomography was ca. 1 mm. Imaged samples contain reasonable number of pores and they thus represent the pore structure of each segment. The experimental setup was designed to compare samples taken from a single slice of willow and thus the purpose of the samples is not to represent willow in general. More representative study containing for example several raw materials would require significantly greater number of samples, which is not currently realistic in studies using x-ray tomography (cf. e.g. recent work by Berhanu et al. The rationale behind the selected process conditions is the following. The non-pyrolysed sample serves as a control and provides information of the original cellular structure of the raw material. According to Yang et al. Before laboratory analysis, all samples (dried willow and biochars) were ground and sieved through a 2 mm sieve. Samples were analysed for loss of ignition at 550 • C (ash content, SFS-EN 13039). The total concentrations of C, H, S and N were determined with an elemental analyzer (Flash EA1112, Thermo Finnigan, Italy), and the O content was calculated by subtracting C, H, N, S, and ash contents from the total. The BET surface area of the biochar was measured with N 2 sorption analysis at 77 K with a surface analyzer (TriStar II 3020, Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, USA) after degassing at 300 • C. The 3D structural characterization of the biochars was conducted with X-ray microtomography. Zeiss MicroXCT-400 device (Pleasanton, CA, USA) was used to acquire 1600 projection images evenly distributed in full 360 degrees with exposure time of 4 seconds. The selected magnification resulted in pixel size of 1.13 μm. Source voltage was adjusted to 40 kV and source current to 250 μA. Filters were not used. 3D reconstruction was performed with device manufacturers XMReconstructor software. Obtained grey-scale images were filtered and segmented as described in a previous paper Images were analysed for porosity, specific surface area, pore size distribution, and structural anisotropy. A detailed account of the methods used for these analyses is given in In addition to the above-mentioned analyses, threedimensional shapes of individual pores were analysed with the method described by Claes et al. HIM imaging was performed with a Carl Zeiss Orion NanoFab device. The helium ion current was 0.2-0.3 pA and the beam energy was 30 keV. Imaging of the 60 • C and 308 • C samples required charge neutralization with an electron flood gun between single line scans. Dwell time with these samples was 0.5 μs and a line averaging of 128 times was used. Use of the flood gun was necessary for charge neutralization as the electrical conductivity of samples were so low that significant charging effects were observed in the imaging. Samples pyrolysed at 384 • C and 489 • C did not require the use of the flood gun due to their higher conductivity. The dwell time with these samples was 10 μs and the line averaging was 4 times. Pressure in the measurement chamber during the imaging was 1-2•10 -7 Torr. Basic properties of the dried willow and biochars are shown in Table The image analysis data (Table These results, together with visual inspection of the pore structure (Fig. Closer inspection of the pore size distributions (Fig. The cross-sectional shape of the pores was found to be different for dried willow and biochars (Table The yield data presented in Fig. The next question is that how does weight loss of 72 % affect the biochar quality? BET results (Table High-resolution HIM images show that x-ray tomography visualization exaggerates the wall thickness between the smaller diameter pores. The wall thickness is close to the resolution of x-ray tomography, whereby segmentation of walls becomes inaccurate. While resolution of x-ray tomography was not able to resolve pores in submicrometre size range which partially contributes to the porosity able to store plant available water, HIM images ensure that the studied biochar did not contain such porosity. The pyrolysis temperature mainly affects chemical properties instead of physical ones (Table where γ is the surface tension of water It is also important to note that pyrolysis temperature has an effect on the cation exchange capacity of biochar Concerning soil amendment use of biochar, our study is limited to so-called direct effects of biochar, where biochar pores directly act as storage space for water In this work we considered only relatively low process temperatures due to device-specific limitations. Considering future work, similar approach should be applied to temperature range covering also higher pyrolysis temperatures as well as to raw materials with different chemical properties. The effects of heating rate were not considered here, but it has been found to influence the porosity development at nanometre size range but only minor effect on the density of surface functional groups Our results indicate that at pyrolysis temperatures below 500 • C and with low heating rate (2 • C min -1 ), the initial pore structure of raw material (in this work willow) determines the micrometre-scale porosity of biochar. Considering the pore size regime relevant for plant water uptake, pyrolysis temperature cannot be used to optimize the micrometre-scale pore system of biochar. Also, the nanoscale porosity of biochar remained at low and virtually constant level when subjected to process temperatures less than 500 • C, which is typical for torrefaction and slow pyrolysis. Considering the development of engineered biochars for agronomic applications with specific target to improve soil water holding capacity, following conclusions can be drawn: (1) If aim is to increase the soil water holding capacity at specific matric potential regime directly via biochar pores, selection of appropriate raw material with desired pore size distribution is essential; 