The metal-based noble gas compounds exhibit interesting behavior of electronic valence states under pressure. For example, Xe upon compression can gain electrons from the alkali metal, or lose electrons unexpectedly to Fe and Ni, toward formation of stable metal compounds. In addition, the Na 2 He is not even stabilized by the local chemical bonds but via the long-range Coulomb interactions. Herein, by using the first-principles calculations and the unbiased structure searching techniques, we uncover that the transition metal Y is able to react with Xe above 60 GPa within various Y-Xe stochiometries, namely the YXe, YXe 2 , YXe 3 and Y 3 Xe structures. Surprisingly, it is found that all the resulting compounds are intermetallic and Xe atoms are positively charged. We also argue that the pressure-induced changes of the energy orbital filling are responsible for the electron transfer from Xe to Y. Meanwhile, the Peierls-like mechanism is found to stabilize the energetically most favorable YXe-Pbam phase. Furthermore, the predicted YXe-Pbam, YXe-Pnnm, and YXe 3 -I4/mcm phases are discovered to be a phonon-mediated superconductors under pressure, with the critical superconducting temperatures in the range of approximately ** The noble gas (NG) elements (e.g. He, Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe) are historically known as inert elements due to their low level of reactivity arising from the completely filled outermost electron shells (the closed subshell configuration). However, since the first experimentally proved synthesis of the metal-based NG compound by , Xe-CH Moreover, pressure can also enhance the oxidation of some elements and results in the formation of noble gas compounds such as Xe-oxides In this context, the compressed compounds of NGs and transition metals appear as a particularly interesting systems. Of special attention to us are the Xe-Fe(Ni) Next, the predicted structures are comprehensively analyzed with respect to their structural and electronic properties, toward further examination of the potential nonconventional behavior. In the present paper, the structure search for the Y-Xe systems is performed by using the particle-swarm optimization method, as implemented in the CALYPSO code Furthermore, the phonon dispersions and the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) calculations are performed in the framework of the linear response theory by employing the QUANTUM-ESPRESSO package To investigate the phase stability of the Y-Xe systems under pressure, we calculate the convex hull at the selected pressures on the basis of the Y-Xe formation enthalpies, as shown in Fig. Next, the electronic band structures, and the partial density of states (DOS) of the predicted Y-Xe compounds are investigated at selected pressure values, and the corresponding results are depicted in Fig. From the partial DOS we can see that for all stable Y-Xe compounds the conducting states mainly derive from the Y-5d states in the vicinity of the Fermi level. However, the Y-s states also give moderate contribution around the Fermi level, especially for the Y 3 Xe-Pnnm, Y 3 Xe-I4/mcm and YXe 2 -I4/mmm structures. It is not a big surprise since the s-d transformation of the Y solid metal under pressure has been reported in the previous studies As mentioned above, the metal-based Xe compounds exhibit unusually electronic valence states under pressure. To investigate the electron transfer and chemical bonding of Y-Xe compounds, we calculate the three dimensional charge difference density (CDC) maps of them, as shown in Fig. Therefore an electron transfer from Y to Xe atoms should be expected. However, in the predicted Y-Xe compounds, Xe is unusually positively charged and behaves as a reluctant rather than an oxidant. According to the previous work Furthermore, we notice that the Xe atoms of the predicted structures show different coordination number. In particular, the coordination numbers of the Xe atom in the Pbam, Pnnm, and I4/mmm symmetry are four, eight and twelve, respectively, as shown in Fig. For both described types of unit cell, it can be clearly seen from the CDC of Y-Xe compounds that Xe atoms loses electron and transfers it to Y atoms. Further, we investigate the structural characteristics of the energetically most favorable YXe Pbam phase, and found that if the Xe and Y atoms are arranged in line along the <110> direction, then the Pbam phase changes into the CsCl-like structure. In fact, the CsCl is also found to be a stable phase for the sibling Xe-Li and Mg-Xe systems under pressure In the present study, the phase stability of Y-Xe binary systems is examined in the pressure range from 0 to 200 GPa, by using the particle swarm optimization technique combined with the first principle calculations. It is shown that the first stable Y-Xe compounds (namely, YXe and Y 3 Xe) can be formed above 60 GPa. However, upon further compression, new stoichiometries of YXe 2 and YXe 3 are also predicted to be energetically stable at 100 GPa and 150 GPa, respectively. In details, the unique octahedron unit and the body-centered like units are found in the Xe-rich compounds. The four, eight, and twelve coordination numbers of the Xe atom are identified in the Y-Xe compounds. The atoms distortions are predicted in the energetically most favorable Pbam-YXe phase, whereas the Peierls mechanism is found to stabilize the YXe-Pbam phase. It is also suggested that all predicted Y-Xe compounds show metallic character. Unexpectedly in all cases, Y metal plays the role of an oxidant and the electrons are found to be transferred from Xe to Y atoms. We discover that pressure can greatly change the energy orbital filling of Y-Xe compounds, which results in the transfer of electrons from Xe to metal Y. Furthermore, except for the YXe 2 -I4/mmm and YXe 3 - P4mmm phases, all the other Y-Xe compounds are found to be phonon-mediated superconductors under pressure. In particular, the metal-superconductor transition temperatures of the Pbam, Pnnm and I4/mcm phases under pressure are in the range of approximately 3-4K, 7-10K, and 5-6K, respectively. In what follows, it appears that the valence bond theory is facing great challenges under pressure, which application can greatly affect the energy orbital filling of solids and lead to the formation of new compounds with unusual behavior of the electronic valence states. In this context, the current theoretical study may serve as a representative example. Specifically, the formation of unique Y-Xe compounds indicates that the quantivalence of metal-based noble gas compounds under pressure remains uncertain, and suggests that the other metal oxidants, similar to Y, may also exist. In this sense, present work provides vital theoretical guidance for exploration and further experimental synthesis of the transition metal-based NG compounds. Table Table2. The calculated Tcs for various Y-Xe compounds at selected pressures. 