Zigzag phosphorene nanoribbons have quasi-flat band edge modes entirely detached from the bulk states. We analytically study the electronic transport through such edge states in the presence of a localized defect for semi-infinite and finite ribbons. Using the tight-binding model, we derive analytical expressions for the Green's function and transmission amplitude of both pristine and defective nanoribbons. We find that the transmission of both semi-infinite and finite ribbons is sensitive to the location of a single impurity defect with respect to the edge. By the presence of an impurity on the outermost edge site of the ribbon, the transmission through the edge channel, similar to a one-dimensional chain, strongly suppresses for the entire energy spectrum of the quasiflat band. In contrast, the transmission of low-energy (E ≈ 0) states, is robust as the impurity is moved one position far away from the edge on the same sub-lattice. The analytical calculations are also complemented by exact numerical transport computations using the Landauer approach. A single layer of black phosphorus(BP) in which P atoms arranged in a hexagonal staggered lattice called phosphorene. This promising new two-dimensional (2D) material, in the sense of its applications in nanoelectronics, can be exfoliated from bulk BP due to weak interlayer van der Waals interaction Of late, 2D nanomaterials have attracted lots of interest and phosphorene, by patterning into phosphorene nanoribbons (PNRs) which can be fabricated with lithography and plasma etching of BP, is a new candidate material for novel electronic devices Similarly to other materials, structural defects is practically an inevitable factor in real PNRs. At the same time, artificial defects may also use to design and functionalize the materials for new applications. For the case of phosphorene and bulk BP, first principle calculations showed It is however, an intersting question to understand the quntum transport in a quasi-flat band composed of edge states in presence of a localized impurity potential. In this paper we study the effect of a single impurity on the quantum transport of the zPNRs focusing on the dependence of transmittance on the position of impurity. We consider zPNRs with different widths and calculate the transmittance through the edge states both analytically and numerically. The paper is organized as follows: In section II we generally introduce our model and formalism of calculating and computing the the transmission coefficient of zPNRs using the tight-binding Hamiltoninan with the scattering approach. Section III is devoted to discussion on the results obtained for different impurity positions of both semi-infinite and finite zPNRs. Finally, we wrap up the paper with the conclusion in section IV. The atomic structure of the pristine zPNR used in our study is shown in Fig. To be able to check our analytic solution, we also use the Landauer approach that is widely used to study quantum transport properties at equilibrium and works on the basis of the recursive Greens function technique which relates the transmittance T (E) at a given carrier energy E to the Greens function ) and line width function Γ. The line width function including the coupling between transport channel with source and drain leads can be calculated as where Σ L , Σ R are the self-energies. Here H center denotes the Hamiltonian of the scattering region including the effect of the impurity potential. The electronic properties of PNRs are mainly affected by the quantization effect across the width of the ribbon due to the appearance of edges. To proceed, it is important to consider two different situations, namely the case of zPNR with a single edge represented by a semi-infinite zPNR and the case of finite ribbon with two parallel edges. In this section, we present and discuss the quantum transport of the semi-infinite zPNR case and the case of finite zPNR will be considered in the next section. The analytical calculation thus can be performed considering a semi-infinite plane with a single edge (N z → ∞). On the other hand side, for the numeric computations, we assume the ribbon to be wide enough such that one of the edges can safely be ignored Let us start with the perfect system where there is no impurity defect. The clean phosphorene confined system with zigzag boundary supports an interesting edge states around E F . These edge states of zPNRs result in a quasi-flat band separated totally from the bulk bands Using the anisotropic honeycomb-lattice model, we can rewrite the Hamiltonian (1) in terms of this new sub-lattice creation and annihilation operators a † n,m , a n,m , b † n,m , b n,m and since the hopping integrals t 1 and t 2 are much larger than the others, we can set t 3 = t 5 = 0 for the analytic solution. Later, we will take into account the effect of t 4 perturbatively. Therefore, we can write In the absence of H in the Hamiltonian(2), which breaks the particle-hole symmetry, the resulting edge states of the system form a perfectly flat band in the middle of the energy spectrum which can be solved as: We now apply this argument again, with m = 0 zigzag chain replaced by m = 1 to obtain the same form of the solution. Thus, the wave-function components at each site of the mth zigzag chain from the edge, Ψ A m , is proportional to α m (k) where α(k) = -2 t1 t2 cos ( k 2 ) and clearly shows the localization of the edge state wave-function on the edge sites. This means that describes an edge state localized on A sub-lattice near the edge m = 0 with zero amplitudes on (n, m, B) sites. Here, the x A coordinate is chosen in such a way that x A (n, m) = n if the site (n, m, A) sits to the right of supercell (even m) and otherwise, In the remainder of this subsection, we focus on the calculation of the effect of hopping parameter t 4 on the flat band which we obtained till now. Using the above wave-function and calculating the expectation value of H 1 term by standard first-order perturbation theory, one can easily obtain the following energy spectrum: where ε 0 = -4 t4t1 t2 is an energy shift. This resembles the energy spectrum of a one-dimensional (1D) chain with hopping parameter t = 2 t4t1 t2 = 0.07eV to the nearest neighbor sites. It is evident that up to this first-order perturbation calculation, the wave-function will not change since the bulk states are separated from the edge one with a large energy gap which leads to zero correction to the first order perturbation. Fig. The aim of this subsection is to obtain an exact expression for the lattice Green's function of the semi-infinite zPNR. We are interested in the transport through the edges of zPNR so, we use the wave-function in Eq. ( where the integral is over the 1-st Brillouin zone, defined by -π < k < π. The typical integrals appearing in the above equation can be evaluated by means of the residue theorem. To be able to understand, we first consider the diagonal element m = m = n = n = 0 and ν = ν = A. Therefore, we need to evaluate the following integral which can be separated into two terms as where The integral I 1 can be evaluated simply by transforming it into an integral over the complex variable z = e ik to set cos (k) = (z +z -1 )/2 and dk = idz/z. By doing so, the denominator appears in the form of a second-order expression in terms of z with two solutions. These solutions are the simple poles of the integrand. By closing the integration contour with a unit radius circle around the origin of the complex plane, only one of the poles occurs inside the contour. Employing the residue theorem, the derivation results in where By the same token, it is easy to show that the integrand in I 2 has two simple poles at k 1 = k 0 + i0 + and k 2 = -k 0 -i0 + with the same residues of e +ik 0 2t sin (k0) . In this case, performing the integral we complete the integration contour by an infinite rectangle in the upper half-plane as shown in Fig. Correspondingly, one can also obtain the analytic solution of integral I 3 . Doing so, since the exponential in the integrand is negative, the contour should be completed by an infinite rectangle in the lower half-plane as shown in Fig. It is now easy to substitute the closed-form expressions for I 1 , I 2 and I 3 into Eq.( Following the same analysis, it is straightforward to obtain the analytical form of the off-diagonal element G 0 (n, 0, A; 0, 0, A; ε) as We need also to calculate the matrix elements G 0 (0, 1, A; 0, 1, A; ε) and G 0 (n, 1, A; 0, 1, A; ε) later. To do so, we use the same method which results in and similarly These results will be used in the following sections to obtain the transmition amplitiude and LDoS for defective zPNRs. Let us now consider semi-infinite phosphorene in the presence of a point defect. Suppose we have an impurity on site (n 0 , m 0 , ν 0 ) which can be described by the following Hamiltonian: where U denotes the on-site potential of the defected site. The effect of this single defect on the electronic states can be studied using the so-called transition matrix ( T ) approach From an expression of this form, it is easily possible to read the transmition ampilitude T of an electron with momentum k 0 as where n > 0. Furthermore, the Greens function of the defective system, G, can be expressed in terms of the clean (defectfree) Greens function, G 0 , according to Dysons equation Using this expression, we can write the local density of states (LDoS), ρ(n, m, ν; ε), in the site of the position (n, m, ν) directly: It is straightforward to show that ρ(n, m, ν; ε) = ρ 0 (n, m, ν; ε) These expressions will be used in the next section to study the transport through edge states of zPNRs in presence of a single defect. In this section, we study the quantum transport of a finite width zPNR in the presence of a single defect. As we already mentioned in the preceding sections, the wave function |Ψ A (a state with nonzero amplitude only on "A" sub-lattice) satisfies the eigenvalue equation H |Ψ A = 0 for a wide zPNR. However, this equation is no longer valid for a finite width ribbon and it is a simple matter to obtain the following off-diagonal matrix elements: where N z denotes the width of zPNR. Therefore, the edge state wave-functions for a finite zPNR can be obtained by diagonalizing the matrix Ψ ν (k)|H |Ψ ν (k) for ν, ν = A, B which results in the following combinations of |Ψ A (k) and |Ψ B (k) : with corresponding eigenvalues We can now proceed to calculate the effect of H term in Hamiltonian(2) on the above energy spectrum. This can be done by obtaining the above matrix elements for H term in addition to H . It is obvious that this only changes the diagonal elements of the matrix which gives rise to the following result for energy E ± (k) using the E(k) of Eq.( Fig. Let us now proceed to study the quantum transport of the finite zPNR in presence of a single point defect. We start to evaluate the free Green's function operator G 0 for finite zPNR. The matrix elements of G 0 are given by where |Ψ ± (k) and E ± (k) are introduced in Eqs. ( Therefore, we need to find the following matrix element Using the definition of ( The integration, now, can be done using the same calculation presented in the previous section which results in where k + 0 and k - 0 are the simple poles of the integrand in Eq. Consider now, as before, the Lippmann-Schwinger equation ( We must now find which can be evaluated using the definition Eq. ( Substituting Eq. (34) into Eq. ( and respectively. The same analysis can be done, when the electron incident from -channel and will be transmitted into -and + channel with amplitiudes and respectively. Consequently, it is now possible to introduce the transmission matrix that allows to write the the total transmission coefficient T as We will discuss the results of this formalism in the next section. In this section, we present and discuss the electronic transmittance through the edge states of the zPNRs in presence of a single point defect. Using the above formalism, we also present the LDoS at the edge of ribbon near the impurity for semi-infinite zPNR. In all the calculations of this section the hopping energies t 3 and t 5 considered to be zero except the last subsection. Let us first consider the case of semi-infinite zPNR with a single defect at the edge of zPNR, namely (m = 0). In general, for each n (with m = 0) there are two different sites to locate the impurity, namely A and B, but only the outermost site (A for the top edge (m = 0))) is relevant. This is due to the vanishing of the wave-function amplitude on the B sites which we discussed before. Therefore, for the impurity on on site (0, 1, A) both analytically (solid lines) and numerically (points) with on-site impurity potential U = 0.5(eV ) for a semi-infinite zPNR. our first choice is the site (n = 0, m = 0, A) to locate the impurity. Thus, we can insert Eqs. ( . From now on, we use the subscript 0(1) of T 0(1) to show the transmission amplitiude when the impurity is located on site (n = 0, m = 0(1), A). Fig. There is also, however, a further position to be considered as the location of the impurity which is (n = 0, m = 1, A) site. Similarly, now we can insert Eqs. ( ) . (42) In Fig. Another significant factor in the study of transport is the behavior of the LDoS as a function of energy on the neighboring sites of the impurity position. This is related to the imaginary part of the Greens function through Eq. which is represented as a function of energy in Fig. which is plotted in Fig. Let us now turn to the case of finite zPNR in presence of a single defect. Similar to the case of semi-infinite zPNR, we consider two different sites (n = 0, m = 0, A) and (n = 0, m = 1, A) to locate the impurity defect. When the impurity situated on site (n = 0, m = 0, A) one can substitute Eqs. (35),(36),(37), and (38) into (39) and use (40) to obtain the transmittance T 0 of the finite zPNR. It is, however, straightforward to calculate the transmittance T 1 when the impurity position moves to site (n = 0, m = 1, A). The resulting expressions in the case of finite zPNR are more mathematically complicated than the semi-infinite zPNR case and we will not present here. Fig. Having understood the effect of a single impurity on the transport properties of zPNRs in the absence of hopping integrals t 3 and t 5 , let us now turn to the case where both t 3 and t 5 are nonzero. For this case, we only consider the semi-infinite zPNR and perform the numerical calculation. As before, we consider two different positions (n = 0, m = 0, A) and (n = 0, m = 1, A) to locate the impurity which results in the corresponding transmittance T 0 and T 1 . Fig. In summary, we have analytically studied the effect of a single impurity defect on the electronic transport through the edge states of the zigzag phosphorene nanoribbons. Using the standard LippmannSchwinger T-matrix approach, we have developed an analytical approach based on the tight-binding describtion of electrons on an anisotropic honeycomb lattice. Our results are the following: We approach analytically the question of quantum transport through the toplogical edge states of zPNRs which form a quasi-flat band in presence of a localized impurity defect. We obtain the expressions of transmission coefficient and LDOS by calculating the lattice Greens function for both semi-infinite and finite zPNRs. Furthermore, we explain the features in the transmittance and obtain analytical expressions that allow us to understand the transport characteristics of zPNRs as a function of energy and scattering potential. We present the sensitivity of elctronic transmittance through the edge states by the presence of a single point defect. For the case where impurity is situated on the outermost sites of the ribbon, the transmission through the states with energies close to the both lower and upper edges of the quasi-flat band suppressed strongly. This is similar to behavioir of transmission in a one-dimensional chain. On the hand, when the impurity moves one position far a way from the edge, only the transmittance through the states with energies close to the lower edge of the band decreased while the states near the upper edge of the band remained unaffected. The presented analytical expressions for transmittance and LDOS are in good agreement with numerical calculations based on Landauer approach. We also perform numerical computations of transmittance using the Landauer approach which showes a very good agreemen with analytical expressions. We further compute the effect of hopping integrals t 3 and t 5 which show no signicant effect on the transport through the edges in both clean and defective samples. Finally, we should emphasize that in this paper, we focused on the effects of a single point defect with finite scattering potential. However, it is also intersting to study the effect of vacancy as the limiting case U → ∞ on the transport properties of the phosphorene ribbons which induces compact localized states with intersting impacts on the transport. These results which are beyond the aim of this paper will be discussed in more detail elsewhere.