A topological superconductor nanowire bears a Majorana bound state at each of its ends, leading to unique transport properties. As a way to probe these, we study the finite frequency noise of a biased junction between a normal metal and a topological superconductor nanowire. We use the non-equilibrium Keldysh formalism to compute the finite frequency emission and absorption noise to all order in the tunneling amplitude, for bias voltages below and above the superconducting gap. We observe noticeable structures in the absorption and emission noise, which we can relate to simple transport processes. The presence of the Majorana bound state is directly related to a characteristic behavior of the noise spectrum at low frequency. We further compute the noise measurable with a realistic setup, based on the inductive coupling to a resonant LC circuit, and discuss the impact of the detector temperature. We have also computed the emission noise for a non-topological system with a resonant level, exhibiting a zero-energy Andreev bound state, in order to show the specificities of the topological case. Our results offer an original tool for the further characterization of the presence of Majorana bound states in condensed matter systems. The search for Majorana fermions 1 -particles that are their own antiparticles -has been an active field of study in high energy physics, with no conclusive/definite evidence of their finding. Since the last decades, the Majorana paradigm has now entered condensed matter physics thanks to the pioneering work of Kitaev. In quantum nano-physics, a huge effort has been devoted to finding a realistic experimental equivalent of the Kitaev model. One possibility is to realize a topological superconductor (TS) nanowire by inducing s-wave superconductivity in a semiconducting nanowire subject to both Rashba spin-orbit coupling and a Zeeman magnetic field. . Top: schematic view of a junction between a normal metal (yellow dots) and a topological superconductor (redgreen dots, with a red Majorana bound state at its end); the normal metal is biased at voltage V . Bottom left: topological superconductor density of states, with a central peak at zero energy due to the Majorana bound state, and square root behavior outside the gap. Bottom right: the principle of the noise detection, using the inductive coupling to a RLC circuit. In this work, the physics of a normal metal -topological superconductor (NTS) junction (see Fig. Using a continuous model describing a semi-infinite Kitaev chain, we derive the finite frequency noise to all orders in the tunnel coupling parameter of the NTS junction (recovering in the process known results for the current and zero-frequency noise In order to illustrate the added value of using finite frequency noise over other quantities relying on DOS, like the differential conductance, we have also computed the transport properties of a non-topological N-dot-S system, where S is a standard BCS superconductor. Indeed this system bears a zero-energy Andreev bound state, with a sharp peak in the DOS, which is susceptible to yield similar differential conductance and finite frequency noise profiles. With the right parameters, this system presents a conductance peak similar to the one of a Majorana bound state, which shows that the conductance alone is not enough to characterize a MBS. However, the emission noise shows a distinctive dip near zero-frequency in this system, which is absent for the NTS junction. We thus believe that the finite frequency noise characteristics of an NTS junction can bring unique, additional information about Majorana fermions in experiments. This constitutes the main motivation of this study. The paper is organized as follows: Sec. II introduces the microscopic model Hamiltonian and defines the Keldysh Green's functions. The Dyson's equations which are relevant for the current and noise calculations are specified in Sec. III. The noise is computed in Sec. IV (real time correlator, emission and absorption noise,...) and detailed results are discussed in Sec. V. Sec. VI shows the calculations and the results for the emission noise of a N-dot-S system, with a BCS superconductor. We conclude this work with Sec. VII. In the whole following text, we fix the value of to 1. A semi-infinite topological superconductor wire is a single-channel p-wave superconductor with spinmomentum locking, described from the continuous version of the Kitaev chain 2 by the helical superconductor Hamiltonian where v F is the Fermi velocity, ∆ is the superconducting gap, and σ 1,2,3 are Pauli matrices in Nambu space. Here, we refer to j = 0 for the TS nanowire and j = 1 for the (spinless) normal metal lead, whose Hamiltonian has the same form, with the gap parameter set to zero. These lead Hamiltonians are conveniently written in terms of the fermionic Nambu spinor ψ j defined as which combines left-and right moving fermion operators c R/L,j . The Hamiltonian describing the tunnel coupling between the two leads has the form (in the absence of applied bias) where c 0 and c 1 are boundary fermions built simply from the sum of the left and right fermionic fields entering the Nambu spinor, evaluated at the location x = 0 of the NTS junction, so that c j = c Rj (0) + c Lj (0). It is also convenient to write this tunnel Hamiltonian in the Nambu representation. The formalism can be generalized to an arbitrary number M of tunnel-coupled conductors as in Ref. 33. For this, we define a tunneling matrix W in lead space, whose diagonal elements vanish: Then, in Nambu representation, the tunneling Hamiltonian takes the form The operator accounting for the current flowing through lead j, is derived from the tunneling Hamiltonian (4) as An essential tool for this study is the Keldysh Green's function for the boundary fermions. It is defined as , where η = ± denotes the Keldysh time index which specifies the position of times on the Keldysh contour. It is represented by the (4 by 4) matrix in Keldysh-Nambu space: where G a , G r , G K are the advanced, retarded and Keldysh components in Nambu space, and the unitary transform L = (1/ √ 2)(τ 0 + iτ 2 ) ⊗ σ 0 (τ j are Pauli matrices in Keldysh space). We wish to express the average current in terms of such Green's functions. For this we write explicitly the expression of the off-diagonal Keldysh Green's functions: The average current can then be recast which reads, in Fourier space, for the two-lead geometry chosen here where we used that, in this case, the tunneling matrix reduces to W 01 = W 10 = λσ 3 . The Dyson's equation is readily expressed in Keldysh-Nambu-lead space as where we have and the tunneling self-energy Wjj is a diagonal matrix of the form Wjj = diag (W jj , -W jj ). Using Eq. ( In order to compute the current, we thus need to know the full expression of the dressed Green's function G K 01 . The Dyson's equation allows us to express this Keldysh component in terms of the advanced and retarded dressed Green's functions as well as the bare Keldysh Green's function and the tunneling self-energy. One has A. Bare Green's functions As a first step, we need to specify g K 00 and g K 11 . The procedure to obtain the boundary Green's function for the uncoupled semi-infinite TS wire has been described carefully in Ref. 19. Following this derivation, the various components of the bare Green's functions for the topological superconductor then read where n F (ω) is the Fermi function and 0 + an infinitesimal introduced to properly define the square root in the complex plane. The Keldysh, retarded and advanced bare Green's functions for the metallic lead are readily obtained by setting ∆ = 0 in the results above, so that There we have introduced the matrix F 1 as Note that the top and bottom diagonal elements respectively have an electron-like and a hole-like character, thus leading to opposite signs for the voltage. Introducing the Heaviside distribution Θ(|ω| -∆), the boundary Keldysh Green's function on the TS side becomes where β is the inverse temperature. In order to write the average current, we then need the expression for the dressed Green's functions G G r/a It follows that the Keldysh component of the dressed Green's function which enters the current average can be written as Where G r/a 00 is also obtained from the Dyson's equation, and reads One readily sees that G r/a 00 is a linear combination of σ 0 and σ 1 Pauli matrices where, denoting Note that α r = (α a ) * and γ r = (γ a ) * . Keeping in mind that g K 00 is also a linear combination of σ 0 and σ 1 , one can significantly simplify the Nambu trace needed for the current Inserting all these expressions in the trace formula for the current Eq. ( F : (31) This is identified as a Landauer formula with the (real valued) Andreev reflection probability whose expression matches exactly with the one of the spectral current density J(ω) obtained in Eq. ( The real time noise correlator in a multi-lead geometry is defined as: where I j (t) is defined by Eq. ( where we recall that • corresponds to matrices in Nambulead space. In our two-terminal geometry, this simplifies as These Green's functions are related to the retarded, advanced and Keldysh components according to Ĝ+-= 1 2 Ĝa -Ĝr + ĜK , Writing explicitly the Keldysh component of the Dyson's equation, Eq.( The four Green's functions G -+ 00 , G -+ 01 , G +- 01 , G +- 11 which enter the real-time noise correlator are ultimately obtained from the above Keldysh components where we introduced the new matrix Substituting these back into the expression for the realtime current correlator allows one to derive an exact, albeit cumbersome, analytic expression for S 11 . In full generality, one may consider that the Green's functions depend on two times t and t . In the specific setup under consideration, we are in a stationary situation as there is only one superconductor in the system. It follows that the time dependence reduces to a single variable, more precisely the time difference τ = t -t . We thus consider the two distinct correlators: Their Fourier transforms define the emission and absorption noise as which are conveniently rewritten using the Fouriertransformed Green's functions as It is clear from these expressions that emission and absorption noises are trivially related when flipping the sign of the probing frequency, namely S + (Ω) = S -(-Ω). It follows that in order to describe the whole range of physical parameters, we can safely focus on positive frequencies for both noise spectra. In order to connect with potential experimental works looking to investigate the finite-frequency noise of the NTS junction, we also compute the noise expected to be measured from a generic quantum detector consisting of a resonant LC circuit, inductively coupled to the NTS junction (see Fig. where is the Bose-Einstein distribution associated with the oscillator modes, and K is the effective coupling constant of the quantum wire with the resonator whose expression reads L and α respectively stand for the inductance of the resonant circuit and the inductive coupling, while η is the width of the resonance. This last parameter depends on the dissipative environment surrounding the LC circuit, In this section, we start by briefly recalling the known results for the conductance and the zero frequency noise, as both these quantities serve as a useful benchmark for our approach. We then move on to the determination of the finite frequency emission, absorption and measurable noises at low temperature. The NTS junction is characterized by its transparency τ (0 ≤ τ ≤ 1), which is defined from the tunneling amplitude λ as τ = 4λ 2 /(1 + λ 2 ) 2 . We use units such that k B = = 1. We adopt the convention that the TS wire is grounded, the voltage drive being applied to the normal metallic lead. We hereby recover important results which were already obtained in a previous study. leading to the predicted Majorana zero-bias peak with quantized height 2e 2 /h and width Γ = τ ∆/2 √ 1 -τ due to resonant Andreev reflexion. As one approaches perfect transmission τ → 1, the strong NTS hybridization turns this peak into a plateau at G = 2e 2 /h extending over the whole subgap regime, |eV | < ∆ (although the Majorana state is ill-defined due to this very same hybridization). Moreover, setting ∆ = 0, one recovers the behavior of a spin polarized N-N junction with a Landauer conduc- . Adding a finite temperature to the system does not substantially change the results and only tends to smooth out the curves, as expected. We now turn to the shot noise S 11 = S ± (Ω = 0), and more specifically the Fano factor, defined as the ratio of the zero-frequency noise to the average current, F = S 11 /eI 1 . In the subgap regime, as predicted in Ref. 19, this Fano factor vanishes at perfect transparency (τ = 1), and increases when the transparency decreases following Above the gap, even at τ = 1, the Fano factor F is finite due to the concomitant presence of both Andreev reflexion and quasiparticle processes. For a normal-normal junction, i.e. in the limit ∆ = 0, the zero-frequency noise at zero temperature shows, as expected, The finite-frequency noise has so far been absent in the investigations of the transport characteristics of topological superconductors. The results for the emission noise S + (Ω) and the absorption noise S -(Ω), obtained from a numerical evaluation of Eqs. ( The noise at finite frequency Ω is created by fluctuations of current processes which are accompanied by the emission or absorption of a photon at the frequency Ω. Understanding the basic process which contributes to the current with emission or absorption of a photon, while conserving the total energy, can give us a qualitative understanding of the finite-frequency noise features. As a warm-up, let us first recall what happens in the most simple situation of a junction between two normal metallic electrodes (corresponding to taking the limit ∆ → 0). There, electronic transport occurs if occupied electron states from one lead have enough energy to reach the empty states of the other. This results in a decreasing linear behavior of the emission noise S + (Ω) for frequencies Ω ∈ [0, eV ] and a vanishing emission noise for higher frequencies due to Pauli blocking. When we replace the normal lead by a topological superconducting wire, the noise spectrum changes drastically. These changes can be understood qualitatively by taking into account the density of states of the topological superconductor, which is gapped for energies |E| < ∆, except for a single narrow peak at zero energy due to the Majorana bound state (see Fig. The qualitative picture showing the basic processes contributing to the finite-frequency noise are shown in Fig. When the bias voltage is smaller than the gap, eV < ∆, there is only one process contributing to the emission noise, which is shown on panel (a). Electrons in the normal metal with energies in the interval [0, eV ] may hop to the Majorana state by emitting a photon of energy Ω = eV (see Fig. For voltages larger than the gap, another emission process kicks in: electrons from the normal metal can be transferred to the empty states above the TS gap, and emit a photon with Ω in the range [0, eV -∆] (see Fig. Absorption processes similar to the emission processes discussed above can also be realized. These are shown on panels (c) and (d) of Fig. Finally, the absorption of photons also allows processes where an electron is transmitted from the topological superconductor to the normal metal, for frequencies Ω ∈ [eV, +∞]. Panels (e) and (f) of Fig. We now show the results for the finite frequency emission noise S + (Ω) and absorption noise S -(Ω) obtained at low temperature T e = 0.01∆ for different values of the transparency τ and the voltage V (applied on the normal lead, the TS wire is assumed to be grounded). The emission noise in the subgap regime eV < ∆ is shown in Fig. Smaller structures can be observed at frequency Ω = ∆-eV and Ω = ∆+eV , corresponding respectively to the onset of processes (d) and (f) from Fig. We now turn to the low-temperature results for the noise at voltages eV > ∆ and in the same low transparency regime (τ = 0.02). The emission noise S + (Ω) is shown in Fig. The absorption noise for eV > ∆ is shown on Fig. It follows from the inspection of the finite-frequency noise, for voltages both above and below the TS gap, that the presence of a Majorana bound state leads to a plateau in the emission noise as a function of frequency, accompanied by a sharp drop to zero at Ω = eV . At this point, it is interesting to relax the constraint of low transparency and study the impact of a higher value of τ . This is shown in Fig. One can readily see that increasing the transparency tends to smooth out all the structures visible in the noise and discussed above. Further increasing the transparency and ultimately approaching τ = 1 (not shown) makes all features in the noise spectrum disappear. The best opportunity to identify the noise plateau associated with the Majorana bound state is thus to focus on the case of tunnel junctions. We end this study with a short discussion of the prediction of the measurable noise. To this end, we choose the inductive coupling scheme introduced in Ref. 20 which involves an LC circuit in the vicinity of the NTS junction (see Fig. Following our investigations on the emission and absorption noise, we focus here on the low transparency regime, as this is the most likely candidate to observe meaningful signatures of the Majorana bound state. The new crucial parameter which dramatically influences the measurable noise is the temperature T LC of the detector. In the low temperature regime for the detector, T LC Ω, the measurable noise, presented in Fig. As one increases the detector temperature (see Fig. A remaining question is to inquire whether a nontopological superconductor/normal metal junction bearing zero-energy Andreev bound states (ABS), which also exhibits a zero bias peak in the differential conductance, is likely to produce the same finite-frequency noise characteristics as the NTS junction, which constitutes the focus of this study. We thus consider here a system where a standard BCS superconductor is connected to a normal lead via a single quantum dot. We compute the finite frequency-noise in a regime where the quantum dot has signatures close to a Majorana bound state when looking at the conductance only. This will allow us to point out the unique information obtained by considering the finite-frequency noise, which permits to make a clear distinction between a real Majorana bound state in a topological superconductor and the presence of an accidental bound state at zero energy close to the junction. The Hamiltonian of the system is: where H D is the Hamiltonian of the dot level at energy : H j (j = S, N ) are the Hamiltonians of the BCS superconductor and of the normal lead: where ∆ S = ∆ is the superconducting gap, and ∆ N = 0. Ψ j,k is a Nambu spinor: where T is a Nambu spinor for the dot electrons. T j is the tunneling amplitude between lead j and the dot, where the constant voltage V j has been included via a Peierls substitution : (62) The tunneling rate between the dot and lead j is further defined as Γ j = πν 0 t 2 j , where ν 0 is the density of states of the metal at Fermi energy. Calculation of the average current and current correlations is carried out using the Keldysh Green function formalism, and has already been presented for a similar system in Ref. 36. The formula for the mean current to lead j is: (63) where the trace is performed in Nambu space, G is the full dot Green function (including the coupling to the leads), and Σ j is the self-energy for lead j. The superscripts r, a, K refer to the retarded, advanced and Keldysh components. Similarly, the formula for the current autocorrelations at finite frequency Ω is: Note that there is an extra term compared to Eq. (51) of Ref. 36, as we are not computing the current cross-correlations between different leads, but instead the autocorrelations. For Ω > 0 (resp. Ω < 0), Eq. (64) gives the emission noise S + (Ω) [resp. the absorption noise S -(Ω)] -to be compared with Eqs. ( We now turn to the results obtained with Eqs. ( Focusing then on a symmetric junction with a dot at zero energy ( = 0), we now plot the emission noise. Fig. We see that, as in the case of the NTS junction, there is a clear plateau in the emission noise, which extends up to Ω = eV . This plateau is the manifestation of the discrete level (here the dot level), which is associated with a narrow peak in the density of states. However, an important difference with respect to the NTS case is also visible in Figs. 9 and 10: at small frequency Ω, there is a dip in the emission noise, with a value at Ω = 0 which is exactly half that of the plateau. When probed on a very long timescale (as in the zero frequency noise), the current fluctuations are reduced by a factor 1/2 due to the double-barrier structure with symmetric couplings. When the timescale is reduced to a time smaller than the average transfer time of an electron between an electrode and the dot level (∼ 1/Γ), then the double-barrier nature of the setup has no impact on the current fluctuations, which explains why the dip in S + (Ω) has a width ∼ Γ. This factor 1/2 for the contrast of the observed dip corresponds to the well-known Fano factor reduction in double-barrier symmetric junctions. The hunt for Majorana fermions continues to be an active field of research. Besides the zero voltage anomaly which was predicted, and in principle measured, by several experimental and theoretical groups, more signatures of these manifestations of collective electronic excitations are desperately needed. In this work, we focused on a normal metal/topological superconductor junction subjected to a constant voltage bias using the non-equilibrium Keldysh formalism. Starting from the boundary Green's functions describing the two isolated parts, we were able to express the average current and noise in terms of dressed Green's functions, accounting for tunneling between the leads at all orders. This allows us to investigate the stationary current, the zero frequency noise and, the main result of this analysis, the finite-frequency emission and absorption noise. Computed for various voltages, at small and intermediate transparency, the finite-frequency noise S + (Ω) and S -(Ω) for the NTS junction show various structures, which can be tied to different emission or absorption processes. In particular, the distinctive feature associated with the presence of the Majorana bound state is a plateau in the noise, extending all the way from Ω = 0 up to a sharp step at frequency Ω = eV for voltages in the subgap regime. The presence of such a plateau is a general feature of a system with a discrete level, which is here the Majorana bound state. However, for a nontopological system with an accidental discrete level at zero-energy, we have shown by computing the emission noise in a N-dot-S system that the double barrier nature of the setup imposes a dip in the plateau at low frequency Ω, which is absent for the NTS junction. In this particu-lar N-dot-S system, the observation of the plateau for the whole frequency range could thus be used to discriminate between an accidental zero-energy Andreev bound state, and a real Majorana bound state. Nevertheless, this still leaves open the possibility that more general superconducting systems which bear ABS embedded in the superconductor would generate the same differential conductance and noise signals as the NTS junction. In any case, tunnel junctions should still be favored, as these characteristic structures are more prominent in the limit of small tunneling amplitudes, and get smoothed out when the transparency is increased. Finally, we used a generic model for measuring noise consisting of a LC circuit inductively coupled to the normal metal/topological superconductor junction under study. In actual experiments, the temperature of this LC circuit is not necessarily the same as the electronic temperature of the junction. We see that when the temperature of the detection (LC) circuit is comparable to that of the electronic temperature of the NTS junction, we recover the same features as the ones observed in the emission and absorption noise. While higher temperatures of the detection circuit slightly blur the quality of this diagnosis, there still remains specific signatures which can be tied to tunneling processes involving the Majorana bound state. Our results therefore suggest that finitefrequency noise measurements offer a novel diagnostic of the presence of Majorana fermions in condensed matter systems. Extensions could include taking into account the finite length of the TS wire where the two Majorana bound states located at each end hybridize, or changing the chemical potential of the continuum version of the Kitaev chain model used here in order to trigger a transition to the non-topological phase. Using a more realistic model for the topological superconductor, including the electron spin, induced superconductivity, etc. is another notable extension in view of a quantitative comparison with experiments. 