We report the structural, transport, electronic, and magnetic properties of Co2FeGa Heusler alloy nanoparticles. The Rietveld refinements of x-ray diffraction (XRD) data with the space group Fm 3m clearly demonstrates that the nanoparticles are of single phase. The particle size (D) decreases with increasing the SiO2 concentration. The Bragg peak positions and the inter-planer spacing extracted from high-resolution transmission electron microscopy image and selected area electron diffraction are in well agreement with data obtained from XRD. The coercivity initially increases from 127 Oe to 208 Oe between D = 8.5 nm and 12.5 nm, following the D -3/2 dependence and then decreases with further increasing D up to 21.5 nm with a D -1 dependence, indicating the transition from single domain to multidomain regime. The effective magnetic anisotropic constant behaves similarly as coercivity, which confirms this transition. A complex scattering mechanisms have been fitted to explain the electronic transport properties of these nanoparticles. In addition we have studied corelevel and valence band spectra using photoemission spectroscopy, which confirm the hybridization between d states of Co/Fe. Further nanoparticle samples synthesized by co-precipitation method show higher saturation magnetization. The presence of Raman active modes can be associated with the high chemical ordering, which motivates for detailed temperature dependent structural investigation using synchrotron radiation and neutron sources. Heusler alloys with the formula X 2 YZ, where X, Y are transition metals and Z is a main group element, which posses the L2 1 structure have attracted great attention due to their rich potential for fundamental science and their wide range of practical applications in spintronics, for solar cells, thermoelectric applications, as shape memory materials, and topological semimetals In recent years, the Co-based Heusler alloys have been studied by reducing the dimensionality, which envisage the importance of size and interfaces in altering their physical properties for various applications However, a detailed study of the magnetic domain structure, critical size, and magnetic anisotropy is still lacking in Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles, and a systematic investigation is required for the various technological applications. In order to understand the relationship between particle size and magnetic properties it is necessary to control the particle size during the synthesis of nanoparticles. In this paper we have focused on the correlation of domain structure and particle size of Co 2 FeGa arXiv:1810.07660v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 17 Oct 2018 nanoparticles. The nanoparticle samples have been synthesized by the sol-gel method with silica support, where the silica concentration plays a crucial role in controlling the particle size Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles were synthesized by the sol-gel method, where 0.48 mmol of Fe(NO 3 ) 3 .9H 2 O, 0.49 mmol of CoCl 2 .6H 2 O and 0.32 mmol of Ga(NO 3 ) 3 .xH 2 O (x=8) were mixed in 50 ml methanol. All the precursors were used as purchased from a commercial supplier without any further purification. For decomposition and reduction of Co, Fe and Ga precursor the solution was sonicated for 5 min. Further, a known concentration of fumed silica (1000, 750, 500, 250, 100, 50 and 25 mg) was added to this solution and mixed in ultra-sonicator bath for 1h. After that when the resulting solution turned yellowish, it was continuously stirred overnight at room temperature to evaporate the solvent and obtain in the gel form. Then, this gel has been dried at 90 0 C for 2hrs. In order to get fine homogeneous dense powder, this solid was gently grinded for few minutes and annealed at 800 0 C for 5hrs in 10% H 2 balanced Ar flow An another series of Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles samples have been synthesized by co-precipitation method as follow. Initially all the precursors in the proper stoichiometric form, i.e. CoCl 2 .6H 2 O (0.400g), Fe(NO 3 ) 3 .9H 2 O (0.404g) and Ga(NO 3 ).8H 2 O (0.500g) have been dissolved in 30 ml de-ionized water and kept to stir for complete mixing of these precursors. Then, a solution of NaOH was added drop wise during the stirring and the pH value was adjusted accordingly. When all the metal ions are settled, the precipitate was obtained by filtering and washing this solution by de-ionized water. Finally, the precipitate was annealed at 800 0 C for 2hrs in gas mixture of Ar with 10 % H 2 . In order to study the effect of pH on the physical properties of these nanoparticles, we varied the pH values from 5, 7, 9, to11 and named the samples as pH5, pH7, pH9, and pH11, respectively. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed using Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation and the obtained data were analyzed by the Rietveld refinements using the FullProf package, where the background was fitted using a linear interpolation between the data points. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurement the samples were transferred from methanol suspension to copper grids. The TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) measurements were performed using the JEOL JEM-1400 Plus microscope with 120 KV accelerating voltage. Magnetic susceptibility and transport measurements were performed using a physical properties measurements system (PPMS EVERCOOL-II) from Quantum design, USA. A commercial photoemission spectrometer (ESCALAB250Xi from Thermo, located at the UNSW, Australia) with chamber pressure < 5×10 -10 mbar has been used to study the electronic structure of the CFG-25 sample. We used a monochromatic AlK α x-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV) and a discharge He source (hν = 21.2 eV) for performing x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) measurements, respectively. For Raman spectroscopy measurements, we used a Argon gas laser with excitation wavelength of 514 nm. The scattered light was analyzed using a Dilor-XY triple spectrometer (at UNSW) in backscattering geometry. In order to avoid laser heating of the metallic samples, the power of the incident laser beam was kept below 10 mW at the sample position. The particle size (<D>) distributions of the Co 2 FeGa CFG-500 CFG-50 i n nanoparticles was studied using TEM. In Figs. 2, we show the TEM images (a-c) and the extracted particle size distribution histograms (d-f) of CFG-1000, CFG-250 and CFG-25 nanoparticle samples, respectively. All TEM images show that the particles are roughly spherical in shape. We have plotted the particle size histogram by considering a large number of individual particles (around 100) using ImageJ software. The histograms have been fitted with lognormal fit (solid line), in which the peaks correspond to the average particle size. From the histogram it is clearly seen that the particle size and the distribution are increasing with decreasing the SiO 2 concentration, see Figs. Recently, Li et al., studied the correlation between the particle size and magnetic properties of Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles and discussed the results in terms of single and multidomain structures where, M(H) is the magnetization at an applied field H, M S is saturation magnetization, and χ p is high field paramagnetic susceptibility. The coefficient of 0.0762 is adopted for cubic anisotropy The K ef f was obtained by plotting dM/dH as a function of 1/H 3 (not shown) in the high field range for each sample. The variation of K ef f with the particle size is shown in Fig. It has been reported that the coercivity increases to a maximum value at a particular particle size and then starts to decrease with further increasing particle size , where g and h are constants and D is the particle size With further increasing the particle size the coercivity decreases, which indicates a multi-domain regime above the critical size D c . The particle size variation with coercivity in the multi-domain regime can be expressed as where a, b are constants Here we note that the highest magnetization (closest to the Slater-Pauling rule) is observed for CFG-25 sample. Therefore we have choosen this sample for electrical resistivity, photoemission and Raman measurements. The variation of the resistivity with temperature in 5-380 K range is shown in Fig. where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity caused by impurities. Electron-electron scattering is expressed by ρ e-e , which has a T 2 dependence at low temperature. The observed T 2 dependence of resistivity could also arise from one magnon scattering, but in half-metals like Heusler alloys, one magnon scattering is absent In the temperature range from 5 K to100 K, the resistivity has been fitted with the following relation For high temperatures between 100 K and 380 K the fitting has been performed using the following equation Region-I (5 K-100 K) A (Ω cm) B (Ω cm K -1/2 ) C (Ω cm K -2 ) D (Ω cm K -9/2 ) 10.62 -2.46×10 -2 4.21×10 -5 -5.93×10 -11 Region-II (100 K-380 K) E (Ω cm) F (Ω cm K -1 ) G (Ω cm K -7/2 ) 10. Here, the constants A and E represent the residual resistivity value, B is the temperature coefficient for disorder, C and F are the temperature coefficient for ρ e-e and ρ e-ph respectively, D and G are the temperature coefficients for two magnon scattering. All the values of the parameters obtained from the fitting are listed in Table In order to study the electronic properties of the CFG-25 sample, we have performed x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and ultra-violet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) measurements using a monochromatic AlK α x-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV) and a discharge He source (hν = 21.2 eV), respectively. Figures. As discussed in the Introduction section, the synthesis process of nanoparticles of Heusler alloys is crucial and the amount of SiO 2 in the sol-gel method strongly affects the physical properties. Therefore, we have also prepared Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles using a co-precipitation method where SiO 2 has not required. The XRD patterns for samples prepared with different pH values are shown in Fig. Y obs 8. From the pattern we can see that all the nanoparticles are well crystalline in nature and the crystal structure is stable having cubic structure without any indication for a secondary phase. The Bragg peaks in XRD pattern corresponds to the (220), ( As mentioned before, Co-based Heusler alloys have a large potential for future spintronic applications and the quality of the crystal structure plays an important role in achieving high spin polarization. Therefore, it is also important to study the lattice vibrations, which are highly sensitive to disorder or direct changes in the crystal structure. For this purpose, Raman spectroscopy is a powerful, sensitive and nondestructive technique in order to investigate the structural changes, which provides the information about the modifications in the lattice vibrations. For the Heusler compounds theoretical calculations have predicated that formerly triply degenerate optical modes can split into three well-separated modes: Γ = F 2g + 2F 1u Using Raman light scattering we have studied the lattice vibrations of Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles samples synthesized by chemical route using SiO 2 (CFG-25 sample) and different pH values ranging from 5 to 11. In Figure In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized ternary Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles via two different chemical methods. First, we optimized the synthesis procedure of these nanoparticles by sol-gel method using different SiO 2 concentrations and have analyzed their structural, magnetic, transport and electronic properties. The XRD, SAED, and high resolution TEM data confirm the perfect crystalline single phase of all nanoparticles. The particle size of these spherical nanoparticles was controlled by varying the SiO 2 concentration. We have established the correlation between particle size and domain structure of these nanoparticles, where the coercivity H C increases with increasing particle size, reaches a maximum value at a critical size, and then decreases with further increase in particle size. The effective magnetic anisotropy constant also behaves in this manner. These results are discussed in terms of the transition from single domain to multi-domain regime. The contribution to electrical resistivity in CFG-25 sample is mainly caused by disorder and electron -phonon interactions in the low and high temperature region, respectively. The valance band spectrum of CFG-25 sample shows a hybridization between the d states of Co and Fe. The Co 2 FeGa nanoparticles prepared by co-precipitation method show magnetization increases with increase in pH value. Finally we have observed Raman active modes, which can be attributed to the high chemical ordering L2 1 structure in all our samples. On the other hand, the L2 1 symmetry can be broken in the nanoparticles due to the size effects, internal strain and enhanced surface effects.