We applied the clustering technique using DTW (dynamic time wrapping) analysis to XRD (X-ray diffraction) spectrum patterns in order to identify the microscopic structures of substituents introduced in the main phase of magnetic alloys. The clustering is found to perform well to identify the concentrations of the substituents with successful rates (∼90%). The sufficient performance is attributed to the nature of DTW processing to filter out irrelevant informations such as the peak intensities (due to the incontrollability of diffraction conditions in polycrystalline samples) and the uniform shift of peak positions (due to the thermal expansions of lattices). The established framework is applicable not limited to the system treated in this work but widely to the systems to be tuned their properties by atomic substitutions within a phase. The framework has larger potential to predict wider properties from observed XRD patterns in a way that it can provide such properties evaluated from predicted microscopic local structure, such as magnetic moments, optical spectrum etc.). The concept of materials informatics based on the big data science has attracted recent interests in the context for discovering and exploring novel materials Ab initio calculations are used to generate supervising references for the machine learning of XRD patterns: We prepared several possible model structures with substituents located on different sites over a range of substitution fractions. Geometrical optimizations for each model give slightly different structures from each other. Then we generated many XRD patterns calculated from each structure. We found that the DTW (dynamic time wrapping) analysis can capture slight shifts in XRD peak positions corresponding to the differences of each relaxed structure, distinguishing the fractions and positions of substituents. We have established such a clustering technique using Ward's analysis on top of the DTW, being capable of sorting out simulated XRD patterns based on the distinction. The established technique can hence learn the correspondence between XRD peak shifts and microscopic structures with substitutions over many supervising simulated data. Since the ab initio simulation can also give several properties such as magnetization for each structure, the correspondence in the machine learning can further predict functional properties of materials when it is applied to the experimental XRD patterns, not only being capable of distinguishing the atomic substitutions. The machine learning technique for XRD patterns developed here has therefore the wider range of applications not limited only on magnets, but further on those materials which properties are tuned by the atomic substitutions. For our target system, [Sm (1-y) Zr y ] Fe 12-x Ti x , we examined the range for x and y as shown in Table After applying lattice relaxations to the initial structures achieved by ab initio geometrical optimizations, we can calculate XRD patterns for the lattices. The procedures in details for the above are given in Sec.'Computational details'. We could therefore generate 'simulated XRD patterns' as above, e.g., 26 patterns for the Sm/Zr substitution, those are the data for the clustering by the unsupervised learning. We examine The numbers of inequivalent configurations of Sm (1-y) Zr y Fe 12-x Ti x to be considered. The numbers in bracket indicate the structure constructed from 2 × 2 × 2 supercell (Sm/Zr), while the rest from 2 × 2 × 1 supercell (Fe/Ti). y\x 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.000 1 13 22 (1) 27 61 0.125 -- Resultant XRD patterns (simulated one) fairly well coincides with experimental ones, as shown in Fig. Specifying a clustering framework is generally given by a combination of methods, a ⊗ b, where 'a/that scoring the dissimilarity', and 'b/that making linkages between elements to form clusters based on the given dissimilarity'. In the present work, we employed the framework, [Normalized Constrained DTW (NC-DTW)] ⊗ [Ward linkage method], using those implemented in 'Scipy package' TABLE The number given in parenthesis represents the number of degenerated configurations within each symmetry at the initial structures for further lattice relaxations. It amounts therefore 124 configurations in total for generating simulated XRD patterns. x ( space group/number of configurations) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 package. The framework is found to achieve the clustering to distinguish the concentration of Sm/Zr substitutions with sufficiently high accuracy, 96.2% (one failures among 26 XRD patterns), as shown in Fig. When the same method (Ward⊗DTW) as in Sm/Zr case is applied to Fe/Ti, the successful rate for the recognition gets reduced to 33.1%. We can identify the reason why the successful rate for the Fe/Ti gets worse than that for Sm/Zr from the dependence shown in Fig. The problem can be resolved by a way assisted by the advantage of ab initio methods in the sense that they can provide several other quantities not only the optimized lattice parameters. Even when DTW(i, j) ∼ v(x i )v(x j ) does not work well due to the degeneracy in v(x), other quantities such as the magnetization M(v) can be non-degenerate (as shown in Fig. so that it can prevent from the problem due to the degeneracy. We have confirmed that the successful rate is actually improved from 33.1% into 99.19%, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. ), in advance, we can identify such a s k for a given e which gives the smallest distance, |es k |. The simulated s k is accompanied by several quantities, {q α }, such as the formation energy, the magnetization, and the local geometrical configuration of substituents, those evaluated by ab initio method. Then the {q α } can be the theoretical predictions for the observed e, serving a machine-leaning framework for XRD patterns assisted by ab initio simulations. Fig. In the case with the degeneracy (Fig. Clustering package 'Scipy' Several preceding works are found those applied DTW to analyse XRD patterns We have developed such a clustering framework that can be applied to XRD patterns of alloys to distinguish the concentrations of substituents. We found that the clustering works quite well to identify the concentrations when applied to the patterns of magnetic alloys based on SmFe 12 . Supercell models for the substitutions are found to work well with ab initio lattice relaxations, reproducing XRD patterns being sufficiently in coincidence with experiments. The implementation of the clustering with [DTW dissimilarity scoring]⊗ [Ward linkage method] is found to achieve around 90% of the successful rate for distinguishing the concentration. The main reason of the failure case in the clustering is identified being due to the degeneracy, namely the situation where different concentrations give almost the same lattice constant. By imposing quantities predicted by ab initio methods into the weight used for the dissimilarity scoring, such degeneracies are lifted to prevent the clustering from failure. Sufficiently good coincidence between simulated and experimental XRD patterns enables the framework to be used to predict unknown concentrations of the substituent introduced in the main phase of alloys from their XRD patterns. The established framework here is applicable not only to the system treated in this work but widely to the systems to be tuned their properties by atomic substitutions within a phase. Not only identifying the concentrations, the framework has larger potential for usefulness to predict wider properties from observed XRD patterns in a way that it can provide such properties evaluated from predicted microscopic local structure (positions of substitutions etc.), including magnetic moments, optical spectrum etc.). The computations in this work have been performed using the facilities of Research Center for Advanced Computing Infrastructure at JAIST. R.M. is grateful for financial supports from MEXT-KAKENHI (17H05478 and 16KK0097), from FLAGSHIP2020 (project nos. hp180206 and hp180175 at Kcomputer), from Toyota Motor Corporation, from I-O DATA Foundation, and from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR-AOARD/FA2386-17-1-4049). K.H. is grateful for financial supports from FLAGSHIP2020 (project nos. hp180206 and hp180175 at K-computer), KAKENHI grant (17K17762), a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (16H06439), PRESTO (JPMJPR16NA) and the "Materials research by Information Integration Initiative" (MI 2 I) project of the Support Program for Starting Up Innovation Hub from Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). R.H. is grateful for financial support from the Development and Promotion of Science and Technology Talents Project (DPST) for a scholarship to study at Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, and research internship at JAIST. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements for the powdered Sm-Fe-Ti were performed at the beamline BL02B2 in SPring-8 (Proposal Nos. 2016B1618 and 2017A1602). CeO 2 diffraction pattern was used to determine the X-ray energy of 25 keV. The diffraction intensities were collected using a sample rotator system and a high-resolution one-dimensional semiconductor detector (multiple MYTHEN system) with a step size of 2θ = 0.006 [deg.] For getting the structures of the target alloys, [Sm (1-y) Zr y ] Fe 12-x Ti x , we firstly constructed a tetragonal (I4/mmm) crystal structure of SmFe 12 using experimental lattice parameters, a = 0.856 nm and b = 0.480 nm (b = a), of SmFe 11 Ti 17 as an initial setting for further optimizations. For Zr-substitutions replacing Sm sites (ranging from 1-4 atoms), we constructed 2 × 2 × 2 supercell, containing 104 atoms in the primitive of tetragonal (Imm2) of SmFe 11 Ti (Fig. For ab initio calculations, we used the spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) implemented in the 'Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP)' To validate our simulated XRD pattern, the simulated XRD patterns were compared to the experimental XRD patterns. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the optimized structures were theoretically calculated by the powder diffraction pattern utility in VESTA The simulated XRD pattern of SmFe 11 Ti agrees very well with the experimental XRD pattern of Sm 1.05 Fe 10.75 Ti 1.25 (Fig. The hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) was used to identify the simulated XRD patterns. All clustering analysis were carried out using Scipy package 