At a superconductor interface with a ferromagnetic insulator (FI), the FI acts to induce a local exchange field within the S layer, which in the presence of spin-orbit interaction promotes a phasemodulated superconducting state. Here we demonstrate that within a thin superconducting loop that is partially proximitized by a FI, spontaneous currents form with a magnetization-orientationdependent chirality with sizable shifts in Little-Parks oscillations. Furthermore, the critical temperature of the loop is also magnetization-orientation-dependent and conversely, the superconducting transition itself may influence the magnetization direction. More generally, the superconducting region above the FI may serve as a "phase battery" and so offer a new device concept for superconducting spintronics. The interaction of interface superconductivity with materials exhibiting strong spin-orbit coupling We note that in uniform systems the helical phases do not carry a current; however, such current-carrying states may appear in non-uniform EXSO systems such as close to a magnetic island on a thin film superconductor In this letter we demonstrate that the EXSO effect leads to spontaneous currents in a closed superconduct-FIG. ing loop in which the superconductor is partially-coupled to a ferromagnetic insulator (FI) as shown in Fig. To describe the superconducting loop we apply the general Ginzburg-Landau (GL) approach which is relevant at a temperature T close to the critical transition T c of the loop. In the presence of the EXSO, the density f (r) of the GL free energy F = f (r)d 3 r reads Here a = -α(T c -T ), α, b and γ > 0 are the standard GL coefficients, ψ is the superconducting order parameter with, D = -i ∇ + (2e/c)A is the gauge-invariant momentum operator (e > 0), n is the unit vector in the direction along which the inversion symmetry is broken (pointing in the z direction perpendicular to S/F interface in our case), h is the exchange field, and ε 0 (r) is the EXSO constant. We assume that the exchange field h in superconductor is generated by the surface field of the ferromagnetic insulator and as Rashba SO interaction they are localized near the S/F interface. We consider the case of the thin ring (thickness and width smaller than superconducting coherence length ξ) where the SO and Zeeman fields are effectively averaged over the cross section of the ring. Taking into account that in our case both the SO interaction and exchange field are present at the distance of the order of interatomic distance a from the S/F interface and then they are averaged over the ring thickness, we have ε ∼ (a/d) ε b , where d is the thickness of the superconductor and ε b ∼ γ v so /v 2 F is the estimation of the EXSO constant for the bulk superconductor, see for example For a 1D ring of radius R it is convenient to write the GL free energy functional (1) using the polar coordinates (r, φ), and take into account that the tangential φ-component A of the vector-potential A = (0, A, 0) is directly related with the magnetic flux Φ = 2πRA enclosed by the superconducting loop. Then the GL free energy then reads where σ is the cross section of the ring, φ = Φ/Φ 0 is the enclosed magnetic flux in the units of the flux quantum Φ 0 = π c/e and is a projection on the ring of the Rashba SOC for |φ| ≤ π/2 and ε(φ) = 0 otherwise. To calculate T c we are concerned with the linear equation for the superconducting order parameter, which for the functional (2) can be written as where λ(φ) = λ so cos(φ -α), λ so = ε 0 hR/γ is the EXSO parameter for |φ| ≤ π/2 and λ(φ) = 0 otherwise. The eigenvalue τ determines the shift of the transition temperature with respect to its bulk value T c0 . Here ξ 2 0 = γ 2 /αT c0 is the GL coherence length. Note that averaged exchange field h av ∼ h a/d and to preserve the superconductivity we need h av T c . However at v so /v F ∼ 0.1 we may have for R/ξ 0 ∼ 10 ÷ 100 a pretty large spin-orbit parameter λ so ∼ 1 ÷ 10 . The current density corresponding to the functional (2) is determined by the relation and we may verify that the Eq. ( and EXSO coupling constant where dφ cos φ cos(nφ) Then we readily obtain from the Eq. ( (10) Let us consider first the case of the flux smaller than the half quantum φ < 1/2. In this situation zero harmonics ψ 0 will dominate ( ψ n ≪ ψ 0 ) if λ so is small: On the other hand for ψ n , we have which leads to the equation for τ ) and finally we have for the transition temperature where we took into account that λ -n = λ * n and In the absence of the external flux (φ = 0) we have the following dependence of the critical temperature τ on the orientation of the exchange field h: In general case if the flux φ is large min |n -φ| occurs for some finite n 0 and for α = 0 we have similarly The results of the numerical calculations for arbitrary values of λ so are plotted in Fig. (12) Figure We have considered above the case of a thin superconducting ring; however, the effect of the phase accumulation due to EXSO coupling (describing by the constant ε ∼ hε 0 ) is very general and can play the role of a superconducting phase battery. Indeed, let us consider the superconducting loop at temperatures below T c where modulus |ψ| of the order parameter is constant. In the case of the infinite wire in the of the EXSO coupling the phase modulated solution is realized ψ = |ψ| exp(iφ) with φ = q 0 l |ψ| and q 0 = hε 0 /γ (l -coordinate along the wire). This solution, however, corresponds to the absence of superconducting current Boundary condition at the interface between modulated (ε = 0) and usual superconducting phase (ε = 0) corresponds simply to the continuity of the current. Let us consider as a generic example of the superconducting wire loop consisting of the region of the length L h with exchange field and L 0 without exchange field (see Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the spinorbit interaction in combination with a magnetic exchange field (EXSO) may induce non-dissipative currents in superconducting loops with a chirality that is controllable through the magnetization alignment. Superconducting elements with EXSO may generate spontaneous phase shifts governed by magnetic moment orientation and by introducing the EXSO wire L h in a DC SQUID (see Fig. 