Grating-based X-ray phase-contrast interferometry has a high application impact in material science and medicine for imaging of weakly absorbing (low Z) materials and soft tissues. For the absorbing gratings, casting of highly x-ray absorbing metals, such as Au and Pb alloys, has proven to be a viable way to generate large area periodic high aspect ratio microstructures. In this paper, we review the grating fabrication strategy with a special focus on a novel approach of casting low temperature melting alloys (Au-Sn and Pbbased alloy) into Si grating templates using hot embossing. The process, similar to nanoimprint lithography, requires particular adjusting efforts of process parameters as a function of the metal alloy and the grating feature size. The transition between solid and liquid state depends on the alloy phase diagram, the applied pressure can damage the high aspect ratio Si lamellas and the microstructure of the solid metal can affect the grating structure. We demonstrate that metal casting by hot embossing can be used to fabricate gratings on large area (up to 70×70 mm 2 ) with aspect ratio up to 50:1 and pitch in the range of 1-20 μm. Grating-based X-ray phase-contrast Interferometry (GI) enables phase contrast imaging with a much higher image contrast of weakly absorbing materials (such as soft tissues) than conventional absorption-based X-ray radiography imaging Metal microgratings were fabricated according to the work flow described in Figure The pattern was designed by photolithography on Si <100> substrates (diameter of 100 mm) and the silicon etching was performed by deep reactive ion etching (Bosch process) Further details of the casting process are reported elsewhere. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Zeiss Supra VP55 was used to characterize the casted gratings in cross section. The X-ray performance of Au-Sn casted grating with a pitch of 4.8 μm was investigated by setting up a laboratory X-ray grating interferometry system using a Hamamatsu L10101 X-ray microsource (35 kV voltage and 0.2 mA electron current) and scintillator-fiber-optic coupled CCD X-ray detector (1024x1024 pixels of 13 μm). The wetting properties of the liquid metal both on top and on the trench wall surface were extremely critical for uniformly filling the Si grooves When the liquid metal did not uniformly wet the Si surface the metal was unequally distributed over the grooves, filling only some of them. According to the Young-Dupré equation The wetting behavior of the Si template with respect to liquid Au-Sn alloy was realized by a conformal coating of the Si grating with a metal film. In the reported experiments, we used Ir films deposed by ALD. The wetting properties of Au-Sn alloy on the Si grating were studied in a previous publication 7 . The Au-Sn alloy (80 w% Au -20 w% Sn) has an eutectic transition at the temperature of 280 °C. This means that the solid metal foil contains the typical lamellar microstructure of eutectic alloy, the grain size for Au-Sn are usually few hundred nm or even smaller. The solid-liquid transition occurs at the eutectic temperature, ensuring a fast and sharp phase change at the melting temperature. The strategy to obtain metal casting with eutectic alloys was to apply the pressure during the solid-liquid transition in order to force the liquid metal to flow into the Si grooves and to reduce the flow on the grating top surface 7 . The overall process time was about 30 min, including heating and cooling. An example of this approach is reported in a previous publication 7 . For Pb-In alloy, a wetting layer can be created during the thermal process of hot embossing without preliminary ALD coating. This property is due to the presence of In in the compound and because In is a good dopant of Si that forms a chemically stable bonding on the Si surface. The Si grating is dipped in a water diluted HF solution (10 w%) for 10 min immediately prior the hot embossing. The phase diagram of Pb-In alloy with composition of 95 w% Pb and 5 w% In indicated the solidus line at 292 °C and the liquidus line at 314 °C13 . With a sufficient slow heating (10°C/min) and a long process time (600 s under pressure in the temperature range of 290 -330 °C) in the hotembossing system, the separation of the In-rich phase, according to the phase diagram The metals and the Si have different thermal expansion coefficient (Au-Sn 14 : 16•10 -6 /C; Pb: 28•10 -6 /C; Si: 3•10 -6 /C). During the cooling down, the volume shrinkage of the casted metal lines can be easily observed in the large pitch gratings of Au-Sn (pitch 20 μm) and Pb-In (pitch 4.8 μm) reported in Figure Delamination does not significantly affect the X-ray performance of the grating since there are no distortions to the surrounding grating lines. Effectively, such a metal delamination has the same effect of local linewidth change for this particular line. Since the Pb-rich alloys are less stiff (Pb young modulus: 16 GPa), the Si cracking is not observed in this case. The pressure of the in-printing process is a relevant parameter to ensure the complete filling of the cavities. The process is realized in vacuum (chamber pressure in the range 100-500 Pa) to avoid the presence of air bubbles inside the grating lines. However, some cavities are formed inside the metal lamellas because of irregularities in the metal foils or metal shrinkage during the cooling phase. Figure Due to the high aspect ratio, the Si lines deformed by bending on one side, the applied pressure was not supported without deformation of the grating. Figure The use of the gratings in GI experiments will be reported separately. Here, the focus is on the viability of the fabrication and the possible impact of inhomogeneous casting that cannot be detected in SEM characterization. Preliminary characterization of the Au-Sn gratings shows that the alloys behave like expected, with a smaller absorption resulting from the composition of the alloy, i.e. 80 w% for Au-Sn in comparison to electroplated Au gratings. Due to the X-ray source characteristics, X-ray grating interferometry systems typically consist of a combination of two 1 (synchrotron-based setups) or three X-ray gratings In particular, the X-ray performance of Au-Sn casted grating with pitch of 4.8 μm (casting thickness 30 μm, grating area 70×70 mm 2 ) was investigated by a symmetric grating interferometer geometry The total length of the system was 55.8 cm. Initially, the Au-Sn casted grating was used as G0 grating together with a G1 phase grating made of silicon and a G2 absorbing grating fabricated by Au electroplating. An average X-ray fringe visibility of 14.0 %, which is comparable to the values achieved in absorbing gratings fabricated by conventional gold electroplating, was observed. After that, the gratings were exchanged and the Au-Sn casted grating was used as G2, an average X-ray fringe visibility of 16.4 % was obtained. The difference in values is caused by different x-ray filtering properties of the gratings, which suggests that different energy range of x-rays is incident on G1 phase grating, which affects the contrast of interference produced by the gratings. The visibility map (visibility at each X-ray camera pixel) and differential phase contrast and scattering images of sample consisting of polystyrene microspheres of 600 μm are shown in Figure High aspect ratio metal microgratings can be fabricated by direct hot embossing of metal foils into Si gratings. The material properties such as the metal wetting on Si template, the alloy phase diagram, the metal shrinkage during the solidification and the associated stress release contribute to the uniformity and the quality of the manufacturing. The hot embossing parameters such as the heating/cooling ramp and the applied pressure have to be finely tuned as a function of the used metal alloy and grating aspect ratio. We tested Au-Sn, Pb-In and Pb-Sn-Ag alloys underling the different relevant peculiarities. A slow cooling is necessary in order to avoid the Si cracking in Au-Sn casted gratings. This issue is not relevant for Pb-based alloys, being Pb less stiff than Au alloy. Pb-In alloy has a good wettability of the Si surface because of the presence of In that can create a selfwetting layer for the liquid alloy without the necessity of the Ir wetting layer used for the Au-Sn alloy. Pb-Sn-Ag alloy form a liquid-phase containing micro-sized solid particles that damage the Si grating lines during the hot embossing so it cannot be used for grating line size smaller than 3 μm. The casted gratings were tested in an X-ray GI set up in order to compare their performance with respect to Au electroplated gratings. A visibility in the range of 15 % at 20 keV was obtained using Au-Sn casted gratings. The metal gratings are key components for X-ray phase sensitive GI systems. The new method has relevant advantages, such as being a low cost technique, fast and easily scalable to large area fabrication. The presented low cost and high yield fabrication process has a direct impact to the commercialization of X-ray GI for medical diagnostics and non-destructive testing. L. Romano, J. Vila-Comamala, M. Kagias, K. Vogelsang, H. Schift, M. Stampanoni and K. Jefimovs, Microelectronic Engineering 176, 6 (2017). TABLE I. Summarizing the main metal properties and comparison of processing. The attenuation length is the depth into the material measured along the surface normal where the intensity of x-rays falls to 1/e of its value at the surface. It was calculated using ref. 