We formulate the necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of dispersionless energy eigenvalues (so-called 'flat bands') and their associated compact localized eigenstates in M -dimensional tight-binding lattices with N sites per unit cell and complex-amplitude nearestneighbour tunneling between the lattice sites. The degrees of freedom M can be traded for longerrange complex hopping in lattices with reduced dimensionality. We show the conditions explicitly for (M = 1, N ≤ 4), (M = 2, N = 2, 3), and (M = 3, N = 2, 3), and outline their systematic construction for arbitrary N , M . If and only if the conditions are satisfied, then the system has one or more flat bands. By way of an example, we obtain new classes of flat band lattice geometries by solving the conditions for the lattice parameters in special cases. Many interesting phases of matter exist when interactions are strong compared to the kinetic energy. Indeed, the study of strongly-interacting many-body quantum systems, ranging from high-temperature superconductors The above considerations highlight the importance of finding and identifying novel classes of flat band Hamiltonians in a systematic way. The absence of dispersion results from destructive interference. Apart from simple cases it is not clear how to engineer (nearly) dispersionless bands in general, topological or not, because this * lauri.toikka@gmail.com requires significant fine-tuning of the lattice overlap integrals -flat bands are generally fragile and destroyed by perturbations unless protected by a symmetry that is respected by the perturbations. An obvious idea of flattening a band by dividing the Hamiltonian in the momentum representation by one of the eigenstates leads to a Hamiltonian in real space that has unphyscial long-range hoppings. In contrast, much progress has been made in developing methods to discover flat band Hamiltonians with finite-range hoppings. Several approaches have been suggested to construct such flat bands: using line graphs The eigenstates of flat band Hamiltonians with finiterange hoppings can be chosen to have strictly finite support, and correspondingly are commonly referred to as compact localised states (CLSs). Recently, much attention has been devoted to attempts at classifying and generating flat bands based on CLSs by identifying the parameter U , the minimum number of unit cells that a CLS associated with the flat band occupies. The complete characterisation of possible U = 1 flat bands has been performed in Ref. To address the problem of finding flat bands, we provide here a general set of necessary and sufficient conditions for the occurrence of dispersionless bands in Mdimensional tight-binding lattices with N sites per unit cell and complex-amplitude nearest-neighbor tunneling between the lattice sites. We report a new general approach for constructing flat band Hamiltonians by using the momentum representation, which has received much less attention in the flat band literature Many problems in quantum physics involve solving the Schrödinger equation where the potential energy is periodic in space. If for the lattice geometry a local basis in terms of on-site orbitals is sufficient, one typically models the wavefunction using the well-established tight-binding approximation. The associated Bloch Hamiltonian can be viewed as a lattice Fourier transform of the set of real-space overlap (hopping) matrices H 1,m that describe tunneling events between the lattice sites. We write the Bloch Hamiltonian in the form where the sum runs over all the unit cells that are connected through hopping, being not necessarily nearest neighbours. Here H 1,m (for all m = 1, 2, . . . , M ) and H 0 are N × N matrices, where N is the number of bands, which equals to the number of sites in a unit cell. The matrix H 0 specifies the intra-cell dynamics, and the set H 1,m specifies the inter-cell dynamics. Without loss of generality, for Hermitian systems, it suffices to consider the 'canonical' case , where the b n (for all n = 1, 2, . . . , N ) are real numbers, by simply performing a suitable basis transformation. In the case of two bands (N = 2), one can further set b 1 = 0 and b 2 = 1 by suitable shifts and rescaling of the spectrum of the Hamiltonian. Quite generally, hopping amplitudes in a lattice can have a phase, e.g. from the Aharonov-Bohm effect in the presence of a magnetic field or spin-orbit coupling; we therefore take H 1,m ∈ C. In this work, we require the flat band to be dispersionless with respect to the M separate momenta q m = q • R m . Importantly, we do not specify the momenta, which means that they can be taken to be linearly independent or linearly dependent. The former case describes an M -dimensional lattice with strictly nearestneighbour hopping, while in the latter case a subset of the momenta q m has been utilized to describe lattices that include further nearest-neighbour hopping. In particular, this flexibility makes our approach powerful for describing a plethora of different flat band lattice geometry classes once we have solved for H 1,m and H 0 the conditions that guarantee the existence of one or more flat bands. To determine the set of necessary and sufficient conditions for one or more flat bands, we start by writing the characteristic equation with eigenvalue λ, which, as indicated, is intended to hold for all q guaranteeing the non-dependence of λ on momentum in the entire Brillouin zone. Focusing in this Section on nearestneighbour hoppings, H 1 ≡ H 1,m , the Bloch Hamiltonian reads where H 1 and H 0 are N × N matrices, and N is the number of bands. To find the necessary and sufficient flat band conditions, we first express the characteristic polynomial p(λ) ≡ det (H q -λI N ) = N k=0 c k λ k of the N × N matrix H q as a polynomial in η ≡ e iq : p(η) = N k=-N xk η k , where xk ≡ x * -k . We then solve the coupled non-linear set {x k } = 0 for the matrix elements of H 1 and H 0 . It can be proven by induction that this set of equations forms the necessary and sufficient existence conditions for flat bands in one dimension. We generalise this principle to higher dimensions in Sec. IV. The procedure described above assumes its simplest non-trivial form in the case of two bands in one dimension with real-valued nearest neighbour hoppings, for which the Bloch Hamiltonian reads In this section, H 1 = a b c d with (a, b, c, d) ∈ R 4 , and we assume that H 0 is scaled so that it is given by 0 where Θ is the Heaviside step function and where η = e iq , and Setting (x 0 , x 1 , x 2 ) = (0, 0, 0), we find from the system (6) the necessary and sufficient flat band conditions which can be straightforwardly solved for (a, b, c, d) once ζ and λ are given. For example, a flat band at zero energy (λ = 0) exists such that is the only solution with d arbitrary. • If ζ = -1 (no on-site terms), then there are infinitely many solutions such that b = c, ad = bc. In the context of the classifications of flat bands based on the compact localised states, both of the above cases have the property U = 1, since λ coincides with an eigenvalue of H 0 Since the determinant of a Hermitian matrix is always real, in the expansion of the determinant the complexvalued terms η k xk are always be paired with their complex conjugates. The polynomial p(η) reads where xi = x * -i for all i = 1, 2, . . . , N + 1. Here, the coefficients xi are in general non-linear functions of the hopping and on-site parameters determining H 0 and H 1 . As indicated earlier, to formulate the flat band conditions we must have all the coefficients vanish individually: x-1 = x-2 = . . . = x-(N+1) = 0. After a direct calculation, we find x x Here C (C 0 ) is the cofactor matrix of H 1 (H 0 ), and H 0 is taken to be diagonal and real. Specifically, we define The system (9) amounts to the full set of sufficient and necessary existence conditions for a flat band at energy λ and its associated compact localized eigenstates in one dimension with N bands and complex nearest-neighbour hopping. That they are sufficient is trivial, and that they are also necessary can be proven by induction. We identify the condition (9a) as the self-interference property of CLSs that requires the hopping matrix H 1 to be degenerate. It reflects the physical property that the flat band eigenstates are compact, that is, there exists a nonzero eigenvector ψ such that H 1 ψ = 0 which means at least one of the eigenvalues of H 1 must be zero leading to Eq. (9a). However, as we have shown here explicitly in terms of the exhaustive existence conditions (9), one evidently needs much more to suppress dispersion. We have verified Eqs. (9a), (9b), and (9c) with the supplementary property f (N ) -(N -1) (0, 0, H 1 ) = 0 for N ≤ 8. Mathematically, Eq. ( ) is limited only by the capacity of generic symbolic computation packages. The principle of the above proof by construction for the necessary and sufficient CLS-FB conditions is the same for any N . Having an M -dimensional Bloch Hamiltonian (1) means that the conditions (9) for the one-dimensional case are repeated for every m = 1, . . . , M . However, there are also additional conditions from the cross-term coefficients. The multinomial p({η m }) reads where m is the dimensionality index, n is the band number index, η m ≡ e iq•Rm , and the set -n , and y , where x(m,N) n is the additional contribution to the direct one-dimensional coefficient. The algebraic form The necessary and sufficient CLS-FB existency equations for N bands in M dimensions form the set of equations where the bar denotes complex conjugation. The complex conjugates in effect are automatically satisfied if the above are satisfied. The functions f are given in system (A1) up to N ≤ 4. If the necessary and sufficient conditions Moreover, our approach makes it possible to construct a pseudo-flat band that is flat only along the directions {m i } in momentum space, by solving only the conditions involving m ∈ {m i }, and leaving the directions m / ∈ {m i } unconstrained. We now demonstrate the usefulness of our apporach and solve the necessary and sufficient conditions If the flat band energy λ coincides with any of the diagonal elements b n of H 0 , then the resulting compact localized states associated with the flat band are all contained within just one unit cell Setting H 0 = 0 and λ = 0, we can solve the coupled non-linear conditions such that d ∈ R, and c 1 , c 2 ∈ C (Fig. Re(c 2 ) [cos(q 1 ) + d cos(q 2 )] +Im(c 2 ) [sin(q 1 ) + d sin(q 2 )] . ( Similarly, setting a subset of the parameters of the Hamiltonian to zero, we find that the following are examples of flat-band solutions to the conditions Here, q 3 (q 2 ) can be any linear combination of q 1 , q 2 (q 1 , q 3 ). For example, are flat-band Hamiltonians in 1D. Here, we took q 1 = q 2 = q 3 . Taking q 2 = 2q 1 and q 3 = 3q 1 would correspond to a one-dimensional lattice with three bands, nearest and next-nearest neighbour hopping (Fig. As another example, we use the necessary and sufficient conditions (9) to find new flat band classes with U > 1, for which a complete generator is currently missing. If λ = b n for all n = 1, . . . , N (the elements of H 0 ), then the corresponding flat band cannot have CLSs in the class U = 1. This follows from the condition (9a): if U = 1 then λ is an eigenvalue of H 0 because the eigenproblem (H q -λI) ψ reduces to H 0 ψ = λψ. Instead of starting from a fully undetermined Hamiltonian by attempting to solve the conditions (9) for all the parameters of the Hamiltonian, we start from the well-known lattice model of the diamond chain, which has the gapped spectrum {0, -2, 2 [1 + cos (q 1 )]}. The flat band at 0 belongs to the U = 1 class, while the flat band at -2 belongs to the U = 2 class. In the canonical basis where H 0 is diagonal, the Hamiltonian reads H q = e -iq1 H † 1 + e iq1 H 1 + H 0 , where Indeed, the flat band λ = 0 coincides with the diagonal elements of H 0 and H 1 takes the form of the U = 1 solution 1 + e iq1 H1 + H0 , where H(b) Here there are two equivalent choices for H1 , labelled by 'a' and 'b'. The necessary and sufficient conditions Recent attempts at classifying and generating flat bands have concentrated on identifying the parameter U , the minimum number of unit cells that a compact localized state associated with the flat band occupies, or lattice-specific methods that lack generality. Here, by focussing on the momentum-space representation, we have used an entirely different approach which allowed us to derive the full set of sufficient and necessary existence conditions for flat bands in generic tight-binding lattices. Our approach, using the necessary and sufficient conditions An immediate benefit of the explicit system Indeed, the range of examples of new flat band systems that can be generated using our approach is substantial. One of the examples we found in Sec. V A resembles an interesting class of materials called a Weyl semi-metal. The band structure of this exotic phase of matter is characterised by a pair of points in momentum space where two non-degenerate bands touch In summary, we have derived the necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of flat bands in Mdimensional tight-binding lattices with N sites per unit cell and complex-amplitude nearest-neighbour tunneling between the lattice sites. That they are sufficient is trivial, and that they are also necessary can be proven by induction. If and only if the conditions are satisfied, then the system has one or more flat bands. where ijk ∈ P 3 means all the six permutations of (1, 2, 3). 21 . (B2g) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) 22 (1) 32 (1) 33 (1) 21 (1) 32 (1) 33 (1) 31 (1) 33 (1) 32 (2) 32 -h 1,1 = y 11 h (2) 22 (H 0 ) 33 -h (2) (2) (2) (2) 21 (H 0 ) 33 + h (2) (2) (2) (2) 12 (H 0 ) 33 + h (2) (2) 11 (H 0 ) 33 -h (2) 21 h(1) 33 , x(1,3) (2) 33 (2) 32 (2) 33 (2) 21 (2) 31 (2) 32 (2) 13 (2) 33 (2) 32 (2) 33 -h (2) 13 h(2) 13 -h (2) 31 (2) 11 (2) 32 ( ) -det (H 0 -λI 3 ). (B3i) • N = 3 and M = 3. Instead of giving the terms in explicit detail as above, we simply list the non-zero ones: ) -2 det (H 0 -λI 3 ). (B4c) Appendix C: More U = 1 flat band cases from solving the necessary and sufficient conditions We present here a collection of one-dimensional Bloch Hamiltonians with four and five bands; that is, we take N = 4, 5, M = 1 (Fig. such that r 1-8 ∈ R.