The advances in fabrication processes in different material platforms employed in integrated optics are opening the path towards the implementation of circuits with increasing degree of complexity. In addition to the more conventional Application Specific Photonic Circuit (ASPIC) paradigm the Programmable Multifunctional Nanophotonics (PMN) approach is a transversal concept inspired by similar approaches, which are already employed in other technology fields. For instance, in electronics Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) devices enable a much more flexible universal operation as compared to Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs). In photonics, the PMN concept is enabled by two-dimensional (2D) waveguide meshes for which, the number of possible input/outputs ports quickly builds up and furthermore, internal signal flow paths make the computation of transfer functions an intractable problem. Here we report a scalable method based on mathematical induction that allows one to obtain the scattering matrix of any 2D integrated photonic waveguide mesh circuit composed of an arbitrary number of cells and which is easily programmable. To our knowledge this is the first report of the kind and our results open the path to unblock this important design bottleneck. Programmable Multifunctional Nanophotonics (PMN) aims at designing common integrated optical hardware configurations, which can implement a wide variety of functionalities by suitable programming The extension of 2D waveguide meshes to account for an increased number of cells and therefore to implement more complex structures including a higher number of TBUs (>80) is desirable, as this will dramatically expand the number of functionalities that can be implemented with a given hardware configuration. Several physical and design limitations have to be overcome and one of the most important is the availability of a scalable method of analysis Mathematical induction (MI), is a technique that can be employed to prove some particular rule or pattern, usually infinite or arbitrarily large Here we report a scalable method based on mathematical induction that allows one to obtain the analytic scattering matrix of any 2D integrated photonic waveguide mesh circuit composed of an arbitrary number of cells and which is easily programmable. To our knowledge this is the first report of the kind and our results open the path to unblock this important design bottleneck. The method not only provides all the desired input/output transfer functions, but also allows to design the unused regions of the waveguide mesh so they can be employed to manage undesired contributions from reflected and crosstalk signals and thus optimize the chip performance and furthermore, it allows to study all the input/output responses as the internal parameters of the TBUs are changed opening the path for error evaluation via Monte Carlo simulations and the incorporation of machine learning algorithms for circuit self-correction. Although the procedure proposed here is developed for a hexagonal waveguide mesh, it can be applied to any uniform 2D mesh topology. In photonics, the PMN concept is enabled by two-dimensional waveguide meshes formed by replicating square, hexagonal We propose here a method for the analytic determination of the full scattering matrix of waveguide meshes composed of an arbitrary number of hexagonal cells. The method uses mathematical induction and is based on increasing 2D hexagonal waveguide meshes formed by n-1 trilattices by adding an extra trilattice unit. Formally the method is stated in the following way. A 2D structure formed by one trilattice is described by a unitary scattering matrix H(1) with known coefficients. Then, if a 2D structure formed by n-1≥1 trilattices is described by a unitary scattering matrix H(n-1) with known coefficients, the structure composed of n trilattices obtained from appending an additional trilattice H(1) to the former is described by a unitary scattering matrix H(n) with known coefficients. This method allows the sequential derivation of the scattering matrix of a n-th order arbitrary hexagonal waveguide mesh using the scattering matrix of the previous lower order mesh H(n-1) and that of the newly added trilattice H Scenario 0: This is the simplest case and the starting point in the generation of a new mesh design. Here, only one out of the 6 ports that define the tri-lattice is connected to the previous mesh ports. The addition of the new tri-lattice increases the number of mesh ports by 4, increasing the number of rows and columns in the scattering matrix, correspondingly. Scenario 1: Here, the addition of the new tri-lattice increases the number of mesh ports by two but the number of complete hexagonal cells does not increase. Scenario 2: Here, the addition the new tri-lattice increases the number of ports by two and the number of complete cells by one. Scenario 3: In this case, the addition the new tri-lattice does not increase the number of ports, since it connects three ports to the previous mesh and the number of complete cells is increased by one. Figure To illustrate the method of analysis we have chosen a waveguide mesh composed by 18 hexagonal cells built upon assembling 27 trilattices as shown in figure We first show the application of the method when a single wavelength operation is considered. We programmed the mesh to implement two multiport rectangular interferometers simultaneously. A 3x3 interferometer is shown inside a blue box, while a 4x4 interferometer is shown in a yellow box. Figure H Hybrid  1 2 The results obtained using the analytic method for a single wavelength are shown in figure The latter have no impact over the circuit operation provided that no input signal is fed to these undesired ports. However, some of these can still be employed and input signals will have no impact over the programmed circuits. This information is provided in the 2D matrix maps. For instance, 3.c. shows that no input signal can be allowed in ports 12 and 13 for the correct operation of the hybrid while input signals from ports 3, 5, 7, 9 etc, will have no impact. In the second case the mesh is programmed to implement a 3x3 beamsplitter and a 4x4 Hadamard transformation. The results rendered by the analytic method are displayed in figure The more powerful and versatile characteristics of the analytic method are however unleashed when using it for spectral characterization. Here, the wavelength (or frequency) dimension is added and truly spectral transfer functions are immediately provided in a few seconds. Figure The most important sources of impairment in the operation of waveguide mesh circuits derive from the fact that either imperfect components are obtained as a result of the fabrication process or that the setting values for the structure phase shifters depart from the ideal values required by design A distinctive feature of the method proposed here is that it provides information related to all the possible signal paths and transfer functions established between input and output ports of the mesh once it has been programmed to implement a given circuit or a simultaneous group of circuits. The mesh is then divided into two parts. One part corresponds to the elements employed to implement the circuits while the other is composed of the elements that are not needed. This second part of the mesh can either be left as it stands or, more interestingly, it can be employed to improve the performance of the programmed circuits by establishing connections to drain possible sources of crosstalk between the implemented circuits to subsidiary ports. Since the method provides the complete information regarding the waveguide mesh, it can be readily employed to test the impact of the programming of non-essential parts of the mesh in order to optimize its operation. To our knowledge no other method reported so far is able to provide this feature. To illustrate this concept, we consider now an example where the waveguide mesh is programmed to implement two simple circuits; a three cavity CROW device [43] and a simple MZI filter. Figure By suitable biasing of the unused TBUs (see Supplementary Material 6) the leaking signals can be re-directed to drain ports for elimination. For example, we have configured the TBUs paced outside the marked regions in the mesh to achieve the routing of these un-desired crosstalk signals to achieve a crosstalk improvement of 20 dB as shown in Fig 6 .f. We ran the test for standard deviation levels σK ranging from 0. 5 % to 2 % obtaining a considerable improvement for the crosstalk levels in all the relevant circuit transfer functions as shown in Fig. An experimental validation of the model is now provided. For this purpose we synthetized and measured different programmed circuits architectures in a seven-cell hexagonal waveguide mesh fabricated in silicon on insulator (see details in The method has been implemented using a script in MATLAB that takes into account the four different scenarios for increasing the waveguide mesh by one trilattice unit. For each case the relevant analytical equations derived in the Supplementary Material 1 are employed. For the Monte Carlo simulations we ran 1000 iterations. The insertion loss of the TBUs is kept fixed to a value of 0.2 dB unless specified. For each iteration, the value of each TBU coupling factor is selected from a normal distribution with average value corresponding to the originally programmed value for ideal operation and a standard deviation specified for each simulation (ranging from 0.5 % to 2 %). Unless specified, overall TBU phase variations are kept fixed to 0. The proposed method can be extended to other waveguide mesh geometries (square, triangular) reported in the literature. The key point here is to identify the unitary building block upon which the mesh can be built (see the Supplementary Material 2 for a description of the unitary building blocks for other cell geometries). It can also be employed for the analysis of triangular and rectangular multibeam feedforward only interferometers. In this case it suffices to emulate the interferometer with the waveguide mesh and program the rest of the mesh to disable any potential signal route outside the physical topology of the interferometer. A final interesting application of the method to be explored in the near future is related to the use of the full scattering matrix to implement circuit state supervision by means of machine learning technique. This could alleviate the need for individual device monitoring by means of signal tapping or CLIPP based approaches In summary, we have reported a scalable analytic method based on mathematical induction that renders the full scattering matrix of any 2D integrated photonic waveguide mesh circuit composed of an arbitrary number of hexagonal cells and which is easily programmable. The method not only provides all the desired input/output transfer functions, but also allows to design the unused regions of the waveguide mesh so they can be employed to manage undesired contributions from reflected signals and thus optimize the chip performance and furthermore, it allows to study all the input/output responses as the internal parameters of the TBUs are changed opening the path for error evaluation via Monte Carlo simulations. We believe that our results open the path to unblock an important bottleneck in the design of complex photonic circuits and will enable the fast analysis of large (LSI) and very large (VLSI) scale integrated multifunctional photonic circuits based on waveguide meshes. Funding. The authors acknowledge financial support by the ERC ADG-2016 UMWP-Chip, the Generalitat Valenciana PROMETEO 2017/017 research excellency award, and the COST Action CA16220 EUIMWP through the FPI predoctoral funding scheme. To illustrate the procedure of obtaining the scattering matrix of hexagonal waveguide meshes with an arbitrary number of Tunable Basic Units (TBUs), we describe here, for each scenario, the associated interconnection diagram and the resulting matrix after appending to a waveguide mesh composed of n-1 tri-lattices (or n-1 order mesh) an additional tri-lattice element to form an n order mesh. Scenario 0: This is the simplest case and the starting point in the generation of a new mesh design. Here, only one out of the 6 ports of the new tri-lattice (Latt N) is connected to the n-1 order mesh. . As shown in Supplementary Figure where IntCon represents the internal connections given by the scattering matrix of the newly added trilattice Latt n. Here, the addition of the new tri-lattice (Latt N) increases the number of mesh ports by two but the number of complete hexagonal cells does not increase, as shown in Supplementary Figure Solving the system of equations related to nodes x=P-1 and y=P renders equations (2) that provide the matrix coefficients that characterize the new waveguide mesh ports and the four submatrices: ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) ( ' ( 1) ( 1,..., 2), ( 1) ( 1) 1 ' Scenario 3: In this case as shown in Supplementary Figure , ' A ., 2), 1 Waveguide meshes can be implemented using different unit cell geometries One of the main benefits of the method proposed resides in its powerful and flexible behavior. To further illustrate its versatility, here we include more examples where multiple 2x2 and 4x4 linear transformations are implemented by more than one circuit programmed over the same waveguide mesh in the case of single-wavelength operation. Moreover, we test the flexibility of the method to characterize the performance of waveguide meshes under realistic conditions by showing how it can be employed to evaluate the impact of having non-ideal components. A wide variety of signal processing operations involve mode transformations, which can be described in terms of multiple input/multiple output linear optics transformations given by an N×N unitary matrix U, 2x2 Transformations (Hadamard, Pauli-y, z): Supplementary Figure , 0 Supplementary Figure Non-unitary Linear transformations: The Single Value Decomposition (SVD) can be used to decompose a non-unitary linear operator into two unitary operators and an intermediate diagonal matrix, The non-ideal behaviour of the TBUs leads to additional losses, scattering, and errors when setting the values for the phases and coupling factors. In the particular case of the implementation and analysis of linear transformations, we can use a simple model that assumes equal insertion loss for every TBU and normal coupling factor and phase drift distribution with standard deviations corresponding to σ K and σ φ , respectively (See Supplementary Note 6 for TBU modelling information). We can quantify the fidelity of the If σ K and σ φ are equal to 0. The fidelity of the hexagonal waveguide mesh remains equal to 1 (100%) independently of the circuit size and the loss per beam splitter. This is not the case for the triangular interferometer design As mentioned in the main document, the more powerful and versatile characteristics of the analytic method are unleashed when using it for spectral characterization. Here, the wavelength (or frequency) dimension is added and truly spectral transfer functions are immediately provided in a few seconds. Moreover, the method can be readily applied in the analysis of complex setups resulting either from the simultaneous programming of multiple independent circuits over the mesh or from involved multistage resonant filters. We provide here two application examples to each case illustrated in Supplementary Figures The Monte-Carlo test performed in this work consider the variation of the whole coupling and phase response of a generic TBU, rather than the variation in the inner couplers and phase-modulators in a balanced Mach-Zehnder configuration. This decision is due to the fact that the TBU architecture is not constrained to the MZI configuration and several alternatives can be employed. To compare the variability in both approaches, we have performed series of 1000-instances Monte-Carlo Test of the MZI-based TBU architecture considering different standard deviation of the inner couplers. These are defined by two independent normal distributions with mean 0.5 (blue-trace). For comparison, we also consider the effect of having the same coefficient in the input and output coupler (red-trace). We show that the numbers employed during the paper of σ K The TBU simplified model employed in the simulations is therefore: where K is the coupling factor in power, φ is the overall phase term, ω n is the normalised frequency (to the BUL) and α is the loss term. However, any model could be straightforwardly employed, including experimental data, or the balanced MZI response with the upper and lower phase terms as arguments. Tables with coupling and phase values. For the implementation of linear transformations, we have employed the adaptation of the rectangular interferometer approach /3 4 /3 4 /3 8 /3