Graphene is an ideal 2D material system bridging electronic and photonic devices. It also breaks the fundamental speed and size limits by electronics and photonics, respectively. Graphene offers multiple functions of signal transmission, emission, modulation, and detection in a broad band, high speed, compact size, and low loss. Here, we will have a brief view of graphene based functional devices at microwave, terahertz, and optical frequencies. Their fundamental physics and computational models will be discussed as well. Electron wavelength is much shorter than photon wavelength. Hence electronic devices exhibit compact sizes. Unfortunately, the electron transport is limited by its mobility or scattering events, which lowers its speed compared to photon transmission or propagation. On the other hand, the sizes of photonic devices are held back by the diffraction or half-wavelength limit. Surface plasmon polariton, which is an entangled state of electron and photon, is a promising candidate to achieve high speed and small size simultaneously. Unfortunately, high ohmic loss of metallic plasmon devices creates a fundamental hurdle for their potential applications. Graphene, a conjugated carbon sheet arranged in a two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal lattice, allows multifunctions in signal emission, transmission, modulation, and detection, featured with the broad band, high speed, compact size, and particularly low loss. Compared to traditional materials such as silicon and III-V semiconductors, graphene demonstrates unique properties in its high electron mobility, large thermal conductivity, strong tion operators, the Hamiltonian of graphene can be written as (1) where e 1 = (0, a), 2 , -a 2 are the three vectors pointing to three nearest-neighbor sites. a is the length of the nearest-neighbor bonds. t ≈ 2.8 eV is the nearest-neighbor hopping energy. The above Hamiltonian can be recasted into a series of summations in the momentum space, i.e. ) where H 12 (k) = -t(e -ik•e1 + e -ik•e2 + e -ik•e3 ) = H * 21 (k). The eigenvalues of Hamiltonian lead to the dispersion relation The conduction and valance bands touch each other at the six Dirac points of the first Brillouin zone. Using Taylor expansion at the Dirac points, the dispersion relation of graphene is approximate to be linear, i.e. where v F ≈ 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity. The electron motion of graphene at the conduction band, which is also known as the intraband transition, can be described by the Boltzmann equation where f is a probability density function of electron defined in the (r, k)-phase space. E and p are the kinetic energy and momentum of electron. Here we use the relaxation time approximation and τ is the relaxation time. Moreover, we ignore the term (∂r/∂t)(∂f /∂r) in the Boltzmann equation, which is related to the diffusion current ignored for the conduction electrons. The above formulation can be rewritten as where v is the group velocity and F = eE, where E is the electric field. Moreover, E = ω, p = k, v = ∂ω/∂k. Using the Fourier transform, we arrive at By multiplying Eq. ( where g is degeneracy, which is equal to 4 for the graphene sheet considering spin degeneracy and two carbon atoms in a unit cell. By using J = g/(2π) ef vdk x dk y , we can get the expression for the conduction-band current Next, we consider the electrical impedance and ignore the magnetic field that is responsible for the Hall impedance, i.e. x -∂f ∂E dk x dk y = σ intra yy where f = 1/(e (E-μc)/kB T + 1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, and μ c is the chemical potential. The above agrees with the intraband transition part of Kubo formula The real part of the conductivity, which corresponds to the interband transition and generation of electron-hole pair, can be obtained by employing the kramers-kronig relation or Fermi's golden rule When photon energy is larger than 2μ c , optical conductivity is dominated by the interband transition. As carrier concentration increases by the electrostatic doping of graphene such that the photon energy is less than 2μ c , intraband transition becomes dominant while interband transitions are suppressed due to the Pauli blocking. There are two common scenarios to theoretically model graphene by classical computational electromagnetics algorithms. One approach is to use the effective bulk permittivity. The in-plane bulk permittivity of graphene is defined as ε r = 1 + iσ s /(ωε 0 d), where d refers to the effective thickness of graphene sheet, and σ s is the surface conductivity calculated by the Kubo-formula of Eq. ( Tremendous efforts have been made over the last decade towards the fabrication of graphene, which, in general, can be categorized into three groups: (1) mechanical cleavage (MC), (2) epitaxial growth (EG), and (3) chemical vapor deposition (CVD). MC is realized by mechanically splitting bulk graphite into atomically thin single layer graphene with the aid of an adhesive tape. The first in-lab fabrication of single layer graphene was demonstrated by Following the growth of graphene on copper foil in CVD chamber, the single layer graphene shall be transferred to the desired substrates with the aid of PMMA (Polymethyl Methacrylate) A graphene-integrated circuit is ready for manufacture after the successful transfer process. Here, we take the graphene-embedded coplanar waveguide as an example and introduce the fabrication technologies utilized for electrodes deposition and graphene patterning (1) Photo-lithography is applied to form the coplanar waveguide pattern on the photoresist layer; (2) Bi-metal layer (20 nm Ti/100 nm Au) is then deposited on the graphene sheet using E-Beam evaporation; (3) The unwanted metal is removed during lift-off. Graphene patterning (Process II) is also achieved by three steps: (1) A pair of 48 × 240 μm 2 Photoresist pattern cover on the graphene sheet between the signal line and the ground; (2) the graphene sheet that is not covered by photoresist is etched away by the oxygen plasma. Note that the plasma power cannot be too high to destroy the protection photoresist; (3) Photoresist is finally stripped with the acetone followed by distilled water rinse. Fig. The development of CVD enables the fabrication of large-area graphene with the size comparable to the wavelength of microwave frequencies and boosts the usage of graphene at microwave band. Before this, most of the works were focused on the simulation region, such as graphene antenna The monolayer graphene allows to be p/n-doped under positive/negative electrostatic bias. The injection of charge carriers will shift the graphene chemical potential (Fermi level) away from the Dirac point resulting in the tunable surface conductivity. Due to the forbidden interband transitions by the Pauli blocking, the graphene monolayer reveals the metallic behavior and supports strong plasmonic effects from the terahertz to mid-infrared even to visible light regions. More importantly, the graphene monolayer with tunable chemical potential (through modulating the gated voltage) enables us to gradually engineer its surface conductivity and subsequently manipulate the graphene plasmon for realizing the tunable optical response of graphene-based antennas. In this section, we will discuss the graphene monolayer as a key element for dynamically altering the antenna characteristics. Regarding the reciprocity theorem, the graphene-based antennas are capable of receiving and transmitting electromagnetic waves. As the receiver, besides the radiation pattern, gain and impedance, the optical absorption plays an important role in converting the propagating wave into surface wave toward high responsivity and also in enhancing near-field. The modulation of the absorption of graphene-based antenna will offer in-depth insight on how to engineer the antenna characteristics. As we know, the intrinsic value of optical absorption of undoped monolayer graphene is 2.3%, which is insufficient to realize strong light-matter interaction. The graphene plasmon and photonic modes, critical coupling effects, etc, have been utilized to improve the absorption of graphene antennas. For instance, through modulating the graphene chemical potential, the log-periodic toothed antenna made by graphene has delivered the multi-resonances with highly tunable intensity and spectral location Besides, the integrations of graphene monolayer with various types of metallic structures also offer additional degrees of freedom for engineering the graphene absorption. Qin et al. desined the antenna designs to enhance the interaction between metallic structures and graphene layer. The graphene monolayer with 30% absorption has been achieved in an ultra-broadband spectral range from 780 nm to 1760 nm through integrating two types of the split cross antennas The electrostatic bias on graphene can gradually change its dielectric constant, which plays an important role in continuously modulating the antenna characteristics proposed the graphene-based twodimensional (2D) leaky-wave antenna allowing both the frequency tuning and beam steering in the terahertz region. The proposed structure is shown in Fig. The modulations of the radiation pattern, directivity and efficiency of other type antennas such as the Fabry-Perot cavity leaky-wave antenna The surface plasmon polaritons supported by the graphene monolayer can be dynamically controlled by the electrostatic doping level, which offer a platform to engineer its spectral resonant location and interaction with metal plasmon. The previous reports revealed that the plasmon of graphene and thin metal layer have the comparable performance The terahertz antennas such as the dipole antenna with the size from several to hundreds micrometers fit the small area of experimentally fabricated graphene, which is a suitable platform for extensive study of the graphenebased/modulated antennas Besides the linearly polarized wave, the graphene monolayer also exhibits capabilities to generate vortex waves. Jian and coworkers proposed the cross shaped antenna to generate the plasmon vortex on the coated graphene monolayer (See Fig. The change of the chemical potential and size of graphene monolayer enable the controllable reflection coefficients and generate the 0, ±1, and ±2 modes of vortex beams at 1.6 terahertz. The three-dimensional radiation patterns and phase fronts of the vortex beams for the modes of l = -1 and l = -2 are shown in Figs. 4(e) and 4(f), respectively. The graphene monolayer also shows potential applications as microwave antennas The resonant optical antenna with spatial conductivity pattern has been demonstrated to launch and control the graphene plasmon tuning the pointing angle and leakage rate of the antenna at a fixed frequency. The radiation pattern with different beam directions can be generated with different sampling points in one modulation period (See Fig allow independent manipulation of graphene properties in both space and time toward the nonreciprocal device With the change of chemical potential from 0.5 eV to 0.9 eV, the radiation beam can be turned from pointing angle of 0 • to 15 • . (See Figs. 4(k) and 4(l)) In the terahertz and visible light regions, the rectifying antenna is used to convert electromagnetic energy into direct current electricity that has promising applications in photodetector and wireless communication systems Modulating the light intensity, phase, and polarization plays a critical role in most optical imaging and communication systems. Compared to modulators operating at telecommunication wavelengths that are predominantly used for fiber communications, terahertz or infrared spatial light modulators are uniquely targeted to environment/health monitoring, navigation, and surveillance through scattering foggy or dusty environments. Due to its large conductivity swing, graphene has attracted lots of attention as a material for terahertz modulators On the other hand, terahertz modulation is also attainable in graphene plasmonic structures. In this regard, Ju et al. From the experimental results of the phase shift versus applied bias, a 65 • phase shift is achieved at a frequency of 0.9 THz. Here we would like to note that in these structures there is always a tradeoff between the modulation depth, insertion loss and the bandwidth of modulation. Later in 2014, a low-bias terahertz modulator based on the integration of split-ring resonator and a graphene layer was further proposed by Degl'Innocenti One interesting approach towards high-performance graphene modulators is via the utilization of hybrid systems. By optically pumping the structure and properly engineering the device, it is possible to obtain significant modulation depth Although several room temperature field effect transistors have been shown capable of detecting terahertz waves with very fast response and high responsivity in the 0.3-3 terahertz range based on InAs nanowire field-effect transistors Recently, it has been generally recognized that graphene can pave the way to robust and cheap terahertz detectors operating at room temperature based on the Dyakonov and Shur scheme Graphene has also been proposed for the broadband terahertz detection by employing a simple top-gate antenna-coupled configuration for the excitation of overdamped plasma waves in the channel of a graphene field-effect transistor Besides, the graphene monolayers have also been widely explored as other functional devices such as the transistors, sensors, memorizers, etc. The graphenebased transistors have shown great promising to reach a smaller channel length and higher speed, which offer the opportunities to outperform the existing devices and become an option for post-silicon electronics Graphene represents an emerging frontier that brings together multidisciplines of physics, material science, electronics, photonics and terahertz plasmonics. It has uncovered exciting prospects in these fields, where novel technologies and solutions are still being developed. From the device and system viewpoint, graphene is a two-dimensional layered material with an intrinsically passivated surface. It is thus amenable to monolithic integration with conventional silicon-based benchmarks as well as other important functional materials, which makes graphene remarkably advantageous over bulk materials whose heterogeneous integration with other materials usually induces defects and deep level trapping centers at the interface. Presently graphene has been suffering some demanding challenges that must be overcome before making an impact on industry-standard device applications. Among many others, the high quality synthesis of large-scale graphene is of paramount importance and will have the most positive impact on this field. Specifically, the improvements in graphene's crystal quality (i.e., carrier mobility) can significantly prolong the lifetime of graphene plasmons, which is strongly correlated with various device performance metrics, such as the light-matter in-teraction strength, absorbance, sensitivity,phase shifts, spectral resolution, modulation efficiency, detectivity, and so forth. Moreover, there remains a most important requirement to gain a detailed and fundamental physical understanding of the hot carrier dynamics and transports in graphene since they are indispensable for efficiently developing high-performance graphene-based informatic functional devices. Furthermore, the nonlocal, nonlinear and quantum effects existing in deep subwavelength graphene nanostructures deserve to be intensively investigated in future as well, which will open up a new platform for quantum information, communication, and measurement. The light-matter interaction will occur at both the atomic/molecular level and single-photon level. Additionally, the graphene based multi-functional on-chip devices operating at microwave, terahertz, and visible light frequencies are expected to be invented. In summary, the various physical and chemical properties of graphene make it well suited for integrated, multifunctional and compact devices and systems, yet its potential has not been fully reached. In this review, we offered a brief on graphene based transmission lines, antennas, modulators, and detectors covering from microwave frequency band to terahertz or infrared band. We believe that future progresses on graphene-based functional devices and microsystems will lead to proliferation in both fundamental investigations and applied technological products for imaging, communication, environmental monitoring, medical diagnostics, spectroscopic studies etc. Wang, R., Ren, XG., Yan, Z. et al. Front. Phys. (2019) 14: 13603. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11467-018-0859-y