Some ABX 3 perovskites exhibit different local environments (DLE) for the same B atoms in the lattice, an effect referred to as disproportionation, distinguishing such compounds from common perovskites that have single local environments (SLE). The basic phenomenology associated with such disproportionation involves the absence of B-atom charge ordering, the creation of different B-X bond length ('bond alternation') for different local environments, the appearance of metal (in SLE) to insulator (in DLE) transition, and the formation of ligand holes. We point out that this phenomenology is common to a broad range of chemical bonding patterns in ABX 3 compounds, either with s-p electron B-metal cations (BaBiO 3 , CsTlF 3 ), or noble metal cation (CsAuCl 3 ), as well as d-electron cations (SmNiO 3 , CaFeO 3 ). We show that underlying much of this phenomenology is the 'self-regulating response', whereby in strongly bonded metal-ligand systems with high lying ligand orbitals, the system protects itself from creating highly charged cations by transferring ligand electrons to the metal, thus preserving a nearly constant metal charge in different local environments, while creating B-ligand bond alternation and ligand-like conduction band ('ligand hole' states). We are asking what are the minimal theory ingredients needed to explain the main features of this SLE-to-DLE phenomenology, such as its energetic driving force, bond length changes, possible modifications in charge density and density of state changes. Using as a guide the lowering of the total energy in DLE relative to SLE, we show that electrons, whereas the high Z elements (Pb) are mostly divalent (p 2 ) with the intermediate one (Sn) having two stable valences. In such dual valence atoms a single valence would disproportionate into two different valences, as illustrated by the "negative U center" of In in PbTe, Cs 2 [AgIn]Cl 6 We will follow in the present work this total energy guide for the tendency of various systems to manifest SLE or DLE behavior. We phrase below a number of questions posed regarding disproportionation in ABX 3 compounds, and will address them in this paper by considering six compounds showing DLE behavior, including BaBiO 3 , (a) What level of electronic structure theory is sufficient to predict the energetic tendency (Fig. Previous studies implied that disproportionation is a correlation effect that may require an explicitly dynamically correlated approach. For example, Park et al Cammarata et al In the present study we find that SLE-DLE selectivity exists in s-p as well as 3d electron compound alike, and that density functional theory (DFT) suffices to correctly describe the energetic selection between SLE and DLE in all such compounds. This establishes such single determinant, mean field band theory as adequate tool for describing the phenomenology related to bond disproportionation, including magnetism within the convex hull construct of Fig. The most basic understanding of the disproportionation problem suggests that when DLE occurs, the elements located at the B site in ABX 3 perovskites will have different FOS. In this view the meaningful descriptor of the local environment of the disproportionating B atom is the FOS. For BaBiO 3 , for instance, the Bi site was said In 1951, Frost To establish whether a structural change such as SLE-to-DLE is associated with a change in charge distribution we compute the quantity most directly related to our question, namely the variational charge density ρ(r) calculated self consistently by DFT for DLE and for SLE geometries. We therefore calculated the charge accumulation function i.e. the charge enclosed in a sphere of radius R around the B atom, as a function of R. Contrary to other methods of estimating the charge around an atom, such as Bader analysis, where a fixed boundary is chosen, the charge accumulation function is a direct measure of the charge density, providing direct evidence of the charge distribution around a certain atom. From these plots, it is also straightforward to clearly see the charge density difference around a certain atom. We clearly see that the physical charge density is essentially unchanged around the B atom as a result of the structural change. If one considers instead an indirect measure such as formal oxidation states, one deduces that it changes very significantly by the SLE-to-DLE transformation. We conclude that the FOS has little or nothing to do with the physical charge density. The reason for this was discussed in detail in Ref 39 in terms of the 'charge self regulating response', whereby charge rearrangement on the cation is offset by opposite rearrangement on the ligands, resulting in a minimal net change in physical charge density. In contrast, the FOS concept focuses just on the atom whose charge is counted, (namely, the B cation in the present case), seeing therefore just a piece of the picture. Similar conclusion were reached for the case of transition metal impurities in semiconductors, It has been often observed that structural disproportionation comes with a simultaneous metal-insulator transition, e.g. in rare earth nickelates The basic electronic structure We demonstrate by DFT calculations that the conduction band wavefunction of both s-p electron and d-electron disproportionated ABX 3 compounds discussed here represent ligand hole states. As to the mechanism of LH formation, we note that this requires that the relevant metal states be deeper than ligand orbitals so electrons can be transferred to the metal (as in late but not early transition metal oxides, or Bi compounds with low s electron valence states) and that a sufficiently strong metal-to-ligand coupling exist so as to split the ligand VB into occupied and unoccupied parts, the latter being LH. Thus, LH does not require disproportionation, (indeed we find it to exist in SLE configurations) but in disproportionated states there exist a short enough B-Ligand bond that could facilitate splitting of the valence band and LH formation. The basic driving force for LH formation is the self-regulating response: Consequently, the ligand transfers electrons (thus, forming a hole) to the metal cation so as to self-regulate its charge (creating the [Ni 2+ -O 1-] complex in RNiO 3 and the [Bi 3+ -O With the advent of accurate first principles exchange and correlation functionals These values of U were chosen based on extensive tests from previous studies. Input crystal structures for relaxation: When available, we have used crystal structures reported in the ICSD It was once thought This kind of phenomena has been labeled in several different ways such as charge ordering, We have analyzed the variational DFT calculated charge density profiles around the B atoms for six structurally relaxed compounds. In For all the studied cases we find that the charge around the B atoms in different local environments, supposedly designated by widely different oxidation states, is rather similar. This principle of conservation of cation charge under different bonding conditions in strongly coupled metal-ligand compounds has been discussed in the context of the Self Regulating Response Given that the physical charge on the disproportionated atoms is rather similar, the next obvious question is: "What is a physically meaningful descriptor of the local environment of the disproportionating B atom?" This will explain, via Fig. A good way to differentiate the B atoms at different local environments in DLE compounds is through a directly measurable quantity such as the bond distance between the B and X atoms. Although there are claims stating that standard DFT "strongly underestimates the breathing distortion parameters" in DLE configurations, In some compounds like CaFeO 3 Table Figures As can be observed on the left panels of figures 5 and 6, all the SLE configurations are metallic. The red curve represents the ligand (Oxygen, Fluorine or Chlorine) states, whereas the green curves represent the B atom orbitals. For the DLE configuration, right panels on Figs The different coupling between large and small octahedra is a clear and straightforward explanation of why the DLE phase is insulating. The hybridization between B atom and ligands also leads to a large DOS contribution from ligand (oxygen, fluorine and chlorine) atoms around the Fermi energy. As shown in Fig. The fact that for all studied compounds there is energy lowering and band gap opening when going from SLE to DLE is a clear indication that there is a universal behavior in these phenomena and, as such, it should be possible to develop a unified model to explain such properties. This can be done through an energy level diagram, as shown in Figure In Fig In Fig 7b If the difference in the strength of the coupling for small and large octahedra is large enough, this will also open a band gap in this material. from metal s orbitals (in late 3d oxides). A special case is when the CBM is made of ligand orbitals, called "ligand hole" states. The driving force for LH formation is the self regulating response: . (e) Disproportionation per se is not related to ligand hole formation which is a more general phenomena associated with strong metal-ligand bonding for the orbital order of ligand orbital energy being above metal orbital energies. However, in creating a compressed octahedron with short bond lengths, disproportionation provides a platform for ligand hole formation. 6 Table