We study the effect of laser driving on a minimal model for a hexagonal two-dimensional material with broken inversion symmetry. Through the application of circularly polarised light and coupling to a thermal free electron bath, the system is driven into a nonequilibrium steady state with asymmetric, nonthermal carrier populations in the two valleys. We show that, in this steady state, interband superconducting correlations between electrons can develop independent of the sign of the electron-electron interactions. We discuss how our results apply, for example, to transition metal dichalcogenides. This work opens the door to technological applications of superconductivity in a range of materials that were hitherto precluded from it. The breaking of inversion symmetry in two-dimensional materials can give rise to dramatic changes in their response to optical driving. Such spatial symmetry breaking occurs naturally in the monolayer group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), which host two inequivalent but degenerate (due to time reversal symmetry) valleys at opposite edges of their hexagonal Brillouin zone (BZ) Nonequilibrium superconductivity has a long history Within standard BCS theory 1. Schematic illustration of the pairing mechanism. The valley K+ is driven with σ+ polarised light of frequency ω0 δ, the band gap, leading to a nonthermal population of the singleparticle states near the centre of the valley. By virtue of broken inversion symmetry, valley K-is left unaffected by the laser. This induces a nontrivial population population difference between the upper and lower bands at ±k. The corresponding occupations of the two valleys, n(E), are illustrated qualitatively on their respective sides of the figure single-band superconductor may be written as where V characterises the strength (and sign) of the electron-electron interaction, E k = ∆ 2 + ξ 2 k is the quasiparticle energy, and n σ (E k ) is the occupation of the quasiparticle state σ at energy E k . In thermal equilibrium at temperature T , the occupation numbers satisfy 1n ↑n ↓ = tanh(E k /2T ), requiring an attractive interaction between electrons for a superconducting instability to develop. In this letter we consider a two-band (α = 1, 2) system subject to interband pairing interactions (see Fig. A similar mechanism was explored in the context of three-dimensional direct band gap semiconductors in Ref. It is the goal of this letter to present a modified mechanism for interband superconductivity which leads to nonzero superconducting correlations without such restrictive requirements, especially those associated with the system-bath parameters. The mechanism that we present below for hexagonal two-dimensional materials with broken inversion symmetry is robust in that there is always one out of two channels that will lead to superconductivity with repulsive interactions. Model.-For simplicity, we focus on a nearest-neighbour tight-binding model on a hexagonal lattice with the Hamiltonian where x, d 3 = -ay connect nearest neighbours This asymmetry between absorption of σ ± polarised light is quantified by the degree of circular polarisation η(k) where P 21 ± (k) = ψ 2k |p ± |ψ 1k and p ± = p x ± ip y describe optical transitions between the conduction and valence bands. The asymmetry, calculated using (2), is plotted for various staggered chemical potentials over the first BZ in Fig. We will study two limiting cases: (i) when relaxation occurs exclusively through tunnel coupling to a threedimensional substrate, and (ii) when fast intraband relaxation establishes a local equilibrium in the upper and lower bands separately. The latter case is important for its closer connection to experiment, but the derivation of the results uses a more phenomenological approach that is easier to follow after exposure to the results of the former. Hence, for clarity of presentation, we will focus the discussion mainly on the former case where we are able to confirm our results using two separate methods, and present the derivation of the latter in the Supplementary Material. We assume a simplified driving pattern as a minimal model of σ + polarised driving in which Ω k = Ω in the regions of the first BZ where η(k) > 0 in Fig. Our complete model Hamiltonian is composed of an interacting system (S), a bath (B), and a system-bath (S-B) interaction where The index λ = (k, α) labels the noninteracting system modes, and N is the number of unit cells. Both the system and the bath are composed of spinless fermionic degrees of freedom: {c λ , c † λ } = δ λλ , and {a λn , a † λ m } = δ λλ δ nm . (The assumption of spinlessness is made for simplicity but can be relaxed without changing our results-see Supplementary Material.) The system is driven by a laser of frequency ω 0 (included semiclassically), and interacts via the scattering of interband pairs. Coupling the system to a bath with which it can exchange both energy and particles brings our system towards a unique nonequilibrium steady state. Born-Markov approximation.-The simplest possible analysis of our time-dependent Hamiltonian can be performed by moving into the frame rotating at ω 0 and applying the Born-Markov approximation. In this approach, we assume that the baths have a continuous density of states ν λ ( ), and that they interact weakly with the system: π|t λ | 2 δ. The dynamics of the system S, described by its reduced density matrix ρ S = Tr B ρ, is then determined approximately [25] by the Master equation where n F (ξ) = (1+e βξ ) -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, ξ λ = E λ -μ, and the rates Γ λ = 2π|t λ | 2 ν λ (ξ λ ) are given by Fermi's golden rule. The Lindbladian dissipators D are defined as D[X]ρ = (2XρX † -X † Xρ -ρX † X)/2. We have neglected any Lamb shift corrections to (9) which renormalise the band structure E λ After making a mean field approximation for the superconducting order parameter in , and solve for the steady state in the long-time limit (relaxation to this steady state typically occurs dynamically over timescales set by Γ -1 1 and Γ -1 2 ). One may then substitute the steady-state value for the anomalous correlator s 21 k into the self-consistency condition for the order parameter. We make the following simplifying assumption about the scattering amplitudes V kk : there exist only two relevant average scattering amplitudes V and V = ve iφ which, respectively, correspond to intra-(K ± → K ± ) and inter-valley (K ∓ → K ± ) scattering events. This in turn implies that there are only two momentum components of the gap, ∆ ± , corresponding to momenta in the vicinity of valley K ± . These two amplitudes will satisfy |V | |V |; since the two valleys are separated by a large momentum transfer, intervalley scattering events are strongly suppressed [V K+,K-= 0 identically using the eigenstates of H(k) in ( which is to be contrasted with the standard selfconsistency condition (1); the equilibrium populations have been replaced by their nonequilibrium counterparts. We have defined In writing down where , and γ α = Γ α /Γ. That is, the valley K -is unaffected by the laser drive, while the populations in the valley K + are nonthermal. The nonequilibrium gap equation ( Including further scattering amplitudes simply increases the dimensionality of this matrix. To zeroth order in |V /V |, the onset of superconductivity is determined solely by the behaviour of the two functions F ± with increasing driving strength The induced population differences 1n 22 kn 11 -k for k ∈ K + and k ∈ K -have opposite sign, which is inherited by the functions F + and F -. It is now also clear why interband pairing is more favourable with respect to intraband pairing: in equilibrium (at temperatures T δ), the population difference 1n 22 kn 11 -k vanishes, which means that the system is "closer" to a superconducting instability (i.e., the nonequilibrium populations n αα k need only be modified slightly). Substituting in our expressions for the steady-state values of the populations and defining , we arrive at for temperatures T δ. The domain of integration extends over positive energies only. The density of states per unit cell ρ(E) for hexagonal materials in the presence of a nonzero staggered chemical potential δ, as in Eq. ( This expression represents our central result: Ideal parameters.-The benefit of the simplified Born-Markov approach is that we are able to evaluate expressions explicitly, which allows us to make concrete statements about optimising the system parameters in order to minimise V c . It is evident from ( for t δ Ω, Γ, having neglecting subleading corrections. is the area of one unit cell. This expression suggests that one should (i) maximise the ratio δ/t, which has the additional benefit of increasing the validity of our assumption about the driving pattern (see Fig. Fast intraband relaxation.-When the interband relaxation rate is slow with respect to the intraband rate Γ 12 , the upper and lower bands (in the valley K + ) will separately equilibrate to quasithermal distributions with effective chemical potentials μ 2 and μ 1 , respectively. These are determined by the driving strength in addition to the intraband relaxation rate and particle number conservation. (The gap equations for this regime are presented in the Supplementary Material.) The phase diagram for this limiting case is shown in Fig. Outlook.-We have shown that interband superconducting correlations due to BCS pairing may develop in the presence of repulsive electronic interactions in twodimensional materials which exhibit circular dichroism. Laser driving with circular polarisation σ + induces a nonthermal particle distribution in the K + valley, while the other valley remains unaffected. Hence, the nonequilibrium population deviation 1n 22 kn 11 -k that appears in the self-consistency condition has the opposite sign for the two valley-band subsystems. We demonstrated this mechanism for two limiting cases of dissipation. Our results are of direct relevance to the monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides, which satisfy the necessary criteria outlined in this letter to potentially realise interband superconductivity. They open the possibility of turning a range of insulating materials into superconductors at the flip of a switch. The diagonal contributions (i.e., ψ x k |p ± |ψ x k ) to the above expression vanish identically by parity and so have already been dropped. Hence, we need only calculate two matrix elements, ψ a k |p ± |ψ b k , in order to find η(k). One may show that, on a hexagonal lattice, where d 1,2 = a 2 y ± √ 3a 2 x and d 3 = -ay are the vectors connecting nearest neighbours In this section we elucidate and add detail to our results relating to the Born-Markov analysis of the nonequilibrium steady state. In particular, we write down explicitly the appropriate equations of motion for system populations and correlators that determine the nonequilibrium populations in the long-time limit presented in the main text. The time evolution of our system is governed approximately by the equation of motion arXiv:1810.12309v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 29 Oct 2018 for the system density matrix ρ S (t) = Tr B ρ(t), having traced out the bath degrees of freedom. The equations of motion for correlators and populations are given by ∂ t O(t) = Tr O∂ t ρ(t), with ∂ t ρ given by the above expression. In particular, in the frame corotating with the laser at frequency ω 0 , the relevant populations and correlators that form a closed set under time evolution are where used in the main text. These equations are a generalisation of those given in Ref. repeatedly, where the Lindbladian dissipator D is defined as We then look for steady-state solutions to the set of equations ( Self-consistency is then obtained by solving ∆k = (1/N ) k V kk ∆k Re(s 21 k / ∆k ). The real part in this expression requires some further explanation. Note that the equations ( Solving the self-consistency condition requires eliminating n 21 k from ( for k ∈ K -, i.e., the same form as ( For ∆ = 0, the expressions ( The integral in ( where v F = 3t/2 and Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. This expression may be derived using the approximate dispersion close to the centres of the valleys, or by expanding the exact density of states given in the main text. We then plug ( where in the second line we have taken the limit of small η (η x 0 and η x 1x 0 ), i.e., Ω, Γ δ. Evidently, to lowest order in 1/η, the cutoff x 1 is irrelevant, with the dominant contribution coming from a region of width ∼ η around x 0 . Using the correspondences x 0 → δ/2, η → Ω 2 + Γ 2 /4, we arrive at the result stated in the main text for F ± , from which one can deduce expressions for V c . Higher order corrections may be included by choosing the cutoff x 1 such that the total number of states is preserved. The majority of the approximations (both controlled and uncontrolled) made in the Born-Markov approach described in the previous section can be made more rigorous using a more careful analysis of the problem within the Keldysh formalism. We also relax the assumption of spinlessness and endow the electrons with a spin degree of freedom for this analysis. We assume a spin singlet interaction between electrons of the form i.e., the scattering of interband spin singlets The bath degrees of freedom can straightforwardly be integrated out to give the components (retarded 'R', advanced 'A' and Keldysh 'K') of the self-energy Σ λ where the imaginary terms give rise to dissipation, and the real parts lead to a renormalisation (Lamb shift) of the bandstructure E λ → E λ +δ λ . The multi-index λ that labels the system modes now also includes spin: λ = (k, α, σ). Both the real and imaginary parts can be written in terms of the spectral densities of the baths The symbol P denotes the principal value of the integral. In the main text, we assumed t λn = t λ ∀n so that , where ν λ (ω) is the bath density of states corresponding to system mode λ. For simplicity, we ignore the energy renormalisation, δ λ = 0, and neglect the frequency and momentum dependence of the dissipation parameters Γ λ (ω) = Γ α , corresponding to a bath with a flat spectral density, J λ = const. In order to proceed with the calculation, we transform into the frame corotating with the laser drive, and make the rotating wave approximation, i.e., neglecting the nonresonant terms that rotate at angular frequency 2ω 0 . In the main text, we assumed a Hamiltonian that includes only the resonant terms from the outset. Without this approximation, the order parameter would not be a time-independent quantity, and we would need to include higher harmonics rotating at e 2niω0t (n ∈ Z) in our ansatz. Importantly, in the rotating frame, we must implement a frequency shift in the Keldysh component Σ K λ (ω) to account for the fact that, in the lab frame in the absence of driving, the bath states are populated thermally, i.e., where T = 1/β and μ are the temperature and chemical potential of the bath, respectively. The quartic interaction term (21) can be decoupled in the standard way using a Hubbard Stratonovich transformation where Ĝ0λ is the system Green's function that includes nonzero driving. We have also defined ∆k = a,τ ∆ a τ k (t)γ a,τ , where a is the Keldysh index a = q, cl and τ = ±1, and we have introduced the 8-component spinor ψ k in Keldysh ⊗ Nambu ⊗ band space (hats denote 8×8 matrices in this space). The most general gap equation corresponding to the saddle point of the action ( where G(k; t, t) is the full time-dependent system Green's function, which includes the effects of driving, interactions with the bath through Σ λ (ω), and nonzero {∆ k }. We have here redefined ∆ k (t) ≡ ∆ cl k (t). The equation ( The equations obtained by varying the action with respect to the classical components of the gap function are automatically satisfied by setting ∆ q k = 0, ∀k. The gap equation ( Since the two valleys K ± are separated by a large momentum, the amplitudes for intra-and inter-valley scattering are expected to be vastly different. We account for this by introducing the two scattering amplitudes V and V , satisfying |V | |V | , which represent some average scattering amplitude for intra-and inter-valley scattering processes, respectively. All other momentum-dependence of the scattering amplitudes is neglected. Having restricted our attention to only these two relevant scattering amplitudes, we need only retain two gap parameters ∆ k = ∆ ± for k ∈ K ± . These two parameters characterise the extent of pairing across the two valleys, as indicated schematically in Fig. Although it is not immediately apparent from their definition (31), the functions f τ k (ω) depend on the gap parameters separately through |∆ + | 2 and |∆ -| 2 [i.e., there are no mixed terms such as Re(∆ + ∆ * -)]. The Fourier-transformed inverse Green's functions are given by where the retarded components of the full Green's function (32) may be expressed in Nambu ⊗ band space as and ξ αk = αkμ. The Keldysh component of the inverse Green's function is given by the self energy When computing the summations over momentum, we convert to an integral over energy with the exact density of states for gapped hexagonal materials stated in the main text. Alternatively, if δ t, one may use the approximate density of states In the limiting case V = 0, the gap equation The correspondence between the Born-Markov description presented in the main text and the more complete Keldysh description is now clear: both approaches give rise to the same equations [i.e., Eqn. In this section, we describe another possible regime of experimental interest: rapid intraband relaxation (with respect to the interband relaxation rate). In contrast to the case considered in the main text, the populations of the upper and lower bands may be significantly altered over a wide range of energies, allowing for smaller critical interaction strengths. In this regime, the upper and lower bands separately quasithermalise to Fermi-Dirac distributions with different chemical potentials, μ 2 and μ 1 , which fix the number of particles in the upper and lower bands, respectively The equations of motion in this case are for k ∈ K + . The corresponding equations for k ∈ K -may be found by substituting n F (ξ kα , μ α ) → n F (ξ kα , μ), i.e., the populations in valley K -remain thermal. If ∆ k = 0, i.e., in the absence of superconductivity, then the populations n αα k will relax to the nonequilibrium distributions n F (ξ kα , μ α ) in the K + valley, as advertised. A relationship between the two effective chemical potentials μ 1 and μ 2 can be found by conserving the total number particles within the K + valley The set of equations ( for k ∈ K + , where ), and γ-1 = γ -1 1 + γ -1 2 . Substituting into the definition of F + , we arrive at Let us define the integrated population difference as