We study amorphous systems with completely random sites and find that, through constructing and exploring a concrete model Hamiltonian, such a system can host an exotic phase of topological amorphous metal in three dimensions. In contrast to the traditional Weyl semimetals, topological amorphous metals break translational symmetry, and thus cannot be characterized by the first Chern number defined based on the momentum space band structures. Instead, their topological properties will manifest in the Bott index and the Hall conductivity as well as the surface states. By studying the energy band and quantum transport properties, we find that topological amorphous metals exhibit a diffusive metal behavior. We further introduce a practical experimental proposal with electric circuits where the predicted phenomena can be observed using state-of-the-art technologies. Our results open a door for exploring topological gapless phenomena in amorphous systems. Weyl semimetals, three-dimensional (3D) materials with Weyl points in band structures All these topological gapless materials feature the existence of gapless structures in momentum space so that the topological invariants can be further defined there. Yet, this can only be guaranteed in a crystalline material with translational symmetry. Here, we ask whether a topological semimetal or metal can exist in an amorphous system with completely random sites, such as glass materials, where the desired translational symmetry is absent. Recent development of technologies in engineering in quantum systems such as arbitrary positioning of atoms In this paper, we demonstrate, by constructing and exploring a model Hamiltonian, the existence of a topological metal phase in a 3D amorphous system. The system is generated by randomly sampling sites in a box (see Fig. Model Hamiltonian.-We start by constructing the following model Hamiltonian where ĉ † x = (ĉ † x,↑ , ĉ † x,↓ ) with ĉ † x,σ creating a fermion with spin σ at the position x, which is a random vector uniformly distributed in the box, x ν ∈ (0, L ν ) with ν = x, y, z, R(θ, φ) denotes the neighboring sites as shown in Fig. In Fig. Bott index and Hall conductivity.-In order to characterize the topology of the 3D amorphous system, we generalize the Bott index originally defined in 2D where Ũx and Ũy are the reduced matrices for U x = P e 2πix/Lx P and U y = P e 2πiŷ/Ly P in the occupied space, respectively. Here, x and ŷ are the position operators and P is the projection operator for the occupied space. As we are interested in the case that the Fermi energy lies at zero energy, we consider the states with negative energy as the occupied space for calculating the Bott index. We prove that this generalized Bott index is equivalent to the topological anomalous Hall conductivity for a Weyl semimetal (which is not necessary to be quantized) in Ref. To show that the Bott index reflects the Hall conductivity in a randomized system, we numerically calculate the Hall conductivity using the Landauer-Büttiker formula in a mesoscopic system. We consider four ideal leads connected to the amorphous system in the x and y directions as schematically shown in Fig. where T mn is the total transmission probability from lead n to m, which is computed using the nonequilibrium Green's function method In Fig. To further identify the topological feature of the system, we calculate the local DOS defined as ρ , where E i is the ith eigenvalue, Ψ Ei,σx with σ =↑, ↓ are the corresponding components of the eigenstate of the system, and [• • • ] denotes the average over samples. The DOS is defined as ρ(E) = x ρ(E, x)/(2N ), which is normalized to one, i.e., dEρ(E) = 1. In Fig. Band properties.-To discriminate the metal or semimetal phase from the insulator phase with respect to m z , we compute the gap, twice of the lowest positive energy, using the Lanczos algorithm, and the DOS for large systems using the kernel polynomial method (KPM), which expands the DOS in Chebyshev polynomials to the order N c Figure Viewing Fig. , where δ i = E i -E i-1 with E i being the ith eigenenergy sorted in an ascending order and i is the sum over an energy bin around the energy E with N E being the energy levels counted. It is well known that for localized states, r ≈ 0.39 , which measures how much a state around energy E is spatially localized. For a completely extended state in an infinitely large system, it is zero; for a state localized in a single site, it is one. Figure Conductivity and Fano factor.-To study the quantum transport properties of the amorphous system, we numerically calculate the transmission matrix tt † at zero energy by the nonequilibrium Green's function method Figure Experimental realization.-Topological amorphous metals may be realized in classical systems, artificial quantum systems and solid-state glass materials. Here, we propose an experimental scheme to engineer a Laplacian (acting as a Hamiltonian) with electric circuits, which takes the form of our Hamiltonian In summary, we have discovered a topological amorphous metal phase in 3D amorphous systems. We identify its topological feature by calculating the Bott index, the Hall conductivity and the surface states. Through further studying its band properties including the energy gap, DOS, LSR and IPR and the quantum transport properties, we find that the topological phase exhibits a diffusive metal behavior. We further predict the phase transition from the topological metal phase to the Anderson insulator phase and the band insulator phase with respect to a system parameter. Our results open a new avenue for studying topological gapless phenomena in amorphous systems. These new phenomena might be observed in various amorphous materials, such as engineered classical or atomic systems and glass materials. In the supplementary material, we will prove the equivalence between the generalized Bott index and the Hall conductivity in 3D Weyl semimetals in Section 1, show the Griffiths effects in Section 2 and the density profiles of the surface states in Section 3, give more discussion on the semimetal phase in Section 4, illustrate the mobility edge in distinct phases in Section 5 and the effects of R c and the on-site disorder in Section 6, and finally introduce an experimental scheme with electric circuits in Section 7. In this section, we will prove the equivalence between the Bott index defined in the main text and the Hall conductivity in 3D Weyl semimetals with translational symmetry, following the method used to prove its equivalence to the Chern number in 2D systems where •ai/(Liai) P = 0 0 0 Ũi with the position operator r = i=1,2,3 xi a i , a i being the lattice vectors and L i being the size of the system along the a i direction; Ũi is the reduced matrix in the occupied space and P is the projection operator that projects states into the occupied space. In a system with translational symmetry, P can be expressed as P = nk |nk nk| where |nk denotes the occupied Bloch state in the nth band with the quasimomentum k = i=1,2,3 k i G i /(2π), where G i is the reciprocal lattice vector. In the coordinate representation, the Bloch state takes the form of r|n, k = e ik•r u n,k (r) = e ik•r r|u n,k where u n,k (r + a i ) = u n,k (r). In this basis, we can expand U in terms of δk i with u n3,k1-δk1,k2-δk2,k3 |u n4,k1-δk1,k2,k3 u n4,k1-δk1,k2,k3 |u n5,k n 5 , k| (S2) where where n i denotes the occupied bands, and, for briefness, we have skipped the index for k. Let us further decompose U into U = 1 + U D + U O where U D + 1 denotes the diagonal part and U O the off-diagonal one. Using this decomposition, we obtain Since U D + U O is at least the second order of δk, the second term contributes a fourth order term and hence we neglect it. To the second order, we only need to evaluate the diagonal part, which is where only the first term contributes to the Bott index as all other terms are purely real. Therefore, to the second order, we have where is the Berry curvature along the G 3 direction and C n is the Chern number for a fixed k 3 in the nth occupied band. Evidently, this is the Hall conductivity σ 12 in unit of e 2 /h and hence we prove the equivalence between the Bott index and the Hall conductivity in a Weyl semimetal. In Fig. In the main text, we show the local DOS in a flat-box like geometry with the height much shorter than the other two dimensions (here we take L x = L y = 20 and L z = 10). Here, we use the same geometry so that the system is gapped under periodic boundary conditions. This enables us to pick up the surface states that are located inside the gap under open boundary conditions along the x and y directions. We illustrate the top view of the surface states in Fig. To further verify the absence of the semimetal phase, let us study the intrinsic conductivity and the Fano factor in a flat-box geometry. By defining a dimensionless parameter we write the intrinsic conductivity (eliminating the contact resistance contribution) as where is the resistance. For a diffusive metal, g ∝ L z as L z → ∞ so that σ I is finite, while in a pseudoballistic regime corresponding to a semimetal, g has an upper bound as L z → ∞ so that σ I goes zero. In Fig. In this section, we study the mobility edge in our system where the system transitions into the extended phase from the localized one as the Fermi surface is tuned. For clarity, let us first consider the limit that m z → -∞. Based on the perturbation theory to the first order, we obtain the following effective Hamiltonian which describes a spinless particle in a 3D amorphous system. In Fig. where [• • • ] indicates the average over distinct samples. The typical DOS is numerically calculated by the KPM. When the DOS is finite, the vanishing of the typical DOS reflects the appearance of localized states. In Fig. In this section, we discuss the effects of R c and the on-site disorder on our results. In Fig. To verify that our results are stable against the on-site disorder, we calculate the Hall conductivity and the DOS at zero energy in the presence of the following term where V 1 (x) and V 2 (x) are uniformly random variables chosen from [-1, 1]. Fig. In this section, we introduce a scheme (shown in Fig. where Y mn = 1/Z mn is the admittance between node m and n with Z mn being the corresponding impedance and Y m = 1/Z m is the admittance between node m and the ground as shown in Fig. where T with M labelling the total number of nodes. Here, J is the Laplacian acting as the Hamiltonian that can be used to simulate our system. We note that such methods have been used to probe the SSH model where H(x, x + R) depicts the hopping between two neighbor sites x and x + R and H(x) the on-site term. We only need to construct the hopping between two sites and the on-site term and all other connections can be built in a similar way. We propose an electric circuit shown in Fig. )|π x,σ π x,σ |, (S21) and |π x,↑ depicts a row vector with an entry corresponding to the node ξ = (x, σ) being one and all other entries being zero, and C 0 (R) = 1/(ω 2 L 0 ) = e λ(1-R) /(2ω 2 L0 ) with ω being the frequency of the alternating current. For the whole system, the contribution from J 0 (x, R) should be summed over R. By appropriately tuning the circuit elements so that R x,↑ = R x,↓ = 1/(ω R C 0 (R) sin θ cos φ), C x↑ = 1/(ω 2 L x↓ ), C x↓ = 1/(ω 2 L x↑ ) and C x,↑ -C x,↓ = m z /(ω 2 L0 ) + R C 0 (R)(1sin θ sin φ), we achieve the expected Laplacian J = iH/(ω L0 ). To measure the surface states, we divide the system into a number of layers and measure the impedance between two nodes in each layer. The averaged impedance is given by