There is a lack of highly efficient light emitting devices (LEDs) operating in the green spectral regime. The devices based on (In,Al)GaN show extremely high efficiencies in violet and blue colors but fall short for longer emission wavelengths due to the quantum confined Stark effect (QCSE). In this paper we present a design of the active region based on wide InGaN quantum wells (QWs) which do not suffer from QCSE and profit from an enhancement in the internal quantum efficiency (IQE). The design exploits highly efficient optical transitions between excited states. It is shown that, counterintuitively, the devices with higher InGaN composition exhibit a higher enhancement in IQE. Experimental evidence is provided showing a gradual change in the nature of the optical transition with increasing thickness of the QW. Moreover, optical gain in long wavelength LDs incorporating standard and wide QWs is investigated to show the utilization of our concept. The optoelectronic devices based on III-nitrides had found many applications including general lighting and displays thanks to their high quantum efficiency From the point of view of reducing the impact of Auger recombination it would be ideal to reduce the carrier density. A simple increase of the active region volume by increasing the number of QWs does not provide the expected efficiency enhancement because of the nonuniform hole distribution among QWs There are a few reports in the literature studying the thick InGaN QWs on the polar cplane orientation Additionally, the current state-of-the-art violet LDs incorporate wide (6.6 nm thick) InGaN QW In this paper it will be shown that, counterintuitively, the LEDs and LDs with wide InGaN QWs can have higher efficiency than with the thin QWs. The enhancement in the efficiency is caused by two factors: (i) screening of the built-in electric field by carriers occupying the ground states and (ii) emergence of exited states with highly efficient optical transition. Together with the lower carrier density in the wide QWs it significantly reduces the non-radiative Auger recombination making the wide InGaN QWs a good candidate for efficient sources of light in the green spectrum. Additionally, it will be presented, contrary to the common understanding, that the higher the composition of the QW the higher this increase in the efficiency is. The scheme of this paper is as following: (1) theoretical calculations will be presented to study the influence of thickness on the optical transitions inside the QW and explicate the idea behind the increased efficiency, (2) photoluminescence spectra of QWs with various thicknesses showing the experimental evidence of emergence of excited states will be shown, (3) the influence of indium composition on internal quantum efficiency (IQE) will be studied theoretically and (4) a comparison of optical gain of blue and cyan LDs with thin and wide QW will be shown to validate the predicted change in the efficiency with the InGaN composition. The intriguing effect which triggered our interest in wide InGaN QWs was a peculiar dependence of photoluminescence (PL) intensity on QW thickness. elsewhere To gain insight into the mechanisms responsible for the observed changes in the trends the SiLENSe 5.4 package has been used for calculation of the potential shape and wavefunction distribution at various excitations On the other hand, the excited states show a remarkably high wavefunction overlaps. The nature of the built-in electric field is responsible for this discrepancy and will be discussed below. The built-in field is caused by appearance of fixed electric charges at the QW interfaces. For the 17% InGaN QW used in this example the polarization-induced sheet charges of 1×10 12 cm -2 form at the QW interfaces as indicated in Fig 4 . To screen the polarization charges a matching number of electrons and holes has to be introduced. However, the electron and hole wavefunctions have a nonzero spatial dimension. Therefore, even if a matching number of electrons and holes is introduced, the remains of the polarization field are present locally. This causes the notable difference between the thin (2.6 nm) and thick (15.6 nm) QWs. The distance at which the influence of fixed charges is present in case of the thin QW is comparable to its thickness. The screening of the fixed electric charges changes the values of the wavefunction overlaps but the qualitative "triangular-like" appearance of the band profile of QW is similar transition <e1h1> is weak but the transitions between excited states <e2h2> is strong almost as in the case of a rectangular QW without piezoelectric fields. The carrier density required to match and fully screen the polarization charges is 5x10 19 cm -3 . To benefit from the high-overlap excited states transition <e2h2> can be achieved only if the polarization field is screened. The required carrier density seems to be extremely high as it is comparable to the one observed in III-nitride LDs at threshold Below the mechanism of filling of the excited states with carriers will be discussed. At no carrier injection, the case shown in Fig Eventually, carriers will start to occupy the excited states. To verify the predictions of the model presented above a set of 17% InGaN QWs with thicknesses ranging from 1.2 to 25 nm had been prepared by PAMBE. In this section only three nm comes from the residues in the He-Cd laser used to excite the samples and can be observed at extremely low light intensities. The peaks at λ=400-405 nm observed also in all of the other samples come from the In0.08Ga0.92N layers. In the case of the intermediate 5.2 nm QW the emission starts at a wavelength of λ=495 nm. The large difference between the emission wavelength of 2.6 and 5.2 nm thick QWs is due to the QCSE which red-shifts the emission wavelength of the latter. However, with the increase of excitation power the emission blueshifts due to screening of the built-in electric fields. Additionally, starting from the excitation power of 1 W/cm 2 , emerging of a second higher energy transition can be seen indicated with a green dashed line in The above experiment proves the predictions of the model of efficient recombination via excited states in wide InGaN quantum well. In this section the behavior of the transitions including the excited states for high indium content QWs will be discussed. It will be shown that the efficiency drop observed in the green spectral regime can be compensated by the use of wide InGaN QWs. This is contrary to the common understanding as the higher indium content generates a higher misfit between GaN substrate and InGaN QW and thus enhances the piezoelectric fields. The increased piezoelectric field causes a growing separation of electron and hole wavefunction and decreases their overlap. the composition of a thin 2.6 nm QW. The commonly observed drop of efficiency is attributed mainly to the decrease of wavefunction overlap with indium content Naturally, one would expect to observe a similar behavior if the thickness of the QW is changed. However, as shown in To compare the efficiency of the thin and wide QWs the following calculation has been carried out. The IQE is given by: , where ΓΓ eeh is the overlap between electron and hole wavefunctions, nn is the carrier density and AA, BB and CC are the Shockley-Read-Hall, radiative and Auger recombination coefficient, respectively. The IQEs for In0.17Ga0.83N (blue color regime) and In0.30Ga0.70N (green color regime) has been calculated for the ABC parameters reported in where qq is the elementary charge and dd QQQQ is the QW thickness. The higher the thickness and the higher the overlap the lower the actual carrier density is as can be derived from Eq To verify the theoretical predictions of high efficiency long wavelength emitters based on wide QWs a set of four LDs had been manufactured. The measurement of optical gain is used to show the change in the efficiency and that the wide QWs can be used in devices requiring high carrier concentration. The optical gain in InGaN LDs has been widely studied and it was shown that it suffers from the green gap problem just as LEDs do The LD structures and calculated confinement factors are provided in the Supplementary Figure These results, showing a high optical gain, are of vast importance as they indicate that the real-life optoelectronic devices can benefit from the increased IQE of wide InGaN QWs. It was shown that, counterintuitively and contrary to the common opinion, wide InGaN QWs have a higher efficiency than their thin counterparts. The increase in the efficiency comes from a transition through excited states with high wavefunction overlap and lower carrier density. It is shown that in a wide QW the carriers occupying the ground states do not recombine but rather screen the built-in electric field. Even after full screening of the field the wavefunction overlap is small enough to prevent recombination through this transition. Instead carriers start to occupy the excited states with a high wavefunction overlap between them. Additionally, the lower carrier density in a wide InGaN QW, compared to normal QWs at the same current densities, ensures a reduction in the nonradiative Auger recombination responsible for the efficiency droop. Furthermore, it was shown that the higher the indium content the higher the wavefunction overlap between the excited states becomes. This result opens a new way to solving the green gap problem in LED efficiency with wide InGaN QWs. Two sets of experiments have been presented to verify the theoretical predictions. In the first one power dependent photoluminescence was measured for QW structures with various thicknesses. A clear transition from the recombination through the ground states to the excited states was observed with increased thickness of QW proving the predictions of the model. In the second experiment the optical gain of LDs with wide QWs was measured. It was shown that an enhancement of the material gain was achieved for wide QWs emitting in both blue and cyan colors. A more significant increase in the efficiency was observed in the case of higher indium content QWs as predicted by the model. We hope these findings will initiate interest and give rise to further research on wide InGaN QWs. The epitaxial growth was carried out using plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy. The MQW samples and blue LDs were grown in a customized VG V90 MBE reactor while the cyan LDs were grown in a customized Veeco Gen20A MBE reactor. Both machines were equipped with two Veeco RF plasma sources. The MQW samples and green LDs were grown on bulk GaN substrates obtained by hydride vapor phase epitaxy while the blue LDs were grown on bulk Ammono-GaN substrates. The InGaN layers were grown at 650 ̊C in indium-rich conditions whereas GaN and AlGaN layers at 730 ̊C at gallium-rich conditions. The high quality InGaN growth was carried out by suppling a high active nitrogen flux of up to 2 μm/h in units of equivalent GaN growth rate. Details of InGaN growth mechanism by PAMBE can be found in Ref. The PL was measured at room temperature (298 K) with a 325 nm He-Cd laser. The system consisted of a 0.55 m long monochromator coupled with a liquid nitrogen cooled Symphony Si CCD detector. A microscope objective was used to focus the laser light on the sample surface and collect the emitted light. The excitation spot was circular with a diameter of 70 μm. Commercially available SiLENSe 5.4 The optical gain was measured using the Hakki-Paoli technique 