Motivated by the existing complications of finding solutions of Eringen's nonlocal model, an alternative model is developed here. The new formulation of the nonlocal elasticity is centered upon expressing the dynamic equilibrium requirements based on a nonlocal residual stress field. This new nonlocal elasticity is explained from the lattice mechanics and continuum mechanics points of view. Boundary value problems obtained based on the new nonlocal elasticity are solved following a proposed iterative procedure. This iterative procedure is centered upon correcting the solution of the classical field problem for the nonlocal residual field of the elastic domain. Convergence analyses are presented to show the convergence of the iterative procedure to the solution of the nonlocal field problem. The iterative procedure is an integrated part of the proposed nonlocal elasticity. Therefore, the newly developed nonlocal elasticity is give the name "iterative nonlocal residual elasticity". In classical mechanics, a body consists of an infinite number of particles each of which is a mass point. Each particle undergoes interactions only with the nearest particles (neighbor particles). Whereas the interactions between non-neighbor particles are weaker than interactions between neighbor particles, these non-neighbor interactions are exist and may contribute to the continuum's mechanics in certain occasions. Therefore, the nonlocal theory was developed to propose a generalized theory, which models the particle exhibits interactions with its neighbors and non-neighbors. According to Eringen where ρ is the mass density, u i is the displacement field of a material particle, and t is the time. F i is a local-type body force, which is conjugate to neighbor interactions. F i is a nonlocal body force. The nonlocal body force (F i ) is a residual field, which generates due to non-neighbor interactions. This nonlocal residual body force yields to the condition where V is the volume of the elastic body. For a homogeneous-isotropic-linear elastic material, F i = 0 The balance laws of nonlocal continua (equation ( where ε ij is the infinitesimal strain. λ′ and μ′ are Lame moduli, which are functionals of |x ′ -x|. The integration over the elastic domain, V, was involved to collect all non-neighbor interactions. With Eringen's manipulation of the nonlocal theory, the balance laws are identical to those of the classical continuum mechanics This total stress field is commonly known as "nonlocal stress field". Complications of finding solutions of nonlocal elasticity problems have been early discussed According to equation (3), the field equation of the nonlocal problem is an integropartial differential equation. Analytical solutions for integropartial differential equations are difficult to be determined, especially for mixed boundary value problems where L is the differential operator as defined by Eringen Whereas solutions can be easily obtained using the differential form of the nonlocal elasticity (equation ( Moreover, the "ill-posedness" of Eringen's nonlocal elasticity was discussed in An example of the paradox and inconsistency of the differential nonlocal elasticity can be exhibited by considering a nonlocal problem of an elastic body under a body force equals its inertia force, in particular F i -ρ ∂ 2 u i ∂t 2 = 0. An example of the latter case is a nonlocal static problem with a zero body force. For this case, equation (4) reduces to: which gives the stress field identical to that of the classical elasticity with no dependency on the nonlocal character of the body. This is a clear violation of the concept of the nonlocal mechanics. The illustrated example and the paradoxes and inconsistencies expressed in previous studies imply that the transformation of the integral nonlocal constitutive law (3) into a differential nonlocal constitutive law as proposed by Eringen An attempt to provide an answer to this question was recently expressed in In the classical mechanics, a balance law is valid not only for the entire elastic body but also for each point belongs to the elastic domain To give more insights on the nonlocal elasticity developed here, the system of particles presented in Fig. 1 is considered. As shown in the figure, a set of interaction forces is generated between a particle (n) and its neighbor particles. In the classical mechanics, these direct interactions are exist. Each one of these interactions forms a local force between two neighbors. From lattice mechanics, the local force field, F, between two neighbor particles (n and m) can be defined as follows: where K is an equivalent stiffness of an interaction between two neighbors. u is the displacement field expressing the translational motion of the particle. In addition to the direct neighbor interactions, interactions are generated between a particle (n) and all other non-neighbor particles. A non-neighbor interaction, F, depends on the distance between the two particles. Thus, the non-neighbor interaction between two non-neighbors (n and j) is a functional of the distance between them |x n -x j |, as follows: where k r (|x n -x j |) is a stiffness that is equivalent to the interaction between two non-neighbor particles. Under the influence of the neighbor and non-neighbor interactions, the condition of the dynamic equilibrium of a particle (n) secretes the following balance equations: where X × ξ denotes a moment field. N m is the number of neighbors of particle (n) while N j is the number of its non-neighbor particles. m ̅ is the particle's mass. We introduce in equations ( In Eringen's form of the nonlocal theory, the balance equations were formed depending on a total field that merges the nonlocal residual field with the local field. However, in the context of the proposed nonlocal elasticity, the nonlocal residual field is formed separately, and it is not merged with the local field. In addition, two types of constitutive equations are needed. In addition to the local-type constitutive equations (which are used to form the local field), constitutive equations are used to form the nonlocal residual field. The global balance laws of a nonlocal continuum with a volume V and bounded by a surface S can be derived according to equation ( where ρ is the mass density. F denotes the local body force. F is a nonlocal residual body force. TdS denotes a surface traction. Like the classical mechanics, the external surface traction (T) is balanced with the body forces and the inertia of the elastic domain (equations ( where n is the unit normal vector. σ is the local stress, and τ is a nonlocal residual stress. The local stress (σ) is conjugate to the direct neighbor interactions while the nonlocal residual stress (τ) is conjugate to the non-neighbor interactions. It should be observed that the stress tensors, σ and τ, are general tensors which have symmetric and skew-symmetric parts. According to equation Equation where the balance equations depend on the symmetric parts of the stress tensors, σ sym and τ sym . In the rest of the paper, the superscript 'sym' is omitted for convenient writing. The balance laws of Eringen's model of the nonlocal linear elasticity depend on a total stress field that merges the local stress with the nonlocal residual stress. This total-nonlocal stress field was formed as a functional depending on the motions histories of all points of the body. However, the balance laws of the proposed nonlocal elasticity (equation ( Eringen expressed a postulation where σ ji = σ ij and τ ji = τ ij , which are the components of the local stress tensor and the nonlocal residual stress tensor, respectively. For a linear elastic material, the infinitesimal strain is the fundamental measure of deformation: The local stress, σ ji , has the same form as the stress field of the classical mechanics: where λ 0 and μ 0 are the Lame constants as defined in the classical mechanics. Following Eringen's definition of nonlocal fields, the following constitutive equation can be proposed for the nonlocal stress residual (τ ij ): where λ r and μ r are Lame moduli, which model the stiffness of a non-neighbor interaction. The magnitudes of these Lame moduli depend of the distance between two non-neighbor particles within the elastic domain (|x ′ -x|). The boundary value problem of the homogeneous-isotropic-linear elastic material formed based on the proposed nonlocal elasticity constitutes the following system of equations: The iterative procedure implemented in this study is pioneered from an iterative-finite element-based model of nonlocal elasticity proposed in → Form τ ji (k) (x) using equation (20)4. → Save τ ji (k) (x). 6: (II) Solving the local boundary value problem: → Recall τ ji (k) (x). → Solve the local boundary value problem for σ ji (k) (x) and ε ij (k) (x). → Save σ ji (k) (x) and ε ij (k) (x). The proposed PROCEDURE presents a simple but effective approach to determine the solution of a nonlocal field problem formed based on the proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity. In an iteration k, the determined fields of a previous iteration k -1 (σ ji (k-1) (x) and ε ij (k- In this section, a set of nonlocal elasticity problems of Euler-Bernoulli beams are solved using the proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity. Because the nonlocal residual stress only models non-neighbor interactions, its Lame moduli (λ r and μ r ) can be considered as follows: where δ(|x|) is a Dirac-delta function. The substitution of equation ( which is an explicit form of the nonlocal residual stress (τ ij ). This constitutive law depends on β λ (|x ′ -x|) and β μ (|x ′ -x|), which are two independent kernels that define nonlocal effects. These kernels depend on two independent nonlocal parameters l λ and l μ . As previously demonstrated by the author, a general form of the nonlocal theory with expanded applicability is the one that considers different nonlocal kernels for the different material coefficients According to equation (20) and equation ( 1: 5: where where M(x) is the local-type bending moment, and M(x) is the nonlocal residual bending moment. w(x) is the beam deflection. L, b and h are the beam length, width and height, respectively. V ̅ , M ̅ , w ̅, and w x ̅̅̅̅ are, respectively, prescribed shear force, bending moment, deflection, and slope at the boundary. It should also be mentioned that the total bending field M total (x) formed by the sum of the bending fields M(x) and M(x) is exactly the same as the one obtained from the equilibrium equation of Eringen's nonlocal elasticity. This total bending satisfies the requirement of the global balance. The convergence is evident in Figures (a) (b) (c) In addition, the obtained solutions fulfill the requirement of the global balance. The proposed iterative approach is operated based on fulfilling the equilibrium requirements globally in each iteration. This can be demonstrated by depicting the total nonlocal bending M total (x) (equation ( Conflict of interest The author declares that he has no conflicts of interest. where U i (x) is a prescribed displacement field at the boundary. 1) (x)) are used to form the nonlocal residual stress, τ ji (k) (x), according to equation (20)4. Then, the determined nonlocal residual stress is substituted into the local boundary value problem (22)1 and (22)2. This local boundary value problem is then solved