Color centers in solids are the fundamental constituents of a plethora of applications such as lasers, light emitting diodes and sensors, as well as the foundation of advanced quantum information and communication technologies. Their photoluminescence properties are usually studied under Stokes excitation, in which the emitted photons are at a lower energy than the excitation ones. In this work, we explore the opposite Anti-Stokes process, where excitation is performed with lower energy photons. We report that the process is sufficiently efficient to excite even a single quantum systemnamely the germanium-vacancy center in diamond. Consequently, we leverage the temperaturedependent, phonon-assisted mechanism to realize an all-optical nanoscale thermometry scheme that outperforms any homologous optical method employed to date. Our results frame a promising approach for exploring fundamental light-matter interactions in isolated quantum systems, and harness it towards the realization of practical nanoscale thermometry and sensing. Stokes and Anti-Stokes emission are fundamental phenomena widely used to study the physicochemical and optical properties of materials. Stokes (Anti-Stokes) photoluminescence occurs when the energy of the emitted photons is lower (higher) than that of the absorbed ones Here, we demonstrate that Anti-Stokes PL can be used to study isolated quantum systemsspecifically atom-like color centers in diamond, over a large range of temperatures. We explore the mechanism for some of the most studied diamond defects, the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) The NV center displays a large phononic sideband, which trivially suggests more efficient coupling to the lattice and a more efficient Anti-Stokes excitation process compared to that of the spectrallynarrower SiV and GeV centers. The much lower value of the ratio I AS /I S for the NV in our experiment is mainly due to the Anti-Stokes excitation laser being quite far below the NV ZPL energy (224.40 meV), at the long-wavelength tail of the phonon side band. Additional contributing factors to the low PL Anti-Stokes emission are the NV photo-ionization process The SiV and GeV centers have similar Anti-Stokes emission efficiencies (normalized to their respective Stokes ones), making them both good candidates for Anti-Stokes quantum measurements and potential nanothermometry applications (cf. Supplementary Information, Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated Anti-Stokes photoluminescence from a single atom-like defect in diamond, and leveraged the process to demonstrate a new variant of all-optical nanothermometry with unprecedented performance. Our approach forms a basis for studies of solid-state quantum systems via Anti-Stokes processes, and for novel non-invasive sensing technologies. The NV-sample consisted in synthetic type Ib ND powders (MSY ≤0.1 μm; Microdiamant) purified by nitration in concentrated sulphuric and nitric acid (H 2 SO 4 -HNO 3 ), rinsed in deionized water, irradiated by a 3-MeV proton beam at a dose of (1 × 10 6 ions per cm 2 and annealed in vacuum at 700 °C for 2 h to induce the formation of NV centers (Academia Sinica, Taipei Taiwan) 