The main purpose of this research is dedicated to the ESR study of the impurity ions such as Gd 3+ in the natural zircon crystal because the presence of the impurity ions in the crystal usually causes color in crystal. The Zeeman interaction, the weak hyperfine interaction and the crystal field interaction due to the environments of the impurity ions will be calculated. Furthermore, the relation between the resonance magnetic field positions in the ESR spectra and the applied magnetic field directions will reflect the impurity ion site symmetry. The change in the crystal field parameters of heat-treated zircon at different atmospheres were related to the change in the color of zircon. Zircon is unique among gemstones because of the remarkable range observed in its specific gravity and its refractivity In 2006, we began to study the impurity ions in zircon, using laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy. The main purpose of this research was dedicated to the ESR study of the impurity ions such as Gd 3+ in the natural zircon crystal because the presence of the impurity ions in the natural crystal usually causes the color in crystal. In the following year, we experimented to heat treating zircon at 900 • C in oxygen and argon atmosphere with calculated crystal field parameters. This experiment affects the change in the second degree crystal field parameter (B 0 2 ). The gadolinium ion was in the presence of a large axial crystalline electric field generated from its surrounding oxygen ions within the zircon lattice The crystal filed was not calculated. According to previous work, we know the mechanism of heat-treating zircon in the oxidizing and reducing atmosphere had two different shades. In oxidizing atmosphere, zircon turns dark brown to light yellowish brown. Zircon changes to greenish blue and yellowish blue when heat treated in a reducing atmosphere. In the term of crystal field, temperature and heat treatment will have the same effect that this research shows the change of crystal field in spin Hamiltonian parameters by ESR spectroscopy. The natural zircons were obtained from Cambodia. The zircon crystal samples were cleaned up using H 2 SO 4 and distilled water to remove impurities on their surfaces. The samples of dimension about 2×2×5 mm 3 and known c-axis were selected for ESR measurements. After that, the samples were separately heated at 900 The ESR spectra of zircon before and after heat treatment in oxygen and CO 2 atmosphere were observed in X-band when the applied magnetic fields are parallel to the c-axis [001] at room temperature (298 K) as shown in Fig. The first term corresponds to the Zeeman interaction arises from the interaction between electron spin angular momentum and external magnetic where β, S, g and B are the Bohr magneton, the spin operators, gyromagnetic tensor and magnetic field respectively. 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 the orientation B c. Under these approximations, the seven allowed transitions (∆M S = ±1) occur at the magnetic field positions given by the following first order expressions where ν is the magnetic frequency. The ground state energy level of the Gd 3+ in the natural zircon that is without a magnetic field, was split into four doublets, denoted by | ± 7/2 , Particularly, the changes in the crystal field parameters of heat-treated zircon at different atmospheres were investigated and these were related to the change in color of zircon. The ESR spectra of zircon crystal before and after heat-treated at 900 • C in oxygen and CO 2 atmosphere with the applied magnetic field parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis [001] directions were generated from the microwave energy absorptions due to the transitions between the spin states of gadolinium ions (Gd 3+ , S = 7/2), which were the impurity ions in the natural zircon crystal. These were confirmed by the clearly resolved fine structure of the gadolinium ion. The second degree crystal field parameter (B 0 2 ) is much larger than the other crystal field parameters. This result reveals that the gadolinium ion is in the presence of a large axial crystalline electric field generated from its surrounding oxygen ions with in the zircon lattice. This electric field of tetragonal symmetry has caused the ESR spectra with the applied magnetic field direction. The change in the crystal field parameters of heat-treated zircon at different atmospheres were related to the change in color of zircon.