Ab-initio calculation of intrinsic spin Hall conductivity (SHC) generally requires a strict convergence criterion and a dense k-point mesh to sample the Brillouin zone, making its convergence challenging and time-consuming. Here we present a scheme for efficiently and accurately calculating SHC based on maximally localized Wannier function (MLWF). The quantities needed by the Kubo formula of SHC are derived in the space of MLWF and it is shown that only the Hamiltonian, the overlap and the spin operator matrices are required from the initial ab-initio calculation. The computation of these matrices and the interpolation of Kubo formula on a dense k-point mesh can be easily achieved. We validate our results by prototypical calculations on fcc Pt and GaAs, which demonstrate that the Wannier interpolation approach is of high accuracy and efficiency. Calculations of α-Ta and β-Ta show that SHC of β-Ta is 2.7 times of α-Ta, while both have the opposite sign relative to fcc Pt and are an order of magnitude smaller than Pt. The calculated spin Hall angle of -0.156, is quite consistent with previous experiment on β-Ta, further suggesting intrinsic contribution may dominate in β-Ta. Our approach could facilitate large-scale SHC calculations, and may benefit the discovery of materials with high intrinsic SHC. The spin Hall effect (SHE) is the phenomenon in which transverse pure spin current can be generated by applying an electric field where n, m are band indexes, n , m are the eigenvalues, f nk is the Fermi distribution function, BZ is the first Brillouin zone, ĵspinz x = 1 2 {ŝ z , vx } is the spin current operator * weisheng.zhao@buaa.edu.cn and ŝz = h 2 σz is the spin operator, vy = 1 h ∂H(k) ∂ky is the velocity operator and the frequency ω and η are set to zero in the direct current (dc) clean limit. The calculation of SHC can be performed by direct evaluation of Equ. To mitigate this problem, the direct evaluation of Kubo formula should be avoided. Anomalous Hall effect (AHE) is a phenomenon closely related to SHE, and a very successful scheme for the evaluation of anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) has been developed Wannier interpolation. The Wannier interpolation approach for calculating SHC is composed of two parts: the construction of MLWF from ab-initio wave function and the calculation of SHC based on MLWF. Generally, only a relatively coarse k-mesh ab-initio calculation is enough for the construction of MLWF. Afterwards, the interpolation of needed quantities on a dense k-mesh can be easily achieved with moderate computational burden. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec.II we describe the basic theories and introduce the essential quantities we need to evaluate in our Wannier-based approach. In Sec.III we provide the detailed derivations on the MLWF basis. To validate our approach, exemplary calculations of Pt and GaAs are shown in Sec.IV A and IV B. Sec.IV C describes SHC calculations of α-Ta and β-Ta. Finally, Sec.V contains a brief summary. First we give a basic description of Kubo formula for SHC. Since the Wannier interpolation approach for AHC has been well established, a comparison of SHC and AHC is beneficial. Then we provide a brief and self-contained introduction to the MLWF. More details on MLWF can be found in Ref. The general form of Kubo formula for AHC and SHC is given by where ĵx = -ev x , 1 2 {ŝ z , vx } for AHC and SHC, respectively. Here the integral in Equ.( To facilitate further analysis, we separate the Equ.(2) into the band-projected Berry curvature-like term and the SHC is the sum over occupied bands The unit of the Ω . The case of ω = 0 corresponds to dc SHC while that of ω = 0 corresponds to alternating current (ac) SHC. The Kohn-Sham equation for the periodic part of the Bloch function is written as where k is the k-point vector, n is the band index, u nk (r) = e -ikr ψ nk (r) is the periodic part of the Bloch function ψ nk (r). Ĥk is the transformed Hamiltonian Ĥk = e -ikr Ĥe ikr and nk is the eigenvalue. Usually one needs a lot of plane waves to expand the u nk in PW method and the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix is performed on each k-point. An alternative representation is the real space Wannier function |Rn , which can be viewed as the Fourier transform of the Bloch wave function where V is the volume of the real-space primitive cell and BZ is the Brillouin zone. In principle, a smooth function in real space results in a localized function in its reciprocal space, and vice versa. However, it is not naturally guaranteed that the simply summed Bloch function of Equ. or equivalently, without changing the physical description of the system. The φ n (k) can be any real function that is periodic in reciprocal space We define the J dimensional unitary transformation U(k) which takes the original Bloch function |u where J is the number of states need to be considered for our targeted physical properties. We call this unitary transformation as the transformation from Bloch gauge to Wannier gauge. Thus, the Fourier transformation pair between the smoothed Bloch functions and the MLWFs are where N 3 k is the number of points in BZ. The above mentioned procedure is suitable for a group of isolated bands after normalization ) mn In summary, by disentanglement we construct an optimally smooth space of J Bloch-like states from initial J k Bloch states. Then by a gauge-selection step we obtain J individually smooth Wannier gauge states. From now on we write the smooth varying |ũ nq as |u (W ) nq to be consistent with latter derivations, and we use q rather than k to represent the k-point of the initial ab-initio k-mesh, while the k symbol is reserved for the Wannier interpolation k-mesh used in the following steps. The combined result is Here, V q,mn is a J k × J dimensional matrix. After MLWF has been constructed, we interpolate operators on a dense k-mesh to get a converged result. In this section we use the interpolation of the Hamiltonian matrix H nm (k) = ψ nk | Ĥ|ψ mk as an example to illustrate the key ideas behind Wannier interpolation. For the reciprocal space Hamiltonian operator Ĥ(q), we define the J × J Hamiltonian matrix in the Wannier gauge as nq δ nm is the diagonal Hamiltonian matrix of the original Bloch states, δ nm is the Kronecker delta function. If diagonalizing where nq will be identical to the original ab-initio nq in the range of n = 1, 2, ..., J. Transforming the Hamiltonian operator from reciprocal space to real space, and then performing inverse Fourier transform we succeed in interpolating the Hamiltonian operator on arbitrary k-point k. Since the Wannier functions (WF) we chose are maximally localized, the H (W ) nm (R) is expected to be well localized in real space, a few R are sufficient in the sum of Equ. The final step is to diagonalize then the acquired eigenvalues and gauge transformation matrix U (k) on arbitrary k-point k can be used for latter extractions of the targeted physical properties. We comment here that since H (W ) (k) are of dimensions J × J, their diagonalizations are very "cheap", compared with the diagonalizations of the Hamiltonian matrices in PW method. Apart from the Hamiltonian matrix ψ mk | Ĥ|ψ nk , another useful quantity for the calculation of SHC is the velocity operator matrix ψ mk |v y |ψ nk . By using integration by parts, we arrive at where ∂ y = ∂ ∂ky . The Wannier interpolation of the matrix A mn,y has been developed in the calculation of AHC, detailed derivations can be found in Ref. Expanding the spin current operator as ĵspinz thus Considering the velocity operator vx = 1 h ∂H(k) ∂kx and using integration by parts, we arrive at For the simplicity of latter derivations, we define where the superscript (H) serves as a reminder that these |u (H) nk lie in the Bloch gauge. In short, (27) Then we need to transform to Wannier gauge by using Substituting Equ. where and the D (H) x has been computed in the calculation of velocity operator. From now on the subscript nm and the k-point k are omitted for conciseness and matrix multiplication are implied. To evaluate the Wannier gauge matrices like u (W ) |ŝ z |u (W ) , we need to transform |u by its inverse Fourier transform The maximal localization ensures that a minimum set of nearest neighbor R-points is sufficient for the inverse Fourier transform Equ. The quantities need to be evaluated are the four real space matrices 0|ŝ z |R , 0|ŝ z (r -R) x |R , 0|ŝ z Ĥ(r -R) x |R and 0|ŝ z Ĥ|R . These real space matrices can be evaluated on the original coarse ab-initio k-mesh, and we use the notation |u and |Rn to represent the original ab-initio Bloch wave function, the Hamiltonian gauge wave function, the Wannier gauge wave function and the smooth real space Wannier wave function, respectively. The notation q and k are used to differentiate the coarse ab-initio q mesh with the dense Wannier interpolation k mesh. The four real space matrices are evaluated in the original ab-initio space. The transformation from coarse abinitio q-mesh to real space mesh are summarized as follows, where N 3 q is the total number of q-points on the coarse q-mesh. The density of q-mesh should be sufficient that high quality |Rn can be constructed. From the real space Wannier function |Rn , the real space matrices can be readily evaluated, The evaluation of the needed matrices in Equ.( and The evaluation of the needed matrices in Equ.( . We expand the where b is a vector connecting a q point to its near neighbors and together with its weight w b satisfy the completeness relation Ref. and The only unknown quantities are q+b which are the spin operator matrices, the Hamiltonian matrices and the overlap matrices of the original ab-initio wave function, respectively. Note the overlap matrices are available "for free" since they have been computed in the construction process of MLWF. The spin operator matrices and the Hamiltonian matrices are easily computed from abinitio results. The pw2wannier90 program, which is the interface between Quantum ESPRESSO At this point, all the needed matrices have been evaluated from the ab-initio calculation. In summary, we succeed in computing the four real space matrices 0|ŝ z |R , 0|ŝ z (r -R) x |R , 0|ŝ z Ĥ(r -R) x |R and 0|ŝ z Ĥ|R . Then we interpolate these matrices on a dense k-mesh by the inverse Fourier transform, i.e. the Equ.( To demonstrate the validity of our Wannier interpolation approach, we performed SHC calculations of fcc Pt and GaAs, which have been investigated by direct evaluation of Kubo formula Equ.(1) based on LMTO method All the ab-initio calculations were performed using Quantum ESPRESSO package based on projectoraugmented wave (PAW) method and a plane wave basis set For the ab-initio calculations, we used a wave function cutoff of 90 Ry and electron density cutoff of 1080 Ry. In the self-consistent field (scf) calculation, Monkhorst-Pack k-meshes of 6 × 6 × 6 to 14 × 14 × 14 were tested while the non-self-consistent (nscf) k-meshes were kept the same as the scf k-meshes for the construction of MLWF. The fcc unit cell contains one Pt atom and the lattice constant was set as 3.92 Å. For the construction of MLWF, an inner frozen window of 0.0 eV to 30.0 eV and an outer disentanglement window of 0.0 eV to 60.0 eV were used to extract 18 spinor WFs having the form of s, p and d-like Gaussians [see Fig. As can be seen in Fig. Comparing with the LMTO results More insights can be obtained by band projected plot of SHC, as shown in Fig. 4 , 0) as the vertical axis, which lies in the X-Γ-L plane and is normal to -→ ΓL. The ( 1 2 , 0, 0) point on the horizontal axis is the L point, the small red spot around the L point is consistent with the band projected result in Fig. Since the calculation of SHC always involves k-point mesh on the order of million, special care must be taken to the convergence issues. As shown in the Fig. 3 ) relative to horizontal and vertical axes] corresponds to the X point. The color represents the logarithm [Equ.(51)] of Equ.( No. ab. k-mesh Wan. k-mesh adpt. k-mesh SHC(( h e )S/cm) small portion of the full BZ. In such cases, the method of adaptive k-mesh refinement can be very helpful. The convergence of the SHC with respect to the choice of k-mesh is presented in Table We further performed ac SHC calculations of GaAs. In this case, the Monkhorst-Pack k-meshes of 10 × 10 × 10 were used for the scf and nscf calculations. The fcc unit cell contains one Ga atom located at (0, 0, 0) and one As atom located at ( 1 4 , 1 4 , 1 4 ), and the lattice constant was set as 5.654 Å. The ab-initio and the Wannier interpolated band structures are shown in supplemental material [27] Fig. For the construction of MLWF, the 10 underlying valence bands are excluded, and 16 WFs are extracted from the 16 bands around the band gap. No disentanglement process is adopted since the 16 bands are isolated. 16 spinor WFs having the form of As located sp 3 -like and Ga located sp 3 -like Gaussians are used [see supplemental material [27] Fig. When the frequency ω varies, the denominator in Equ.(1) may approach 0, causing large spikes in the plot. To mitigate this difficulty, two kinds of smearing are adopted, the fixed smearing and adaptive smearing. Follow the method in Ref. which is varied according to the level spacing. The a is the factor of adaptive smearing, and further more the calculated W nm,k is compared with a fixed value W max to avoid too large smearing parameter. In the calculation of Fig. Irrespective of the different ab-initio method adopted in the calculations, our results of Fig. In this section we perform SHC calculations on tantalum. Tantalum has been adopted in many SOT experiments because of its large spin Hall angle (SHA). Two phases of tantalum can exist, i.e. the α-Ta and β-Ta. It is already known that the resistivity of β-Ta, around 200 μΩcm, is approximately 4 times as large as that of α-Ta, which has resistivity around 50 μΩcm For the ab-initio calculations, we used a wave function cutoff of 60 Ry and electron density cutoff of 480 Ry. For the self-consistent field (scf) calculation, Monkhorst-Pack k-mesh of 8 × 8 × 8 was used, and the non-self-consistent (nscf) k-mesh was kept the same as the scf k-mesh for the construction of MLWF. The α-Ta has a bcc crystal structure and the lattice constant was set as the relaxed result of 3.322 Å. For the Wannier interpolation, a k-mesh of 100 × 100 × 100 and an adaptive k-mesh of 10 × 10 × 10 were used. For the calculations of band projected and k-resolved SHC, i.e. Fig. For the construction of MLWF, an inner frozen window of 0.0 eV to 30.0 eV and an outer disentanglement window of 0.0 eV to 50.0 eV were used to extract 18 spinor WFs having the form of d, p and s-like Gaussians [see supplemental material [27] Fig. The variation of SHC with respect to the changes of Fermi energy is shown in Fig. We further performed SHC calculation of β-Ta. The case of β-Ta is more complicated than α-Ta. Regarding the crystal structure of β-Ta, models of tetragonal, hexagonal, β-Uranium and etc. have been proposed The unit cell contains 8 Ta atoms. The lattice constants were set as a =5.34 Å and c=4.97 Å. For the construction of MLWF, an inner frozen window of 0.0 eV to 30.0 eV and an outer disentanglement window of 0.0 eV to 50.0 eV were used to extract 144 spinor WFs having the form of d, p and s-like Gaussians for each Ta atom. A Monkhorst-Pack k-mesh of 4 × 4 × 4 was used in the nscf calculation and it was found that the spread of each WF was less than 1.86 Å2 , and the spreads for both the disentanglement and Wannierization processes were converged under 1 × 10 -10 Å2 . For the Wannier interpolation, a k-mesh of 60 × 60 × 60 and an adaptive k-mesh of 6 × 6 × 6 were used. The Wannier interpolated band structure again accurately recovered the ab-initio one, shown in supplemental material Fig. Unlike the case of α-Ta, the variation of SHC relative to the position of Fermi energy shows more complex behavior. The SHC at Fermi energy is -389 (h/e)S/cm, still an order of magnitude smaller than that of fcc Pt, but 2.7 times of α-Ta. While at 1.238 eV above Fermi energy, the SHC reaches its peak value of -2055 (h/e)S/cm. The bands around Fermi energy are mainly composed of d states, where considerable numbers of band crossings and spin-orbit-split gaps induce large changes of SHC, consistent with the band projected SHC as shown in Fig. The results are θ α-Ta SH -0.0142 and θ β-Ta SH -0.156. The magnitude of θ β-Ta SH is quite consistent with the experimental value of 0.12 to 0.15 The Wannier interpolation approach for the Kubo formula of intrinsic SHC is developed to achieve high accuracy and efficiency. The results of Pt dc SHC and GaAs ac SHC are validated against previous works by direct evaluating Kubo formula, and SHC of α-Ta and β-Ta are calculated based on the Wannier interpolation approach. It is found that SHC of β-Ta is 2.7 times of α-Ta, while both have the opposite sign relative to fcc Pt and are an order of magnitude smaller than Pt. Moreover, based on experimental data of resistivity, our calculated spin Hall angle of β-Ta is -0.156, quite consistent with spin Hall angle measured in experiment. This further implies that intrinsic contribution dominates in the spin Hall effect of β-Ta. The calculations are performed in four consecutive steps. First, a self-consistent calculation produces the converged charge densities. Second, a non-self-consistent calculation is performed on a regular k-mesh and three matrices are computed, which are the spin operator matrix, the overlap matrix and the Hamiltonian matrix. Third, the maximally localized Wannier functions are constructed. Finally, the Kubo formula is interpolated on a dense k-mesh by MLWF to obtain converged results. Due to the merit of real space localization, the fourth interpolation step is very efficient compared with "brute-force" ab-initio calculation on the dense k-mesh. To facilitate the convergence of SHC, adaptive refinement of k-mesh is implemented. The rapid variations of SHC, which are usually located in small portion of the full Brillouin zone, can be captured by the adaptive k-mesh refinement effectively. Since calculations based on LDA/GGA exchange correlation potentials often predict smaller band gaps than experiments, we implement scissors shift in the calculation of SHC to rectify this deviation. To improve convergence in ac SHC calculations, adaptive smearing is implemented and the GaAs calculation shows desirable results. This Wannier interpolation approach serves as a postprocessing step to economically calculate SHC. The ultimate accuracy of the calculated SHC is determined by the underlying ab-initio code, since the MLWFs are constructed to provide lossless interpolation of physical quantities in the energy range of interest. The construction of MLWF is independent from the choice of the underlying code, thus our derivation and implementation of Wannier interpolation for SHC are able to co-operate seamlessly with different ab-initio algorithms and implementations.