In this letter we demonstrate the development of ternary Nb3Sn multifilamentary conductors with artificial pinning centers (APC) which achieve high critical fields. These recently-developed conductors were tested in a 31 T magnet, and the results showed that their upper critical field (Bc2) values at 4.2 K are 27-28 T, and irreversible field (Birr) values are above 26 T, values similar to or higher than those of best RRP conductors. The non-Cu Jc has been brought to nearly 1200 A/mm 2 at 16 T and 4.2 K, comparable to RRP, in spite of the fact that the fine-grain Nb3Sn fractions in filaments are still low (20-30%) and the grain sizes are still not fully refined (70-80 nm) due to conductor designs and heat treatments that are not yet optimized. The Nb3Sn layer Jc at 4.2 K, 16 T is 4710 A/mm 2 for the APC wire with 1%Zr, about 2.5 times higher than RRP conductors, in spite of the fact that its grain size is not yet fully refined due to insufficient oxygen and unoptimized heat treatment. An analysis is presented about the non-Cu Jc that can be achieved by further optimizing the APC conductors and their heat treatments. Several next-generation proton-proton circular colliders have been proposed to succeed the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), including the Future Circular Collider (FCC) and the High-energy LHC (HE-LHC), for both of which 16 T magnets based on Nb3Sn superconductors are being studied as the baseline for the main dipoles Extensive efforts have been made to improve the Jc level, including fine tuning of precursors such as local area ratios (LAR), doping, and heat treatments; however, these have not led to any substantial change to the stagnant performance levels. It is shown in Also in Development of ternary PIT-APC multifilamentary wires began in earnest from 2017, as a collaboration between Fermilab, HTR, and OSU, with focus on improving conductor design, including filament architecture, precursor selection, precursor ratios, tube size, and powder packing density, etc. These efforts have led to significant improvement of performance of the APC conductors in the past two years, while this improvement process is still ongoing. Meanwhile, these progresses also aroused great interest in Nb3Sn pinning work in other groups recently. In parallel there is also some interesting work on APC Nb3Sn with new alloys at FSU The PIT-APC multifilamentary wires used for this work were fabricated by HTR. So far all of the APC wires have been made using a 48/61 design (i.e., 48 Nb3Sn filaments and 13 Cu hexagonal rods) with a Cu/non-Cu ratio of ~1.3. Designs with higher filament counts are in the preparation stage. All wires were fabricated with a starting billet diameter of 19 mm and drawn to various final wire diameters of 0.5-1.0 mm, resulting in a total length of 100-200 meters for each billet depending on final diameters. After continuous optimization of conductor recipe and improvement of the fabrication process, presently all APC wires can be routinely drawn to the final sizes in single pieces: none of the past 15 billets had any wire breakage. Two of our most recent multifilamentary APC conductors have been tested at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) and the results are reported here. Conductor A (T3851, denoted as APC-A) used Nb-0.6%Zr-3at.%Ta tube, in which both Zr and Ta contents fell short of target due to problems in making that batch of alloy, while Conductor B (T3882, denoted as APC-B) used Nb-1%Zr-4at.%Ta tube. Both conductors used mixture of Sn, Cu, and SnO2 powders. APC-A had enough oxygen for each filament, but the recipe was not yet fully optimized for Cu/Sn and Nb/Sn ratios, as will be discussed below. On the other hand, it was found that APC-B had an insufficient level of oxide due to unoptimized recipe and precursor selection: as a result, some filaments were only partially oxidized. In order to compare results of the APC wires and present Nb3Sn conductors, two reference wires were also measured. One is a standard Ti-doped RRP wire for quadrupole magnets in the High Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) upgrade, which has a diameter of 0.85 mm and 108/127 subelements; other parameters specified in Two different types of tests were performed at NHMFL. The first was a measurement of resistance vs field (R-B), and was used to determine Birr and Bc2 as in For the R-B measurements, the sample length was 15 mm and the voltage tap separation was 5 mm; a sensing current of 31.6 mA was used. Because 5 samples could be mounted together for each run, we always included at least one reference wire which gave a second check on the results. The voltages were recorded both for increasing and decreasing magnetic fields; hysteresis was minimized by the choice of time constant and was embedded in our error estimates for the critical field determinations (~0.2 T). For V-I tests on straight samples, each segment of 35 mm was measured with voltage tap separation of 5 mm, and a criterion of 1 μV/cm was used to determine the critical current (Ic). For ITER barrels the voltage tap separation was 50 cm and a criterion of 0.1 μV/cm was used to determine Ic. The R-B curves of APC-A and APC-B are shown in Fig. The above results clearly show that the IO technique slightly enhances Bc2 of Nb3Sn instead of reducing it. This is quite different from NbTi conductors, in which a clear suppression of Bc2 was seen when APCs were incorporated The non-Cu Jcs calculated from the Ics of APC-A and APC-B are shown in Fig. From the above measured non-Cu Jcs and FG area fractions, the Nb3Sn layer Jcs are calculated and shown in Fig. If the targeted FG fraction and layer Jc can be reached, the non-Cu Jc at 16 T and 4.2 K should scale to 2000 A/mm 2 or above, greater than the target for FCC so that sufficient margin can be provided, representing a crucial advance for Nb3Sn conductors.