We present the realization of an acoustic diode or rectifier, exploiting symmetry-breaking nonlinear effects like harmonic generation and wave mixing and the filtering capabilities of metamaterials. The essential difference and advantage compared with previous acoustic diode realizations is that the present is simultaneously a time invariant, frequency preserving and switchable device. This allows its application also as an on-off or amplitude-tuning switch. We evaluate its properties by means of a numerical study and demonstrate its feasibility in a preliminary experimental realization. This work may provide new opportunities for the practical realization of structural components with one-way wave propagation properties. In acoustics, the invariance of the wave equation with respect to time inversion, also known as reciprocity, has been exploited in many applications, e.g. for wave focusing in Time Reversal experiments Examples of the first approach (periodically varying elastic properties in space and time) are provided by theoretical and numerical studies of one-dimensional system described by the discrete nonlinear Schrödinger equation with spatially varying coefficients embedded in a linear lattice Examples of the second approach (introduction of nonlinearity), instead, include 1-D design of a "superlattice" structure coupled with a nonlinear elastic medium Many of these approaches are based on designing pe-arXiv:1810.10634v1 [physics.app-ph] 24 Oct 2018 riodic structures, mainly phononic crystals and elastic metamaterials, which have attracted much attention for their wave manipulation capabilities, including negative refraction In this paper, we propose the realization of an AD, based on the use of linear phononic crystals and elastic metamaterials, embedded between elastic nonlinear regions. The novelty of the device is that it is simultaneously time-invariant (in the sense that its physical properties are not modified externally from the forward to the backward propagation direction The working principle of the AD proposed in this study is illustrated in Fig. i) Propagation from left to right (LtR, Fig. 2 , which is a subharmonic of f 1 . The next portion of the device, FB2, is a low-pass filter, which eliminates frequencies above f 0 , and a second nonlinear zone, NL2, where the second harmonic f 1 = 2f 0 is generated. Finally, another passband filter (FB3) filters out f 0 and the harmonics higher than f 1 , giving an overall output signal f 1 at the same frequency of the input. ii) Propagation from right to left (RtL, Fig. To verify the feasibility and functionality of the device, we will first simulate its behaviour numerically (Figs. In the numerical simulation (Fig. The nonlinear sections NL1 and NL2 are realized by considering a zone of diffuse nonlinearity, and the numerical nonlinear parameters are set in order to produce about 10% of harmonics and subharmonics. These two nonlinear zones are placed between two filters made of metamaterials or phononic crystals, which confine the frequency components of the wavefield falling in their BGs, creating a sort of resonant cavity (also named left and right cavities in the following). The dimensions of these regions and of the nonlinear elements can be tailored to enhance the desired frequencies through resonance effects (f 0 in the left, and f 1 in the right cavity). A nonclassical nonlinear model The structure of each metamaterial/phononic crystal part (FB1-FB3) is described in detail in the Supplemen- tary Material [43] together with its dispersion characteristics. The scalability of the results is guaranteed by the fact that the geometry of the constituent elements can easily be tuned to shift the pass bands to the desired frequencies. The excitation signal (a sinusoidal wave) is uniformly applied at the left boundary of FB1 (for LtR propagation) or at the right boundary of FB3 (for RtL propagation). We assume reflecting condition at the boundary that are free from excitation. With this configuration we perform wave propagation simulations to demonstrate the effective feasibility of the AD. For the LtR (RtL) propagation, we inject a monochromatic wave of frequency f 1 = 600 kHz on the left (right) side of the device and the corresponding f 2 = 900 kHz in the left cavity. The output signal is recorded on the left (right) side of the sample (T1 in Fig- Although any mechanism able to generate subharmonics In the first case, the source S 2 (the pump) is switched on/off at regular time intervals and the corresponding output recorded (see Fig. The same numerical experiment is then repeated at increasing amplitude of the pump (S 2 ) while keeping the amplitude of S 1 fixed. Since the amplitude of the f 0 component (the subharmonic of the input) is proportional to the product of the two mixed frequency amplitudes, it is possible to change the output signal amplitude by tuning the amplitude of the pump (S 2 , in this case), as shown in Fig. The discussed design of the AD is quite general and can be realized with different nonlinearity types, filtering characteristics or optimized properties. We demonstrate its feasibility through the experimental realization of a prototype, representing the central part of the device, which is responsible for the breaking of reciprocity. We use a 380 × 40 × 6 mm 3 aluminium plate (ρ = 2700 kg/m 3 , E = 70 GPa and ν = 0.33) with a phononic crystal region representing the filtering barrier (FB2 in Fig. In the experiments, the emitting piezoelectric contact transducer was connected to an arbitrary waveform gen- erator (Agilent 33500B) through a 50dB linear amplifier (FLC Electronics A400). The receiving transducer/laser interferometer was connected to an oscilloscope (Agilent Infiniium DSO9024H) for data acquisition. Figs. In the second experiment (Fig. In summary, we have presented numerical and experimental results demonstrating the feasibility of an acoustic diode based on alternating nonlinear elastic and metamaterial frequency-filtering regions, with time-invariant, frequency preserving characteristics. The design concept is sufficiently general to allow flexibility in its realization, involving different combinations of nonlinearity and BG mechanisms, and the use of phononic crystals or resonant metamaterials provides the opportunity to tune and scale results to the desired device sizes and frequency ranges. Additionally, the adoption of an input monochromatic driving signal allows the adaptation of the concept to different types of devices, such as switches or transistors, which can be exploited in practical applications in the field of acoustics or ultrasonics 