Group III nitride based two-dimensional multi-quantum well (MQW) nanostructures find remarkable applications in the visible to ultraviolet light sources. The interface optical (IFO) phonon modes in a c-axis oriented superlattice of [Al 0.35 Ga 0.65 N (~1.75 nm)/Al 0.55 Ga 0.45 N (~2nm)] 20 MQWs are observed using tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopic (TERS) studies. The near-field studies using TERS probe with an Au spherical nanoparticle of ~ 200 nm diameter were carried out at ambient conditions showing approximately two to three orders of enhancement in the Raman intensities. The interface phonon mode belonging to E 1 symmetry [IFO(E 1 )] vibrating normal to the c-axis of MQWs appeared to be more prominent in the case of TERS measurement compared to that for the other interface phonon mode of A 1 symmetry. The confined electric field of the polarized electro-magnetic excitation using TERS probe, parallel to the plane of the interface of MQW, is made responsible for the plasmonic enhancement of IFO(E 1 ) phonon mode. The confinement was verified using finite-difference time-domain simulation. Quantum wells (QW) are two-dimensional (2D) nanostructures. They are well known for the unidirectional phonon and carrier confinement effects, as well as for the bidirectional transport properties. The major components of various optoelectronic devices of III-nitrides are fabricated using superlattices or in other words 'lattice of lattices' structures. The assembly of a superlattice exhibits a substantial penetration of wave function between the neighboring layers because of the tunneling effects leading to the formation of a multiquantum well (MQW) The vibration of surface atoms with their amplitudes confined close to the surface is known as surface optical phonon mode, and its strength decrease exponentially with depth. The effect of electron-phonon scattering originating from the surface modulation is the major reason for the pronounced generation of surface optical phonon modes. The surface optical phonon modes becomes prominent with the breakdown of translational symmetry of the surface potential because of the presence of periodic textures engraved on the surface of nanostructures Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) is a non-destructive optical characterization technique exclusively meant for the study of nanostructures in the subwavelength regime The present study is mainly focused on the TERS studies of 2D MQWs of AlGaN with a higher degree of ionic character than the covalent counterpart. The TERS probe attached with plasmonic Au nanoparticle is also used to confine the electric field of the electro-magnetic excitation parallel to the plane of the interface of MQW. So, the present study also implemented polarized TERS as a localized probe to study its influence on various interface optical phonon modes and understanding the role of confinement of electric field generated at the consecutive layers of plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxial (PAMBE) grown [Al 0.35 Ga 0.65 N (~1.75 nm)/Al 0.55 Ga 0.45 N (~2nm)] 20 MQWs. The finite-difference timedomain (FDTD) simulation is carried out to understand the confinement as well as the interaction of the electric field with the sample. The MQW of [Al 0.35 Ga 0.65 N (~1.75 nm)/Al 0.55 Ga 0.45 N (~2nm)] 20 on AlGaN (~300 nm)/AlN (~200 nm) buffer layer was grown on a c-plane oriented sapphire substrate using PAMBE (VEECO; Gen 930) system. Standard effusion cells for group III sources were used along with a radio-frequency (RF) plasma source for N activation. The detailed growth mechanism of MQW is discussed in our previous reports The schematic of the TERS technique used for the investigation of interface optical phonon modes of 2D MQW nanostructures are shown in supplementary Figure The Raman scattering data were recorded using vertically polarized (400:1) 514.5 nm excitation on MQWs with an integration time of 10 s. The scattered signals were dispersed with 1800 grmm -1 grating and recorded with a thermoelectrically cooled CCD detector. The far-field (excluding the TERS probe) and near-field (including the TERS probe) spectra were collected through the same 50 objective with N.A. value of 0.45 leading to focused spot size, d ~ 1.5 μm. A nominal laser power of ~0.6 mW with a power density of 34 KWcm -2 was used for the study Commercial 3D FDTD numerical simulation software (Lumerical FDTD Solutions, Canada) was used to understand the localized field distribution around the coupled system of the Au tip and the analyte. The TERS tip was configured by keeping Au particle with 200 nm diameter on a tilted conical shaped glass tip. The plasmonic probe was simulated considering confinement of 514.5 nm excitation light source at the Au NP using perfectly matched-layer boundary conditions. A plane wave source polarized in the X-axis direction was used to inject the field along the Z-axis for the excitation of the coupled Au tip and MQW system. The simulation time was tuned to 1000 fs to allow the energy field to decay completely. During all the numerical simulations, the mesh size was kept as 2 × 2 × 1 nm. Further, the tip was positioned 10 nm above the sample surface to simulate the approximate gap expected during a typical scan. The near-field intensity maps for the multilayer were simulated and evaluated with the experimental data. The schematic structure of [Al 0.35 Ga 0.65 N (~1.75 nm)/Al 0.55 Ga 0.45 N (~2nm)] 20 (Fig. In order to examine the localized field enhancement in the presence of TERS tip on the multilayer, the near-field electric field intensity imaging for the coupled system was simulated and analyzed using FDTD numerical simulations. The schematic of the simulated structures (Fig. The vibrational properties of the samples with MQW structures of c-plane oriented [Al 0.35 Ga 0.65 N/Al 0.55 Ga 0.45 N] 20 is shown in Figure The observed near-and far-field Raman spectra, shown in Figures , AlN-E 2 H and AlN-A 1 (LO) Raman modes of wurtzite phase where λ is the periodicity of the superlattice. 12,13 Broadening of phonon mode, particularly for the interface modes both in far-and near-field measurements, may be due to luminescence in MQW. The Raman enhancement factor for the recorded TERS spectra is estimated using the relation where I with-tip and I without-tip are the recorded Raman scattering intensities with and without the presence of TERS probe in the near-and the far-field, respectively. V FF is the laser excitation interaction volume of the far-field configuration and V NF is the effective plasmonic interaction volume constituted by the near-field evanescent waves. We assume a interaction volume of cylindrical shape (Supplementary informartion Fig. Table belonging to E 1 symmetry (supplementary Fig. In conclusion, interface optical (IFO) phonon modes along with symmetry allowed modes are Raman spectra of MQWs of III nitrides with a sufficiently high enhancement factor of two to three orders. In the case of interface optical phonon modes, the mode with E 1 symmetry which is generated due to the vibration of surface atoms normal to the c-axis of the MQWs, appears to be more distinct. The large TERS enhancement of IFO(E 1 ) as compared to that for the other interface Raman mode of A 1 symmetry is attributed to the presence of a confined electric field parallel to the plane of a superlattice of MQWs, as also confirmed from the finite-difference time-domain simulations. The EF of the spectra can be calculated using the Eqn (1). Let us consider V FF is the interaction volume of the far-field laser probe and V NF is the effective interaction volume of near-field TERS probe. We consider a cylindrical interaction volume for 2D MQW as V = π (d/2) 2 δ (Fig. Therefore; V FF = π  750 2 nm 2  550 nm ( δ = Thickness of buffer + MQW) = 971.45 10 6 nm 3 V NF = π  50 2 nm 2  100 nm (δ ~ plasmonic interaction volume as estimated in the FDTD calculation) =78.510 