We present a many-body formalism for the simulation of time-resolved nonlinear spectroscopy and apply it to study the coherent interaction between excitons and trions in doped transition-metal dichalcogenides. Although the formalism can be straightforwardly applied in a first-principles manner, for simplicity we use a parameterized band structure and a static model dielectric function, both of which can be obtained from a calculation using the GW approximation. Our simulation results shed light on the interplay between singlet and triplet trions in molybdenum-and tungsten-based compounds. Our two-dimensional electronic spectra are in excellent agreement with recent experiments and we accurately reproduce the beating of a cross-peak signal indicative of quantum coherence between excitons and trions. Although we confirm that the quantum beats in molybdenum-based monolayers unambigously reflect the exciton-trion coherence time, they are shown here to provide a lower-bound to the coherence time of tungsten analogues due to a destructive interference emerging from coexisting singlet and triplet trions. Atomically-thin materials exhibit unique physical phenomena emerging from extreme dimensional constraints, which adds to their attractiveness as practical components for ultrathin electronics and optoelectronics While the steady-state properties of TMDCs have been studied in detail by linear optical techniques, the recent application of time-resolved nonlinear spectroscopy has enabled the study of excited-state dynamics on femtosecond timescales. In particular, two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy (2DES) At present time, there is a lack of first-principles techniques capable of simulating the nonlinear optical response of condensed-phase materials. This is in stark contrast to the state of affairs for linear spectroscopy, where time-dependent density functional theory and the Bethe-Salpeter equation both predict accurate spectra, including excitonic effects Shown in Fig. Negatively charged trions in TMDCs are commonly characterized based on the spin of the two conduction-band electrons, leading to singlet or triplet trions when the spins are opposite or equal, respectively. The combination of valley and spin selectivity implies selection rules for trions at low temperatures (with the thermal energy smaller than the conduction band splitting). The behavior is illustrated in Fig. Because the many-body Hamiltonian conserves momentum, the trion states can be expressed as where c 1 , c 2 , and v index the conduction and valence bands (including spin) and with Q as the momentum of the inital conduction band electron. In our simulation, details of which can be found in the Supporting Information, the band structure is described by a parameterized two-band model The trion states are calculated by configuration interaction using a many-body Hamiltonian containing a screened Coulomb interaction, as done in previous extensions of the Bethe-Salpeter equation to three-particle complexes The screened Coulomb interaction is approximated as orbitalindependent and isotropic, using a model dielectric function, W(q) = 2πe 2 /qε(q) with ε(q) = 1 + 2πχ 2D q, where χ 2D is a two-dimensional material-dependent polarizability In Fig. Here, V = (eA/mc)λ • p is the light-matter interaction, where A is the vector potential, e and m are the electron charge and mass, c is the speed of light, p is the momentum operator, and λ is the polarization of the optical field. Here we use circular polarization that selectively excites carries in the K valley. The exciton and trion excited states are indexed by α, and the associated initial state is labeled as "i"; while for excitons this is the vacuum state, for singlet trions the initial state has an excess spin-down electron with momentum Q at the K point, and for triplet trions the initial state has an excess spin-up electron at the K point (see Fig. In Fig. We next turn our attention to 2DES, through which the coherent Here, ω 1 and ω 3 are the excitation and detection energies, respectively, and t 2 is the time delay. The excitation energy difference between excited states α and β is given by According to Eq. 3, the quantum beats due to the exciton- trion coherence are mapped onto the cross-peaks corresponding to trion excitation and exciton detection, and vice versa. Indeed, these spectral locations were employed in the quantum beat measurements by Hao et al. For WX 2 , both singlet and triplet trions form bound states, and as such both contribute to exciton-trion quantum beats resulting from coherent interactions with their respective exciton resonance. In our simulation, we can choose to include or exclude the repulsive intravalley exchange interaction, which breaks the degeneracy of the singlet and triplet trions. If we exclude the interaction, the beating pattern shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have presented a many-body formalism for the simulation of time-resolved nonlinear spectroscopy including three-particle excitonic complexes. Although the formalism can be straightforwardly implemented in a firstprinciples manner, we have here employed a parameterized two-band model and an isotropic, static dielectric function. Combined with a careful truncation of the Brillouin zone, these choices allowed us to provide highly converged results despite the otherwise high computational cost. In applying this formalism to excitons and trions, we uncover various fundamental properties of these charge carrier complexes that relate to the optoelectronic functionality of TMDCs and provide excellent agreement with recently measured 2DES. As noted before, helicity and frequency selective excitation of the A transition in the K valley allows control of the spin state of the optically created electron-hole pair. Consistent with our results, an even more comprehensive spin control can be achieved for bound trion states in MoX 2 : helicity selective excitation at the bound trion transition generates three-body complexes consisting of a spin-up hole, and spin-differing electrons (following the convention from Fig. 