Edge structures are highly relevant to the electronic, magnetic and catalytic properties of twodimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and their one dimensional (1D) counterpart, i.e., nanoribbons, which should be precisely tailored for the desirable applications. In this work, we report the formation of novel Mo6S6 nanowire (NW) terminated edges in a monolayer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) via an e-beam irradiation process combined with high temperature heating in a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). Atomic structures of NW terminated edges and the dynamic formation process were observed experimentally. Further analysis shows that NW terminated edge could form on both Mo-zigzag (ZZ) edge and S-ZZ edge which can exhibit even higher stability superior to the pristine zigzag (ZZ) and armchair (AC) edge. In addition, the analogous edge structures can be also formed in MoS2 nanoribbon and other TMDs material such as MoxW1-xSe2. We believe that the presence of these novel edge structures in 2D and 1D TMD materials may provide novel properties and new opportunities for their versatile applications including catalytic, spintronic and electronic devices. Atomic thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are a class of emerging two dimensional (2D) materials with potential application in electronic Like most 2D materials, monolayer MoS2 has two types of edges, namely armchair (AC)-edge and zigzag (ZZ)-edge. Of them the ZZ-edge is more thermodynamically-favored which could be classified into Mo-ZZ edge or S-ZZ edge depending on the specific edge termination On the other hand, the rapid development of in-situ (S)TEM technology provide us the ability of atomic scale structural analysis along with the power of performing real-time structure modification The MoS2 sample was prepared via a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process. Molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) (Aladdin, 99.9%, 1mg) powder was spread on the bottom of the quartz boat and covered with the cleaned SiO2/Si substrate. The furnace was firstly heated to 600 o C in 20 min and then heated to 830 o C in 10 min, then kept for the next 10 min. The excessive sulfur source (Aladdin, 99.99%, 3g), with its temperature reaching 180 o C, was heated 2 min before the furnace temperature reached 830 o C, and then held for the next 10 min. Argon (99.999%) was used as the carrier gas, with an optimized flow rate of 20 standard-state cubic centimeter per minute (sccm) during the synthesis process. The total growth time lasted for about 10 min and then the furnace cooled down naturally. As prepared MoS2 sample was first characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM, SU70, Hitachi, and optical microscope (Axio Imager A2m, Zeiss) (Fig. To achieve the desirable edge structures, we first created fresh edges by forming holes in the pristine monolayer MoS2 through an e-beam sculpting process at high temperature condition. As prepared MoS2 sample was heated to 750 o C, at which temperature an atomic flat zigzag edge can be produced by ebeam etching and thermal effect By performing continued irradiation at the same temperature condition of 750 o C, abnormal contrast was frequently observed on the edge of these etched holes as the ADF-STEM image shown in Fig. A typical formation process of Mo6S6 NW terminated edges along ZZ direction was captured, which can help us understand its formation mechanism. We kept the irradiation and temperature conditions consist with the etching process (temperature was maintained at 750 o C and the dose rate was cal. ~12 A/cm 2 ). A corresponding time-sequential ADF-STEM images was shown in Fig. Besides the e-beam effect, preparation temperature is another key factor for controllable fabrication of Mo6S6 NW edge. Here we explain why high temperature heating is essential to form NW terminated edge structures. Fig. In conclusion, a novel type of Mo6S6 NW edge structure was fabricated via an in-situ TEM methods. The detail atomic structures were examined and the formation process was captured. All Mo6S6 NW terminated edges we created are along ZZ direction, no AC-NW edge were observed. Atomic resolution STEM images reveal nanowires bonding with different zigzag edge usually shows selective rotation angle. Typically for the Mo ZZ edge it tends to form stable (~0 o , ~0o ) structure and more degree of freedom for the S ZZ edge as (~0 o , ~30 o ) and (~0 o , ~0o ) were observed. To achieve the desire edge structures, we suppose that a Mo rich or S deficiency environment are essential, which can be created by e-beam. High temperature conditions are also play an important role while the best condition is around 750 o C based on our experiments. The ultra-stability of the NW terminated edge with wide temperature range as well as high portability in the MoS2 nanoribbon and other TMDs materials like MoxW1-xSe2 system lights up the way for the potential application. Our results present here will encourage more theoretical study and experimental exploration on these novel edge structures and properties. 