Hybrid superconductor-semiconductor structures attract increasing attention owing to a variety of potential applications in quantum computing devices. They can serve to the realization of topological superconducting systems, as well as gate-tunable superconducting quantum bits. Here we combine a SiGe/Ge/SiGe quantum-well heterostructure hosting high-mobility two-dimensional holes and aluminum superconducting leads to realize prototypical hybrid devices, such as Josephson field-effect transistors (JoFETs) and superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs). We observe gate-controlled supercurrent transport with Ge channels as long as one micrometer and 1 devices (SQUIDs). Finally, We present tunnel-spectroscopy measurements of the induced superconducting gap, as well as a microscopic inspection of the S-Sm interface by crosssectional transmission-electron-microscopy. All devices have Al superconducting leads deposited on the sidewalls of a wet-etched mesa structure. The etching process yields a sidewall slope of θ ≈ 10 • enabling direct side contacts to the QW [Fig. We investigate the interface between the Al contacts and the Ge QW with TEM analysis. First, we observe direct contact between the Al and the QW [Fig. 1 (d)]. Second, diffusion of Ge atoms into the Al layer is found at the Al/QW interface, seen as darker contrast in Fig. In order to demonstrate JoFET functionality, we perform two-probe transport measurements on a single junction device at 15 mK using a standard lock-in technique. The sample is in series with low-temperature RC filters and high-frequency filters. All transport data shown in this work are corrected to remove the contribution from the total series resistance of the measurement circuit (about 45 kΩ). Figure Next, we present the realization of SQUIDs consisting of two independently controlled JoFETs position in the two arms of a superconducting aluminum ring with an inner (outer) surface area of about 12 (27.5) μm 2 [Fig. To investigate SQUID operation, we measure dV/dI in a four-probe configuration and apply a magnetic field, B, perpendicular to the device plane. We begin by characterizing one Josephson junction at a time. This is straightforward since the junctions are off (i.e. fully insulating) when no voltage is applied to the respective gates. We find that both junctions have I s R n values consistent with those obtained for the device geometry of Fig. When both junctions are simultaneously on (i.e. in the superconducting regime) we can observe periodic SQUID oscillations in the switching current as a function of the out-of-plane magnetic field. Representative results are given in Figs. When both junctions are turned on, I s exhibits pronounced periodic oscillations [Fig. In order to probe the superconducting gap ∆ * , induced in the Ge 2DHG we use a JoFET with a constriction in the accumulation top gate and additional side gates designed to create a quantum point contact with tunable transmission [Fig. As before, the top gate is negatively biased in order to accumulate holes and make the channel conducting. Then we apply a positive voltage V sg to both side gates simultaneously. The conductance pinch-off characteristic exhibits plateau-like structures reminiscent of conductance quantization [Fig. We are interested in the tunneling regime at high positive V sg . Figure The estimated ∆ * is roughly half of the superconducting gap in bulk Al. We should like to note that we cannot exclude the unlikely, yet possible, presence of a strong asymmetry between the two sides of the tunnel point contact. For instance, a significantly less transparent contact on the left side would lead to a correspondingly weaker proximity effect and a "soft" induced gap. As a result, the suppressed conductance in Fig. In conclusion, this work provides ample evidence of gate-tunable induced superconductivity in a high-mobility 2DHG confined to a Ge QW. JoFET functionality in single junctions is corroborated by the observation of h/2e-periodic oscillations in the switching current of SQUID-type devices, which can find application in phase sensitive experiments. High mobility SiGe/Ge/SiGe heterostructures were grown by reduced pressure chemical vapor deposition (see Figure 