Reversible martensitic transformations (MTs) are the origin of many fascinating phenomena, including the famous shape memory effect. In this work, we present a fully ab initio procedure to characterize MTs in alloys and to assess their reversibility. Specifically, we employ ab initio molecular dynamics data to parametrize a Landau expansion for the free energy of the MT. This analytical expansion makes it possible to determine the stability of the high-and low-temperature phases, to obtain the Ehrenfest order of the MT, and to quantify its free energy barrier and latent heat. We apply our model to the high-temperature shape memory alloy Ti-Ta, for which we observe remarkably small values for the metastability region (the interval of temperatures in which the highand low-temperature phases are metastable) and for the barrier: these small values are necessary conditions for the reversibility of MTs and distinguish shape memory alloys from other materials. A martensitic transformation (MT) An urgent technological challenge for actuator and biomedical applications is to identify alloys that exhibit reversible MTs that are stable during operational cycles. With very few exceptions To overcome these limitations we have employed ab initio molecular dynamics (aiMD) simulations to access structural properties at finite temperature, and combined our ab initio data with a 2-4-6 Landau-Falk expansion of the free energy Any first order phase transition, like the reversible MT described here, involves the nucleation and growth of a new phase inside the other; the consideration of this mechanism is beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless, even for a homogeneous transition, small metastability regions, energy barriers and latent heats generally distinguish reversible MTs from ordinary MTs; with our approach we provide a fully ab initio strategy to identify these fundamental characteristics of a MT. The austenitic phase in Ti-Ta is a solid solution of Ti and Ta with body-centered cubic (bcc) symmetry, called β phase. At lower temperatures the β phase breaks its cubic symmetry and transforms into one of the twelvefold degenerate orthorhombic martensitic variants, called α . As depicted in Fig. The MT in Ti-Ta can be described by two order parameters that change together: the spontaneous lattice strain (SLS) of martensite, which accounts for the respective elongation and shrinkage of the lattice parameters, and the average displacement from ideal bcc positions ∆y. The SLS is given by We have performed Parrinello-Rahman In Fig. The results for the SLS from the numerical simulations are shown as square symbols in Fig. The square symbols in Fig. From the temperature dependence of the two order parameters in our aiMD simulations the transition temperatures T 0 for Ti-25Ta and Ti-31.25Ta have been determined To fully characterize the MT α β we can parametrize the free energy F (V, T ), which, at zero pressure, governs the thermodynamics of the phase transition. For reversible MTs, Falk FIG. b) The time-and atom-averaged ∆y parameter as a function of temperature for Ti-25Ta (red) and Ti-31.25Ta (blue). The inset shows the directions of the average atomic displacements observed in the aiMD simulations. For both order parameters, squares are extracted from the aiMD simulations, circles are experimental data for bulk and thin film samples at room temperature, and solid lines are predictions from the Landau-Falk expansion (no fit). where a, b, and c are material-dependent parameters, and T c < T 0 is the temperature at which the austenitic phase becomes metastable. In this picture, T 0 is the temperature at which the free energies of austenite and martensite are equal. In the case of the MT in Ti-Ta, Eq. ( eters and latent heats measured experimentally. Here, we determine the parameters a, b, c, and T c exclusively from first principles simulation data. Specifically, we have parametrized the free energy to reproduce the energy difference between β and α at 0 K, the transition temperature T 0 , and the values of the order parameters at 0 K and at T 0 (see the Supplemental Material [26] for details). The obtained free energy curves as a function of η are presented in Fig. As the temperature increases, the martensitic minimum shifts towards smaller values of η. At high temperature the free energy has only one minimum at the austenitic phase, hence the martensite is unstable. The martensitic and austenitic phases are therefore found to be unstable in a very wide range of temperatures. This is confirmed by our aiMD simulations: as initial configurations we used both the α as well as the β phase and apart from the simulations for Ti-31.25Ta at T = 500 K the structure immediately transformed to the thermodynamically stable one, reflecting the instability of the corresponding other phase. Within the Landau-Falk expansion, however, a small interval of temperatures around T 0 is predicted in which both phases are metastable, separated by a very small free energy barrier, as shown in the inset of Fig. Most notably, we extract from the analytical expansion metastability regions of only 70±30 K and 30±10 K, and free energy barriers of only 200±70 μeV/at. and 100±30 μeV/at. for Ti-25Ta and Ti-31.25Ta, respectively. These exceptionally small values indicate that the MT in Ti-Ta is highly reversible. In fact, such small metastability regions and energy barriers for bulk material are necessary properties that distinguish reversible MTs from irreversible MTs. For comparison, the energy barriers for the MTs in Fe-C alloys range between 20 -50 meV/at. A very small free energy barrier is also consistent with our numerical calculations, as for Ti-31.25Ta we have captured a MT within one aiMD run (see Fig. The analytical expansion in Eq. ( In conclusion, we have successfully applied a combination of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations with an analytical expansion of the free energy to characterize the most significant properties of martensitic transformations, which often cannot be captured by 0 K calculations. The methodology presented in this work is based entirely on first principles data and is very well suited to study MTs in a variety of compounds. In particular, we have applied this formalism to the technologically relevant Ti-Ta alloy, for which we have predicted for bulk transformations very small metastability regions (tens of K) and very small free energy barriers (hundreds of μeV). These two quantities are decisive in specifying reversible MTs and have to be considered as the fundamental origin of the shape memory effect. The work presented in this letter has been financially supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the research unit FOR 1766 (High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys, http://www.for1766.de), under the grant number RO3073/4-2 (sub-project 3). D.G.S. acknowledges financial support from the Olle Engkvist Foundation. The computations have been performed using the Gamma and Triolith clusters, managed by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at the National Supercomputer Centre (NSC) in Linköping, the Kebnekaise cluster at the High Performance Computing Center North (HPC2N) in Umeå, and the Beskow cluster at the Center for High Performance Computing (PDC) in Stockholm. Alberto Ferrari, 1, * Davide Sangiovanni, 1, 2 Jutta Rogal, 1 and Ralf Drautz 1 1 Interdisciplinary Centre for Advanced Materials Simulation, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany 2 Department of Physics, Chemistry, and Biology (IFM), Linköping University, SE-58183 Linköping, Sweden We have performed Parrinello-Rahman N P T molecular dynamics percells of the conventional orthorhombic cell of α containing 256 atoms (see Fig. Fig. The transition temperatures have been determined from the simulations by considering the temperature dependence of the spontaneous lattice strain of martensite arXiv:1810.05489v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 15 Oct 2018 (SLS) and the average atomic displacement (∆y) as a function of temperature. For Ti-25Ta both order parameters drop to zero between 600 K and 650 K, while for Ti-31.25Ta at roughly 500 K. By averaging the actual temperatures of the MD runs, the values for the transition temperature have been calculated to be T 0 = 627 K and 496 K for the two compositions, respectively. The experimental transition temperatures have been evaluated as where M s and A s are the martensitic and austenitic start temperatures, respectively. We have taken the measured temperatures for Ti-Ta from Ref. In 1980, Falk where η is an order parameter, a, b, c, and T c are positive, material-dependent constants, and F 0 (T ) decribes the temperature dependence of the absolute free energy of austenite. Without loss of generality, to treat the relative free energy difference between austenite and martensite, we have chosen F 0 (T ) = 0. To determine the values of a, b, c, and T c for Ti-25Ta and Ti-31.25Ta we have imposed the following conditions: • at 0 K, F (η, T ) has two minima at respectively η = -1 and η = +1; FIG. FIG. • at 0 K, F (0, 0) -F (1, 0) = ∆E (β-α ) , where ∆E (β-α ) is the 0 K energy difference between austenite and martensite; • at the transition temperature T 0 , F (η, T 0 ) has two minima at respectively η = -η 0 and η = +η 0 , where η 0 is the value of the order parameter at T 0 extracted from the N P T simulations; • at the transition temperature T 0 , F (0, T 0 ) -F (η 0 , T 0 ) = 0. FIG. The input parameters and the values of the coefficients of the free energy expansion are compiled in Tab. I. The analytical values of the order parameter η as a function of temperature can be derived from Eq. ( η can be used to obtain the values of SLS and ∆y as a function of temperature, as done in Fig. To further test the validity of Eq. ( FIG. where β = 1 kBT and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Considering that we have neglected the temperature dependence of the absolute free energy of austenite by setting F 0 = 0, Eq. (4) gives the "static" contribution to the energy, i.e. the energy that a system with a given value of the order parameter would have at 0 K. We have hence performed additional calculations of the 0 K energy of our system for different values of the order parameter and compared the results to the analytical trends. Figure If F 0 (T ) = 0, the entropy does not depend on temperature S(η, T ) = S(η). As can be seen in Fig. The analytical model provides also the range of temperatures in which martensite and austenite are both stable (metastability region of the MT) and the height of the barrier at the transition temperature T 0 where FIG. The error bars associated with the values of T 0 ∆S, ∆T and ∆E barr have been determined by a sensitivity analysis. The factor that influences the most the latent heat T 0 ∆S is ∆E (β-α ) . Deviations of 5 meV/at. on this quantity change the latent heat by roughly 2-3 meV/at., hence a value of 3 meV/at. has been taken as the absolute error in this case. The reported values for ∆T and ∆E barr , instead, have been found to be almost insensitive to variations of 5 meV/at. and 50 K in the parameters ∆E (β-α ) and T 0 . Changes of the order of 5% on η 0 though affected the final value of these quantities by roughly 30%. This has therefore been assumed as the relative error on ∆T and ∆E barr . For Ti-31.25Ta we detected a MT during a 10 ps aiMD run at 500 K (figure Simulations in the N P T ensemble make it possible to compute the equilibrium volume of the system as a function of temperature. Figure 