Introducing noncollinear magnetization into a monolayer CrI3 is proposed to be an effective approach to modulate the local electronic properties of the two-dimensional (2D) magnetic material. Using first-principles calculation, we illustrate that both the conduction and valence bands in the monolayer CrI3 are lowered down by spin spiral states. The distinct electronic structure of the monolayer noncollinear CrI3 can be applied in nanoscale functional devices. As a proof of concept, we show that a magnetic domain wall can form a one-dimensional conducting channel of in the 2D semiconductor via proper gating. This conducting channel is approximately 7 nm wide and has the carrier concentration of 10 13 ∼ 10 14 cm -2 . Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, The atomic structure of the monolayer CrI 3 is shown in Fig. In real materials, the size of domain walls is determined by competition of exchange interaction and magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE). Although the domainwall width will be estimated in Appendix A using the calculated material parameters, we consider the magnetization gradient as an imposed parameter to study the influence of the noncollinearity on the electronic structure. Specifically, a spin spiral (SS) state is introduced in a monolayer CrI 3 . In a SS, the magnetization varies along a certain direction with a constant spatial gradient ∇θ, where the polar angle θ is used to describe the direction of local magnetization, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. The calculation is carried out using the projected augmented waves method implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). Figure The energy difference between a SS state and the collinear magnetization is plotted in Fig. Here a = 7.0 Å is the lattice constant, which equals to the length of the vector a 1 in Fig. It is worth noting that although SOC is included in our calculation, the MAE is much smaller than the exchange energy and is neglected in Eqs. ( Here K = 3.6 meV/nm 2 is the MAE calculated in Appendix A. The same unit cell with collinear perpendicular magnetization has the MAE -KW λ. Since the unit cell contains λW/( √ 3a 2 /4) Cr atoms, the change in the MAE per Cr atoms due to the presence of the SS reads 4 meV, which is independent of the type (zigzag or armchair) and the wave vector. Therefore the magnetic anisotropy contributes a constant of approximately 0.4 meV per Cr atom into ∆E, which is much smaller than the numbers (∼ 10 meV) used in the fitting and hence can be neglected in practice. To study the influence of noncollinear magnetization on the electronic structure, we calculate the density of states (DOS) of CrI 3 without and with a SS state, which are shown in Fig. are shifted towards lower energy by the noncollinear magnetization. The calculated energies of the highest occupied state and the lowest unoccupied state are plotted in Fig. The noncollinearity-modulated electronic structure in the 2D ferromagnet CrI 3 , which is schematically illustrated in Fig. The carrier concentration in the 1D conducting channel can be estimated using the calculated DOS. As shown in Fig. Orientation q ( Å-1 ) nc (10 The electron densities n c for other wave vectors are estimated in the same manner, as listed in Table In addition, a monolayer CrI 3 on a substrate with strong SOC would induce the so-called Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction Using first-principles calculation, we have demonstrated that the noncollinear magnetization in a monolayer of 2D ferromagnet CrI 3 lowers down both the conduction and valence bands and hence increases the work function of CrI 3 . The noncollinearity-induced modulation results from the charge redistribution, which enhances the surface dipole moment of CrI 3 . This effect suggests a new and efficient way of tuning the electronic structure of 2D ferromagnetic materials by introducing, e.g., a magnetic domain wall or a Skyrmion, and shall have potential application in designing nanoscale functional devices made of 2D materials. atom. Without loss of generality, we consider the magnetization gradient along x direction. The magnetization of neighboring Cr atoms at r i around m n (located at r n ) follows the Taylor expansion (up to the second order term) Substituting Eq. (A3) into Eq. (A2), we obtain where we have used the following relations for the honeycomb lattice, Comparing the above expression with the definition, Eq. (A1), we find the spin stiffness of the monolayer CrI 3 A = -(J 1 + 6J 2 )/ √ 3 = 19.2 ± 0.8 meV. Note that the unit of A for 2D ferromagnets is different from that of three-dimensional materials. It is usually very challenging to find the converged value of the MAE using first-principles calculations and therefore we first examine some numerical convergence in our calculation. Here we consider the hexagonal unit cell of the monolayer CrI 3 containing two chromium atoms and six iodine atoms. Spin-orbit interaction is turned on and the collinear magnetization is set to be perpendicular to the atomic plane. The 2D BZ is sampled by a 10×10 k mesh. A much denser sampling with 80×80 k mesh has been tested later and all the reported results are well converged with respect to the sampling of k points in the BZ. Figure The MAE of the monolayer CrI 3 is calculated by comparing the energy difference between the magnetization aligned inside the atomic plane and perpendicular to it. As shown in Fig. 