BaPd 2 As 2 belongs to 122 pnictide group, famous for exhibiting superconductivity at high temperatures and other electronic correlations. Unlike the 122 iron arsenides, BaPd 2 As 2 exhibits superconductivity at low temperature when realized in theThCr 2 Si 2 type structure (I4/mmm). We have performed density functional theory (DFT) based calculations to investigate the structural, elastic, electronic, thermodynamic, and optical properties of BaPd 2 As 2 in this study. The structural, elastic, and the band structure features are compared with the available experimental and theoretical results. Pressure and temperature dependences of various important thermodynamic functions, e.g., bulk modulus, specific heats at constant pressure and volume, coefficient of volume thermal expansion, and Debye temperature are studied in details for the first time. The optical parameters of BaPd 2 As 2 are also studied in details for the first time. The optical properties compliment the electronic band structure characteristics. Optical constants show significant dependence of the state of polarization of the incident electric field. BaPd 2 As 2 exhibits high reflectance in the infrared and near-visible region and strongly absorbs the ultraviolet radiation. The relevance of the electronic energy density of states and the characteristic phonon frequency to superconductivity in BaPd 2 As 2 is also discussed. 1 Introduction Discovery of superconductivity in layered iron arsenides properties suitable for applications. Hence, it is always instructive to study the optical parameters of layered ternary metallic systems keeping the possibility of potential applications in mind. The structural and elastic properties are intimately related to the bonding characteristics of a crystal. This bonding and structural characteristics determines the features of phonon spectrum, and therefore set the energy scale for superconductivity. The electronic band structure and the electronic energy density of states at the Fermi energy are also quite important for emergence of superconductivity at low temperature. We have revisited these properties in this study. All the calculations were performed using the density functional theory (DFT) based ab-initio calculations. Our study reveals conventional metallic characteristics for BaPd 2 As 2 . The electronic band structure calculations show several bands with varying degree of dispersive features crossing the Fermi level. The electronic density of states at the Fermi energy, N(E F ), is derived primarily from the As 4p orbitals and Pd 4d orbitals with a small contribution from the Ba 5d electronic states. The elastic properties are highly anisotropic. The optical constants also show anisotropy with respect to the polarization of incident electromagnetic radiation. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes briefly the computational methodology. In Section 3, results of the computations are presented and analyzed. Important conclusions drawn from this investigation are discussed and summarized in Section 4. The most popular practical approach to ab-initio modeling of structural and electronic properties of solids is the DFT with periodic boundary conditions. In this formalism the ground state of the crystalline system is found by solving the Kohn-Sham equation In the above expression,  is the volume of the unit cell,  frequency of the incident electromagnetic wave (photon), e is the electronic charge, ψ are the conduction and valence band wave functions at a given wave-vector k, respectively. The delta function ensures conservation of energy and momentum during the optical transition. The Kramers-Kronig transformations yield the real part  1 () of the dielectric function from the corresponding imaginary part  2 (). Once these two parts are known, all the optical constants can be obtained from them To study the pressure and temperature dependent thermodynamic properties, we have employed the energy-volume data calculated from the third-order Birch-Murnaghan equation of state 3 Results and analysis As mentioned in the preceding section, the superconducting phase of BaPd 2 As 2 crystallizes in the ThCr 2 Si 2 -type structure. The optimized crystal structure of is shown in Fig. The structural ground state yields the fully relaxed lattice parameters of BaPd 2 As. These theoretical lattice parameters are given in Table It is seen from the above table, the calculated elastic constants are larger than those found by Shein et al. All these stability conditions are satisfied by the elastic constants of BaPd 2 As 2 . The elastic moduli and the Poisson's ratio can be calculated from the values of C ij . Table Table We have found that G < B. Therefore, the mechanical failure in BaPd 2 As 2 should be controlled by the applied shear component. The Pugh's ratio is linked with the ductile/brittle behavior of a compound. The bulk modulus is a factor that measures the resistance to a volume change due to isotropic applied pressure and the shear modulus measures the resistance to plastic deformation. A high value of the Pugh's ratio is associated with ductility, whereas a low value corresponds to brittle nature. If B/G > 1.75, the material is expected to behave in a ductile manner; otherwise, the material is expected to be brittle. In addition, the ratio B/G reflects the hardness of a material. The smaller the ratio B/G is, the larger the hardness of the material. For BaPd 2 As 2 , we have found that B/G > 1.75. Therefore, this material should be ductile in nature. Poisson's ratio (n) plays an important part in assessing many mechanical properties of crystalline solids. It can predict the stability of solids against shear. Low value of n is indicative of stability against shear The difference between the two particular elastic constants, (C 12 -C 44 ), defined as the Cauchy pressure Density of states (electrons/eV) Materials are often used at different pressures and temperatures. Therefore, study of the variation of different thermal parameters with pressure and temperature is important. Figs. where h refers Planck's constant, k B is symbolized for Boltzmann's constant, N A is Avogadro's number, ρ denotes mass density, M is the molecular weight and n is the number of atoms in the molecule. The average sound velocity v in the polycrystalline material is determined by where v and v are the longitudinal and transverse sound velocities in the solid and are obtained using the isotropic shear modulus G and the bulk modulus B as follows The ambient condition value of θ D was found to be 266 K and 269 K for QHDA and sound velocity method, respectively. Both our methods yield almost identical value θ D , giving an independent check of the accuracy. The T-dependent behavior of the specific heat under constant volume, C V , and constant pressure, C P , are shown in Fig. Optical properties of a material determine response of the compound to the incident electromagnetic radiation. The response to visible spectra is particularly important from the view of optoelectronic device applications. This response to the incident electromagnetic wave is completely determined by the various energy dependent (frequency) optical parameters, namely the real and the imaginary parts of the dielectric constants, 1 () and  2 (), respectively, real part of refractive index n(), extinction coefficient k(), real and imaginary parts of the optical conductivity σ 1 () and σ 2 (), respectively, reflectivity R(), and the absorption coefficient α(ω). The estimated optical parameters forBaPd 2 As 2 for incident photon energies up to 20 eV, with electric field polarization vectors along [100] and [001] directions, are presented in Figs. Fig. The real and imaginary part of the calculated optical conductivity is shown in Fig. The absorption spectrum is presented in Fig. All the calculated optical parameters show significant dependence of the state of electric field polarization. The material under study, therefore, possesses noticeable optical anisotropy. 4 Discussion and conclusions First-principles DFT based calculations have been used to investigate the elastic, electronic, thermodynamic, and optical properties layered ternary BaPd 2 As 2 superconductor with ThCr 2 Si 2type structure. The pressure and temperature dependent thermodynamic parameters have been studied using the QHDA for the first time. The energy dependent optical parameters have been calculated with different electric field orientations, also for the first time. The optimized lattice parameters agree quite well with earlier studies BaPd 2 As 2 possesses significant elastic anisotropy. The Pugh's ratio, Poisson's ratio, Cauchy pressure, all these indicators imply ductile nature of BaPd 2 As 2 with significant metallic bonding characteristics. The Cauchy pressure indicates that central force dominates in atomic bondings. Debye temperature extracted from the QHDA and elastic constants are almost identical. It should be noted that both Kudo et al. 