The accuracy of the constrained random phase approximation(cRPA) method is examined in multi-orbital Hubbard models containing all possible on-site density-density interactions. Using DMFT, we show that the effective model constructed using cRPA fails to reproduce the spectral properties of the original full model in a wide parameter range. By comparing quantities such as the density of states and quasiparticle residues of the full and the effective models, we show that cRPA systematically overestimates the screening of Hubbard U for DMFT impurity solvers. We instead propose a new method to investigate the screening mechanism in the system using the local polarization, which is highly successful in reproducing spectra and also shows that the true screening is far less than that predicted by RPA. Furthermore, we compare the fully screened interaction W given by RPA and our new method and show that the RPA W is also overscreened and misses the signatures of local screening, which are clearly present in our new method. Achieving a truly ab initio description of complex correlated materials is one of the prime objectives of condensed matter physics today. These compounds attract lots of interest as they often have very complicated phase diagrams displaying a variety of interesting phenomena such as metal-Mott insulating transition(MIT), unconventional superconductivity and non-trivial magnetic order,charge/spin density waves etc In this paper,we investigate the accuracy of cRPA using a class of model Hamiltonians based on models used to study strongly correlated materials. This allows us to study the fundamental causes for the failure of cRPA in strongly correlated systems in general, instead of merely making predictions about a specific compound. In all of our models, we include strong hybridization between localized and itinerant bands as the accuracy of cRPA is particularly questionable in such systems. Our models are two dimensional and we retain all density-density Hubbard interactions, reminiscent of the models used to study typical transitional metal oxides. We use DMFT to compute the spectra and quasiparticle residues of both the full multi-orbital model as well the effective oneorbital model using parameters obtained from cRPA. We show that i) cRPA has a tendency to systematically overestimate screening in the system. ii) We also find that for a large range of parameters, inter-orbital and weakly correlated orbitals' U parameters have little effect on the spectrum, thus negating the fundamental screening mechanisms used in cRPA. iii) Instead, we study a far more accurate form of W and U using the DMFT local Polarization bubble which exactly includes all local interactions. Using this new method, we show that the true screening is far less than predicted by cRPA/RPA and that the actual U predicted by this method has little frequency dependence. iv) We also study the fully screened interaction(W) evaluated using RPA and our new method and show that the RPA W is unable to capture the Mott transition and also shows no signatures of local screening processes, which are present in in the W evaluated using our new method. Since local interactions are treated exactly in DMFT, this success of the local Polarization method clearly shows that DMFT takes into account all the predominant screening processes in strongly correlated systems which are missing from RPAbased approaches. We start by introducing the two models, which we name dp model (for the two-band model) and dps model(for the three-band model). For the dp model, we parametrize the tight-binding part of our Hamiltonian using a two-component field ] creates a d (p) electron with spin σ and wave vector k. The Hamiltonian is given by : where This parametrization is motivated by recent research where τi denotes Pauli matrices and In Fig. For simplicity,the parameterization used is similar to dp model Here we choose t ps (k) = 0 with two considerations in mind: i)Physically,it is reasonable to take it to be zero as these two bands are well-separated in energy; ii) It is helpful in reducing the sign problem in our CTQMC impurity solver used while solving the DMFT equations,which are discussed in detail in section II C. For the interacting part of the Hamiltonian, we only retain all possible on-site density-density interactions and ignore exchange interactions such as Hunds Coupling. The interaction Hamiltonian is given by: (5) Here i labels the lattice site, m, o ∈ {p, d, (s)} , {U dd , U pp , U ss } represent the intra-orbital interaction strengths and {U dp , U ds , U ps } the inter-obital interaction strengths.As the d band is taken to be the most correlated one,we place the added constraint that U dd is the greatest of all the U parameters. Approximation(cRPA) In this section, we describe the cRPA scheme used in this paper. In cRPA with P r approximated by only the particlehole(RPA)"bubble" diagrams.The fully screened interaction W RP A can be also evaluated using RPA by factoring in the screening effect of P d on u The Feynman diagrammatic illustration for the summation procedure of the bubble diagrams used to calculate W RP A or u cRP A is shown in Fig. and interaction matrix V in the two models are given by (V ) mn = U mn defined in Eq. [5],where m, n ∈ {p, d, (s)} and wavefunction a n λ,k in λ band is n, k|λ, k . In order to solve our lattice models,we employ the DMFT method which maps them onto an impurity problem subject to the following self-consistency condition Here h 0 (k) is the kernel of the two tight-binding models H dp(s) 0 , ∆ is the frequency-dependent hybridization of the impurity with the bath and Σ is the impurity Self Energy, which is approximated within DMFT to be equal to the (local) Self Energy of the system.The double counting(DC) term Σ DC is needed to subtract the part of the correlation that is overcounted in our tight-binding models and the DMFT solution.We used the form for the DC term given in Eq. [10] which generalizes the standard DC correction to multi-band systems with interorbital interactions The quantum impurity model is solved using the numerically exact continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo method The lattice self-energy and Green's function are obtained by iterating our equations to self-consistency. As noted earlier, the chemical potential in all our simulations is adjusted such that the total electron occupancy is 3. As our DMFT scheme provides us with quantities on the imaginary (matsubara) axis, in order to obtain physical quantities on real frequency axis we use the maximumentropy analytical continuation method where m is the band index. In this section,we compare the densities of states(DOS) obtained for three different scenarios near the Metal-Mott insulator transition (MIT) for both the dp and the dps models using DMFT. The three scenarios we study are: 1) Full two-orbital(dp) or three-orbital(dps) DMFT with all on-site interactions factored in, which we dub the "2-orb/3-orb" scenario, 2)one orbital DMFT where we fix the value of the effective u dd to the same value as full model (thereby neglecting any screening) , which we name the "1-orb bare" scenario and 3)one orbital DMFT with an effective u dd on the correlated orbital calculated using cRPA, dubbed the "1-orb cRPA" scenario. We emphasize here that the number of bands are the same in all three scenarios considered and the differences lie in the choice of correlated orbitals and value of the interaction in these subspace.In the following, we choose the following sets of parameters for U : (U pp = 0.2U dd , U pd = 0.8U dd ) for the dp model and (U pp = U ss = U ps = 0.1U dd , U pd = 0.6U dd , U ds = 0.3U dd ) for the dps model. These parameters give appreciable screening by cRPA and are therefore suitable to investigate its accuracy. With these sets of U, we find that in "2-orb/3-orb" scenario the critical U for the MIT for the dp model is U M IT dd ∼ 3.2, while for the dps model U M IT dd ∼ 4.5. For the "2-orb/3-orb" scenario,though there exist Hubbard-like interaction terms in the p or s orbitals, the self energies in these orbitals are normally negligible compared to that in the d orbital, as shown in Fig. In order to calculate the effective interaction parameters predicted by cRPA, we obtained the screened frequency-dependent u and W for the critical values of U dd for the two models given earlier. As shown in Fig. In order to further illustrate the inaccuracy of cRPA, we shall now show how the "1-orb cRPA" scenario deviates from the other two for a broad range of U dd by comparing the quasiparticle residue Z d of the d-band (calculated using Eq. [12]) in the three scenarios for both models. Z d gives us the extent of the correlations present in the correlated band and (within the DMFT approximation) is the inverse of the effective mass of the quasi-particle excitations. So a value of 1 would denote lack of correlation, whereas Z d ∼ 0 would signal proximity to an insulating solution with Z d becoming zero at the critical U . From the results shown in Fig. We shall now explain a new formulation for estimating the screening in strongly correlated systems. As we have shown, RPA-like non-interacting bubble diagrams are inadequate in explaining the screening present in these systems. In an effort to modify this formalism and yet preserve the mathematical simplicity of the method, we shall replace the non-interacting Polarization bubble used in RPA/cRPA with the full local Polarization bubble within DMFT approximation P Loc . Similar to cRPA, we shall also define P Loc = P Loc The local polarization bubbles P Loc here are constructed from the local two-band impurity charge and spin susceptibilities which are easily calculated using the CTQMC impurity solver Using this new procedure we estimate the new screened interaction parameters W Loc and u cLoc for two sets of In this paper,we investigate the validity of cRPA as a method for predicting the Hubbard U for strongly correlated systems.To this end we study two different models, each of which have one strongly correlated band strongly hybridized with other weakly correlated band/s. We compare three scenarios derivable from the original lattice models and show that the full and the "1-orb bare" scenarios have very similar spectral functions for a wide region of interaction parameters.On the other hand,the cRPA "1-orb cRPA" scenario with an effective on-site Hubbard U calculated using cRPA has the tendency of being more metallic. We also compare the quasiparticle residue Z d of the three scenarios and show that cRPA gets progressively worse as the on-site U dd of the correlated band increases.These results together clearly show that cRPA has a pathological tendency to overestimate screening in strongly correlated systems. This, we believe, is simply due to the fact that the RPA-like bubble diagrams are not the exclusive leading order terms in the screening of local Coulomb repulsion. This systematic overscreening adds to other known deficiencies of cRPA, such as its violation of Pauli principle (note recent attempts to address this by Shinaoka et. al 