We study magnon properties in terms of spin stiffness, Curie temperatures and magnon spectrum of Fe-Ni, Co-Ni and Fe-Co random alloys using a combination of electronic structure calculations and atomistic spin dynamics simulations. Influence of the disorder are studied in detail by use of large supercells with random atomic arrangement. It is found that disorder affects the magnon spectrum in vastly different ways depending on the system. Specifically, it is more pronounced in Fe-Ni alloys compared to Fe-Co alloys. In particular, the magnon spectrum at room temperature in Permalloy (Fe20Ni80) is found to be rather diffuse in a large energy interval while in Fe75Co25 it forms sharp branches. Fe-Co alloys are very interesting from a technological point of view due to the combination of large Curie temperatures and very low calculated Gilbert damping of ∼0.0007 at room temperature for Co concentrations around 20-30%. FIG. There has been a growing interest in disordered magnetic materials in the last few decades in the form of transition metal alloys and diluted magnetic semiconductors Previous studies of magnon properties of disordered magnets have been focused on diluted magnets and the effect of dilution on the magnon spectrum and spin stiffness The paper is organized as follows: In Section II we introduce the methodology and give the details of the calculations, in Section III we present our findings and in Section IV we give a summary and provide an outlook. A magnetic solid at finite temperature displays two different kinds of magnetic excitations, namely spin wave excitations (magnons) and electron-hole pair excitations (Stoner). The magnon excitations are responsible for transversal fluctuations while Stoner excitations cause longitudinal changes of the moments. At low temperatures and in particular for bulk materials, as in this study, the magnon excitations dominate and as a first approximation the Stoner excitations can be neglected. However, it is worth noting that they may play an important role at high temperatures and also for certain materials with induced magnetic moments. Longitudinal fluctuations can however be modelled in a more advanced treatment The low energy spin excitation in a form of a magnon is characterized by the wave vector q within the Brillouin zone and for a cubic, ordered, material the magnon energy E(q) = ω(q) ≈ Dq 2 , where D is the spin wave stiffness 25 arXiv:1810.08487v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 19 Oct 2018 and M is the magnetization, J ij is the exchange interactions between magnetic moments m at sites i and j connected with position vector R. In the case of disorder, the spin wave stiffness D is obtained in by averaging over all N atoms in the system as The dynamics of a magnetic material at finite temperature and thus the magnetic excitations, is conveniently modelled through atomistic spin dynamics (ASD) simulations where γ is the electron gyromagnetic ratio and α is the Gilbert damping parameter. The latter can either be taken from experiments using ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) or calculated from first-principles. The effective interaction field B i experienced by each atomic moment i is given by where H is the spin Hamiltonian governing the interactions between the magnetic moments. We are employing the semi-classical Heisenberg model, H =ij J ij m i • m j , where the exchange interactions are parametrized from first-principles calculations. The effective interaction field is complemented with a stochastic field b i that is modeled with uncorrelated white noise with a temperature dependent variance We are employing two different complementary methods for calculating the magnon spectrum, 1) the adiabatic magnon spectrum (AMS) valid for the ground state and 2) from ASD simulations through the dynamical structure factor at finite temperatures and damping. The adiabatic magnon spectrum is directly connected to the real-space exchange interactions J ij through Fourier transformation In the spirit of virtual crystal approximation (VCA), it is tempting to perform a chemical average of the Fourier transformed exchange interactions, i.e. J(q) = J 11 (q)x 2 1 + J 12 (q)x 1 x 2 + J 21 (q)x 1 x 2 + J 22 (q)x 2 2 (6) in the case of binary alloy and where x 1 and x 2 are the concentration of each chemical type. In such a case, the "effective" magnon energy ( =1) for each wavevector q can then be adapted to the expression valid for one atom/cell of ordered systems where M is the saturation magnetization. However, this treatment of the disorder is over-simplified and does not reproduce experimentally observed excitations. Analogous to multi-sublattice ordered systems, where N magnon branches appear in the spectrum (N is the number of sublattices), chemically disordered systems containing K chemical components will exhibit K magnon branches. More specifically, in the case of a binary alloy (K=2), the magnon energies at each wave-vector q will be given by the eigenvalues of the following 2 × 2 dynamical matrix ω(q) = 4Eig 2. Dynamical structure factor The magnon dispersion at finite temperatures are directly accessible in ASD through the dynamical structure factor S(q, ω) The correlation function defined in Eqn. ( The magnon energies are determined by the peak values of S(q, ω) at wavevector q. In contrast to the adiabatic treatment, temperature effects from the Gilbert damping processes are included that give rise to intensity variation of the available energies. In the present study, we have not included longitudinal fluctuations of the magnetic moment. Such fluctuations give rise to Stoner excitations and an additional damping mechanism for magnons so-called Landau damping. All first-principles calculations in this study was performed using a multiple-scattering (Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker, KKR) implementation of the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the SPR-KKR software The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) using the Perdew-Burke-Enzerhof (PBE) parametrization was used as exchange-correlation for the volume relaxation while all other calculations employed the local spin density approximation (LDA). The calculations are fully relativistic employing the atomic sphere approximation with a basis set consisting of spdforbitals. The coherent potential approximation (CPA) was employed for treating the disorder. In order to study the magnetic excitations and finite temperature properties, the total energies from the electronic structure calculations are mapped onto an effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian generalized to random alloys. The magnetic exchange interactions were obtained from the magnetic force theorem using the formalism of Lichtenstein, Katsnelson, Antropov and Gubanov (LKAG) The spin stiffness of the Fe-Co alloys in the bcc lattice shows a more interesting behaviour. At low concentrations of Co (x < 0.2), the spin stiffness is similar as for elemental Fe while it increases for higher concentrations of Co. At the phase boundary around x = 0.7, the spin stiffness is approximately twice as large as that of Fe. This suggests that the are ample possibilities for tuning the magnetic properties in this system. Our computed Curie temperatures are shown in Fig. , where T c is the "true" value (which can be obtained from Monte Carlo). The two different methods (MFA and RPA) then set the upper and lower bounds of T c . Of the three considered alloy systems, the Fe-Ni system displays the lowest values of T c while Fe-Co the highest with values peaking around 1500 K for Co concentrations around 0.5. Gilbert damping in magnetic materials determines the rate of dissipative energy processes with the surroundings. Very often a low damping is wanted in order to minimize energy losses but equally important is the ability to tune the damping. This can be achieved by, e.g., impurity doping E. Magnon properties FIG. Overall, we find that the main features of the magnon spectra are quite similar in all systems we have considered here. We therefore choose in this section to present results only for two systems of particular technological interest: i) permalloy (Fe 20 Ni 80 ) in the fcc lattice and ii) Fe 75 Co 25 in the bcc lattice chosen due to its large magnetic moment and low damping. In Fig. FIG. The MDOS obtained from AMS has two distinct peaks which we can denote "acoustic" and "optical" branch in analogy to phonons. The two branches are separated by a small gap. However, even at low temperature (T = 10 K), the MDOS as obtained by ASD simulations is broadened enough such that the two branches overlap. The peak positions are however almost identical. Although one need to keep in mind that AMS is using a simplified treatment of disorder, namely VCA, while ASD simulations are treating the disorder much more accurately by using a large random supercell. Increasing the temperature to 300 K softens the spectrum almost uniformly. This finding has been used to describe the low temperature dependence of MDOS with a quasiharmonic approximation in Refs. [45 and 46]. The calculated magnon spectrum for Fe 75 Co 25 , displayed in Fig. To further quantify the effects of disorder on magnon properties, in this section we compare ordered system with disordered system having the same composition. More specifically, we compare Fe 50 Co 50 which exists both in ordered structure, B2, or as a disordered random alloy in bcc structure. Both the magnetic moments (M s ≈ 2.2μ B ) and Curie temperatures (≈ 1400 K) are rather similar between the two structures. The calculated Gilbert damping at room temperature is however lower for the ordered B2 structure, 0.0007 vs 0.0011 for the random alloy. It is worth noting that the damping for the B2 is remarkable low for a metallic compound. In Fig. In Fig. The most elaborate way to determine magnon lifetimes theoretically is through time dependent density functional theory and linear response We have presented magnon and finite temperature properties of random alloys using a combination of electronic structure calculations and atomistic spin dynamics simulations. Disorder is seen to have a pronounced effect on the magnon properties causing additional scattering and damping of magnon modes. However, the degree of magnon scattering and damping depends sensitively on the chemical composition of the alloy and also on the relative concentration of the constituent atomic species, prompting for material specific studies. For example, the magnon spectrum of permalloy (Fe 20 Ni 80 ) is much more affected by disorder causing diffuse spectra in most of the Brillouin zone than that of Fe 75 Co 25 where welldefined magnon states exist everywhere. Similarly, we compared the magnon properties of Fe 50 Co 50 , both as ordered structure and as random alloy. We found a distinct difference in the magnon density of states between the two as well as observing shorter magnon lifetimes in the random alloy. We hope that the present study will motivate new experiments in the next generation of neutron scattering facilities. These new facilities currently under construction may now have the required accuracy to fully resolve the intricate magnon features in random alloys. V. L. Moruzzi, Phys. Rev. B 41, 6939 (1990). I. Turek, J. Kudrnovský, V. Drchal, and P. Weinberger, Phys. Rev. B 49, (1994).