A 3D woodpile structure tunable plasma photonic crystal is designed, simulated, and experimentally characterized over the S -X band of the electromagnetic spectrum. The measurements confirm that the electromagnetic response is rich in dynamics. The photonic crystal's reconfigurability, achieved through individual discharge control of the properties of the woodpile plasma columns, offers an unprecedented opportunity to better resolve the interactions between both the Bragg and localized surface plasmon modes which dominate the spectrum at lower frequencies. Both the experiments and simulations reveal evidence for the coupling of Bragg and surface plasmon modes through a Fano resonance. Photonic crystals (PCs) are artificially-ordered materials designed to transmit or reflect electromagnetic (EM) waves over a limited range of frequencies as a result of destructive and constructive Bragg scattering interferences within the periodic structure In this letter we describe the construction and performance of a 3D PPC consisting of a woodpile lattice structure formed from intertwined orthogonal nested 2D arrays constructed from gaseous plasma columns. The woodpile lattice structure allows for the excitation of both surface plasmon and Bragg scattering modes for arbitrary incident polarization. The plasma column properties can be individually controlled allowing reconfigurability of the PC. For example, we can turn off the plasma of all of the columns oriented in one direction, transforming the structure into a lower dimensionality 2D array. As described below, we show that there is a synergistic interaction of the two nested 2D arrays, affected somewhat by the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons. Figure We use the ANSYS commercial software package referred to as the High Frequency Electromagnetic Field Simulator (ANSYS HFSS 16) to compute the electromagnetic fields and transmission spectra. The simulations are carried out in 3D. The plasma columns are modeled with a frequency dependent Drude dielectric constant given by where ω is the EM wave frequency, ν is the electron collisional damping rate, and ω p is the plasma frequency, given by ω p = n e e 2 /m e ε o with n e , e, and m e the column electron number density, electron charge, and electron mass, respectively, and ε o is the vacuum permittivity. As described in our prior study In the experiments, a pair of broadband microwave horn antennas (A INFO LB-20180 2 GHz -18 GHz) are used as the source and detector, located in the rectangles shown in Fig. The antennas are connected to a HP 8722D Vector Network Analyzer to measure the sparameters, particularly S 21 , which represents the EM transmission through the crystal. The measured transmission reported below was recorded with an integration time of 5 ms per frequency point in the scan, with a source power set at -5 dBm. The use of plasmas allows for localized surface plasmon (LSP) excitation at the plasma -quartz/air interface at frequencies below the plasma frequency when the E-field is in a plane perpendicular to the plasma columns. For 2D PPCs, LSPs are excited for TE polarizations only, with Bragg scattering modes expected for both polarizations. As we show below, this 3D PPC exhibits characteristics attributable to both LSP and Bragg scattering, and the attenuation is not simply the linear combination of that associated with the interwoven 5 x 5 orthogonal 2D PPCs, but instead, exhibits synergistic effects arising from the interplay between the EM activity contributed by both lattices in this woodpile configuration. Experimental and simulated transmission spectra are shown in Fig. We plot the transmitted spectra for a discharge current of I P = 34.4 mA in Fig. The measurements and simulations described here, of a 3D plasma photonic crystal with a woodpile configuration, present an electromagnetic system that is rich in dynamics and an opportunity for reconfigurability that is not generally found in microwave plasma photonic crystals. We see compelling evidence for the coupling of Bragg and LSP modes through a Fano resonance. The design allows for individual control of each element in the 3D crystal. Future research will examine the propagation of waves along complex defects (associated with non-activated plasma elements) that extend in three dimensions.