Data-driven prediction of molecular properties presents unique challenges to the design of machine learning methods concerning data structure/dimensionality, symmetry adaption, and confidence management. In this paper, we present a kernel-based pipeline that can learn and predict the atomization energy of molecules with high accuracy. The framework employs Gaussian process regression to perform predictions based on the similarity between molecules, which is computed using the marginalized graph kernel. To apply the marginalized graph kernel, a spatial adjacency rule is first applied to convert molecules into graphs whose vertices and edges are labeled by elements and interatomic distances, respectively. We then derive formulas for the efficient evaluation of the kernel. Specific functional components for the marginalized graph kernel are proposed, while the effect of the associated hyperparameters on accuracy and predictive confidence are examined. We show that the graph kernel is particularly suitable for predicting extensive properties because its convolutional structure coincides with that of the covariance formula between sums of random variables. Using an active learning procedure, we demonstrate that the proposed method can achieve a mean absolute error of 0.62 ± 0.01 kcal/mol using as few as 2000 training samples on the QM7 data set. The chemistry and materials communities have embraced data science and machine learning to bring about revolutionizing solutions to long-standing challenges in molecular modeling, optimal experiment design, and high-throughput structure screening 1. accuracy: While the atomization energy of drug-like ligands are on or above the order of 10 3 kcal/mol, it is the binding energy, i.e. the difference between the energy of two ligand-protein complexes, that is sought for applications such as drug screening. It is therefore expected that a good predictive model should carry less than 1 kcal/mol absolute error, or 10 -3 relative error; 2. smoothness: The prediction must be at least twice differentiable with regard to the molecular geometry for a model to be usable as a force field for dynamics simulations; Gaussian process regression (GPR) A critical component in a GPR model is a function that estimates the covariance of target values between pairs of data samples. In the context of molecular property prediction, a covariance function translates structural similarity into correlations between the target properties using the similar property principle Meanwhile, designing valid kernels on non-Euclidean spaces as those spanned by molecular configurations and conformations is an inherently challenging task, because the kernel must satisfy certain properties such as symmetry and positive-definiteness to ensure convexness of the resulting machine learning model Despite the success of the feature vector approach, it is important to point out that squashing a molecule, which is intrinsically a non-linear structure with a variable number of degrees of freedom, into a fixed-length feature vector could be a detour that compromises the generalizability of machine learning models across the diverse chemical space. This is likely the reason why fingerprints are prevalently used to describe local atomistic neighborhoods that possess bounded complexities. In contrast, an intrinsically non-linear data structure, such as a graph, could be a powerful and intuitive representation to capture all the geometric and topological information of whole molecules In this work, we present how a particular type of graph kernel, i.e. the marginalized graph kernel can be integrated into a Gaussian process regression-based active learning pipeline for molecular atomization energy prediction. In section 2, we introduce the mathematical formulations for the techniques used in this study, including the marginalized graph kernel, Gaussian process regression, and active learning. In section 3, we present computational setup and results. We conclude the work in section 4. In fig. Predictions for the energy of new molecules can be made using the pairwise similarity matrix among the new molecules and the cross-similarity matrix between the new molecule and the training molecules. In the subsections below, we will explain in detail each component of the procedure. We use lower case letters, e.g. a, in bold font to denote vectors, and upper case letters in bold font, e.g. A, for matrices. By default, we assume vectors are column vectors. We use diag(a) to denote a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are specified by a, and use I to refer to the identity matrix. Given matrices A ∈ R m1×n1 and B ∈ R m2×n2 , the Kronecker product A ⊗ B ∈ R m1m2×n1n2 is defined as: The element-wise product, also known as the Hadamard product, between two matrices of the same size A, B ∈ An undirected graph G is a discrete structure consisting of a set of uniquely-indexed vertices and a set of undirected edges E ⊂ V × V . The vertices and edges may be labeled using elements from label sets Σ v and Σ e , respectively. In a weighted graph, each edge (v i , v j ) is associated with a non-negative weight w ij . In undirected graphs w ij = w ji . w ij = 0 if v i and v j are not connected by an edge. An unweighted graph can be regarded as a specialized weighted graph where w ij = 1 between each pair of (v i , v j ) connected by an edge and 0 elsewhere. Two vertices are neighbors if they are connected by an edge. A walk on a graph is a sequence of vertices such that all pairs of adjacent vertices are neighbors. The adjacency matrix of a graph of n vertices is a matrix A ∈ R n×n with A ij = w ij . The adjacency matrices of undirected graphs are symmetric since w ij ≡ w ji . The row-normalized adjacency matrix P := diag(d) -1 A, where d i := ∑ j A ij is the vertex degree vector, can be used as the transition matrix of a Markovian random walk process. In other words, P ij could be interpreted as the conditional probability for a random walker at vertex v i to jump to v j during a single step. The practice of using labeled graphs, with the exemplary ball-and-stick model, to represent molecules has gained popularity well before the era of machine learning. In this work, we represent a molecule of n atoms as an undirected graph Graph kernel and active learning for molecular energy labeled by the distance between the atoms, while its weight w ij is set by a spatial adjacency rule A(r i , r j ), whose specific form will be discussed in section 3.1. The adjacency matrix of a molecular graph is thus Note that the edges are often supersets of the collection of covalent bonds in a molecule. The marginalized graph kernel K(G, G ′ ) . ( Here, l is the length of the path, h and h ′ are paths on the graphs represented by length-l vectors of vertex labels, p s (•) is the starting probability of the random walk on each vertex, p q (•) is the stopping probability of the random walk on each vertex at any given step, p t (•, •) is the transition probability between a pair of vertices, K v (•, •) is an elementary kernel that computes the similarity between two vertices, K e (•, •) is another elementary kernel that computes the similarity between pairs of bonds. Despite the overwhelming appearance of the infinite summation, eq. ( where R ∞ is the solution to the linear system: with Equations ( Tang et al. Graph kernel and active learning for molecular energy form: with r ∞ being the solution to the linear system where p is the starting probability vector of G with q is the stopping probability vector of G with q i = p q (v i ); P is the transition probability matrix as defined in definition 6, where the augmented degree di = ∑ j A ij /(1 -q i ) ensure that the transition and stopping probabilities on each node sum to 1; v ′ , p ′ , q ′ , P ′ , E ′ are the corresponding vectors and matrices for G ′ ; Kv ⊗ is the kernelized Kronecker product between v and v ′ where K v (•, •) replaces the product operation between the vertex labels; Ke ⊗ is the kernelized Kronecker product between E and E ′ where K e (•, •) replaces the product operation between the edge labels. For clarity of the discussion below, we denote ) , To solve eq. ( Tang et al. The linear system D × V -1 × -A × ⊙E × in eq. ( 'Stray' atoms, i.e. atoms that are not neighbors to any other atoms, have d i = 0. This pathological situation can render the linear system singular, and is resolved by setting the corresponding d i = q i = 1. This is equivalent to immediately terminating any random walk path originating from the stray atoms. which is identical to that in kernel ridge regression Here, are the training set covariance matrix, training-test cross-covariance matrix, and test set covariance matrix, respectively, that are obtained by iterating the graph kernel over all pairs of molecules from the corresponding datasets. The marginalized graph kernel is particularly suitable for predicting extensive properties such as molecular energy. To see why, first recall that the kernel possesses a vertex-wise summation structure ∑ h,h ′ • • • as manifested in eq. ( Tang et al. Graph kernel and active learning for molecular energy with Equation ( terms effectively computes the expectation of the similarity between all random walk paths originating from the pair of vertices (h 1 , h ′ 1 ). We could thus regard it as a vertex-wise atomistic neighborhood similarity kernel, denoted as κ(•, •): The overall similarity between two graphs as computed by the marginalized graph kernel is thus merely a summation over the similarity between all pairs of vertices, i.e. From this perspective, the graph kernel can also be viewed as a global structural kernel, as mentioned in that sums over the environment covariance matrix computed between atomistic neighborhoods. To ensure extensiveness of the energy prediction, we can hypothetically predict the individual contributions of each atom to the total energy of an unknown molecule, and then sum up the contributions. We assume that there exists some energy decomposition algorithm (EDA) where the superscripts correspond to molecule ids. Tang et al. Under the multivariate normality condition, the total energy E, being the sum of individual random variables representing atomic energies, is itself a normally distributed random variable, The variance of E is . Note that this exhibits exactly the same pairwise summation structure as that of the marginalized graph kernel. Thus, by summing up the cross-covariance submatrices between pairs of molecules in eq. ( , we could define an alternative GPR model that bypasses energy decomposition: This leads exactly back to eq. ( The former approach, however, avoids the potentially costly and controversial explicit energy decomposition, while still enjoying automatic scaling of the predicted energy with respect to molecule size. This approach can also speed up GPR computation by creating covariance matrices whose size is proportional to the number of molecules, rather than the number of total atoms, in the data set. Given a training set S, a test set T , an acquisition function Q(•, •) that measures the learning value of a sample given a GPR model, active learning can be performed using the following protocol: G ← TrainGPR(S), 3: S ← S ∪ {α}, T ← T \ {α}, 6: until stop criteria met. A natural choice of the acquisition function would be prediction error, which is the absolute difference between the GPR prediction and the truth value of the target function at the sample points. However, since the ground truth may not be known or is too difficult to obtain for every point in practice, the GPR predictive uncertainty could be used as an alternative acquisition function. In this case, the 'unsupervised' learning procedure can proceed even without any target function value due to the fact that the GPR posterior variance does not depend on the target value. 3 Computation and Results The vertex elementary kernel that we use for the marginalized graph kernel is an elevated Kronecker delta function on element symbols: The edge elementary kernel is a square exponential function on edge lengths, which evaluates to 1 if two edges are of the same length and smoothly transitions to 0 as the difference in lengths grows: The adjacency rule that computes the weights for each edge also assumes a square exponential form: where σ ij , as given in the appendix, are element-wise length scale parameters derived from typical bonding lengths. A uniform starting probability p s (•) ≡ s and a uniform stopping probability p q (•) ≡ q are used across all vertices. In fig. The complete marginalized graph kernel as specified in section 3.1 is controlled by 5 hyperparameters ν, ζ, λ, s, and q, each of which possesses a unique physical interpretation: • ν is the baseline, or 'prior' , similarity that we assign between atoms of difference elements. ν must be within (0, 1) to ensure that the linear system in eq. ( • ζ controls how quickly the weight of an edge decays with regard to increasing interatomic distance. It affects the edge density of the molecular graph and is one of the two factors that determines the neighborhood range of each atom. • λ control the sensitivity of the kernel with respect to differences in edge length. Since the order of a covalent bond is strongly correlated with its length, λ can be effectively used to discriminate different Tang et al. Graph kernel and active learning for molecular energy Each square tile corresponds to an element of the V×R∞ vector, which is a weighted average (marginalization) of the similarity between all paths generated by simultaneous random walks originating from the two atoms. The matrices effectively visualizes the atomistic neighborhood similarities with darker colors indicate higher similarity. Note for example the difference in similarity between the oxygen atoms in the ether bond to itself and to the oxygen atom in the alcohol group. types of bonds. • s affects the sampling preference of the simultaneous random walk among pairs of vertices, and could thus be thought as a factor of significance. From the perspective of GPR modeling, the magnitude of s is the a priori standard deviation of atomic contributions to molecular energy. In practice, we may abandon the probabilistic interpretation of s and allow it to assume values that do not sum up to unity. • q determines the average length of the random walk paths being sampled, and together with ζ determines the range of the atomistic neighborhoods that are effectively compared between atoms. Graph kernel and active learning for molecular energy MAE and error-uncertainty correlation. These hyperparameters lead to GPR models with both high predictive accuracy and uncertainty-error correlation, the latter of which is crucial for unsupervised active learning. Figure A further examination on the conditional distribution of the mean absolute error, log-log-likelihood, and error-uncertainty correlation provides additional insights into the effect of the hyperparameters. As shown by fig. Graph kernel and active learning for molecular energy true error, which may not be known in practice, by checking if the predictive confidence intervals contain a proportional percentage of the true value of the test samples. For example, an interval surrounding the predictive mean that corresponds to a 50% confidence level should roughly contain the true value of 50% of the test samples. Overall, we found that a proper choice of s can lead to a coverage curve that lies very close to the diagonal. Meanwhile, the GPR model has a general tendency to be overfident with large training sets, most likely due to the existence of molecules that consistently cause large errors as demonstrated later in the lower panel of fig. Error-uncertainty correlation Figure As a first benchmark of prediction accuracy, we use a random selection of N molecules from the QM7 dataset to train GPR models and measure the MAE and root-mean square error (RMSE) on energy prediction for the rest of the molecules. As shown in the upper left panel of fig. Molecule E and F contain a conjugated triple bond system and an unsaturated bicyclic ring with an oxygen bridge, respectively, which are rare in the benchmark dataset. The lack of explicit angular information in our current implementation could have weakened the performance of the graph kernel in such situations. Nonetheless, the GPR model is potentially able to use high predictive uncertainties as a form of alert to trigger fall-back mechanisms such as alternative calculations. In this paper, we presented a new machine learning pipeline, which integrates the marginalized graph kernel, the Gaussian process regression method, and an active learning protocol, for predicting molecular atomization energies. The method achieves excellent accuracy while using significantly smaller training sets as compared with previous methods. We show that the marginalized graph kernel defines a molecular similarity metric that is computed using both topological and geometric information, and that the kernel can naturally adapt to molecules containing diverse topology, number of atoms, and element species. GPR models created using the marginalized graph kernel can produce energy predictions that scale properly with molecule size while bypassing any explicit energy decomposition procedure. We demonstrate that the convolutional -or pairwise summation -structure of the kernel is crucial in enabling the prediction of extensive properties that automatically scales with molecule size. It is worth noting that the work is inspired by the localized random walk graph kernel for molecules proposed by Ferré et al We expect that the presented method could benefit from a more thorough design and selection of the Reference designation: FHB 2.4.1 Energy Regression CM: Coulomb Matrix; MBTR: many-body tensor representation; SOAP: smooth overlap of atomic positions; BoB: bag of bonds; EB: encoded bond.