We report an advanced organic spin-interface architecture with magnetic remanence at room temperature, constituted by metal phthalocyanine molecules magnetically coupled with Co layer(s), mediated by graphene. Fe-and Cu-phthalocyanines assembled on graphene/Co have identical structural configurations, but FePc couples antiferromagnetically with Co, up to room temperature, while CuPc couples ferromagnetically, with weaker coupling and thermal stability, as deduced by element-selective X-ray magnetic circular dichroic signals. The robust antiferromagnetic coupling is stabilized by a super-exchange interaction, driven by the out-of-plane molecular orbitals responsible of the magnetic ground state and electronically decoupled from the underlying metal via the graphene layer, as confirmed by ab initio theoretical predictions. These archetypal spin interfaces can be prototypes to demonstrate how antiferromagnetic and/or ferromagnetic coupling can be optimized by selecting the molecular orbital symmetry. Paramagnetic molecules become potential building blocks in spintronics when their magnetic moments are stabilized against thermal fluctuations, e.g. by a controlled interaction with a magnetic substrate. Spin molecular interfaces, with preserved magnetic activity and exhibiting magnetic remanence at room temperature (RT) can open the route to engineer highly spin-polarized, nanoscale current sources. The need to fully control the organic spin interface and the tuning of ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferromagnetic (AFM) coupling to achieve a stable conductance has motivated a vast experimental interest. Magnetic properties of molecular systems on metal surfaces can be readily modified by the molecular packing or by the orbital intermixing with the metallic states, Turning to the magnetic properties, the XMCD spectra at the Co L 2,3 edge for a single Co layer and a Co film intercalated under the Gr sheet, obtained as the difference between the absorption edges acquired with left-and right-circularly polarized radiation, are reported in remanence condition, i.e. with no applied external field, at room temperature in the right panels of Fig. Magnetism generally emerges from short-ranged interactions between molecular units due to the localization of the atomic wave functions. To achieve a magnetic interaction over a large distance, a super-exchange mechanism can be invoked, where the bridging over non-magnetic organic ligands mediates higher-order virtual hopping processes. In metal phthalocyanines, the organic ligands can mediate the coupling between the central transition metal ions and a magnetic layer. The confirmation of the AFM and FM coupling found experimentally and the role of the molecular orbitals involved in the magnetic response are clarified by DFT calculations. In In the case of CuPc, the spin imbalance is located at the central ion and on the surrounding N atoms, and coupled ferromagnetically with the Co spin moment. Top views of the spin densities (panels c,f) better display the shape of the orbitals involved and the flips of the local magnetic moments. Quantitative data (atom-resolved magnetic moments, as given by Löwdin charge analysis) are provided in the Supporting Information. A detailed analysis of Löwdin charges can also be used to further discriminate the symmetry of the molecular orbitals involved in the magnetic coupling. In the case of CuPc, upon adsorption the magnetic moment of the molecule is mostly carried by the half-filled A fine tuning of these spin interface architectures requires to evaluate the robustness of the magnetic response against thermal fluctuations, thanks to temperature-dependent XMCD measurements (Fig. Indeed, the super-exchange path stabilizes the AFM coupling up to 200 K for FePc/Gr/OOP Co, while for FePc/Gr/IP Co a residual XMCD signal is detectable even at RT. The FePc magnetic state coupled to Gr/OOP Co and Gr/IP Co can be understood in terms of the relative orientation between the molecule and substrate easy magnetization axes, since an extra amount of energy is needed to turn the FePc magnetization, from its intrinsic IP direction, to adapt to the OOP Co easy magnetization axis. The magnetic-coupling for CuPc/Gr/OOP Co is much weaker, being not driven by a 180 • super-exchange mechanism, as reflected by the disappearance of any XMCD remanent signal above 50 K. These differences can be quantitatively evaluated by performing a Brillouin fit over the thermal evolution of the XMCD intensity, leading to a coupling energy of 2.8 ± 0.6 meV and 2.1 ± 0.5 meV for FePc ong Gr/1 and 6 ML Co, respectively, while the less stable CuPc/Gr/1 ML Co system exhibits a much lower coupling energy of 0.6 ± 0.2 meV (for detailed discussion see the Supporting A direct magnetic coupling has been also detected for FePc molecules adsorbed on Gr grown on Ni(111), leading to a ferromagnetic alignment, 29 while in-plane AFM coupling mediated by graphene was recently observed between a Ni thin-film and Co-porphyrin molecules up to 200 K. In particular, the Fe-N-Gr-Co super-exchange channel drives an AFM coupling, favored by the presence of out-plane molecular orbitals, mediated by the organic ligands and graphene. On the other side, in the Cu-N-Gr-Co the magnetic coupling is strongly weakened by 90 • super-exchange interaction path leading to a FM coupling of the molecule to the Co layer. This scenario, completely supported by the theoretical spin density calculated on the whole moiré cell, is robust against different exchange and correlation functionals. The choice of an effective super-exchange path can ensure the stability against thermal fluctuations, even at RT, and it can be further optimized with a fine control of the relative orientation of the easy magnetization axes at the spin interface. In perspective, the magnetic remanence at RT of these archetypal spin interfaces, once paired with a tunable magnetic substrate, opens the possibility to produce future operational spintronic devices. Sample preparation: The Ir(111) surface was prepared with several cycles of 2 keV Ar + sputtering, followed by annealing above 1300 K. The Gr sheet was grown on the clean and ordered Ir(111) surface by exposing the substrate to a partial pressure of 10 XAS and XMCD measurements: X-ray absorption spectroscopy and magnetic circular dichroism (XAS and XMCD) measurements were performed at the BOREAS beamline of the Alba synchrotron radiation facility 31 in total electron yield (TEY), by measuring the sample drain current normalized with respect to incident flux, measured as the drain current on a clean gold grid. The measurements were performed in two different experimental geometries, in order to probe the magnetic response along the easy as well as the hard magnetization axis. The in-plane magnetic state was studied by impinging the sample at GI, namely at 70 • incidence angle; while the out-of-plane magnetic response is determined at NI. The hysteresis curves have been obtained by normalizing the field-dependent L 3 XMCD intensity at a pre-edge signal, in order to cancel-out any field-induced artifact. Theoretical modeling: Plane wave density functional theory calculations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO 