The generalized pseudopotential theory (GPT) is a powerful method for deriving real-space transferable interatomic potentials. Using a coarse-grained electronic structure, one can explicitly calculate the pair ion-ion and multi-ion interactions in simple and transition metals. Whilst successful in determining bulk properties, in central force metals the GPT fails to describe crystal defects for which there is a significant local volume change. A previous paper [PhysRevLett.66.3036 (1991)] found that by allowing the GPT total energy to depend upon some spatially-averaged local electron density, the energetics of vacancies and surfaces could be calculated within experimental ranges. In this paper, we develop the formalism further by explicitly calculating the forces and stress tensor associated with this total energy. We call this scheme the adaptive GPT (aGPT) and it is capable of both molecular dynamics and molecular statics. We apply the aGPT to vacancy formation, divacancy binding and stacking faults in hcp Mg. We also calculate the local electron density corrections to the bulk elastic constants and phonon dispersion for which there is refinement over the baseline GPT treatment. Generalized pseudopotential theory (GPT) is a firstprinciples framework for deriving real-space interatomic potentials in metals and alloys from density-functional quantum mechanics 1,2 . In a basic plane-wave basis, the GPT provides an updated and refined version of second-order pseudopotential perturbation theory, with linear screening and nonlocal, energy-dependent pseudopotentials, that can be applied to sp-valent, nearlyfree-electron (NFE) simple metals. More generally, in a mixed basis of plane waves and localized atomic d states, the GPT additionally captures both tight-binding (TB) d-state interactions and sp-d hybridization between the broad NFE sp-bands and the narrow TB d bands. The practical challenges of the GPT for pure transition metals have also led to the development of a simplified model GPT (MGPT) For bulk elemental metals, the GPT total energy E tot is developed in a volume-dependent many-body cluster expansion 1,2 , which in its simplest form is truncated at pairwise interactions: where Ω is the atomic volume and the prime on the double summation over ion positions i and j excludes the i = j term. The large volume term E vol is independent of the positions of the ions, and accounts for most of the equilibrium cohesive energy of the metal, as illustrated in Fig. The structure-independent nature of the pair and multi-ion potentials in the GPT ensures that these potentials are transferable to all ion configurations of the bulk metal, either ordered or disordered. This includes all structural phases of both the solid and the liquid, as well as the deformed solid and imperfect bulk solid with either point or extended defects present. At the same time, the explicit volume dependence of the volume term and potentials is global and not local, so that the creation of a free surface, or even a bulk defect that comes with significant free volume, such as a vacancy, still receives no contribution to its formation energy from E vol in Eq.1. As a result, both surface energies and the vacancy formation energy can be significantly underestimated. In simple metals, the problem with the vacancy formation energy in particular is a well-known shortcoming of conventional second-order pseudopotential perturbation theory To address such shortcomings in the GPT, Moriarty and Phillips 7 transformed the bulk global-volume representation of the total energy to an equivalent local electron-density representation, such that Eq.1 becomes where ni is a simple functional of the average value of the valence electron density n val on the site i, and nij is the arithmetic average (n i + nj )/2. For central transition metals there are corresponding three-and four-ion potential contributions on the right-hand-side of Eq.2. In the perfect crystal with equivalent ion positions, Eq.2 is an exact transformation and only a redefinition of variables, with all quantities still determined from first principles. The step forward comes in then, as an ansatz, applying Eq.2 to all ion configurations, including free surfaces and bulk defects. In doing so, one notes from Fig. In the present paper, we take an additional major step and develop the local-density representation of GPT into a robust general method we now call the adaptive GPT or aGPT, which includes not only energies but the forces and stresses needed for atomistic simulation and a much wider treatment of materials properties. The formalism of the aGPT is elaborated in Sec. II, including the averaging required in Eq.2. For simplicity this discussion is done in the context of a well-studied simple-metal Mg prototype (see Sec. I B), but the results can be immediately applied to the empty, almost filled, and filled dband metals covered by Eqs.1 and 2. The averaging is not unique, but it can be optimized, and we have developed a good way to do this that makes calculated properties quite insensitive to the parameters defining the averaging, while at the same time allowing the calculation of smooth derivatives of the averaged quantities. In Sec. III we discuss the evaluation of the corresponding aGPT forces and stresses, and test the results with calculations of phonons and elastic constants. In this regard, an earlier, simplified form of Eq.2 was used by Rosenfeld and Stott 8 to resolve the well-known bulk compressibility problem in pseudopotential perturbation theory, as we further discuss below in Sec. I A, and as we use here as an additional fundamental test for the aGPT elastic moduli. Finally, in Sec. IV we apply the aGPT to the calculation of relaxed single vacancies and divacancies as well as to stacking fault energies in hcp Mg. There are two fundamental ways to calculate the bulk modulus of a single crystal using the interatomic pair potentials derived from second-order pseudopotential perturbation theory, or more generally from the GPT. The first method involves taking the explicit second volume derivative of the total energy given by Eq.1. This procedure corresponds to a homogeneous deformation of the primitive cell of the lattice and produces the so-called static bulk modulus B s . The second method calculates the bulk modulus using the long-wavelength (low-q) behavior of the dynamical matrix, which determines the elastic constants of the material Magnesium is an important lightweight metal whose bulk properties are very well described by the GPT via Eq.1, making it an excellent prototype material for developing the aGPT. The first-principles pair potentials v 2 and volume term E vol for this metal have been calculated over a wide volume range in connection with detailed studies of the temperature-pressure phase diagram and thermodynamic properties of Mg in the mid 1990s Also of interest in developing the aGPT is the baseline value of the unrelaxed vacancy formation energy at constant volume, Ω = Ω 0 , as calculated from Eq.1 in the bulk GPT. This quantity is given by 2 where E 0 coh ≡ E tot ({R 0 }, Ω 0 )/N and E 0 vol ≡ E vol (Ω 0 ). The virial pressure P 0 vir ≡ P vir (Ω 0 ) arises in connection with the energy needed to compress the lattice uniformly and maintain constant volume Ω = Ω 0 once the vacancy is created. Of the two terms on the second line of Eq.3, the second virial pressure term is the largest for Mg, but the total is only E u coh = 0.44 eV, some 45% below the measured vacancy formation energy, as discussed in Sec. IV. The local volume change associated with a crystal defect gives rise to a local change in the valence electron density. We briefly review the treatment of the electron density in the GPT as applied to sp-valent simple metals. The valence electron density consists of a uniform electron density n unif = Z/Ω (where Z is the valence) plus small oscillatory and charge-neutral screening and orthogonalization-hole components 1,2 The screening electron density δn scr arises from firstorder pseudopotential perturbation theory which for a simple metal has the form 2 where where wion is a well-defined average value of the ionic pseudopotential over the free-electron Fermi sphere, G is the exchange-correlation functional, ǫ is the dielectric function of the interacting electron gas and Π 0 is the electron gas polarizability in the Hartree or random phase approximation. Each of these quantities can be directly evaluated in terms of input pseudopotential and electron gas quantities. The orthogonalization-hole component arises from the difference between the valence electron density constructed from the one-particle pseudowavefunctions and the valence electron density constructed from the 'true' one-particle wavefunctions. For the non-local, energydependent Austin-Heine-Sham (AHS) pseudopotential 14 used in the GPT, there exists an exact transformation between the one-particle pseudo-and 'true' wavefunctions which can be exploited to obtain the exact orthogonalization-hole density. The orthogonalizationhole contribution to n val in Eq.4 has the form where Z * is an effective valence occupation (Z * ≥ Z) and n oh is a localized hole density. For a simple metal, n oh is confined to the inner-core region of the site i, but both Z * and n oh depend on the properties of the pseudopotential. For the non-local, energy-dependent AHS pseudopotential used in the GPT, we have 2 and where Θ < is a Heaviside step function that ensures that the integral is over just the free-electron Fermi sphere and p c is the inner-core projection operator The valence electron density n val can equivalently be written as a superposition of self-consistently screened pseudoatom densities n pa The precise form of the pseudoatom density n pa can readily be derived from Eqs.4, 5 and 7. We do this by inserting the full-form of the structure factor S(q) into Eq.5 and then adding the q = 0 term to the summation over q to account for the net uniform density Z * n unif /Z. Finally, we convert the summation over q to an integral and infer that the single-site pseudoatom density is given by n pa (r, Ω) = Ω (2π) The calculated GPT radial pseudoatom density u pa (r) = 4πr 2 n pa (r) for Mg at the experimental roomtemperature atomic volume Ω = 156.8 a.u. is shown in Fig. To connect the GPT valence electron density with the aGPT total energy in Eq.2, we spatially average the GPT valence electron density n val about the site i using an arbitrary normalized distribution function f w . For a bulk crystal with equivalent ion sites, the spatially-averaged electron density ni about a site i is constrained to be the uniform valence electron density n unif . Combining the two equivalent valence electron density formulations in Eqs.4 and 11, yields the bulk constraining equation Here the bar over the densities refer to an averaging with respect to some distribution function with both δn i scr and δn i oh having similar forms. Typically, this averaging smooths out the long-range screening oscillations. As a result of the bulk constraining equation, the aGPT preserves the bulk total energy for any given crystal structure with equivalent ion sites. The first step towards developing a practical aGPT scheme for describing defects or surfaces is to make the approximation that ni = j npa (R ij , Ω)δn i ohδn i scr (15) can be applied generally. Furthermore, the spatiallyaveraged local electron density ni can be broken down into an effective on-site contribution ni a = npa (R ii , Ω)δn i ohδn i scr and an off-site or background component ni We make an additional assumption that the on-site density is constant ni a ≡ na and as a result only the background density ni b is site-dependent. Under these assumptions, we may calculate the on-site density na using the bulk constraining equation in Eq. 13. In practice this amounts to first calculating na for an ideal bulk crystal prior to calculating the total energy for the surface or defective crystal. For certain d-band metals e.g. Cu, there may be s-d transfer between the surface and the bulk The next step towards a practical aGPT implementation is to specify the form of the distribution function f w in Eq.14. We choose f w to correspond to a sigmoid function which is the sigmoid function that is typically used in the GPT to truncate the pairwise interaction which in the limit α → ∞ is the volume of a sphere of radius R a . The two parameters α and R a represent the only parameters in this form of the aGPT. The Gaussian width α is chosen such that the radial derivatives of the spatially averaged pseudoatom density are smooth. If the radial derivatives were not smooth then there would be an unphysically large change in the forces as the interatomic separation changes from less than R a to greater than R a and vice-versa. In the rest of this paper, we choose α = 25 which produces a spherically averaged pseudoatom density with smooth derivatives over a wide range of averaging sphere radii. We have a certain amount of freedom in choosing a value for R a since physical properties of interest do not seem strongly dependent on R a . We choose the optimum of R a to be that which reproduces the GPT volume-conserving elastic constants most closely. These issues will be discussed further in Sections III and IV. Whilst other normalized distribution functions have been trialled, none represented an improvement on the sigmoid function. The resulting spatially-averaged pseudoatom density is shown in Fig. The spatially averaged pseudoatom density is smoothly truncated to ensure force continuity during molecular dynamics. If we denote R 0 and R c as the cut-off onset and final termination respectively, then our approach is to replace npa by a polynomial whose value and derivatives exactly match npa at R 0 and whose derivatives are precisely zero at R c . This polynomial can be found using Hermite interpolation The force F iα on the atom i describes how the total energy changes with respect to an infinitesimal shift in its position R iα . As the ion-ion potential is selfconsistently screened, we can ignore any change in electron screening 20 The force in the GPT involves only radial derivatives of the screened ion-ion interaction whereas the aGPT force will involve contributions from density derivatives of both E vol and v 2 . It is instructive to decompose the force into three parts where the second term is the force due to the radial derivatives of v 2 , the first and third components are the for the 3s and 3p bands in Mg for the pseudoatom n = npa (blue) in the bulk metal at Ω = 156.8 a.u. force due to the density derivatives of E vol and v 2 respectively. The first component can be written where ∂E vol /∂ ni is shorthand for the density derivative evaluated at ni . We can write the derivatives of the spatially-averaged local electron density, noting that the on-site density na does not contribute, as and where R jiα is the α component of the difference between position vectors R i -R j and R jiα /R ij are the direction cosines. Eq.21 can be in more symmetric form The second component of the force looks similar to the GPT force. However, it is only equal to the GPT force in the bulk. It is given by The final component, which contains an additional neighbor sum, is given by The bulk force constant matrix A ijαβ will largely be the same as for the GPT. However, there will be small contributions from the density derivatives of E vol and v 2 . These additional contributions require further neighbor summations. These third and fourth-order terms can be necessary to capture the phonon dispersion at certain q-points in the Brillouin zone, in particular for Be dispersion relation for thermodynamically stable hcp Mg at the equilibrium atomic volume and c/a ratio is shown in Fig. The exchange-correlation functional was taken in the local-density approximation using the correlation function of Perdew and Wang Molecular dynamics simulations that sample an isobaric ensemble require a barostat to match the external pressure to the internal pressure 26 P int =α σ αα /d where σ is the internal stress tensor and d is the dimension of the cell. This matching is effectively the equilibrium condition i.e. the time average of the internal pressure is the external pressure. In such simulations, only the lattice parameter a is dynamic. This constraint is slightly artificial if the crystal has multiple lattice parameters as in the case of hexagonal crystals. Relaxing this constraint requires that we now sample an isostress ensemble where the prefactor of inverse volume V -1 is required by dimensional analysis. The application of a strain changes the lattice vectors h in the following way where δ is the Kronecker delta. Since the lattice vectors act as basis vectors for the position vectors of the atoms, a strain transforms the ion at site i to a new position Riα i.e. (29) where S iα is the position of site i in a fractional coordinate system. After application of the strain, the Cartesian distance between sites i and j is given by where Gαβ (ε) = γ hγα hγβ is the strained metric tensor. If the strain is sufficiently small so as to vanish at quadratic order ε αβ = δε αβ , we may write where G αβ is the metric tensor of the unstrained crystal. By denoting the second term as δG αβ and expanding Eq.29 about δG = 0, we find This Taylor expansion allows us to explicitly evaluate the derivative of the interatomic separation R ij with respect to strain Turning to the aGPT stress tensor, we make a decomposition of the stress tensor σ along the same lines as for the force The second term in the decomposition takes the form of a virial stress tensor where ijα is defined as the force on ion i due to ion j Including volume dependence of the spatially-averaged pseudoatom density will mean that first contribution to the total stress tensor cannot be written as a virial where, using the identity ∂Ω/∂ε αβ = Ωδ αβ , we have This form can be inserted into Eq.37 and made more explicitly symmetric in i and j σ The final contribution to the total stress tensor is given by We calculate the elastic constants numerically by approximating the derivative Since the elastic constants are extremely sensitive to minor changes in the potential, we choose to approximate the derivative in Eq.40 using a central difference method whose error is of quartic order in the strain parameter. These results are shown alongside GPT and experimental values in Table The elastic constants can be used to find an optimum value of the averaging sphere radius R a . In particular, the volume-conserving elastic constants should be equivalent in the GPT and aGPT. The difference arises as a result of the approximations and assumptions made in the aGPT formalism. With reference to our calculated aGPT elastic constants in Table A vacancy is the primary test case for the aGPT, since it is the simplest defect for which there is considerable local volume change. As a consequence, a large amount of the energy required to create a vacancy is not captured by the GPT and other methods based upon second-order TABLE I. Elastic constants calculated for hcp Mg with the experimentally observed values for Ω = 156.8 a.u. and c/a = 1.62. The GPT elastic constants were calculated in two ways, using only the virial stress tensor without basal plane relaxation (labelled 'Virial' in the table) and using the virial stress tensor with volume derivatives and basal plane relaxation. The aGPT elastic constants were calculated at two physically reasonable values of the averaging-sphere radius. The experimental values [GPa] ----0.79 ± 0.03 ) where N a is the number of sites and E tot is a function of both the number of atoms and number of vacancies. The term in the brackets can be evaluated at finite N and then extrapolated into the thermodynamic limit N → ∞. Provided that the atomic positions are relaxed and we are using the bulk equilibrium lattice parameters, it is unnecessary to relax the lattice parameters for the vacancy cell. This is because the largest correction to the vacancy formation energy is -P Ω 1f where Ω 1f is the misfit or vacancy formation volume. We have calculated the relaxed vacancy formation energy in hcp Mg at the experimentally observed atomic volume Ω = 156.8 a.u. and c/a = 1.62. In our calculations, the atomic volume is kept constant which means that the removal of an atom gives rise to a contraction of the lattice. The vacancy formation energy is calculated at multiple values of N and extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit. In addition, we also calculate the misfit volume Ω 1f using the following formula 7 where B is the bulk modulus as calculated in Section III. These results are given in Table where E 2f iNN is the divacancy formation energy for a vacancy at the origin and a vacancy in the i th neighbor shell. The divacancy formation energy was calculated using an analogous expression to Eq.41. The ordering of the first and second nearest neighbors is dependent on the c/a ratio in hcp crystals. In Mg, the c/a ratio is less than the ideal value which means that the first nearest neighbor lies at a distance less than the lattice parameter a. We make a nearest neighbor definition along the same lines as Uesugi et al. Information about the plastic behavior of a metal can be inferred from a calculation of the stacking fault energies and the profile of the γ-line. In particular, the stacking fault energy controls the dissociation width of dislocations into partial dislocations. This in turn controls the ability of a dislocation to cross-slip and limits easy-glide. The γ-line is defined in the following manner. An infinite crystal is partitioned into two subcrystals with their interface being some crystallographic plane. One half of the crystal is moved relative to the other along some crystallographic direction until the crystal has been translated by an integer multiple of the lattice vectors. The γ-line is the relative energy change during this process, normalized by the area of the crystallographic plane. Practical computations pose several challenges for this procedure. All of the approaches begin by choosing a supercell whose lattice vectors {a 1 , a 2 } define the crystallographic plane over which the slip occurs. For instance, in the basal plane of the hcp structure these can be represented as the Cartesian vectors a 1 = [1, 0, 0] and a 2 = [-1/2, √ 3, 0]. The supercell is extended n times in the a 3 direction such that there are n unit cells . The definition of a 3 is not unique and it need not be perpendicular to the crystallographic plane. In fact, the only requirement on a 3 is that it connects to an atom which is out of the crystallographic plane. There are a number of ways to create the stacking fault. One such method is the so-called 'slab' method If a crystal has a stacking fault, the atoms will relax in order to minimize the interatomic forces that were created by the fault. Using the original Vítek description 32 of the γ-line, only out-of-plane relaxations are allowed. If such restrictions were not in place then the atoms would relax to either the equilibrium positions or the stable stacking fault up to some strain due to the finite supercell. In certain crystallographic planes and for certain elements, notably the Pyramidal II plane for Mg 31 , both the stable stacking fault energy and stacking fault vector calculated using the Vítek method are not very close to the fully relaxed values. Along these planes if the entire γ-line is desired then it is necessary to remove the restrictions on in-plane relaxations away from the fault itself Whilst we expect the aGPT to apply well to finite temperature, thanks to good agreement with the GPT and DFT harmonic phonon band structure in Figs. for equilibration, and a time step of 0.1 fs. The aGPT calculation was performed with 512 atoms whilst the GPT calculation was performed with 2000 atoms. The results of this calculation are plotted in Fig. We have demonstrated that it is possible to include local volume effects by modifying the GPT so that it now depends on a spatially-averaged local electron density. In particular, we have developed the aGPT formalism to the extent that it is now possible to do molecular statics and dynamics. To this end, we calculated the vacancy formation energy in hcp Mg at the equilibrium lattice parameters. The aGPT relaxed vacancy formation energy significantly improves upon the relaxed GPT vacancy formation energy relative to the experimentally observed value. In addition, the aGPT provides improved stacking fault energies for hcp Mg. The computational cost in time of the aGPT is greater than that of the GPT. This is a result of the additional neighbor loop in the calculation of the forces. Provided that the neighbor table maker is linear scaling O(N ), for instance using a linked list, both the GPT and aGPT are O(N ). Relative to empirical potentials, the major computational cost is due the long range cut-off in both the GPT and aGPT. This can be demonstrated by considering a short ranged empirical pair potential whose neighbor cut-off is roughly 1/3 that of the GPT (i.e. it runs over the first handful of neighbor shells), we would expect the GPT to be approximately 3 3 = 27 times slower. Furthermore, we expect the aGPT to be 27N c slower than the GPT where N c is the number of atoms in a linked-list block. Bulk properties such as phonon dispersion and elastic constants were also calculated as fundamental tests of the aGPT. The inclusion of the spatially-averaged local electron density modifies the bulk phonon dispersion. This is a result of the additional derivatives of the electron density that appear in the expression for the force constant matrix. The elastic constants are also modified although the volume-conserving elastic constants should be the same as for the GPT. It is only the assumptions and approximations in the aGPT that make them differ. Thus, we can use the volume conserving elastic constants to find an optimum value for the averaging sphere radius R a which is the lone free parameter in the aGPT. This constraint would appear to favor near-neighbor values of R a , for instance R a = 1.8R WS . The aGPT can be used to accurately calculate selfdiffusion and defect-defect interactions in elemental metals. However, further work needs to be done on extending the aGPT to alloys in order to study solute diffusion or solute-defect interactions. We plan to use the aGPT to further study vacancies and, in particular, the hightemperature deviation from Arrhenius behavior J. A. Moriarty, Physical Review B 16, (1977);