Motivated by recent experimental studies probing i) the existence of a mobile layer at the free surface of glasses, and ii) the capillary leveling of polymer nanofilms, we study the evolution of square-wave patterns at the free surface of a generic glass-forming binary Lennard-Jones mixture over a wide temperature range, by means of molecular dynamics simulations. The pattern's amplitude is monitored and the associated decay rate is extracted. The evolution of the latter as a function of temperature exhibits a crossover between two distinct behaviours, over a temperature range typically bounded by the glass-transition temperature and the mode-coupling critical temperature. Layer-resolved analysis of the film particles' mean-squared displacements further shows that diffusion at the surface is considerably faster than in the bulk, below the glass-transition temperature. The diffusion coefficient of the surface particles is larger than its bulk counterpart by a factor that reaches 10 5 at the lowest temperature studied. This factor decreases upon heating, in agreement with recent experimental studies. Thin films and their free interfaces are used in a variety of applications such as catalysis Measurements of diffusion coefficients at the surface report values considerably higher than the respective bulk coefficients at the glass-transition temperature Furthermore, large variations in surface diffusion coefficients among different molecular glass formers bearing a similar bulk mobility were linked to the strength of the intermolecular forces Further insight into glass-forming systems has been provided by numerical simulations. Several studies have addressed the factors that govern dynamical heterogeneity and spatial correlations in the bulk Surface-diffusion-mediated decay of two-dimensional nanostructures has been recently studied by a combined analytical and kinetic Monte-Carlo approach The aim of the present work is to provide additional insight into the surface mobility of a glass-forming liquid by means of molecular dynamics simulations. Similarly to a recent work where we probed the viscoelastic behaviour of nonentangled polymer films above the glass-transition temperature, through the capillary leveling of a square-wave surface pattern This new study is carried out over a wide temperature range, sampling both the glassy and liquid states of the film. The associated decay rates are extracted whereas surface and bulk mobilities are examined. Further insight into the surface and bulk mobilities is gained by examining the self part of the van Hove function, as well as via the layerresolved analysis of the liquid particles' mean-squared displacements. We examine a binary mixture of 80% A and 20% B particles that interact via a LJ potential The Van der Waals parameters were chosen as The potential was truncated at a cut-off radius The numbers of particles of type A and B are 2938 and 734, respectively. The binary mixture interacting with this parameter set corresponds to the Kob-Andersen liquid model which is not prone to crystallization or to phase separation; it is extensively utilized in studies of glass-forming liquids The substrate particles' radius is and they attract A and B atoms with the following energy magnitudes The initial configuration of the glassy film was obtained by the aid of the Aten program Afterwards, particles were removed from both edges of the free surface in order to obtain the 3D pattern, henceforth designated as the 'top layer' (see Fig. To examine the behaviour in the bulk, a configuration comprising 5076 particles was constructed at an elevated temperature, T = 0.80, and at a density of . After removing close contacts, the system was cooled to T = 0.30 by conducting runs in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble (NPT) at pressure p = 0. The temperature step between the isothermal runs ranged from dT = 0.1 for the highest temperatures to dT = 0.025 and dT = 0.0125 at temperatures around the bulk glass-transition temperature T g . The duration of each isothermal run ranged from 1.6•10 4 (at T > 0.5) to 3•10 5 (at T  0.5). Defining the cooling rate as the difference between the starting temperature and the final temperature divided by the time of the quench, the cooling rate was 0.75 This amounts to half the cooling rate used in the original model of Kob and Andersen and, although it remains quite fast, it is slower than the fastest cooling rate in experiments Figure To investigate the mobility of the liquid's molecules, we examine the self-part of the van Hove space-time correlation function defined as : (1) with representing the position of particle i along any of the x, y and z directions, N being the number of particles that constitute the top layer, being the ensemble average over realizations and time origins and is the Dirac's distribution. In order to account for the natural anisotropy of the system induced by the interfaces, the van Hove function was evaluated in each direction separately. In Fig. The previous two-peak fine-structure separation of relaxation processes is no longer detected at late times for T > 0.30, thus indicating a more homogenous mobility at higher temperature. Nevertheless, the "shoulder" observed in panels b and c at at early times, is maintained and gains significantly in intensity at higher temperatures. Assuming that the mechanism of diffusion does not change appreciably at the sub-T g temperatures examined, it is reasonable to surmise that this behavior arises from the same origin as in the lowest temperature case, i.e. the increase with time of the number of top-layer particles gaining access to the free surface. In sharp contrast, there is no sign of enhanced mobility in the bulk samples as temperature rises. Only at T = 0.375, one can discern a marginal increase in the mobility of the bulk particles at long times, as reflected by the tail of the van Hove distribution. Since the bimodal distribution at low temperatures which is indicative for the dynamic heterogeneity in the motion of the top layer particles, is no longer detected at elevated temperatures, it may be considered as a signature for the transition for these particles to the glassy state. To examine the global consequences of the enhanced surface mobility on the film leveling, we have monitored the average height h av (t) of the top layer particles. The initial value of h av (counted from the substrate) was h av0 = 13.5. An example of the time evolution of the rescaled amplitude, , for a temperature T = 0.45, is displayed in Fig. Finally, the apparent total diffusion coefficients, of the top layer particles were extracted from the MSD curves at different temperatures, and compared with the corresponding bulk values, D b in Fig. This ratio drastically rises with cooling as it has been observed in both experimental and theoretical studies Molecular dynamics simulations have been conducted in order to examine the decay process of a periodic square-wave pattern at the free surface of a binary Lennard-Jones film. Contrary to previous simulation studies of the capillary leveling of thin films, the evolution of the height was examined over a wide temperature range sampling both the liquid and glassy states of the film. Different mechanisms appeared to control the pattern leveling in those two states. By the aid of layer-resolved analysis of the particles' mean-squared displacements, we showed that diffusion is much more efficient in the layer close to the free surface than elsewhere in the bulk. Specifically, at the lowest temperature studied, the diffusion coefficient of the surface particles is found to be 10 5 times larger than the bulk counterpart and this difference decreases upon heating.