Spinel ferrites in general show a rich interplay of structural, electronic, and magnetic properties. Here, we particularly focus on zinc ferrite (ZFO), which has been observed experimentally to crystallise in the cubic normal spinel structure. However, its magnetic ground state is still under dispute. In addition, some unusual magnetic properties in ZFO thin films or nanostructures have been explained by a possible partial cation inversion and a different magnetic interaction between the two cation sublattices of the spinel structure compared to the crystalline bulk material. Here, density functional theory has been applied to investigate the influence of different inversion degrees and magnetic couplings among the cation sublattices on the structural, electronic, magnetic, and optical properties. Effects of exchange and correlation have been modelled using the generalised gradient approximation (GGA) together with the Hubbard "+U " parameter, and the more elaborate hybrid functional PBE0. While the GGA+U calculations yield an antiferromagnetically coupled normal spinel structure as the ground state, in the PBE0 calculations the ferromagnetically coupled normal spinel is energetically slightly favoured, and the hybrid functional calculations perform much better with respect to structural, electronic and optical properties. Zinc ferrite or ZnFe 2 O 4 (ZFO) belongs to the mineral class of spinel ferrites crystallising in a cubic crystal structure with the general formula M Fe 2 O 4 . Common to all spinel ferrites is the face-centred cubic (fcc) arrangement of the oxygen anions. In the so-called normal spinel structure the octahedrally coordinated B-sites (O h ) are solely populated with Fe 3+ cations whereas the tetrahedrally coordinated A-sites (T d ) accomodate a divalent d-metal cation, e.g., M ∈ Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Mg, Cd. An example for a fully inverse spinel ferrite is NiFe 2 O 4 (NFO), whereas CoFe 2 O 4 (CFO) has a partially inverse structure with λ ≈ 0.8. Here, we focus on differences between the collinear AFM and FM normal spinel structure, as well as inverse structures with λ = 0.5 and λ = 1.0. Presented results include structural (lattice constant a, oxygen parameter u, bulk modulus B), electronic (density of states (DOS), band structure), magnetic, and optical (dielectric functions) properties. The results of the present work have been obtained by density functional theory (DFT) calculations employing the Vienna ab initio Simulation package (VASP) For the more demanding PBE0 calculations, Γ-centred k point meshes of 6 × 6 × 6 and a cutoff energy of 500 eV have been used. Ground-state geometries were determined by a cubic spline fit to the total energies with respect to the unit cell volumes. The obtained structural properties of ZFO are given in table I in comparison to available experimental results. The GGA+U calculated lattice constants, oxygen parameters u, and bulk moduli for the normal spinel are 8.541 Å, 0.261, and 161.1 GPa, and 8.545 Å, 0.260, and 162.0 GPa for the AFM and FM arrangement of magnetic moments among the B-site sublattice, respectively. The respective PBE0 calculated lattice constants, oxygen parameters u, and bulk moduli are 8.446 Å, 0.261, and 173.8 GPa, and 8.452 Å, 0.260, 174.1 GPa, and are in much better agreement to the experimental results of 8.441 Å [40] (8.4599 Å [6]), 0.260 [41], and 175.0 GPa [42], respectively. This is in line with the general trend that hybrid functional calculations for oxide semiconductors yield better agreement of lattice parameters and bulk moduli with respect to experimental results. As can be seen from the data in table I, with increasing inversion degree λ the lattice constants decrease from the normal spinel AFM values for both, GGA+U and PBE0 functional calculations, in agreement with experimental results of Wu et al., The DOS of normal ZFO with a AFM and FM arrangement of magnetic moments among the B-site sublattices, partially inverse ZFO (λ = 0.5) and fully inverse ZFO (λ = 1.0) are shown in figure From the DOS with respect to the inversion degree λ it can be seen that an increasing inversion degree shifts the valence band DOS towards higher energies, and exhibits a growing contribution to the tetrahedral Fe and octahedral Zn DOS, respectively. From figure For the normal spinel and AFM arrangement of magnetic moments among the B-site sublattice it is no surprise that the spin resolved band structure depicted in the upper panels of figure Based on the obtained relaxed structural ground states for different inversion degrees λ and magnetic arrangements on the B-site sublattices the optical properties have been calculated and are depicted in figure In summary, a detailed investigation on the influence of the inversion degree λ and different arrangements of the magnetic moments among the B-site cations on the structural, electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of the spinel ferrite ZFO has been presented. It has been shown that the hybrid functional PBE0 performs better than GGA+U , and yields an overall better agreement with respect to experimental results on structural, electronic and optical properties. These hybrid functional calculations provide the basis for future in-depth analyses of the optical properties in relation to the band structure and DOS, as well as taking into account strain effects from underlying substrates. 4,39 V. A. M. Brabers, in Handbook of Magnetic Materials, Vol. 8, edited by K. H. J. Buschow (Elsevier, 1995) pp. 189 -324. D. Fritsch and C. Ederer, Phys. Rev. B 82, 104117 (2010). N. Caffrey, D. Fritsch, T. Archer, S. Sanvito, and C. Ederer, Phys. Rev. B 87, 024419 (2013).