We investigate the energy spectrum, wave functions and local density of states (LDOS), of an electrical dipole placed on a sheet of gapped graphene as function of the charge strength Zα, for different sizes of the dipole and for different regularisation parameters. The dipole is modeled as consisting of a positive and negative charge. Bound states are found within the gap region with some energy levels that anti-cross and others that cross as function of the impurity strength Zα. The anti-crossings are more pronounced and move to higher charges Zα when the length of the dipole decreases. These energy levels turn into atomic collapse states when they enter the positive (or negative) energy continuum. A smooth transition from the single impurity behavior to the dipole one is observed: the states diving towards the continuum in the single impurity case are gradually replaced by a series of anticrossings that represent a continuation of the diving states in the single impurity case. By studying the local density of states at the edge of the dipole we show how the series of anticrossings persist in the positive and negative continuum. One of the most intensively studied stable twodimensional (2D) systems is monolayer graphene (MLG). This is not only due to its very interesting thermal and electrical properties of MLG, but also because of its ability to mimic relativistic physics at low energies. Interesting phenomena such as Klein tunneling that were predicted almost a century ago Placing MLG on a substrate like SiC or hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) breaks the sublattice symmetry creating a gapped spectrum. For example, putting MLG on a SiC substrate creates a gap of 260 meV [4] and It is important to mention that the appearance of such a resonant state is a clear signature of atomic collapse. The production of an electron-hole pair as the signature for the atomic collapse depends on the Fermi energy. If the systems Fermi energy is such that the bound state is empty an electron-hole pair will be created upon entering the negative continuum. However, in the case of a filled bound state such a pair creation will not occur It is important to stress that in this paper by atomic collapse we mean the effect were a bound state enters the negative continuum producing a resonance (i.e. quasibound state). Throughout the paper we will also refer to this effect as "diving into the continuum". The reason to stress this is that in the existing literature sometimes confusing definitions for atomic collapse are used (e.g. see comment The purpose of this study is two-fold. First, we investigate the full spectrum of a physical dipole in gapped graphene within the continuum approximation. Note that all previous studies were also done within the continuum approximation. Obtaining the full spectrum will give us more insight in the physics. Also, the spectrum can be accurately determined for all energy levels and arbitrary dipole sizes. We would like to emphasize that such a detailed study does not yet exist in the literature. Determining the exact full spectrum is very useful regarding the experimental observation of atomic collapse. The second purpose of this paper is to investigate how the atomic collapse phenomenon evolves from the single impurity case to the dipole case. The paper is structured as follows: in Sec. II we present the model and derive the equations that have to be solved numerically. In Sec. III we present our numerical results on bound states inside the gap. The numerical results on atomic collapse states inside the continuum are given in Sec IV, and in Sec V we present our conclusions. In this section we present the mathematical model and equations used throughout this paper. We solve the dipole problem within the continuum model using the full Dirac Hamiltonian: Here σ i are the Pauli matrices, ∆ is the size of the gap, I 2 is the identity matrix and V (x, y) is an external electrostatic potential. Choosing the x axis along the positive and negative charges (see Fig. (2) Here α 0 = e 2 /4πκ, Z is the charge number, κ the effective dielectric constant, d the distance between the two charges and r 0 the distance from the charges to the graphene sheet. The experimental situation is shown schematically in Fig. Following Ref. Here we introduced the rescaled energy Ē = E/ v F and band gap ∆ = ∆/ v F . V (x, y) is given by the expression: (4) Where we introduced the dimensionless effective fine structure constant α = α 0 / v F . Note that the band gap itself leads to a characteristic length scale for the states located inside the gap given by the effective Compton wavelength R ∆ = v F /∆. Before examining numerical solutions we would like to emphasize that the two-impurity problem cannot be solved exactly. There is no longer cylindrical symmetry and as a consequence the total angular quantum number Ĵz = Lz + 2 σ z is no longer a conserved quantity. This is in contrast with the single negative/positive impurity case where Ĵz is conserved and the expectation value takes the discrete values < Ĵz > / = (m + 1/2), where m can take the values 0, ±1, ±2, .... However, it is still interesting to calculate the expectation value of Ĵz which in Cartesian Coordinates is given by: The expectation value of the total angular momentum for a state described by the two component wave function Ψ = (ψ a , ψ b ) is then given by the following expression: C. Finite size simulation As discussed in the introduction, atomic collapse occurs when bound states dive into the continuum turning them into a resonance. However in light of atomic collapse we need information about the continuum that will show us unambiguously that the diving series of anticrossings persists into the continuum. In order to get an idea about these extended states inside the continuum we consider a finite size system which we solve using the finite elements method. Such an approach was already suggested by Pomeranchuck Here, ∆ 0 is the height of the infinite mass potential outside the confinement region, R is the size of the flake and c defines the sharpness of the edge. Note that imposing an infinite mass boundary condition does not take into account any edge specifics and in principle the edge of the flake consists of a mixture of zig-zag and armchair boundaries In this subsection we focus on the bound state spectrum located inside the gap. We will show that the diving of states towards the continuum seen in the single impurity case We solve the set of coupled equations (3a) and (3b) using the finite elements method implemented in Mathematica, which discretizes the lattice and allows for a numerical solution of the problem. It should be mentioned that the discretization procedure introduces spurious solutions due to the so called fermion doubling problem In Fig. Let's first discuss Fig. In Fig. The continuation of the levels regardless of the anticrossings is further supported by Fig. Note also from Fig. Up to now we focused on the dipole spectrum of two charges located at a fairly large distance from each other, indeed for d = 10 nm the Compton wavelength R ∆ = 5 nm is small compared to the inter-charge distance. Therefore it is interesting to study how the spectrum evolves with decreasing inter-charge distance. In Figs. Note that in Fig. Up to now our main focus was on the first series of anticrossings shown in Figs. In order to understand this peculiar behavior of this descending state with sharper anticrossings we plot the probability density in Fig. In Fig. In contrast with the densities shown in Figs. In this subsection we calculate the expectation value of the total angular momentum operator which will reinforce our previous interpretation of the anti-crossings. However, the usefulness of the total momentum operator is limited to large inter-impurity distances and smaller charges when the breaking of angular symmetry is less dramatic. It is interesting to calculate the expectation value of the total momentum operator Ĵz for the points shown in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. For the densities shown in Fig. However, in order to get conclusive information about the atomic collapse it is essential to investigate what happens when states enter the continuum. In this section we show that the diving of the series of anticrossings persists as a peak in the local density of states (LDOS) providing a clear signature of atomic collapse in a dipole field. In the introduction it was already mentioned that the story of atomic collapse contains two parts: 1) the creation of an electron-hole pair, and 2) redistribution of the bound state over the continuum states as a resonance, visible as a peak in the LDOS in the negative continuum close to the impurity. As Pomeranchuk noted pair creation will not always occur while the peak in the LDOS in the negative continuum will always be observable and is the true signature for atomic collapse Also from an experimental point of view the LDOS is interesting to calculate since it can be directly measured using an STM tip. Regarding atomic collapse it is most interesting to probe the LDOS at one of the impurity sites. In Fig. From Fig. In Fig. It is also interesting to study the charge for which the first state enters the continuum as function of the distance between the impurities. This is analogous to the critical charge for atomic collapse for a single impurity (point for which the first state dives into the continuum). This critical charge is shown in Fig. The correspondence of our results with those of a recent publication In this paper we investigated the full spectrum of a physical dipole located on the surface of a gapped graphene system within the continuum approximation. We investigated the evolution of the spectrum as function of the charge of the dipole and the inter-charge distance. By studying the probability density we showed that electron states located mostly at the positively charged impurities dive towards the negative continuum as a distinct series of anticrossings. Similarly hole states are mostly located at the negatively charged impurity dive as a series of anticrossings towards the positive continuum. From this result we can conclude that the diving of the states into the continuum is gradually replaced by a series of anticrossings that dive into the continuum in a dipole field. It is the appearance of this series of anticrossings inside the continuum, seen as a peak in the LDOS, that is the signature of atomic collapse in a dipole field. with increasing flake size the anticrossings in the continuum will be located closer to each other. When the distance between the impurities is increased the anticrossings become less and less pronounced showing a gradual evolution from the dipole to the single impurity case. We supported this observation by calculating the LDOS at the position of one of the impurities. The result of this calculation showed that the diving of the energy levels persist into the continuum and can be observed as a peak in the LDOS. The peaks visible after a state enters the continuum is the signature of atomic collapse in a dipole field. The calculated LDOS, and the atomic collapse states in the continuum,should be directly measurable in experiments. We also calculated the dependence of the critical charge for atomic collapse (the charge for which the first series of anticrossings enters the continuum analogous to MLG) as function of the distance between the impurities. The critical charge increases with decreasing inter-charge distance. Next to the atomic collapse phenomenon in the dipole system we also investigated general features of the energy spectrum. We investigated for example the influence of the regularization parameter on the spectrum and showed that the results only change quantitatively. We also noted a state diving towards the continuum exhibiting sharper anticrossings (i.e. with smaller anticrossing gaps) and which was much more localized at one of the impurities compared to the other states. The probability density of this state is very asymmetric in the direction of the dipole axis which should be a clear signature in the experimentally measured LDOS. This state has not been observed and characterized in previous studies. We also calculated the expectation value of the total angular momentum operator and investigated how the total probability density of the state changes around the anticrossings. We found that at the first point of anticrossing the two energy levels behave as neutral states, i.e. equally distributed over the two charges with zero total angular momentum. From our results we can now understand why in the literature different conclusions are reached with regard to the atomic collapse in a dipole field. In Refs. In the single impurity system very good qualitative agreement between the experimental and theoretical predictions were observed In conclusion, in this study we calculated for the first time the full spectrum generated by a dipole on gapped graphene without the use of any approximations. Our approach enabled us to study the spectrum of a dipole in a more profound and detailed way as compared to previous publications which allowed us to understand why different conclusions were reached in the literature. We showed that their is a continuous evolution from atomic collapse for single impurities to atomic collapse in a dipole field: states diving and hybridizing with the continuum are gradually replaced by a series of anticrossings representing a continuation of the single impurity behavior. Our results are complemented by the calculation of the experimental observable LDOS providing clear signatures to look for in experiments. W. Greiner, B. Muller, and J. Rafelski, Quantum Electrodynamics of Strong Fields, (Springer Berlin, Heidelberg,