We report an enhancement of thermal conductivity (κ) below the superconducting transition temperature (T C ) in the high carrier density β-V 1-x Ti x alloys. We find that the point defects generated when Ti is added to V reduce the electron mean free path down to the inter-atomic distances and make the high frequency phonons ineffective in carrying heat. In this Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit, the phonon thermal conductivity is dominated by the low frequency phonons limited by the scattering due to the electrons. The formation of Cooper pairs below the T C re-normalizes the phonon mean free path and enhances the κ. The conductivity of a metal reduces when the disorder increases and it becomes an insulator at an extreme level of disorder The loss of electron degrees of freedom in metals near the Anderson transition can also lead to a renormalization of electron-phonon coupling and an unconventional superconductivity The thermal conductivity of metals can be expressed as κ = κ e +κ l , where κ e = 1 3 C e v F l e and κ l = 1 3 C l v s l ph are the electronic and lattice thermal conductivities respectively The body centred cubic (bcc) β-V 1-x Ti x alloys are considered to be an alternate system for superconducting magnet applications due to their relatively high T C and large upper critical field in the zero temperature limit (H C2 (T = 0)) Figure Figure The free carrier density of ceramic superconductors are about two orders less than that of the good metals like Copper The κ ez is given by κ -1 ez = κ -1 e-i,z +κ -1 e-l,z , where κ -1 e-i,z and κ -1 e-l,z are the thermal resistivities due to the scattering of electrons from the defects and phonons respectively. In the normal state, κ -1 e-i,n = AT -1 and κ -1 e-l,n = BT 2 + O(T 4 ), where A and B are the constants. The exact form of κ e-l,n can be found in ref. The κ lz is given by where xT + P z x 4 T 4 and the constant M = k 4 B /(2π 2 3 v s ). Here, is the reduced Plank's constant, v s is the sound velocity. The coefficients N z , L z , C z and P z represent the strength of phonon scattering due to boundaries, dislocations, electrons and point defects respectively. The J 3 (θ D /T ) is the Debye function The difference between κ ln and κ ls is that the g(x) is equal to unity in the normal state and the form of g(x) in the superconducting state is in Ref. The symbols and in Fig. The κ(T ) in the superconducting state of the V 1-x Ti x alloys with x > 0.1 increases when the temperature is decreased below T C indicating that the phonons are the major carriers of heat in the superconducting state. This is a perfect example for the case where the electrons dominate the heat conduction. The analysis of the κ n of the alloys indicates that the κ en contributes more than 70% to the κ n below 8 K, although the l e approaches the Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit. This indicates that these alloys are at the metallic side of the Anderson transition We found by fitting κ ls using eq.1 that the thermal conduction by phonons in the normal state of these alloys is limited only by scattering due to the electrons and point defects. In case of vanadium, κ es > κ ls for T ≥ 2 K. However, the κ ls of the x = 0.1 alloy starts to increase when the temperature is reduced below T C = 6.4 K and become more than κ es below a temperature T cr = 3.4 K which is more than T C /2. In case of x = 0.3 and 0.5 alloys, the T cr is very close to T C . Similar effect is observed in the alloys with x up to 0.7 (not shown here) above which the bcc structure become unstable and a transition to a hexagonally close packed structure Therefore, the scattering of phonons by the point defects becomes less effective. Instead, dislocations become the major scatterers of phonons and κ ls decreases when temperature is reduces below T C /2. Figure Majority of the these defects are the point defects generated by the addition of titanium. As the amount of titanium increases in vanadium, the number of point defects increases and the resistance to heat flow increases. However, strong electron-phonon interaction persists all through the composition range due to the softening of the phonons when titanium is added to vanadium We conclude that the observation of an increase in the thermal conductivity when the temperature is reduced below T C in a crystalline superconductor having dense free electrons requires the presence of a very large number of point defects. The point defects scatter electrons and phonons differently. When present in very large numbers, the point defects reduce l e drastically to the inter-atomic distances driving the material towards metal-insulator transition, while they scatter effectively the high frequency phonons leaving out the heat conduction to long wavelength phonons. In such a scenario, if the electron-phonon scattering is strong, these long wave length phonons are scattered mainly by the electrons as the average l ph is quite small as compared to the sample dimensions, and the inter-grain boundary and inter-dislocations distances. In such a case, the loss of electrons when the material become superconducting enables the phonons to carry heat effectively. This results in the enhanced thermal conductivity below the T C which in general is not expected in a metallic system. Methods: The poly-crystalline V 1-x Tix samples were prepared by arc melting and characterized by x-ray diffraction measurements (see the supplement for the details). The electrical resistivity and thermal conductivity measurements on these alloys were performed using a physical property measurement system (Quantum Design, USA).