One of the most exciting properties of two dimensional materials is their sensitivity to external tuning of the electronic properties, for example via electric field or strain. Recently discovered analogues of phosphorene, group-IV monochalcogenides (MX with M = Ge, Sn and X = S, Se, Te), display several interesting phenomena intimately related to the in-plane strain, such as giant piezoelectricity and multiferroicity, which combine ferroelastic and ferroelectric properties. Here, using calculations from first principles, we reveal for the first time giant intrinsic spin Hall conductivities (SHC) in these materials. In particular, we show that the SHC resonances can be easily tuned by combination of strain and doping and, in some cases, strain can be used to induce semiconductor to metal transition that makes a giant spin Hall effect possible even in absence of doping. Our results indicate a new route for the design of highly tunable spintronics devices based on two-dimensional materials. The spin Hall effect (SHE) is a phenomenon emerging from spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in which an electric current or external electric field can induce a transverse spin current resulting in spin accumulation at opposite sample boundaries. Our noncollinear DFT calculations were performed using the Quantum Espresso code The intrinsic spin Hall conductivities were calculated using the PAOFLOW code where j = {s, v} is the spin current operator with s = 2 (β, Σ : 4 × 4 Dirac matrices) and f n ( k) is the Fermi distribution function for the band n at k. We note that, in contrast to most of reported calculations of SHC based on the above formula, Let us first consider unstrained structures. Figures As a next step, we have explored the possibility of tuning the electronic properties and spin Hall conductivity via external strain. The band gap (E g ) manipulation in group-IV sulfides and selenides was previously reported in Ref. 19, where compressive strains along either x or y axis were found to strongly reduce the band gap, and for larger strains could induce a semiconductor to semimetal transition. In the present study, we consider all possible strain configurations varying between -10% to +10% with the step of 2%, thus 121 different configurations for each compound. Below, we will discuss only the results for SnTe which displays the highest potential for spintronics; the complete set of results for all considered group-IV monochalcogenides is reported in the SM (Figs. Figure The corresponding spin Hall conductivities calculated at intrinsic chemical potential plotted in panel (b) clearly reflect the profile in (a), that is, as long as the material is semiconducting, it cannot exhibit any spin Hall effect. Within the regions of E g = 0, the values of σ z xy vary because each of these strain configurations induces different modifications in the electronic structure. However, we are still able to draw general conclusions regarding the impact of the strain based on the analysis of few selected configurations A, B, C displayed in Fig. The spin Hall conductivities of structures A, B, C shown in Fig. It is evident that the σ z xy can be giant without any doping (structures A, B), which we attribute to the presence of resonance E 2 much closer to the Fermi level than in the unstrained monolayer (E F is located on the slope in both A and B configurations). Statistical analysis of these two parameters for all calculated structures confirms that indeed the change in the band gap is mainly correlated with the resonance E 2 (calculated Pearson's correlation between E g and E 2 is around 80%), while the position of E 1 hardly depends on the band gap. This means that strain is more likely to shift/modify unoccupied bands which will also determine the SHC. Finally, the σ z xy in the moderately strained configuration C also exhibits a finite value at the Fermi level, but since the peak E 2 is not so close to E F , the spin Hall effect is weaker. The experimental realization of SHC, its tuning and switching on/off, is likely to require a combination of doping and strain. In order to quantitatively estimate the effect of both we have calculated the values of σ z xy averaged over the range of chemical potential that correspond to a given electron/hole concentration for every configuration of strain. The results for SnTe are shown in Fig. In summary, we have reported for the first time the emergence of a giant spin Hall effect in group IV monochalcogenides, which can be switched on/off and modulated either by doping or uniaxial compressive strain. The most interesting candidate for spintronics is SnTe. We have predicted that the SHE in this compound can be very strong. Moreover, the monolayer and multilayer samples have been recently synthesized and they reveal high potential for technology. Finally, we emphasize that 2D spintronics is not just a hypothesis; the recent discovery of 2D ferromagnetism 