Harmonic measurements of the longitudinal and transverse voltages in Bi-Sb/Co bilayers are presented. A large second harmonic voltage signal due to the ordinary Nernst effect is observed. In experiments where a magnetic field is rotated in the film plane, the ordinary Nernst effect shows the same angular dependence in the transverse voltage as the damping-like spin-orbit torque and in the longitudinal voltage as the unidirectional spin-Hall magneto-resistance respectively. Therefore, the ordinary Nernst effect can be a spurious signal in spin-orbit torque measurements, leading to an overestimation of the spin-Hall angle in topological insulators or semimetals. In metal-based spintronics, heavy metals such as platinum, tantalum or tungsten are used to convert charge currents into spin-currents via the spin-Hall or Rashba-Edelstein effect One way to quantify the spin-to-charge conversion efficiency is to measure the the spin-Hall angle θ SH . While the reported magnitude of the spin-Hall angle varies somewhat in the literature, it is generally agreed that the spin-Hall angle in heavy metals is of the order of 10% In addition, it has been reported that the unidirectional spin-Hall magneto-resistance (USMR) is orders of magnitudes larger in topological insulator/ heavy metal bilayers films than in conventional heavy metal/ ferromagnet bilayers While these aforementioned reports have given credence to the promise of using topological insulator materials for high efficiency electronics applications, there are also recent reports that indicate how the extracted spin Hall angles could be impacted by spurious signals. For example, Yasuda et al. A double Hall-bar structure is used to measure transverse (Vxy) and longitudinal (Vxx) voltages on the Bi-Sb bilayer samples considered in this work. The magnetic field is applied in the film plane at an angle φ with respect to the current direction. The inset shows a micro-graph of an actual double Hall-bar device. The width of the Hall bar is 6 μm. Nernst effect (ONE) Notably, ONE refers to the generation of a voltage, when both a temperature gradient and a magnetic field are present Two control experiments will be discussed in the following to separate thermal effects from SOT and USMR. First, we will compare the harmonic voltage response in Bi-Sb/Co samples to that in Bi-Sb/Al samples. While in Bi-Sb/Co, voltages can arise due to magneto-transport effects, the effects in Bi-Sb/Al will be purely thermal. Secondly we will explore the magnetic field dependence of the voltage response. While spin-transport effects are expected to be suppressed by large magnetic fields, the thermal voltage due to the ONE increases linearly with magnetic field. The samples discussed in this work are Bi 0.74 Sb 0.26 (4)/Co(4), Bi 0.96 Sb 0.04 (10)/Al(5) and Pt(5)/Py(5) (thickness in nm). We refer to these samples as Bi-Sb/Co, Bi-Sb/Al and Pt/Py respectively. All samples are capped with 2.5 nm Si 3 N 4 . The B-Sb is grown epitaxially on high resistivity Si(111) substrate by molecular beam epitaxy. Bulk samples of both Bi 0.74 Sb 0.26 and Bi 0.96 Sb 0.04 are semi-metals Co is deposited with e-beam evaporation onto the Bi-Sb ex-situ and the magnetic easy axis is in the film plane. Al, Pt and Py are grown by magnetron sputtering. After growth, optical lithography and Ar-ion milling are used to pattern Hall bar devices, as shown in the inset of Fig. In all experiments reported here the magnetic field is sufficient to fully saturate the magnet along the fielddirection. Further, all experiments were performed at room temperature and at constant Joule-heating power of P heat = I 2 R = 0.18 mW. For harmonic measurements presented in this work, an ac current I = I 0 • sin(ωt) with ω/2π = 1.5 kHz is applied. If SOT is present, the ac current can induce quasi static magnetization oscillations and thus periodic changes of the resistance and Hall resistance. Therefore, in addition to the first harmonic voltage response V ω , a second harmonic voltage V 2ω will be induced at twice the excitation frequency Further, the ac current induces a periodic temperature gradient. Since Joule heating is quadratic in the current, a second harmonic voltage response can also be induced by thermal effects such as the ordinary Nernst effect The first harmonic Hall voltage can be written as: Here, φ B is the angle between the current and the external magnetic field B ext in the film plane (cf. Fig. where V AHE is the anomalous Hall effect voltage, ∆B DL is the effective field due to the damping like torque, μ 0 M eff is the effective magnetization, A is the coefficient for the ANE/ SSE, α and β are geometrical factors, ∆T is the temperature gradient, N is the ordinary Nernst coefficient, ∆B DL is the effective field due to field-like torque and V USMR is the amplitude of the unidirectional spin-Hall magneto-resistance. The field-like SOT can be extracted from the φ B dependence of the second Harmonic voltage signal. However, it is important to consider the magnetic field dependence in addition to the φ B -dependence for the ex- Here, φB is the angle between the current direction and Bext in the film plane. Lower panel: V2ω shows a cos(φB) dependence in the samples with Bi-Sb, due to the ordinary Nernst effect. In the sample Pt/Py, spin-orbit torque and anomalous Nernst effect are present. The solid lines are fits to eq.( traction of the damping-like SOT, as well as the USMR, to distinguish magneto-thermal effects from SOT. We start by discussing the angular dependence of the transverse harmonic voltages. The top panel in Fig. The second harmonic Hall voltage V 2ω xy is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. The fact that no field-like torque is observed in the sample Bi-Sb/Co, as well as the fact that voltage signals in Bi-Sb/Al and Bi-Sb/Co are comparable gives rise to the suspicion that the signal in the sample Bi-Sb/Co might be dominated by the ONE. To unambiguously distinguish the ONE from SOT, the B ext -dependence will have to be considered, which we will discuss after the following discussion on USMR measurements. In addition to the angular dependence of V xy , the longitudinal voltage V xx was measured (Fig. only observed in the samples with a magnetic layer (top panel), while all samples show an angular dependence of V xx 2ω that can be well described with Eq. (2) (bottom panel). In the Pt/Py reference sample, a clear signature from field-like SOT (∝ sin(2φ B ) cos(φ B )) can be observed while the USMR (∝ sin(φ B )) is small. The sample Bi-Sb/Al shows a sin(φ)-dependence due to the ONE. The absence of field-like torque in Bi-Sb/Co, as well as a signal amplitude comparable to the signal in Bi-Sb/Al raises the suspicion that the signal in Bi-Sb/Co is dominated by the ONE and not a large USMR. To determine the origin of the large voltages observed in Bi-Sb/Co, we repeat the measurements shown in Fig. Similarly, a clear presence for the USMR is seen only in the sample Pt/Py (Fig. Next we will calculate the ONE coefficient N and show that N is equal in samples Bi-Sb/Co and Bi-Sb/Al. To this end we estimate the temperature gradient using the 1D heat equation T (z) = qi /κ, where T (z) is the temperature, qi is the volumetric power density and κ the thermal conductivity. The boundary conditions at the interfaces are: We assume no heat conduction at the surface of the sample and a fixed temperature at the backside of the substrate. The following values for the thermal conductivity have been used: κ Bi-Sb = 6.8 W m -1 K -1 Using these values, we find N = 3 × 10 -6 V T -1 K -1 in Bi-Sb/Co and N = 2.6 × 10 -6 V T -1 K -1 in Bi-Sb/Al. These values are well in agreement and confirm the same origin of V 2ω in the samples Bi-Sb/Co and Bi-Sb/Al, namely the ordinary Nernst effect. Further, N is of the same order of magnitude in other semi-conducting materials 