In iron-based superconductors the interactions driving the nematic order that breaks the lattice four-fold rotational symmetry in the iron plane may also facilitate the Cooper pairing, but experimental determination of these interactions is challenging because the temperatures of the nematic order and the order of other electronic phases appear to match each other or to be close to each other. Here we performed field-dependent 77 Se-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements on single crystals of iron-based superconductor FeSe, with magnetic field B0 up to 16 T. The 77 Se-NMR spectra and Knight shift split when the direction of B0 is away from the direction perpendicular to the iron planes (i.e., B0 c) upon cooling in temperature, with a significant change in the distribution and magnitude of the internal magnetic field at the 77 Se nucleus, but these do not happen when B0 is perpendicular to the iron planes, thus demonstrating that there is an orbital ordering. Moreover, stripe-type antiferromagnetism is absent, while giant antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations measured by the NMR spin-lattice relaxation gradually developed starting at ∼ 40 K, which is far below the nematic order temperature Tnem = 89 K. These results provide direct evidence of orbital-driven nematic order in FeSe. The interactions between structure, magnetism and superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors have been of wide interests In Fe-based superconductors, FeSe has the simplest crystal structure, while it has representative properties as other Fe-based superconductors, thus it has been intensively studied However, recent findings show that stripe-type AFM order emerges under high pressure, and the AFM ordering temperature increases with high pressure Here we present for the first time field-dependent 77 Se-NMR measurements systematically on high-quality single crystals of FeSe with applied magnetic field B 0 up to 16 T and temperature down to 1.5 K. We observed orbital ordering which is demonstrated by the splitting of the NMR spectrum and Knight shift. As measured by the 77 Se-NMR spin-lattice relaxation, giant AFM spin fluctuations gradually develop starting at ∼ 40 K, which is far below the nematic order temperature T nem = T s = 89 K. These discoveries provide direct evidence of orbitaldriven nematic order in FeSe. They also shed light on the important role of the nematic order on the superconductivity of Fe-based superconductors. Single crystals of FeSe were grown in evacuated quartz ampoules using the AlCl 3 /KCl flux technique with a temperature gradient of 5 o C/cm along the ampoule length. The temperatures of the hot and cold ends used for the growth were 427 o C and 380 o C, respectively. X-ray diffraction verified that the crystals have a high-purity single phase with a tetragonal crystal structure at room temperature, where the lattice c-axis is perpendicular to the Fe-planes (ab-plane). A SQUID magnetometer was used to measure the DC magnetic susceptibility χ(T ). The samples used for our NMR measurements have a typical size of 3.3 × 2.7 × 0.1 mm 3 . The NMR coil used for the measurements was made from 50 μm diameter silver wire wound with ∼ 18 turns and attached to a goniometer on an NMR probe by epoxy. A single-crystal FeSe sample was put inside the coil so that the sample rotation axis is in the lattice abplane and perpendicular to the applied field B 0 . A commercial network analyzer was used for the observation of the tuning and matching of the resonant circuit located at the bottom of the NMR probe. The NMR spectra and spin-lattice relaxation time T 1 were measured with an inversion-recovery method, where a π pulse is first applied to invert the nuclear magnetization M 0 to the -z axis, and then after a delay time t, a π/2 pulse is applied to measure the recovering magnetization M (t) component along the z axis, which gives T 1 as a function of time t as M (t) / M 0 = 1 -2exp( -t / T 1 ) Figure Thus, undoubtedly the spectrum split is the result of a structure symmetry break in the ab-plane due to the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structure phase transition (structurally a and b are not equal any more), which is known as the consequence of the electronic nematic order in the Fe-planes Moreover, with the nematic order the spectrum splits also reflect a significant change in spacial field distribution (∆B FWHM ) and also a change in the value of the internal field (B ′ ) at the Se-sites. Here ∆B FWHM = ∆f / 77 γ I , where 77 γ I = 8.131 MHz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio of the 77 Se nucleus, and the Se-sites has a change ∆B ′ = ± 12.0 G (a Knight shift change of ± 0.010%) from the average value (B ′ ) of the internal field B ′ = 160 G (or an average Knight shift 0.133%) (not shown here), i.e., the change of the value of internal field ∆B ′ reaches ± 7.5% from the average value of the internal field B ′ in the Fe-planes. The Knight shift K is defined by K = (ν -ν L )/ν L as a tradition, and it should be field independent. That the values of K(T ) at B 0 a&b are apparently larger than those at B 0 c at T < T nem indicates an anisotropic hyperfine coupling. In general, the Knight shift K is given by where spin Knight shift K spin = [A spin /N A μ B ]χ spin , and orbital Knight shift Here χ spin and χ orb are the electron spin and orbital susceptibility, respectively. A spin and A orb are the hyperfine coupling constants between the studied nucleus and the electron spins and the electron orbitals, respectively. N A is the Avogadro's number and μ B is the Bohr magneton. Likewise, the magnetic susceptibility χ is the sum of the contributions from core diamagnetic susceptibility (χ dia ), orbital (van Vleck) paramagnetic susceptibility (χ orb ) and Pauli spin paramagnetic susceptibility (χ spin ) where only K(T ) and χ(T ) are temperature dependent. However, surprisingly, upon further cooling in temperature, the K(T ) -χ(T ) plot exhibited in figure In other words, the Knight shift K(T ) at low temperatures predominantly comes from the contribution of the orbital Knight shift K orb [Figure The reason that K spin (T ) ≈ 0 in all directions can be understood by enormous AFM spin fluctuations developed in the same temperature regime, whereas there is no existence of electron spin order, as directly evidenced by our 77 Se-NMR spin-lattice relaxation data (see next), with the consideration of a more general expression of the spin Knight shift as . This is the summation of the terms of hyperfine coupling interaction to the individual electron spins (the degree of electron spin polarization is ∝ χ i spin ), where each term could be very different from each other due to the AFM spin fluctuations, resulting in a cancelation of them. On the other hand, the dramatic increase of the orbital Knight shift K orb [Figure (3) Therefore, this indicates that all the data values of ∆ν a,b shown in figure Furthermore, in order to investigate the electron spin dynamics and to support the observations in the NMR spectrum and Knight shift, we performed the 77 Se-NMR spin-lattice relaxation measurements as a function of temperature and applied field, as exhibited in figure Generally, 1/T 1 T probes the imaginary part of the lowfrequency (ω → 0) dynamical susceptibility [χ(q, ω)] averaged over the momentum (q) space as A -a χ ′′ (q, ω)/ω, where A q is the hyperfine coupling constant. For conventional Fermi liquid conductors, , which gives the Korringa law where γ I(e) is the gyromagnetic ratio of nucleus (electron), N (E F ) is the density of states of electrons at the Fermi energy E F , and f (E) is the energy distribution function. For AFM correlated electrons, χ(q) can have a peak at the AFM wave factor Q = (π, π), and then 1/T 1 T ∝ χ(Q) with a Curie-Weiss type relation as: 1/T 1 T = C ′ /(T -θ), as often seen in cuprate and other Fe-based superconductors Moreover, below T nem in the range 40 K<T ≤T nem , 1/T 1 T continues to show a free-electron behavior (Korringa law), where 1/T 1 T is a constant as exhibited in figures 3(a)-3(b) insets, i.e., there is essentially no AFM spin fluctuations at the T nem regime over a wide range of temperature. Therefore, AFM spin fluctuations can be excluded from the driving mechanism of the nematic order. Figure We would like to point out that, among the two groups of the 3d Fe t Finally, we discuss the field effect on the characteristic temperatures. That the values of T s (T nem ) are not affected by the directions or magnitude of the applied field could be explained by the weak anisotropy character of the paramagnetic Fe-spins in the high symmetry tetragonal lattice. That T + is linearly proportional to B 0 could be understood due to its full magnetic character that involves electron orbital moments, while the reason for the decrease of the value of T + with B 0 is not clear. Whereas there is no appearance of long-range AFM order of the electron spins, we note that there were reports about short-range stripe magnetic order and possible spin-orbital coupling In summary, we report direct observation of orbital ordering which is demonstrated by the splitting of the 77 Se-NMR spectrum and Knight shift in single crystals of iron-based superconductor FeSe. As illustrated by the field-dependence of the 77 Se-NMR spin-lattice relaxation, stripe-type AFM order is absent, whereas giant AFM spin fluctuations developed starting at temperatures far below the electronic nematic order temperature T nem , thus both of which can be unambiguously excluded from the origin of the nematic order. These discoveries provide direct evidence of orbital-driven nematic order in FeSe. Our results also help to the understanding of the strong interplay between structure, magnetism and superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors as well as other unconventional superconductors.