High-temperature superconducting materials are being considered to generate the magnetic fields required for the confinement of plasma in fusion reactors. The present study aims to assess the microstructural degradation resulting from ion implantation at room temperature under two implantation conditions: 0.6 MeV Xe 2+ to a fluence of 9 x10 13 ions/cm 2 and 2 MeV Xe 2+ ions to a fluence of 1 x 10 16 ions/cm 2 , in Yttrium Barium Copper Oxide (YBCO) tapes. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and high-resolution characterisation techniques including Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) analyses were used to correlate alterations in superconducting behaviour measured using a Magnetic Properties Measurement System (MPMS) to amorphization and recovery caused by ion implantation. TEM analysis was performed to depth-profile the degree of crystallinity (or lack thereof) on irradiated samples. SRIM predicted the damage depth at 900 nm below the sample surface of the 2 MeV Xe + implanted sample and 450 nm beneath the surface of the 0.6 MeV Xe 2+ implanted sample. 2 MeV Xe + implantation caused the superconducting temperature to decrease by 10 K and the critical current density to display a 10-fold reduction. Post-irradiation heat treatments up to 600 ̊C caused recrystallisation of the irradiated layer, but also oxygen loss and alterations in grain size. The recrystallised grain orientation was random in TEM lamellae, however, bulk samples re-grew along the original crystal orientation provided that some of the original material was not amorphized (ie if they nucleated on crystalline YBCO). This is promising for the thermal recovery of tokamak components. The high temperature superconductors (HTS) based on Yttrium Barium Copper Oxide (YBCO) and other rare-earth elements (collectively, REBCO) have been proposed as candidate materials for magnetic confinement of plasma in Tokamak nuclear fusion reactors It is therefore essential, for the assessment of candidate materials, to study their electrical and microstructural response to radiation damage. Fischer et al. Previous studies on irradiated YBCO characterised the implanted material, but only at relatively low fluences, up to 1x10 13 ions/cm 2 While an understanding of the amorphisation conditions of YBCO is essential to its safe use as a magnetic confinement material for nuclear applications, the concept of post-amorphisation thermally induced recrystallisation is also worthy of investigation There are two essential aspects which must be addressed by the characterisation procedure: accurate atomicscale quantification of the oxygen stoichiometry and an assessment of the level of amorphisation/crystallinity, both of which can be altered by exposure to radiation and both of which are crucial for superconducting properties. The present study relies on laboratory X-ray diffraction (XRD) as a method which allows the measurement of lattice parameters (which can then be correlated to oxygen stoichiometry), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to assess the degree of crystallinity/amorphisation caused by exposure to ion implantation. The two techniques combined allow a comprehensive characterisation of the microstructures which, complemented by the use of superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry measurements, leads to improved understanding of the degradation of superconducting properties due to ion implantation. Single crystal YBCO samples were produced by the Top Seeded Melt Growth (TSMG) process ( Samples of 4 mm wide 2G-HTS tape from SuperPower Inc (with APCs) were also analysed and irradiated for comparison with the bulk irradiated samples and for ease of superconductivity measurements. The 1μm thick layer of YBCO, which was delivered with a Cu stabilising layer and Ag overlayer was exposed by etching with ferric chloride and a combination of ammonium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide respectively. The oxide-based buffer layers and Hastelloy substrate on which the YBCO was grown were however not removed, maintaining the structural integrity of the tape. Previous measurements have shown that this chemical etching process does not harm the superconducting properties of the wire The samples of Superpower tape, with HTS surface exposed, were cut into 3 mm diameter discs, mounted in standard plastic straws and loaded into the MPMS with the applied field held perpendicular to the surface of the tape. Superconductivity temperature and critical current density measurements were performed using a Quantum Design SQUID, using the 3 mm disc samples of etched SuperPower tape, oriented with the applied field B//<c> axis. Measurements were performed varying the applied field from 0.01 -6 T and the temperature from 4.2 -77 K. SRIM (18) was used to simulate the implantation profiles of the bulk and tape samples, as well as the in-situ ion implanted TEM 3mm disc (prepared from the Superpower tape). The "Ion Distribution and Quick Calculation of Damage" (Kinchin-Pease) model was used with bulk density set to 5.51 g/cm 3 , atomic density to 7.65x10 22 atoms/cm 3 , displacement energy of 25 eV for yttrium, barium and copper and 20 eV for oxygen. The ion beam conditions used were 2 MeV Xe for the ex-situ and 600 keV Xe for the in-situ irradiations. Ex-situ ion implantations were performed on YBCO bulk and tape samples along the crystallographic <c> axis at the University of Surrey Ion Beam Centre. 2 MeV Xe + ions were implanted at room temperature into the samples to a total fluence of 1x10 16 ions/cm 2 . A summary of the change in superconducting critical temperature following the ex-situ implantations is shown in Table Samples were prepared for TEM analyses using standard lift-out techniques on a Zeiss NVision 40 focussed ion beam (FIB) microscope. TEM samples were prepared for the in-situ ion implantation and recovery study, by cutting 3 mm discs from the etched Superpower tape using a 3mm disc cutter. The discs were mounted using a Gatan clamp-style DuoPost holder, with the perovskite side facing downwards. A Gatan PIPS II ion polishing system was used to ion-beam mill the samples until electron transparency was obtained. The ion guns were set to 6 ̊ from the top (both), the beam energy was set to 5 keV and the samples were spun at 3.5 revolutions/min. Double ion-beam modulation was used and beam currents were in the range 20-30 μA. TEM analysis was performed on a JEOL 2100 microscope equipped with an Oxford Instruments energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) detector. Crystallinity and amorphisation were shown through the acquisition of selected area diffraction patterns across the ion implanted area. A Bruker D2 Phaser (equipped with a 1D strip detector) was used for X-ray diffraction (XRD) scans with a voltage of 30 kV, a current of 10 mA using variable step size, angle and dwell time which will be specified on each scan, on a stage spinning at 60 revolutions/min. Bulk samples were mounted with plasticine onto a polycarbonate sample holder. SuperPower tape was placed on level single crystal silicon. A glass slide was used to level the samples and ensure they were parallel to the rim of the sample holder. Commercial software CrystalDiffract was used to analyse the patterns along with entries from the ICSD database (© FIZ Karlsruhe). Two methods for the calculation of lattice parameters were compared: (1) using XRD patterns from the ICDD database which were performed on compounds of known oxygen content and finding the best match and (2) using a pattern for fully oxygenated Y-123 perovskite and adjusting the lattice parameter until the best fit was found, then using the difference in c-axis parameter to calculate the oxygen content according to the formula developed by Benzi et al Heat treatments were carried out using the Carbolite Gero Rapid Heating Chamber Furnace RWF in air at atmospheric pressure. The furnace was heated 15 ̊C above the temperature needed for annealing. Once the stable temperature was reached, samples were placed into the furnace. Opening the furnace dropped the temperature by around 15 ̊C (to the intended temperature of annealing), once closed, the target temperature was reduced by 15 ̊C to maintain the annealing temperature. After the samples were held at the annealing temperature for the intended time, they were removed from the furnace and allowed to air cool to room temperature. The TSMG process produced a homogeneous microstructure consisting of discrete Y-211 particles <5 μm in diameter within the single crystal Y-123 matrix, as shown in our previous published work on experimental setting optimisation for YBCO characterisation X-ray diffractograms of the pristine (non-irradiated) YBCO melt-grown single crystal (SX) bulk sample confirmed that the YBa2Cu3O7-d (Y-123) and Y2BaCuO5 (Y-211) phases were present (Figure Xe + with a fluence of 1x10 16 ions/cm 2 (showing maximum damage of 40 dpa at 300 nm and total damage depth of 800 nm) and b) 600 keV Xe 2+ with a fluence of 9x10 13 ions/cm 2 (showing maximum damage of 0.45 dpa at 100 nm and total damage depth of 300 nm). In order to assess the degradation in superconducting properties caused by the Xe + implantation, the critical current density as a function of applied magnetic field (Jc(Bapp)) was measured at 4.2 K, before and after implantation. A standard magnetic method was employed. The tape sample (ex-situ implanted with 2MeV Xe ions to a fluence of 1x10 16 ions/cm 2 ) was cooled in a field value of -1.5 T, which was subsequently swept up to 7 T and back down to -1.5 T, measuring the induced magnetic moment of the sample (m) at 0.1 T intervals. Hysteresis loops are generated (as shown in Figure where R is the sample radius (1.5 mm), and t is the thickness of the superconducting film (nominally 1 μm). The resultant Jc(Bapp) data are presented in Figure The SRIM-predicted damage depths were confirmed by TEM on the bulk sample. Figure The ion-implanted top surface layer was fully amorphous, as shown through electron diffraction (Figure Some particles contained within the damage layer were however found to still show crystallographic (channelling) contrast in bright-field micrographs. One such example is shown in Figure A TEM sample made of Superpower tape, as shown in Figure The Azimuthal radial integration and sum of the SAD patterns in Figure Eight furnace heat treatments were performed in the 300-800 ̊C range for durations of 10-1200 mins on the Superpower tape samples (details shown in Table The XRD results show that both the unirradiated bulk and tape samples were prepared with the <c> axis normal to the sample surface. Both types of sample contained some form of flux pinning additions, Y-211 particles in the TSMG bulk samples and barium zirconate nanorods in the coated conductor, added to increase critical current density The functional properties of amorphous YBCO are well known. It is being studied as it can be produced through deposition or sputtering techniques and has exhibited properties of interest for bolometric applications Most perovskite ceramics are commonly described as amorphising heterogeneously, by one of several mechanisms, although this can depend on the irradiation conditions used. The most commonly suggested mechanisms, which were proposed for perovskite ceramics such as ZrSiO4 and SrTiO3, are either directimpact (in-cascade) amorphisation of an individual collision cascade and the local defect accumulation as a result of cascade overlap Analytical models to describe this coupled effect were developed by Gibbons The concept of amorphisation becoming increasingly difficult with increasing temperature and only occurring below a specific critical temperature (31) led us to explore the possibility of annealing damage through heat treatments to attempt recovery of the functional properties of the YBCO. If the stoichiometry is unaltered after ion implantation, the crystal structure and therefore the superconductivity could potentially be restored by thermally assisted recovery processes. Thermal recrystallisation could lead to the component in-service lifetime to be significantly extended, reducing the cost and environmental impact. This possibility was tested by our experiments with in-situ TEM implantation and annealing as well as ex-situ furnace heat treatments and XRD. In-situ heating (Figure Oxygen loss in YBCO can be observed as an increase in the orthorhombic unit cell's lattice <c> parameter with decreasing oxygen content, as demonstrated by Benzi et al. The microstructure and electrical properties of YBCO superconducting tape and bulk samples were assessed before and after ion implantation. The present study proved that: 1. Xe -ion implantation at an energy of 600 keV to a fluence of 1x10 13 ions/cm 2 amorphised the TEM lamellae (the whole depth) during in-situ TEM ion implantation experiments. Subsequent in-situ heating of the lamellae caused recrystallisation at around ~600°C when samples were held for 10 min and melting/complete degradation of the samples at 900°C. 16 ions/cm 2 reduced the superconducting temperature by 10 K and cut the critical current density down to 1/10 th of its former value. The fluence and energy selected were predicted to produce damage to a depth of 800-900 nm below the surface of the samples, using SRIM software. TEM characterisation revealed that the specimen was fully amorphized to a depth of 900 nm after ion implantation. Of the original 1μm thick YBCO tape, only 1/10 th remained crystalline and superconducting. 3. Heat treatments showed that recrystallisation can be achieved around 600 ̊C, however the heavily textured <c> axis grain orientation which was present before irradiation cannot be recovered unless the superconductive tape was not fully amorphised. The lattice parameter shows some oxygen loss after heat treatment. Future studies annealing from an earlier stage (prior to full amorphization) to recover the properties would be of interest.