Aggregation-based assays, using micro-and nano-particles have been widely accepted as an efficient and cost-effective bio-sensing tool, particularly in microbiology, where particle clustering events are used as a metric to infer the presence of a specific target analyte and quantify its concentration. Here, we present a sensitive and automated readout method for aggregation-based assays using a wide-field lens-free on-chip microscope, with the ability to rapidly analyze and quantify microscopic particle aggregation events in 3D, using deep learning-based holographic image reconstruction. In this method, the computation time for hologram reconstruction and particle autofocusing steps remains constant, regardless of the number of particles/clusters within the 3D sample volume, which provides a major throughput advantage, brought by deep learning-based image reconstruction. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate rapid detection of herpes simplex virus (HSV) by monitoring the clustering of antibodycoated micro-particles, achieving a detection limit of ~5 viral copies/μL (i.e., ~25 copies/test). Particle clustering-based assays have been regularly used for various biosensing applications ranging from the detection of small molecules 1 to proteins, 2,3 nucleic acids, Here, we demonstrate an automatic, high-throughput and real-time aggregation-based bio-sensor analysis method, covering a large number of micro-particles in 3D using deep learning assisted lens-free digital holographic microscopy. Fig. As a proof of concept, we developed an aggregation assay for sensing HSV-1 particles. This virus binds to the antibodies attached to the micro-particles, causing the micro-particles to cluster. To characterize the system, we prepared solutions with different concentrations of HSV and mixed them with the cluster assay (see Materials and Methods section for details). Fig. To quantify the detection limit of the system for HSV sensing, we took the data of the first four concentrations and fit a linear regression model, as shown in Fig. We developed a fast, sensitive and automated read-out method for particle clustering-based assays using wide-field lens-less computational on-chip microscopy powered by deep learning. A CNN-based algorithm is used to reconstruct the micro-particle clusters in 3D, all in parallel, and facilitate the detection and counting of the particles inside each cluster using a single hologram snapshot. Based on DPC and LoG feature detector, individual micro-particles inside each cluster are accurately localized and analyzed in less than one minute. As a proof of concept, we demonstrated accurate and rapid read-out of an HSV micro-particle clustering assay with a detection limit of ~5 cp/μL. This method can also be widely applied to rapidly characterize other types of particle clustering-based bio-sensor assays. The streptavidin coated silica particles (~2 μm diameter) were purchased from Microspheres-Nanospheres Inc. (item # C-SIO-2.0SAv). The biotin tagged Herpes Simplex Virus type 1/2 polyclonal antibody and Phosphate Buffered Solutions (PBS) was acquired from Thermo Fischer Scientific (item # 10010023). The HSV viral culture (NATtrol Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 Strain: MacIntyre, 50,000 cps) was acquired from ZeptoMetrix Corporation. All the chemicals and materials were used as received. The particles (20 μL) used for the experiments were first washed by diluting in PBS (200 μL) followed by centrifugation. The supernatant was discarded and replaced with pure PBS buffer. This step was performed three times and the particles were finally suspended in 400 μL of PBS. This washing step is important as the viral buffer itself can also cause clustering of the micro-particle assay, leading to false detections of virus. The biotin coated antibodies were added to the particles (ratio of 1:55 v/v) and incubated for 1.5 hours. Following incubation of the unattached antibodies were washed away by centrifugation. The antibody coated particles were re-suspended in PBS at a concentration of 1.5×10 4 particles/mL. This antibody coated particles can be used immediately for experiments or stored in the freezer for up to a week. The virus solution at different concentration was added to the particles at equal volumes and mixed overnight (~16 hours) and then used for imaging. Prior to adding the particles, the viruses were isolated from their original solution using a centrifuge filter and re-suspended in fresh PBS. The coverslips were thoroughly cleaned before imaging. They were first incubated in acetone overnight and then washed with ethanol and water. The coverslips were plasma treated for 120 seconds prior to using them. The lens-free microscope utilized a partially coherent source (λ = 510 nm, Δλ = 3 nm, coupled to a single mode fiber) as illumination, and a CMOS image sensor chip (Sony IMX081, 1.12 μm pixel size) to capture holograms of the samples (see Fig. The image sensor used was a Bayer color image sensor. To correct the non-uniform illumination and sensor response on the captured hologram, we performed a wavelet transform (using order-eight Symlet where λ = 510 nm is the illumination wavelength, n = 1.5 is the refractive index between the sample and the image sensor, z 2 = 500 μm is the rough spacing between the sample to the sensor plane, which was initially based on the physical thickness of the glass coverslip and the protective filter of the image sensor chip, and also validated to be the center of the depth distribution of micro-particles in the 3D volume (see supplementary Fig. A CNN was trained to perform simultaneous autofocusing and phase recovery for each micro-particle cluster within the back-propagated hologram FOV To enhance the signatures of individual micro-particles inside a cluster before the detection step, the DPC processing step was applied, where we took the Fourier transform of the reconstructed complex region-of-interest and shifted the zeros frequency component by -π/2, followed by an inverse Fourier transform. A LoG filter with window size of 7-by-7 pixels and σ = 0.6μm (which effectively targets circular blobs with a diameter of d = 2√2 ߪ ≈ 2 μm) was applied on the DPC image. The local maxima with a pixel value above the threshold (0.1) were detected. Non-maximum suppression was used to eliminate the local maxima that were too close to each other (i.e., with a distance <1.5 μm), to avoid multiple detection of the same micro-particle. This number was used to estimate the size for each cluster and generated the corresponding statistics in Fig. Microbead cluster height distribution on the lens-less image. Assay composition change due to virus concentration change. 