Inorganic nitrides with wurtzite crystal structures are well-known semiconductors used in optoelectronic devices. In contrast, rocksalt-based nitrides are known for their metallic and refractory properties. Breaking this dichotomy, here we report on ternary nitride semiconductors with rocksalt crystal structures, remarkable optoelectronic properties, and the general chemical formula MgxTM1-xN (TM=Ti, Zr, Hf, Nb). These compounds form over a broad metal composition range and our experiments show that Mg-rich compositions are nondegenerate semiconductors with visible-range optical absorption onsets (1.8-2.1 eV). Lattice parameters are compatible with growth on a variety of substrates, and epitaxially grown MgZrN2 exhibits remarkable electron mobilities approaching 100 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . Ab initio calculations reveal that these compounds have disorder-tunable optical properties, large dielectric constants and low carrier effective masses that are insensitive to disorder. Overall, these experimental and theoretical results highlight MgG-3TMNG-2 rocksalts as a new class of semiconductor materials with promising properties for optoelectronic applications. Nitride materials are relevant to several industrial and technological fields, and historically are separated into two families. The first family is main-group metal nitride semiconductors with wurtzite crystal structure, typified by (Al,Ga,In)N, which are known for direct band gaps and high carrier mobilities and found in various optoelectronic devices. Recently, increased attention has been devoted to semiconducting II-IV-N2 ternaries, which are structurally similar to III-N wurtzite compounds but with the main group III 3+ metal replaced with group II 2+ and group IV 4+ metals (for example, Zn Each of the compounds, synthesized as thin films via sputtering, exhibits diffraction peaks corresponding to a simple rocksalt structure and lattice parameters compatible with epitaxial growth on a variety of substrates. Mg-rich compositions exhibit semiconducting optoelectronic properties with visible-range optical absorption onsets. MgZrN2 grown on MgO shows electron mobilities approaching 100 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at ca. 10 18 cm -3 electron density. Ab initio calculations suggest these compounds have disorder-tunable optical properties, disorder-tolerant electronic properties, low effective masses, and large dielectric constants. Overall, these results broaden the landscape of semiconducting nitrides to ternary materials with rocksalt-derived crystal structures. First we hypothesize about possible structures found in ternary rocksalt-derived nitrides. Ternary rocksalt-derived nitrides can exist in several extended structures, but can be locally described as edge sharing cation/anion octahedral motifs, just like in the case of oxides. Extending the same motif arguments to AE2 2+ TM 5+ N3 stoichiometries, Mg2NbN3 is expected to have a clustered N-AE4 2+ TM2 5+ motif. Interestingly, within the confines of this framework, local charge neutrality could not be achieved with octahedrally coordinated G=6 metals, suggesting a compound such as Mg3MoN4 would not be stable in a rocksalt-like structure. In order to confirm these hypothetical considerations about the structures in the MgG-3TMNG-2 family, we performed first-principles structure searches, using the kinetically limited minimization approach. for each system the lowest energy rocksalt structure exhibits local octahehedral motifs as expected by the qualitative arguments above; also, our calculations show only a small energy penalty for adopting different motifs (Table To validate these predictions, we synthesized both stoichiometric (x=0) and Mg-rich Next, we report on optoelectronic properties of the MgG-3+xTM1-xNG-2 thin films. The stoichiometric films prepared for this study had conductivities >1S cm -1 and did not exhibit a clearly-defined absorption onset, presumably due to degenerate carrier densities. Thus, following the strategy to prepare non-degenerate Zn-rich ZnSnN2 ternary wurtzite semiconductors by creating oxygen-impurity compensating defect complexes To support these experimental measurements, we computed the properties of the MgG-3TMNG-2 materials with electronic structure calculations using many-body perturbation theory in the GW approximation. To further examine the role of structural disorder on electronic properties of MgG-3TMNG-2 compounds we performed inverse participation ratio (IPR) calculations As shown in Figure The hexagonal projection of MgG-3TMNG-2 lattice parameters also fall within the range of InN-GaN-AlN a-lattice parameters (Figure Mg-rich compositions and epitaxial films were measured using a Lakeshore 8425 Hall probe equipped with a 2T superconducting magnet and variable temperature sample environment. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using an FEI Talos F200X microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy was performed on the TEM in scanning mode. The TEM lamella was prepared via ion beam milling and lift-out using an FEI Helios Nanolab dual beam SEM/FIB. Computational: First principles density functional and many-body perturbation theory calculations were performed with the VASP code, employing the generalized gradient (GGA) and GW approximations, respectively For the final ground state structures, a symmetry analysis was performed using the FINDSYM software Disordered structures were generated through first-principles Monte-Carlo sampling in supercells between 64 and 96 atoms (5 random seeds per each case) using the Metropolis criterion for 2000 and 10000 K as effective temperature we expect charge compensation can still occur. Variable-temperature resistivity measurements from Mg-rich films are presented as an Arrhenius plot in Figure