We present measurements of pure spin current absorption on lateral spin valves. By varying the width of the absorber we demonstrate that spin current absorption measurements enable to characterize efficiently the spin transport properties of ferromagnetic elements. The analytical model used to describe the measurement takes into account the polarization of the absorber. The analysis of the measurements allows thus determining the polarization and the spin diffusion length of a studied material independently, contrarily to most experiments based on lateral spin valves where those values are entangled. We report the spin transport parameters of some of the most important materials used in spinorbitronics (Co60Fe40, Ni81Fe19, Co, Pt, and Ta), at room and low (10 K) temperatures. Recent advances in spinorbitronics have evidenced the need for new characterization techniques, measuring precisely the spin-dependent material properties. Indeed, parameters such as the damping, the polarization, the spin diffusion length, the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) or the spin Hall angle are key factors to understand and control various mechanisms: spin transfer torque 1,2,3 , spin texture dues to DMI Among those basic material parameters, the spin diffusion length occupies a primordial role in all spin transport mechanisms. Pioneer spin transport measurements of the spin diffusion length spin diffusion length is central in the controversies concerning the determination of the charge-to-spin conversion rates Gap dependence measurements in lateral spin-valves Spin diffusion lengths of heavy metals have also been extracted using non-local measurements in LSVs Importantly, using this technique there is no need for varying the thickness of the studied material. As the spin diffusion length of a material varies with its resistivity Up to now, spin absorption measurements have been performed to extract the spin diffusion length of non-magnetic heavy materials. As it has been done one NiFe/Cu nanostructures The devices nanofabricated and measured in this paper are lateral spin-valves In the case of ferromagnetic spin-absorbing materials, the electrodes and the absorbing wire are constituted of the same element. Hence, only one step of lithography and multi-angle deposition have been used. All the nanodevices are geometrically identical, except for the widths of the spin-absorbing wires (cf. figure Cu has been used as nonmagnetic material for the conducting channel, in order to optimize the interface quality and to limit its influence on the spin accumulation relaxation: indeed, Al/CoFe interfaces has been shown to induce resistive interfaces (more details are presented in the supplementary materials). The ferromagnetic and absorbing wires are all 20 nm thick, the non-magnetic channels are 80 nm thick, while ferromagnetic and non-magnetic nanowires are 50 nm wide. The distance center to center between the two ferromagnetic electrodes is 300 nm. The resistivities were measured by using a Van der Pauw 33 method, and the parameters of Cu are taken from previous measurement and control samples Figure The non-local measurements shown on figure The spin signal decrease for a given spin diffusion length can be calculated using 1D analytical expressions derived from the Valet Fert model. A description recently proposed where λ i , ρ i , P i and t i are respectively the spin diffusion length, the resistivity, the polarization and the thickness of the i th material. The material N is the non-magnetic channel, while the material A is the absorber. The effective spin diffusion length λ N * reflects the two-parallel relaxation path, i.e. the channel and the absorber, for the out-of-equilibrium spin accumulation. The analytical model used to extract the polarization and the spin diffusion length from the spin signal amplitude is detailed in the supplementary materials. The spin transport parameters of platinum and tantalum have been extracted (cf. table 1). The spin diffusion length of Ta is found to be of around 2 nm at both 300 K and 10 K. The measured resistivity of Ta being also invariant from temperature (200 μ.cm), these results are in good agreement to the assumption that the product ρλ is independent of temperature for most materials For Pt, we find a very good agreement with recent spin pumping experiments Let us now apply this model to the case of ferromagnetic materials. In most of the studies concerning ferromagnetic elements, the estimation of the spin diffusion length λ A and of the polarization P A is difficult, since they are usually entangled together in a single effective parameter, as in the case of spin resistances. If the ferromagnetic electrodes are made with a different material than the absorbing wire, then the dependence of the spin signal on the absorber does not allow to determine λ A and P A independently. Here, we propose a simple solution, consisting in the use of a nanodevice made with the same ferromagnetic material A for the electrodes and the absorbing wire. In that situation, the material parameters take place both in the spin injection and detection efficiency of the electrodes (i.e., the amplitude of the spin signal) and in the absorption efficiency of the spin signal (i.e., the decreasing profile of the spin signal with the width w A ). The injection efficiency primarily depends on the polarization P F = P A , while the absorption efficiency depends on another parameter (more details in annexes and on figure Devices with CoFe, NiFe and Co electrodes and spin sinks have been studied in order to measure their spin diffusion lengths and polarizations at both 300 K and 10 K. The evolutions of the spin accumulation are presented in figure As mentioned above, the polarization and spin diffusion length are linked in most experiment. Hence, variations of the couple (P F , λ F ) can hence appear from one paper to another, but the spin resistance area product ρ F λ F /(1 -P F 2 ) should be similar. Considering low resistivities, as by extracting them from the bulk materials, can also lead to differences in the obtained spin transport parameters To conclude, we studied the absorption of pure spin currents in different materials, in order to determine their spin transport parameters. We demonstrated here that spin absorption experiments are well adapted to study ferromagnetic materials. We extracted values of spin diffusion length and polarization of several ferromagnetic element and heavy metals, at both 300 K and 10 K. This study shows that this mean of analyzing is versatile, and adapted for any material possessing a short spin diffusion length. 