A two-dimensional, transient, multi-scale modeling approach is presented for predicting the magnitude and rate of percolation segregation for binary mixtures of granular material in a rotating drum and conical hopper. The model utilizes finite element method simulations to determine the bulk-level granular velocity field, which is then combined with particle-level diffusion and segregation correlations using the advection-diffusion-segregation equation. The utility of this modelling approach is demonstrated by predicting segregation patterns in a rotating drum and during the discharge of conical hoppers with different geometries. The model exhibits good quantitative accuracy in predicting DEM and experimental segregation data reported in the literature for cohesionless granular materials. Moreover, since the numerical approach does not directly model individual particles, it is expected to scale well to systems of industrial scale. Granular materials are processed in many industries, such as those that manufacture chemicals, food products, and pharmaceuticals. Unintentionally heterogeneous powder blends can result in inconsistencies during processing and unacceptable product quality. The components of a granular mixture typically have different properties, such as size and shape, which can result in the segregation of the components. Hence, it is useful to have tools for predicting segregation in order to help better design and manage unit operations and, ultimately, product quality. Many phenomena can result in segregation, such as vibration-driven percolation and convection A number of studies have modeled shear-driven percolation segregation using a continuum approach that incorporates advection due to mean flow, percolation-driven segregation, and diffusion Predictions from these studies were shown to be quantitatively accurate when compared with DEM-only simulations and experiments. A variety of flows have been studied using a continuum approach to obtain advection fields, such as chute Although good agreement with DEM simulations and experiments have been observed for several aspects of these flows, such as velocity fields and wall stress profiles Only recently have researchers begun to combine computationally predicted velocity fields with expressions for particle diffusion and segregation. For example, Bertuola et al. This work extends the model developed by Liu et al. Three-dimensional, coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian, FEM models The commercial FEM package Abaqus/Explicit V6.14 is used to perform the simulations. The geometry of the simulated rotating drum, shown in Figure The material properties needed in the MCEP model are bulk density, Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, dilation angle, material internal friction angle, and wall friction angle. All of these material parameters can be obtained from independent, standard material tests. For example, a uniaxial compression test can be used to calibrate the bulk density, Young's modulus, and Poisson's ratio, while a shear cell test can be used to calibrate the material's internal friction angle and wall friction angle. Refer to Liu et al. The Abaqus element mesh for the rotating drum is shown in Figure Figure It is worth noting that since a coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) method is used, the Lagrangian mesh, i.e., the hopper wall, is placed inside the Eulerian mesh. A penalty method is then used to prevent material penetration and, thus, to ensure mass conservation. The algorithm calculates a repulsive contact force proportional to the penetration distance between the Lagrangian mesh and the material in the Eulerian mesh There are a number of modeling procedures to overcome these severe cases, namely: (1) use a refined mesh in the region where penetration happens; (2) reduce the time step size so that a smaller penetration distance is used to calculate the contact force; and (3) round sharp corners of the Lagrangian mesh, as shown in Figure Since a quasi-2D rotating drum flow The advection-diffusion-segregation (ADS) equation is used to model the diffusion and shearinduced percolation segregation of a binary granular mixture and the resulting temporally and spatially varying concentration fields of the component materials. Specifically, the governing equation is, , where ci is the local concentration of material species i (either small, i = s, or large, i = l, particles). The parameter D is the diffusion coefficient tensor for that species, v is the local advective velocity vector of the bulk material, and vp is the percolation velocity vector. Since binary mixture is studied in the current work, D and vp represent the mixing and segregation parameters between the two species. Note that previous work has shown that the self-diffusion coefficient D is an anisotropic tensor quantity The percolation velocity vp derived by Fan et al. Here, gravity acts in the negative y-direction and percolation is dominant in the direction of gravity where S is the percolation length scale and is the magnitude of the spanwise shear rate. Note that unlike the diffusion coefficient, the percolation speed does depend on the local particle concentration. Relationships for the percolation length scale S as a function of the particle diameter and small to large particle ratio have been proposed ( Using the local mass conservation equation, adopting the relationship presented above (Eqs. ( where the sign is determined by the size of the particles, as indicated in Eq. (2). The numerical method used to solve the ADS equation in the current model is the same one used in previous works where, , , ( , , , and . The computational molecule for this scheme is shown in Figure A MATLAB program is used to iterate the finite difference scheme. A C++ code was developed to read and process the large FEM output files (.obd files). The material boundaries computed within the FEM simulation from the Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) values are used directly by the MATLAB algorithm. To ensure mass conservation of each species, the segregation and diffusion fluxes are set to zero on the boundary and, thus, material cannot exit the domain by advection. A threshold is set to ensure the material concentration value remains between zero and one, and a small time step is carefully chosen to ensure the stability of the explicit scheme. Finally, a fitting approach is applied to ensure that the material concentration of the boundary node is equal to the value of the node that is one grid point inward, a scheme commonly employed in CFD computations Mesh dependency studies were performed to ensure the convergence of the numerical results for both the FEM and the ADS equation calculations. For the FEM simulations, comparisons of the averaged velocity differences in the system were compared to determine convergence, with the details shown in Table ( ) Note that to achieve numerical convergence and stability, the number of nodes used in the second-order Tylor Lax-Wendroff scheme must be much larger than the number of nodes in the FEM mesh. A linear interpolation algorithm, implemented in MATLAB, is used to transfer data from the FEM nodes to the ADS nodes. The initial conditions used in the simulations correspond to a perfect mixture since segregation is the main focus of this work. The reader is referred to In this section, predictions from the FEM-ADS equation models are compared to previously published DEM and experimental results. Specifically, the segregation profile normal to the bed surface is examined for a rotating drum and the temporal variation in the fraction of fine particles at discharge is compared for two different hoppers. In addition, qualitative examination of the particle concentration fields are discussed as well as parametric studies. The rotating drum FEM-ADS model predictions are compared to bi-disperse particle segregation DEM results reported by Schlick et al. There are two differences between these previous DEM simulation parameters and those of the Schlick et al. work The dilation of cohesionless granular materials is usually small and, thus, a dilation angle of 0.1° was adopted, which is the minimum value allowed in Abaqus for the MCEP model. Note that even with a small dilation angle, the accumulated bed dilation will grow with large shear strains. However, for the current work, the dilation is not significant since the FEM velocity field is periodic for the rotating drum and so the accumulated shear strain is small. Similarly, for the hopper flow the total shear train is also small so that bed dilation is negligible. Simulations that involve large shear strains should consider the use of a different constitutive model that does not result in excessive bed dilation. The Poisson's ratio is very small because the powder bed is loose, with a relative density around 0.3, and thus it is very compressible. Previous work has demonstrated that small Poisson's ratios are measured at small solid fractions To verify that the FEM model predicted the flow field accurately, the surface velocity in the streamwise direction of the DEM simulation reported by Schlick et al. was compared with that of an FEM simulation using the material parameters in Table As mentioned in Section 3, it is necessary to know the diffusion coefficient D and the percolation length scale S in order to compare results from the FEM-ADS model with those from DEM simulations. These values were found in Figure Figure To provide a quantitative comparison of the two modelling approaches, the steady-state concentration of small particles is plotted in Figure Experimental work on bi-disperse particle segregation carried out by Ketterhagen et al. The Mohr-Coulomb properties used in the FEM simulations should, preferably, be calibrated from experimental characterization. Unfortunately, these values were not reported in the Ketterhagen et al. work As mentioned in Section 3, a single diffusion coefficient D, as opposed to an anisotropic tensor, leads to accurate predictions in segregation-dominated flows The percolation length scale S is calibrated to one set of experimental data and used to predict other experimental configurations. Specifically, the aim is to reproduce the experimentallyobserved normalized mass fraction of fines xi/xf, where xi is the mass fraction of fines collected at discharge in a given sample and xf is the initial mass fraction of fines in the bed. Figure Finally, the FEM-ADS model is further compared to experiments performed in the 55° hopper with a well-mixed initial fill, but different initial fines mass fractions, namely 20% and 50%. The same large and small particles are used in these experiments. The same diffusion coefficient (D = 2.5 mm 2 /s for 55° hopper) and percolation length scale (S = 2 mm) as used previously are used in these new simulations. Figure A two-dimensional, transient modeling approach for predicting binary segregation in particulate systems was presented. This model is an extension of previously published works The FEM-ADS model segregation predictions were quantitatively accurate for both systems. A significant advantage of this multi-scale modeling approach is that it is expected to be more computationally efficient than DEM-only models for industrially-relevant system sizes We close by pointing out future research directions and extensions of the multi-scale modeling approach. First, the current model is one-way coupled, which means that the material concentration is computed after the FEM simulation is completed. A two-way coupled model should be developed if materials with significantly different properties are used. Second, future work should focus on expanding the current multi-scale segregation model to three-dimensions 