We investigate and experimentally observe the existence of topologically protected interface modes in a one-dimensional mechanical lattice, and we report on the effect of nonlinearities on topological protection. The lattice consists of a one-dimensional array of spinners with nearest neighbor coupling resulting from magnetic interactions. The distance between the spinners is spatially modulated to obtain a diatomic configuration, and to produce a non-trivial interface by breaking spatial inversion symmetry. For small amplitudes of motion, the interactions are approximately linear, and the system supports topologically protected interface modes at frequencies inside the bulk bandgaps of the lattice. Nonlinearities induced by increasing amplitude of motion cause the interface modes to shift outside the bandgaps and merge with the bulk bands. The resulting edge-to-bulk transition causes the extinction of the topologically protected interface mode and extends it to the entire length of the chain. Such transition is predicted by analytical calculations and verified by experimental observations. The paper thus investigates the existence of topologically protected interface modes obtained through broken spatial inversion symmetry, and documents their lack of robustness in the presence of nonlinearities. Notable efforts have been devoted to the investigation of topological protection in condensed matter Topological protection can be achieved through time-reversal symmetry breaking, which generally requires the employment of active elements that effectively bias the interactions within the media. Examples include circulators in optomechanics In systems that involve active elements, topological protection may be tailored or removed by control of such elements. In passive systems, the control of TP modes must instead rely on the inherent dynamic behavior of the lattice. Thus, nonlinearities appear as natural choices to pursue the objective of controlling and tailoring TP modes. Indeed, the vast majority of studies in the field of topological protection is limited to linear systems. While some theoretical investigations involving topological transitions have been recently presented Nonlinearities, for example, enable uneven distributions of the wave energy, which in turn may lead to nonreciprocal wave propagation The theoretical analysis of nonlinearities and their effect on a topologically non-trivial interface is presented in Following this introduction (Sec. I), Sec. II is devoted to the description of the considered lattice, its main physical parameters and the study of its corresponding analytical model, both in linear and nonlinear regimes. The experimental investigations are described in Sec. III. Finally, Sec. IV summarizes the key findings of the study and highlights potential extensions. Three Appendices supplement the work. The investigations on TP and nonlinearities presented in A simplified model is formulated according to the configuration of Fig. According to the approximations made and the derivations reported in the Appendix A, the equations of motion for the i-th unit cell can be expressed as follows: where I is the inertia of each spinner, k θa , k θ b , k ta , k t b are the linear interaction coefficients, while γ a , γ b define the nonlinear interaction coefficients. The equations for the inverted unit cell are formally identical, with the proper switching of the subscripts, and are reported in Appendix A for brevity. Analysis of the equations reveals that the motion of each spinner is governed by its rotary inertia, and by the magnetic interactions that in the linear regime manifest themselves as a term that is proportional to the rotation of each individual spinner. This effectively produces the effect of a torsional spring connected to the ground. An additional term couples neighboring spinners through a torque that is approximately proportional to the relative displacement between neighboring magnets in the direction transverse to the spinners chain, here measured by the sum of their respective rotation angles. We first investigate the underlying linear behavior of the lattice, by considering small angular perturbations and neglecting the nonlinear terms in Eq. This lattice features two dispersion branches separated by three bandgaps (Fig. The first bandgap starts at zero frequency and extends up to a frequency cut-off at μ = 0, which is the result of the grounding constants k θ . Breaking of spatial inversion symmetry by inverting the order of the distance modulations, produces dispersion curves that differ in terms of the associated topological invariants. Specifically, the topological properties of the second and third bandgaps can be switched by permutation of the intra-cell and inter-cell connecting springs, i.e. inverting the unit cell, or by considering k t,a > k t,b or vice versa, i.e. k t,b > k t,a . The topological invariant, the Zak phase Next, we evaluate the effect of increasing amplitude on the eigenvalues and associated eigenmodes of the system. To this end, we consider the governing equations for the finite N + N = 40 system with interface, which are obtained from the assembly of equations in Eq. ( where Θ = [Θ a,1 , Θ b,1 , ..., Θ a,N , Θ b,N ] T is a vector including the complex amplitudes of all angular degrees of freedom of the lattice, K(Θ) denotes the effective stiffness matrix and θ = Θe jωt . For low amplitudes |Θ| 1, the stiffness matrix K is independent of Θ and the solution is straightforward. However, when nonlinearities play a role the effective stiffness matrix depends on the amplitudes of motion, which requires an iterative analysis. Specifically, we use a Newton-Raphson scheme To write the nonlinear governing equations in canonical form, Eq. ( This system of 2N equations has 2N + 1 unknown variables {Θ, ω}, and therefore infinite solutions. To extract specific {Θ, ω} pairs, we impose particular values to the total amplitude of the chain A, defined as the L 2 norm of Θ. Thus we add the additional equation |Θ| 2 -A = 0, where A has a numeric value. When A → 0 is imposed, the linear solution is recovered. We start by solving for a small value of A (e.g. A = 10 -3 ), and we use the linear eigenvector-eigenvalue pair {Θ l , ω l } as initial guess. The linear eigenvector Θ l is simply scaled as Θ g = Θ l /|Θ l | 2 A and the linear eigenvalue ω l is used as is. This way we ensure that the initial guess Θ g is the eigenvector of the linear problem and that its total amplitude The algorithm yields a new solution that is then used as the initial guess for a slightly higher value of A, and so on. With this procedure we calculate the evolution of the eigenvalue-eigenvector pair for increasing values of total amplitude A. The amplitude of applied force f 0 is calculated as the first harmonic of the instantaneous force measured by the load cell. Second and higher harmonics of all the measurements have been found more than an order of magnitude lower than the first harmonic. Each experiment produces a triplet of values: the amplitude of the response Θ 22 , its frequency, and the amplitude of the applied force f 0 . Mapping these values through a series of experiments leads to a surface that correlates frequency, amplitude of response and amplitude of applied force. The surface can be represented as contours that relate frequency and amplitude of response at constant applied force. In this representation, resonance frequencies are identified as points of minimum required force, i.e. as the valley of these surface. The results are presented in Fig. Since the shaker is controlled in open-loop, we control the amplitude and frequency of the harmonic electronic signal sent to the shaker that imposes the motion θ 1 = Θ 1 e iωt , and its velocity is measured with the LDV, from which the amplitude of its first harmonic Θ 1 is calculated. Then, for each experiment, we get a triplet of values: the amplitude of the response Θ 1 , its frequency, and the amplitude of the applied force f 0 . The experiment is repeated over a range of imposed amplitudes from 0 to 0.04 rad and frequencies from 30 to 43 Hz. Mapping the results produces a surface that correlates frequency, amplitude of response and amplitude of applied force. The contours of this surface correlate frequency and amplitude of response for constant amplitude of excitation force f 0 . For this range of amplitudes and based on the assumptions described in Appendix A, the governing equation of the forced response is equivalent to that of an undamped Duffing oscillator, where f (t) is the external force. The response amplitude for harmonic excitation f (t) = f 0 cos(ωt) can be obtained analytically from [30] where A is the amplitude of the response in θ mm, which leads to a rotary inertia value of I = 37.2 Kg mm 2 including the magnets. We calculate the inertia using meticulous measurements of the volumes and masses of all the parts conforming each spinner. We measured all the geometries in spinner: the main body, the pegs, the bearings and the bearing balls. Then we created a detailed CAD model and calculated the volumetric inertias (m 5 ) of three different parts: the spinner body and pegs, the bearing outer cylinder, and the bearing balls. Those were obtained by numerical integration about the axis of gyration I V = (r 2 i δV i ), where r i is the distance between the center of the i-th differential volume δV i and the axis of gyration. We also calculated the volumes and weighted the parts separately. Assuming that the materials are homogeneous, we estimate the densities rho m of each part m. We calculate the mass inertia by multiplying GmbH. This is a single point LDV, so we repeat the experiments 40 times and move the LDV device manually between locations to measure the motion of all the spinners. The DAQ is used to trigger the excitations and measurements always with the same time interval between them, which ensures that the steady-state is reached and that phase is synchronized between experiments. The signal imposed to the shaker is either white noise over the frequency range of interest (0 -80 Hz) to provide the response of the system in the frequency domain, or harmonic for steady-state measurements. The signal is properly amplified to obtain the targeted amplitudes of displacement in the shaker. These amplitudes are monotonically but not proportionally related to the amplitude of the electronic signal that excites the shaker. Therefore, we can increase and decrease the amplitude of motion Θ 20 imposed to spinner n = 20 without knowing its exact value a priori. The exact value of the motion is calculated a posteriori 1: Experimental values of constants k θ and k t as a function of distance between magnets d 0 = D -2R -h m .