Exceptional points (EPs) are singularities that arise in non-Hermitian physics. Current research efforts focus only on systems supporting isolated EPs characterized by increased sensitivity to external perturbations, which makes them potential candidates for building next generation optical sensors. On the downside, this feature is also the Achilles heel of these devices: they are very sensitive to fabrication errors and experimental uncertainties. To overcome this problem, we introduce a new design concept for implementing photonic EPs that combine the robustness required for practical use together with their hallmark sensitivity. Particularly, our proposed structure exhibits a hypersurface of Jordan EPs (JEPs) embedded in a larger space, and having the following peculiar features: (1) A large class of undesired perturbations shift the operating point along the exceptional surface (ES), thus leaving the system at another EP which explains the robustness; (2) Perturbations due to back reflection/scattering force the operating point out of the ES, leading to enhanced sensitivity. Importantly, our proposed geometry is relatively easy to implement using standard photonics components and the design concept can be extended to other physical platforms such as microwave or acoustics. Exceptional points (EP) are peculiar singularities that arise in non-Hermitian Hamiltonians when two or more eigenstates coalesce In this work, we present a new non-Hermitian photonic structure that exhibits an exceptional hypersurface (ES) embedded in a higher dimension parameter space. This, in turn, provides additional degrees of freedom that can be exploited to combine robustness with enhanced sensitivity. Particularly, robustness can be achieved if the system's response is tailored such that a large class of fabrication errors and experimental uncertainties shift the operating point along the ES. On the other hand, enhanced sensitivity can arise if the perpetration due to the measurements forces the spectrum away from the ES, causing large splitting of the resonant frequency (as compared to that associated with diabolic points To this end, we consider the structure depicted schematically in Fig. where ãcw,ccw are the field amplitudes of the clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) modes, ω 0 is the resonant frequency, γ is the cavity loss rate which can be decomposed into intrinsic absorption, radiation loss, and loss to the waveguide (i.e. γ = γ abs + γ rad + μ 2 /2), (see Supplementary Note A for details). In the absence of any reflective perturbations, the system exhibits an EP. Any variations of the coupling coefficients or the resonant frequency of the cavity will still leave the system at an EP. On the other hand, if a nanoscatterer (or any other form of reflective perturbations) come to the vicinity of the ring, it will introduce a bidirectional coupling between the clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) waves and shifts the system away from the EP which in turn will leave a fingerprint on the emission spectrum of the system (if used in the lasing regime) or the power scattering spectrum (if operated in the amplification regime). and μ is the coupling rate between the resonator and the waveguide. In addition, α = r m exp(i2φ 3 ) where r m is the field reflection coefficients at the mirror and φ 3 = β w L 3 . Here β w is the propagation constant of the waveguide and the distances L 3 are depicted in Fig. 2. Note that the above form of the Hamiltonian does not necessarily imply that the system is nonreciprocity. The eigenvalues of H ES as written in the bases exp(-iωt), together with the associated eigenvectors ã1,2 are given by: ( The spectrum of the Hamiltonian H ES features an EP with two identical eigenmodes characterized by a finite CCW component and a null CW component. Importantly, this is even true for any value of ω 0 , γ and αμ 2 . In other words, there is hypersurface spanned by all possible values of these parameters where the system remains at an EP. For instance, if the fabricated system has extra (less) loss, stronger (weaker) coupling to the waveguide or a shift in its resonance frequency from the original targeted values, the system will be still located at an EP without the need for any external tuning. Only perturbations that introduce differential loss or frequency mismatch between the two modes (CW and CCW) can affect the system performance. However, these perturbations do not arise naturally in our proposed design since any change in the shape/size of the resonator or its coupling to the waveguide will affect both modes symmetrically. This unique feature provides unprecedented robustness that cannot be achieved in standard non-Hermitian systems that rely on isolated EPs in the design parameter space. However, in the presence of a nanoscatterer located in the vicinity of the ring resonator, the interaction between the scatterer and the evanescent field of the optical modes introduces a bidirectional coupling between the CW and CCW modes, which are described by additional corrections of the same order to both off-diagonal matrix elements of H ES , say . If we further assume that is much smaller than other matrix elements, it is straightforward to show that the splitting of the eigenfrequency is In standard waveguide-coupled microring resonators operating at a DP, this splitting will be rather . Thus, in addition to its robustness, the proposed system is expected to also provide enhanced sensitivity. In order to put this discussion on a more solid ground while at the same time elucidate on the relevant experimental parameters, we study the above structure using the scattering matrix method (SMM) By doing so, we obtain (see Appendix B for details): where φ = φ 1 + φ 2 and φ = φ 2 + φ 3 , with φ 1,2 = β r L 1,2 and φ 3 = β w L 3 . In general, the values of propagation constants associated with the ring and straight waveguides, β r,w , can be complex with the imaginary parts accounting for the possible radiation and material loss as well as the gain (loss due to coupling to the waveguide is treated separately). For reasons that will be clear shortly, we are particularly interested in the case of active devices where the microring exhibits enough optical gain to bring the system at or close to the lasing condition (for completeness we treat the passive case in Appendix C). Under either of these conditions, the lasing or the transmission spectrum (respectively) is dominated by the the poles of the power scattering coefficient T = |s out /s in | 2 , or equivalently the zeros of D. To characterize the performance of the proposed structure, we thus study the behavior of D as a function of the particle reflectivity r p and the input frequency parametrized by φ (we do not take the waveguide dispersion into account at this moment), i.e. D ≡ D(r p , φ). For any set of design parameters and a specific value of r p , the lasing conditions is achieved for values of φ ≡ φ D satisfying the equation D(r p , φ D ) = 0, which gives exp(iφ ± D ) = τ -1 (t p ± i r 2 p -exp(2iφ )r m κ 2 r p ). The maximum frequency splitting ∆φ ≡ Re[φ + D -φ - D ] occurs when exp[2iRe(φ )] = -1. As a side comment, we note that Im[φ D ] = -κ 2 /2, which implies the lasing threshold occurs when the gain is enough to compensate for the radiation/material loss as well as the loss due to coupling to the waveguide, as one would expect. By writing r m = r m × | exp(2iφ )| we find: In Eq. ( ∆φ DP = 2r p . Equation ( Intuitively, as the perturbation due to the scatterer shifts the system far away from the EP, the extra sensitivity is lost. In the active scattering regime, when the gain brings the system relatively close to the lasing point but remains below the lasing threshold, the transmission peaks can be obtained by solving Eq. ( Having discussed the essential features of the proposed structure, we now confirm our predictions by performing two-dimensional full-wave simulations In conclusion, we have proposed a new class of non-Hermitian sensors that operate at exceptional surfaces as opposed to isolated exceptional points. This new paradigm provides more degrees of freedom that can be exploited to combine the robustness needed for reallife applications together with the enhanced sensitivity associated with exceptional points. Towards this goal, we have also proposed a specific device design that can be implemented by standard photonics technology. To establish the superior performance of the proposed structure, we have investigated its operation by using the scattering matrix formalism, showing that it can function both in the lasing and amplifying modes. These predictions have been confirmed by performing two-dimensional full wave simulations using a realistic material platform. Additionally, we also expect our proposed system to demonstrate some robustness against the type of thermal fluctuations studied recently in As we discuss in Appendix F, initial estimations indicate that the operation will not affect if the temperature vary by ∼ ±20K. Another important aspect is the performance of this device in the quantum limit. Very recently, it was shown that non-Hermitian Hamiltonians with unidirectional coupling can exhibit superior performance in the quantum regime We anticipate that our results will open a host of new possibilities for sensing applications using practical non-Hermitian devices. Importantly, the proposed design concept presented here can be implemented in other physical platforms such as acoustics or microwaves. calculated at the coupling regions (dashed lines of Fig. By assuming r m ∼ 1 and exp(2iφ ) ∼ -1, the reflection vanishes (i.e. v left = 0) when: exp(iφ N ) = τ 1 + r p κ 2 (t p ± i r 2 p + κ 2 r p ) (C3) As expected, Im(φ N ) = κ 2 2 which gives the condition for critical coupling which is very small and does not affect the performance significantly. Note that the thermal expansion of silica, ≈ 0.5 × 10 -6 K -1 , can be safely neglected. Thus our analysis shows that a temperature variation within ±20 K around the optimal operation point can be easily tolerated by our device.