Phonon modes of the spin crossover complex [Fe(phen)2(NCS)2] Phonon modes are known for playing an important role during thermal phase transition in many materials. The softening of optical modes can lead to symmetry breaking, whereas the change in frequencies between phases is responsible for a vibrational contribution to the entropy change, which may drive phase transition. This is also true for transition metal complexes, which undergo spin-state switching from low-spin (LS) to highspin (HS) state It may also open new possibilities for driving spin conversion by vibrational excitation Single crystals of [Fe(phen)2(NCS)2] compound were obtained by slow diffusion as indicated by Real et al. Before discussing and interpreting IR, THz and Raman spectroscopy results with DFT calculations, a discussion about the symmetry of the [Fe(phen)2(NCS)2] molecular and crystalline structures of this SCO material is required. Figure The [Fe(phen)2(NCS)2] SCO material crystallises in the Pbcn space group. Figure The low frequency modes in the THz range are known to have an important contribution to phase transition at thermal equilibrium, as their contribution to vibrational entropy is high. They also play a central role in the ultrafast structural dynamics involved in the LIESST phenomena. Indeed, the activation and damping of the molecular breathing mode and its coupling to torsion and lower frequency modes is the key feature of this process explaining both efficiency and speed Depending on the probe polarization (parallel or perpendicular to the molecular axis) the breathing (110 cm -1 ) and the bending (85 cm -1 ) modes can be detected during LIESST, as the photoexcited LS molecule reaches the HS state. The breathing mode, related with the elongation of the average Fe-N bond length, is activated first and energy is then transferred to the torsion of the N-Fe-N angles The totally symmetric breathing mode (Ag) is a Raman active mode, associated with the in-phase breathing of all the molecules in the crystal (Fig. This combined experimentaltheoretical study illustrates that some lattice phonon modes in molecular crystals made of several symmetry-equivalent molecules in the unit cell, can be viewed as a combination of identical intra-molecular vibrations, in phase or out-of-phase from molecules to molecules. These combinations, with respect to the different symmetry operators of the space group, correspond to various modes of different symmetries. Compared to the simple view used to describe vibrations in SCO materials from a single molecular perspective, the present study illustrates how tacking into account molecular packing and symmetry allows for a complete description of the phonon modes. This is true for high frequency modes like the NCS stretching phonons, for which 8 lattice modes exist and 7 are spectroscopically active. It also stands for some lower frequency modes like breathing or bending modes, which may be symmetric or antisymmetric. The duplication of modes of different symmetry in the crystal, compared to the isolated molecule, may play an important role for the description of the vibrational entropy contribution to phase transition at thermal equilibrium. The results also show that polarization-resolved TD-THz spectroscopy performed on single crystals allows for a clear identification of the symmetry of the phonon modes. More interestingly, some of these modes are known to be strongly coupled to the change of spin state. With the development of intense and pulsed THz and IR lasers, allowing for non-linear phononics, Table 