The energy landscape of carbon is exceedingly complex, hosting diverse and important metastable phases, including diamond, fullerenes, nanotubes and graphene. Searching for structures, especially those with large unit cells, in this landscape is challenging. Here we use a combined stochastic search strategy employing two algorithms (AIRSS and RG 2 ) to apply connectivity constraints to unit cells containing up to 100 carbon atoms. We uncover three low energy carbon polymorphs (Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d) with new topologies, containing 32, 36 and 94 atoms in their primitive cells, respectively. Their energies relative to diamond are 96 meV/atom, 131 meV/atom and 112 meV/atom, respectively, which suggests potential metastability. These three carbon allotropes are mechanically and dynamically stable, insulating carbon crystals with superhard mechanical properties. The I43d structure possesses a direct band gap of 7.25 eV, which is the widest gap in the carbon allotrope family. Silicon, germanium and tin versions of Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d also show energetic, dynamical and mechanical stability. The computed electronic properties show that they are potential materials for semiconductor and photovoltaic applications. The group IV elements carbon and silicon are central to life and technology respectively. Carbon can form many allotropes in addition to graphite and cubic diamond (cd). For example, quasi zero-dimensional fullerenes, quasi onedimensional nanotubes, quasi two-dimensional graphene and other three-dimensional crystals such as hexagonal diamond (hd), chaoite 1-3 and amorphous carbon. In the past decades, hypothetical crystalline structures of carbon Silicon, germanium and tin adopt similar structures to carbon, and have also attracted many theoretical efforts to explore their polymorphs The development of rapid and reliable codes for the computation of material properties, combined with the advent of algorithms for the prediction of crystal structures The cold compression of carbon nanotube (CNT) bundles 41 is another route to synthesize novel carbon phases, and is an effective theoretical way to design new carbon crystals The P6/mmm structure possesses relatively high symmetry (No. 191) in comparison with Pbam-32. There are 36 carbon atoms in the crystalline cell of P6/mmm and only 4 of them are inequivalent. The P6/mmm structure contains 5-fold, 6-fold and 8-fold topological carbon-rings, which is similar to the previously proposed low-energy M585 phase I43d is a topologically interesting cubic carbon phase with very high symmetry (No. 220). It is a complex structure containing 94 carbon atoms in its primitive cell (188 atoms in the conventional cubic cell). Only six of them are inequivalent. Such a large-sized and low-energy carbon structure presents a challenge to crystal structure prediction techniques In Fig. The energetic stabilities of Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d as carbon indicate that they possess relatively higher probabilities to be synthesized. However, their dynamical stabilities and elastic stabilities should be determined. The phonon dispersions of Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d as carbon are computed (see methods in the supplemental material 39 ) and plotted in Fig. The electronic properties of these three new structures of carbon are investigated by both the PBE and HSE06 methods. The calculated band-gaps are summarized in Tab. I and Tab. S2 together with those of some selected tetrahedral struc-We can see that the PBE-based band gaps of the carbon Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d are 4.76, 3.55 and 5.91 eV. The band gap of 5.91 eV for I43d is about 0.7 eV larger than that of the previously proposed I-4 (5.25 eV) In view of their tetrahedral topological atomic configurations, the crystalline Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d structures are likely in silicon, germanium and tin. After optimizing as silicon, germanium and tin, the topological characteristics of Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d are maintained. The lattice constants and bond lengths are correspondingly enlarged in comparison with those in carbon and the bond angles are well conserved. We have summarized all the structural information, including space groups, lattice constants, inequivalent atomic positions of Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d, as carbon, silicon, germanium and tin structures, in the supplemental tables 39 . The total energies, equilibrium volumes, PBE-based and HSE06-based band gaps of the Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d as silicon, germanium and tin are summarized in Tab. I and Tab. S2. The total energies of the silicon-version Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d relative to cd silicon are 33, 46 and 39 meV/atom, respectively. These energies are comparable to those of the previously proposed Pbam-24 (29 meV/atom) The electronic properties of these three new structures as silicon, germanium and tin are also investigated by both the PBE and HSE06 methods. Their corresponding band gaps are summarized in Tab. I and Tab. S2. The HSE06-based band structures and density of states of these three structures (Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d) for silicon are shown in Fig. The germanium Pbam-32 structure possesses a direct PBE band gap of 0.08 eV. This band gap is 0.66 eV in HSE06 as shown in Fig. In summary, three tetrahedral networks (Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d) uncovered by a stochastic search strategy using the AIRSS and RG 2 -codes, are investigated as carbon, silicon, germanium and tin structures through first-principles computations. The newly identified Pbam-32, P6/mmm and I43d structures contain 32, 36 and 94 atoms in their primitive cells, respectively. For carbon, their energies relative to cd are 96 meV/atom, 131 meV/atom and 112 meV/atom, respectively, showing good energetic stability. They are further confirmed to be dynamically and elastically stable superhard insulators, which are expected to be synthesized experimentally. I43d is a wide-gap semiconductor with a 7.25 eV gap, which is the widest know band gap of any carbon solid. These three new structures are also confirmed to be viable phases for silicon, germanium and tin, also showing remarkable energetic stability and positive dynamical and elastic stabilities. Their calculated electronic properties are suitable for semiconductor and photovoltaic applications. A. El Goresy and G. Donnay, Science 161, 363 (1968).