In the present work, we demonstrate for the first time the outstanding dynamic mechanical properties of nanoquasicrystalline Al 93 Fe 3 Cr 2 Ti 2 at.% alloy and composites. Unlike most crystalline aluminium-based alloys, this alloy and composites exhibit substantial strain rate sensitivity and retain much of their ductility at high rates of strain. This opens new pathways for use in safety-critical materials where impact resistance is required. Quasicrystals were first observed in rapidly solidified Al-Mn-(Fe/Cr) alloys by Daniel Shechtman We studied the dynamic mechanical performance of a quaternary quasicrystalline Al 93 Fe 3 Cr 2 Ti 2 at.% alloy (hereafter denoted QC) and the composites obtained by mixing 10 and 20 vol.% pure Al fibres into a matrix of QC alloy (referred to as QC-10 and QC-20 respectively). Rapid solidification is required for quasicrystals production in the selected alloy (atomisation has been previously shown to produce a nano-quasicrystalline structure Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) was performed on a Philips CMS-X4 W-filament microscope. Samples were prepared with a Gatan dimple grinder and Gatan Precision Ion Polishing System. The quasicrystalline particles were too small for the smallest selected area aperture to be used for electron beam diffraction. Convergent beam diffraction (CBD) was performed instead using the smallest spot sizes, which when converged would allow diffraction patterns to be taken from microstructural features as small as ~40 nm. Manual measurements of particle sizes were performed on bright-field images for maximum accuracy over ~120 measurements, which were then plotted as a graph and fitted to a Gaussian distribution. Results are quoted as mean value ± full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the distribution. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to measure chemical compositions of quasicrystals and their surrounding matrix with an Oxford Instruments EDX detector. Values quoted are mean ± standard deviation obtained over 10 measurements in randomly distributed locations on the 3mm TEM disc. Tensile and compressive quasi-static tests were performed at a strain rate of 10 -4 s -1 at room temperature. Tensile quasi-static tests were performed by Westmoreland plc using an Instron servo-hydraulic mechanical testing machine and measuring strain by means of an extensometer. Compressive quasi-static tests were performed in-house using an Instron servo-hydraulic testing machine in displacement control. In compression cylindrical specimens were used, of diameter 2 mm and height 2 mm. The number of tests was limited by the volume of material available but at least 2-4 repeats of each test were performed. Quasi-static tests were highly repeatable, with scatter less than 1%. Dynamic tests were performed using a split-Hopkinson bar set-up available in the University of Oxford. Test pieces were marked using evenly spaced markers and the tests were filmed by means of a high-speed camera. Strain was measured through digital image correlation (using the marks as references). Between 2-4 repeats of each test were performed and representative graphs were selected and displayed. Dog-bone shaped threaded round-section samples of ASTM standard size E8/E 8M sub-size 4 (diameter 4 mm, gauge length 16 mm) were used in tension. Dynamic equilibrium in the tensile tests was achieved only in a small number of experiments, and only just prior to the specimen failure; for this reason the measured tensile stress versus strain curves are not presented, but only the measured tensile strength is reported; the average strain rates indicated are obtained by averaging the measured strain rate between the point of dynamic equilibrium and the time at which peak stress is achieved. Specimens of diameter 3 mm x 6 mm were used in compression. During dynamic compression tests, dynamic equilibrium was achieved towards the end of the elastic response. Detailed microstructural characterisation was performed. Phase identification within samples of the QC alloy and QC-10 and QC-20 composites was performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), displayed in Figure TEM micrographs of the icosahedral quasicrystalline particles and their respective 5-fold symmetry convergent beam diffraction pattern (CBDP) are shown in Figure Localised plastic deformation initiated along shear bands inclined at approximately 45° from the direction of loading, corresponding to a plateau in the true stress-strain curves, shown in Figure Figure 