In this work we test graphene electrodes in nano-metric channel n-type Organic Field Effect Transistors (OFETs) based on thermally evaporated thin films of perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid diimide derivative (PDIF-CN2). By a thorough comparison with short channel transistors made with reference gold electrodes, we found that the output characteristics of the graphene-based devices respond linearly to the applied biases, in contrast with the supra-linear trend of gold-based transistors. Moreover, short channel effects are considerably suppressed in graphene electrodes devices. More specifically, current on/off ratios independent of the channel length (L) and enhanced response for high longitudinal biases are demonstrated for L down to ~140 nm. These results are rationalized taking into account the morphological and electronic characteristics of graphene, showing that the use of graphene electrodes may help to overcome the problem of Space Charge Limited Current (SCLC) in short channel OFETs. Organic electronics have gathered a great deal of attention due to the possibility to fabricate flexible and low cost devices for several applications. the overall performances of the devices at the nano-metric scale, despite the fact that the maximization of the output currents, switching frequencies and minimum supply voltages are directly related to the reduction of the active channel length L In this work, we report on the fabrication and characterization of short channel n-type OFETs with graphene electrodes and with channel length L ranging from 140 nm to 1 μm, with a fixed channel width (W=2μm). For direct comparison, devices with an analogous architecture have been fabricated using standard gold contacts in the same L interval. As the organic semiconductor, we used a perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid diimide derivative, also known as PDIF-CN2 (Polyera ActiveInk TM N1100), which has gained great attention in the last years due to its enhanced air stability and excellent n-type transporting properties As the electrode material, we employed polycrystalline monolayer CVD graphene grown and transferred with a wet-approach, as reported in Graphene sheets under analysis are found to be heavily p-type doped, as it can be seen from the transport characteristics of micrometric strips (W=2m, L=4m) used as a benchmark (Figure Contact effects are indeed known to be not uniquely dictated by the energetic alignment at the electrode/organic Schottky interface, but morphological as well as geometrical contributions must be considered too. In fact, the correlation between the molecular crystal domain orientation on the electrodes and the resulting work function and injection barrier has been studied for different configurations, in particular pentacene on graphene See supplementary materials for further details on the estimation of work function of graphene and electric characterization of the nano-devices.