A potential strategy for controlling stratification in a drying suspension of bidisperse particles is studied using molecular dynamics simulations. When the suspension is maintained at a constant temperature during fast drying, it can exhibit "small-on-top" stratification with an accumulation (depletion) of smaller (larger) particles in the top region of the drying film, consistent with the prediction of current theories based on diffusiophoresis. However, when only the region near the substrate is thermalized at a constant temperature, a negative temperature gradient develops in the suspension because of evaporative cooling at the liquid-vapor interface. Since the associated thermophoresis is stronger for larger nanoparticles, a higher fraction of larger nanoparticles migrate to the top of the drying film at fast evaporation rates. As a result, stratification is converted to "large-on-top". Very strong "small-on-top" stratification can be produced with a positive thermal gradient in the drying suspension. Here we explore a way to produce a positive thermal gradient by thermalizing the vapor at a temperature higher than that of the solvent. Possible experimental approaches to realize various thermal gradients in a suspension undergoing solvent evaporation, and thus to produce different stratification states in the drying film, are suggested. The drying of colloidal suspensions has been studied for several decades. The key ingredient of the diffusiophoretic model is that the cross-interaction between the large and small particles has asymmetric effects on the phoretic drift of particles and drives the larger ones away from the interfacial region faster than the smaller ones. The approach of Martín-Fabiani et al. can be used for systems where the particle size can be tuned with external stimuli. We performed MD simulations on a suspension of a bidisperse mixture of nanoparticles. The entire system consists of ∼ 7 × 10 6 LJ beads, 200 LNPs, and 6400 SNPs. The system is placed in a rectangular simulation cell of dimensions L x × L y × L z , where L x = L y = 201σ, and L z = 477σ. The liquid-vapor interface is in the x-y plane, in which periodic boundary conditions are imposed. In the initial suspension, the thickness of the liquid film is about 304σ. The volume fractions of LNPs and SNPs in the initial dispersion are φ l = 0.068 and φ s = 0.034, respectively. Along the z-axis, all particles are confined in the simulation cell by two walls at z = 0 and z = L z . The particle-wall interaction is given by a LJ-like 9-3 potential, 3 , where the interaction strength W = 2.0 , h is the distance between the particle center and the wall, and h c is the cutoff length of the potential. For the solvent beads, D W = 1σ and h c = 3σ (0.8583σ) at the lower (upper) wall. With these parameters, the liquid solvent completely wets the lower wall while the upper wall is purely repulsive. For the nanoparticles, both walls are repulsive with D W = d/2 and h c = 0.8583D W , where d is the nanoparticle diameter. To model evaporation of the solvent, a rectangular box of dimensions L x × L y × 20σ at the top of the simulation cell is designated as a deletion zone and a certain number (ζ) of vapor beads of the solvent in this zone are removed every τ , where τ = σ(m/ ) 1/2 is the reduced LJ unit of time. In this paper, two evaporation rates ζ = 30 and ζ = 5 are adopted. At these rates, the liquid-vapor interface retreats during evaporation at almost a constant speed, v e . The value of v e is determined for each evaporating suspension by directly computing the location of the interface as a function of time. The diffusion coefficients of nanoparticles are calculated with direct, independent simulations and the results are D l = 3.61 × 10 -3 σ 2 /τ for LNPs and D s = 2.11 × 10 -2 σ 2 /τ for SNPs at the initial volume fractions of nanoparticles prior to evaporation (see Supporting Information). The ratio D s /D l = 5.8 is higher than α = 4, the value expected from the Stokes-Einstein relation, which may be due to the finite concentrations of nanoparticles. The Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) All results are presented below in the LJ units. Here we provide a rough mapping of these units to real ones in Table I by mapping the LJ solvent adopted in this paper to a liquid with a critical point similar to water, a typical solvent used in drying experiments. mapping are provided in the Supporting Information. Our goal is to demonstrate that a temperature gradient and the associated thermophoretic effect can be used to control stratification in a drying suspension of a polydisperse mixture of nanoparticles. We have previously shown that particles of different sizes have different thermophoretic responses to a thermal gradient. For Scheme A, the systems are labeled as T l 1.0 ζ y where the subscript y denotes the value of ζ. For Scheme B, T 1.0 ζ y is used to emphasize that the entire system is maintained at 1.0 /k B during evaporation. For Scheme C, the systems are labeled as T l 1.0 T v x ζ y , where x indicates the value of T v . All systems studied are listed in Table We also studied systems with ζ = 5 and T v < T l , which show negative thermal gradients in the suspension and thermophoresis similar to those in T l 1.0 ζ 30 and T l 1.0 ζ 5 where evaporative cooling occurs. However, we observed condensation of droplets in the vapor phase if T v is made lower than the temperature at the liquid- vapor interface in Scheme A with the same ζ. Despite this unwanted effect, cooling the vapor at a temperature lower than that of the suspension could be one experimental approach to apply a negative thermal gradient for systems that evaporate slowly or for which the effect of evaporative cooling is not as strong as that for the model LJ liquid employed in our simulations. The last six systems in Table In the main text we focus on the first five systems in Table When all solvent beads in the simulation cell are thermalized during evaporation, the temperature in the entire system is constant and no thermal gradients are produced. Thermophoresis is thus suppressed and only diffusiophoresis remains. The expected outcome is "smallon-top" stratification for Pe l Pe s > 1. The results from T 1.0 ζ 30 and T 1.0 ζ 5 confirm this prediction, as shown in Figs. The last row of Fig. Consequently, there is a positive temperature gradient in the liquid solvent along the film's normal direction toward the interface. The solvent density develops a negative gradient and the accompanied thermophoresis drives LNPs toward the substrate. As a result, thermophoretic and diffusiophoretic effects are in synergy and strong "small-on-top" stratification is generated, which is apparent in Fig. To understand quantitatively the stratification phenomena in drying particle suspensions, we plot the temperature and density profiles in Fig. The local density of solvent or nanoparticles is computed as ρ i (z) = n i (z)m i /(L x L y σ), where n i (z) represents the number of particles in the spatial bin [z -0.5σ, z + 0.5σ] and m i is the particle mass. A nanoparticles straddling several bins is partitioned based on its partial volume in each bin. When computing the solvent density, the volume occupied by the nanoparticles is subtracted. The second row of Fig. A positive thermal gradient and a negative density gradient of the solvent can be seen clearly in Figs. It is expected that for systems thermalized with Scheme C and T v < T l , a negative thermal gradient develops in the liquid solvent, similar to the evaporative cooling case in Scheme A. Consequently, systems under Scheme C with T v < T l could display "large-ontop" stratification as long as the thermal gradient is large enough. These cases are in fact observed and discussed in detail in the Supporting Information, where some complications are noted related to droplet condensation in a vapor that is thermalized at low temperatures. Even for T v T l , the thermal gradient in the drying suspension can still be negative if evaporative cooling is strong enough. This is the case for T l 1.0 T v 1.05 ζ 5 and T l 1.0 T v 1.0 ζ 5 (see Supporting Information). To quantify stratification, we define an order parameter using the full density profiles of nanoparticles. z in with i ∈ {l, s}. The order parameter of stratification is then computed as (2 z l -2 z s )/H(t), i.e., the mean separation between LNPs and SNPs nor- malized by H(t)/2, where H(t) is the instantaneous thickness of the suspension. In the equilibrium suspension prior to evaporation, both z l and z s are very close to H(0)/2, where H(0) is the initial film thickness. During evaporation, z l -z s < 0 indicates "small-on-top" stratification while z l -z s > 0 signifies "large-on-top". In Fig. The stratification order parameter used here and in Ref. Evaporative cooling is a natural effect in a fast drying liquid. If a particle suspension is placed on a substrate that is kept at a constant temperature and the suspension undergoes very fast solvent evaporation, then a temperature lower than that of the substrate is expected at the evaporating interface, resulting in a negative thermal gradient in the suspension. T l 1.0 ζ 30 and T l 1.0 ζ 5 studied here are set up to mimic such situations. However, it is challenging to maintain a constant temperature or induce a positive thermal gradient along the normal direction toward the interface in a drying suspension, especially when the evaporation rate is high. One possible approach is to dissolve a gas (e.g., N 2 , Ar, He, or CO 2 ) into the solvent (e.g., water). Beaglehole showed that heating a water film with a dissolved gas from above or below produces very different temperature distributions within the liquid. In most experiments, films are much thicker than those studied here with MD and evaporation rates are much lower by a factor of 10 4 to 10 5 for drying at room temperature, about 45% of the critical temperature of water. In these systems, evaporative cooling is negligible and heat transfer is fast enough to make temperature uniform throughout a drying film. In all simulations discussed thus far, the temperature of the thermalized liquid zone is always 1.0 /k B . The highest temperature used for the thermalized vapor zone is 1.2 /k B , which is close to the critical temperature, T c , of the LJ solvent with r c = 3.0σ. Furthermore, all simulations start with systems in which the nanoparticles are uniformly dispersed and then the evaporation process and the thermal gradient are imposed simultaneously. With this approach the interplay between diffusiophoresis and thermophoresis is investigated. To ensure that the physical mechanism of controlling stratification via thermophoresis is applicable to systems with both liquid and vapor temperatures way below T c , we run an additional simulation for RT l 0.9 T v 1.0 ζ 5 , i.e., with the bottom layer of the solvent adjacent to the lower wall thermalized at 0.9 /k B while the vapor zone above the liquid-vapor interface thermalized at 1.0 /k B . For RT l 0.9 T v 1.0 ζ 5 , the system is first relaxed under the imposed thermal gradient, which causes the LNPs to drift toward the lower wall via thermophoresis. The SNPs are still uniformly dispersed in the film as they are almost irresponsive to the thermal gradient. Then the solvent is evaporated from the relaxed system. The results for RT l 0.9 T v 1.0 ζ 5 are discussed in detail in the Supporting Information and fully consistent with the idea that thermophoresis from a positive thermal gradient from the bulk of a film to its drying front works in synergy with diffusiophoresis to enhance "small-on-top", while a negative thermal gradient works against diffusiophoresis to suppress "small-on-top" and promote "large-on-top". In this paper we focus on how stratification can be controlled in a drying suspension of a bidisperse mixture of nanoparticles via MD simulations with an explicit solvent model. We demonstrate that a thermal gradient and the induced thermophoresis can be used to alter stratification from "large-on-top" all the way to strong "small-on-top". This strategy is based on the observation that particles of different sizes in a suspension have different responses to a thermal gradient. In particular, larger particles experience a larger driving force that transports them into cooler regions where the solvent density is higher. For A ns = 100 adopted here, the smaller nanoparticles show little or even no response to a thermal gradient. When a suspension undergoes fast drying and only a thin layer of the solvent adjacent to the substrate is thermalized at T l , mimicking an experimental situation where the substrate supporting the suspension is maintained at a constant temperature during solvent evaporation, a negative temperature gradient develops in the suspension because of the evaporative cooling effect that makes the temperature at the evaporating interface to drop below T l . A larger fraction of the larger nanoparticles are driven into the interfacial region via the thermophoresis induced by this thermal gradient. As a result, the fast drying suspensions display "large-on-top" stratification instead of "small-on-top" expected by the diffusiophoresis model in which the suspension is assumed to be isothermal during evaporation. The film thickness in our simulations prior to evaporation is about 300σ ∼ 105 nm. For a temperature difference 0.1 /k B across the film, the magnitude of the thermal gradient is about 0.5 K/nm if we take /k B ∼ 550 K as in Table ACKNOWLEDGEMENT that the system is first relaxed under the imposed thermal gradient. After relaxation, the solvent is evaporated at a rate ζ = 5. In Fig. During the evaporation process of RT l 0.9 T v 1.0 ζ 5 , a weak negative temperature gradient emerges in the drying suspension as shown in Fig. For RT l 0.9 T v 1.0 ζ 5 , because the imposed thermal gradient is outweighed by evaporative cooling, the temperature profile in the drying suspension has a negative gradient from the bottom of the suspension to the liquid-vapor interface. The resulting thermophoresis makes the LNPs to drift toward the interface and their accumulation is even more significant than the enrichment of SNPs near the receding liquid-vapor interface. As a consequence, the "smallon-top" stratification in the relaxed system is weakened during drying, as shown by the plot of the stratification order parameter vs time in Fig. In all simulations discussed previously, a Langevin thermostat that is weakly coupled to the solvent beads has been used to control temperature. In Scheme A and Scheme C, a layer of solvent adjacent to the bottom wall is thermalized in a drying suspension. Additionally, the vapor zone is also thermalized in Scheme C. In these schemes, the most part of the system including the liquid-vapor interface has no thermostats and the dynamics is controlled by the interactions between the particles (i.e., the Hamiltonian). Local momentum conservation is preserved away from the thermalized zones. The hydrodynamic interactions between nanoparticles are captured with this approach. In Scheme B, all solvent beads in the system are coupled to a Langevin thermostat in order to achieve an isothermal system during evaporation. To address whether the observed phenomena including stratification may be affected by the Langevin thermostat employed in the simulation, though the strength of the thermostat is weak as we use a small damping rate, 0.01τ -1 , we performed an additional simulation in Scheme B with the temperature of the system controlled by a thermostat based on dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) [for detail, see https://lammps.sandia. gov/doc/pair_dpd.html]. In the DPD thermostat, two particles experience an equal but opposite viscous drag force that depends on the difference between the velocities of the two particles. All results in this paper are reported in the reduced Lennard-Jones (LJ) units based on (energy unit), m (mass unit), and σ (length unit). Here we provide details on how the rough mapping between the LJ and real units given in Table 