We report superconducting properties of noncentrosymmetric superconductor LaPtGe which crystallizes in noncentrosymmetric α-ThSi2 structure. The magnetization, resistivity and specific heat measurements confirms that LaPtGe is a type-II bulk superconductor with a transition temperature Tc = 3.05 ± 0.05 K. Muon-spin relaxation/rotation measurements confirms that time reversal preserved in the superconducting ground state. In the recent years, several new superconducting materials have been discovered. Many of these new superconductors are described as "unconventional", as their superconducting properties deviate from traditional BCS theory At present, the major issue in this area is how the antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling influences the parity mixing in these materials and the presence/absence of time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB). Till now, only a small number of superconductors have been discovered that exhibit TRSB In this paper, we report a comprehensive study of the superconducting properties of the noncentrosymmetric ternary equiatomic compound LaPtGe, which is a ternary variant of α-ThSi 2 structure where a threedimensional network of three connected metalloid atoms is found with tetragonal symmetry Here we have used resistivity, magnetization and heat capacity along with muon-spin spectroscopy to probe the gap symmetry and nature of the superconducting ground state. Polycrystalline LaPtGe samples were prepared using standard arc melting technique. High purity La (99.99% ), Pt (99.99%) and Ge (99.99%) were taken in a stoichiometric ratio and melted in a water-cooled copper hearth under high purity Argon gas. The resulting ingot formed with the negligible mass loss was flipped and remelted several times to improve the homogeneity. Phase purity and crystal structure of the sample was confirmed by room temperature x-ray diffraction measurement using a PANalytical diffractometer equipped with CuKα radiation(λ = 1.5406 Å). Magnetization measurements were done using a superconducting quantum interference device (MPMS 3, Quantum Design). The electrical resistivity and heat capacity measurements of the sample were performed using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). The μSR experiments were carried out using a 100 % spin-polarized pulse muon beam at ISIS facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom. The x-ray diffraction pattern is shown in Fig. b. Normal and superconducting state properties Temperature dependence of electrical resistivity ρ(T ) of LaPtGe in the temperature range 1.8 K to 300 K in zero applied magnetic field is shown in Fig. where ρ s is the temperature independent saturation value of resistivity which will attain at high temperatures. The value of ρ i (T ) can be written as In this relation temperature independent residual resistivity which arises from impurities and disorder is accounted to ρ i,0 , while the second term adds the temperature dependent general resistivity which can be written according to generalized Bloch-Gruneisen expression where Θ D is the Debye temperature obtained from resistivity measurements, while C is a material dependent pre-factor. A fit employing this model is shown in Fig. Figure The value of H C1 (0) was estimated to be 2.1 ± 0.2 mT after fitting Eq. 4 in H C1 (T ) plot. Figure In order to measure the upper critical field as a function of temperature H C2 (T), the shift in T C in different applied magnetic fields was determined from magnetization and resistivity data. Resistivity measurement as a function of temperature, ρ(T), was performed at different applied magnetic fields up to 0.36 T [see inset Fig. The value obtained after fitting Eq. 5 is H C2 (0) = 0.69 ± 0.01 T. Orbital limiting field H orbital C2 (0) is the field where the Cooper pairs breaks due to an increased kinetic energy and is given by the Warthermar-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) expression where α is the purity factor given by 0.693 and 0.73 for superconductors in dirty and clean limit respectively. The initial slope -dH C2 (T ) dT in the vicinity of T = T C yields a value of 0.67 ± 0.04 T/K , which gives H orbital C2 (0) = 1.41 ± 0.08 T. Another mechanism which suppresses superconductivity is the Pauli-limiting field. According to the BCS theory, the Pauli-limiting field is given by H P C2 (0) = 1.86 T C , which for T C = 3.05 ± 0.05 K, produces H p C2 (0) = 5.7 ± 0.1 T. The Maki parameter which measures the relative strengths of the orbital and Pauli-limiting fields calculated using α M = √ 2H orb C2 (0)/H p C2 (0) = 0.16 ± 0.01. Such a small value of Maki parameter implies that the effect of Pauli limiting field is negligible. The solid lines are fit to the data using Eq. 5. The inset shows the resistivity curves at different applied magnetic fields. The characteristic Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ GL can be evaluated using the H C2 (0) value from the relation where φ 0 ( = 2.07 × 10 -15 Tm 2 ) is the magnetic flux quantum. Using H C2 (0) = 0.69 ± 0.01 T, we estimated ξ GL (0) = 218 ± 4 Å. The Ginzburg-Landau penetration depth λ GL (0) can be calculated from the relation Using the values of H C1 (0) = 2.1 ± 0.2 mT and ξ GL (0) = 218 ± 4 Å, we calculated λ GL (0) = 5047 ± 28 Å. Ginzburg-Landau parameter for the sample is calculated with the equation This yields a value of κ GL = 23 ± 1. For a type-II superconductor κ GL ≥ 1 √ 2 . Therefore, it is clear that LaPtGe is a type-II superconductor. The thermodynamic critical field H C can be calculated using the relation H C1 (0)H C2 (0) = H 2 C lnκ GL , giving the value as H C = 21 ± 1 mT. Specific heat data were collected in the temperature range 1.9 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K. The bulk nature of the superconducting state is evidenced by the occurrence of a well-developed discontinuity at T C = 2.9 ± 0.05 K. The normal state specific heat data can be extracted by the relation Fitting the above equation in the data above T C determine the Sommerfeld coefficient (γ n ), which describes the electronic contribution and the Debye constant (β) representing phononic contribution. The solid blue line in the inset of Fig. The estimated value of θ D = 147 ± 4 K is consistent with the value obtained from the parallel-resistor model. Under the assumption of a degenerate electron gas of non-interacting particles, the Sommerfeld coefficient γ n is proportional to the density of states at the Fermi level. The value of γ n can be used to estimate the density of states at the Fermi level D C (E F ) via the relation where k B is Boltzmann constant. Substituting γ n = 7.12 ± 0.19 mJ/molK 2 , yields D C (E F ) = 3.02 ± 0.03 states eV f.u . The electron-phonon coupling constant λ e-ph , a dimensionless number which describes the coupling between electron and phonon is given by McMillans equation where μ * is the repulsive screened Coulomb potential having typical material specific values in the range 0.1 μ * 0.15, where 0.13 is used for intermetallic superconductors. Incorporating the values of θ D and T C yields λ e-ph = 0.67 ± 0.03, which is comparable to those in noncentrosymmetric superconductors such as 0.63 in Re 6 Hf Using the value of λ e-ph = 0.67 in Eq. 14 and 15 yields D band (E F ) = 1.81 ± 0.06 states eV f.u and the effective mass of quasiparticle as 1.67m e where we used m * band = m e . The condensation energy U(0), which is the difference between the ground state energies of the normal state and the superconducting state, can be estimated using the relation U(0) = 1 2 ∆ 2 (0)D band (E F ) employing ∆ 2 (0) = 6.65 × 10 -23 J and D band (E F ) = 1.1378 × 10 -43 J -1 mol -1 from specific heat measurements to give U(0) = 25.1 ± 0.4 mJ/mol. The electronic contribution to the specific heat, C el (T), is calculated by subtracting the phononic contribution of the specific heat from the total specific heat C(T). The specific heat jump ∆C el T C at T C is 9.2 ± 0.5 mJ/molK 2 . The normalized jump in specific heat is then obtained as where , where E(ξ) is the energy of the normal electrons measured relative to Fermi energy, y = ξ/∆(0), t = T /T C and ∆(t) = tanh[1.82(1.018((1 /t)-1)) 0.51 ] is the BCS approximation for the temperature dependence of energy gap. The normalized electronic specific heat is related to the normalized entropy by where C el below T C is described by the above equation whereas above T C its equal to γ n T C . Figure Further analysis of the superconducting ground state of LaPtGe was carried out by muon spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) measurements. Zero-field muon spin relaxation spectra (ZF-μSR) collected at temperatures Field (mT) above and below T C as shown in Fig. where σ ZF is the relaxation due to static, randomly oriented local fields associated with the nuclear moments at the muon site. The spectra can be well described by the function where A 1 corresponds to the initial asymmetry, Λ is the electronic relaxation rate which fluctuates on a time scale much faster than muon time scale, and A BG is time-dependent background contribution from the muons stopped in the sample holder. The temperature dependence of the fit parameters Λ and σ showed no perceptible temperature dependence above and below T C , indicating that time-reversal symmetry is preserved within the detection limit of μSR for LaPtGe. Transverse field muon spin rotation experiments (TF-μSR) was performed in an applied field of 10 mT. Figure where ω 1 and ω 2 are the frequencies of the muon precession signal and background respectively, φ is the initial phase offset and σ TF is the Gaussian muon spin deplorization rate. The value of σ TF depends on the distribution of vortices in the superconducting state which causes an increase in depolarization below T C . σ TF (T) at different applied fields in the range 10 mT ≤ H ≤ 40 mT was extracted using Eq. 20 as shown in Fig. Field dependence of the depolarization rate σ(H) was determined by making isothermal cuts to the σ TF (T) and is shown in Fig. where h = H/H C2 is the reduced field, and φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. The resulting fits to the data are shown as solid lines in Fig. where ∆(T) = ∆ 0 tanh[1.82(1.018((T C /T )-1)) 0.51 ] is the BCS approximation for the temperature dependence of the energy gap. The solid lines in Fig. The fit yields a value of the energy gap as ∆ 0 = 0.46 ± 0.01 meV which gives the BCS parameter ∆ 0 /k B T C = 1.79 ± 0.07, which is very close to BCS value of 1.76 implying moderately coupled nature of the sample. The specific heat measurement also suggested the moderately coupled superelectrons where ∆ 0 /k B T C = 1.66 ± 0.02. A slight difference in the energy gap value is due to the microscopic and macroscopic nature of μSR and specific heat respectively. So the specific heat measurement along with TF-μSR results confirm that LaPtGe is a s-wave superconductor. The quasiparticle number density per unit volume and mean free path related Sommerfeld coefficient via the relation where k B is the Boltzmann constant, N A is the Avogadro number, V f.u. is the volume of a formula unit and m * is the effective mass of quasiparticles. The electronic mean free path l and Fermi velocity v F is correlated with residual resistivity by the relation while the Fermi velocity v F can be written in terms of effective mass and the carrier density by The dirty limit expression for the penetration depth λ GL (0) is given by where ξ 0 is the BCS coherence length. The London penetration depth λ L , is given by The BCS coherence length ξ 0 and the Ginzburg-Landau coherence ξ GL (0) at T = 0 K in the dirty limit is related by the expression Eq. 24-29 form a system of four equations which can be used to estimate the parameters m * , n, l, and ξ 0 as done in Ref. where n is the quasiparticle number density per unit volume. According to Uemura et al. High purity samples of LaPtGe is prepared by arcmelting. X-ray diffraction confirm sample crystallized in noncentrosymmetric LaPtSi structure (space group no. 109). The sample exhibited superconductivity with a transition temperature T C = 3.05 ± 0.05 K. Comprehensive transport, magnetization and heat capacity measurements suggest LaPtGe is moderately coupled s-wave superconductor. Transverse field muon experiments further confirm moderately coupled s-wave superconductor. Zero-field μSR measurements did not find any evidence of time reversal symmetry breaking in the superconducting ground state. Above mentioned results suggest the antisymmetric spin-orbital coupling is not effecting the superconducting ground state. It is clearly important to work on more noncentrosymmetric superconductors having high antisymmetric spin-orbital coupling to understand the complex superconducting ground state of these superconductors.