In the recent work of Ref. Atomic clusters and NanoCrystals (NCs) offer promising perspectives for the study of electronic orders and correlations at the scale of single electronic states in the quantum confined regime, through statistical analysis of the energy levels distribution or the study of the spatial structures of the corresponding wave-functions. The quantum confined regime is reached when the electronic level spacing δ in a NC is larger than the thermal broadening k B T and larger than the coupling Γ of these levels to the continuum of states within the metallic electrodes employed for measurements. In this regime, the energy of the discrete levels and the spatial distribution of the associated wave-functions depend on the boundary conditions imposed by the surface of the NC. The quantum confined regime has been intensively studied in semiconducting Quantum Dots (QDots), either in colloidal QDots is large because of the large Fermi wavelength λ F = 2π/k F , which makes the experimental identification of the discrete levels in the spectrum easier than in metallic QDots where the Fermi wavelength is short. The energy distribution of the electronic levels and the structure of the associated wave-functions is expected to depend on the location of the energy levels with respect to the Thouless energy E T = h/τ where τ is the propagation time of the electrons across the QDot. With this definition of the Thouless energy, one finds that the ratio E T / δ = (4π/3)(r/λ F ) The first regime, where the level spacing is smaller than the Thouless energy, is reached in QDots of radius much larger than the Fermi wavelength. In this case, for electronic states whose energy measured with respect to the Fermi energy is smaller than the Thouless energy, the electronic wave-functions are delocalized on the whole QDot and consequently, the electronic states are correlated through their Fermi statistics. In presence of electron-electron interactions and disorder, this leads to the formation of a complex quantum system with chaotic dynamic The second regime, where the level spacing is larger than the Thouless energy, is reached in QDots of radius smaller than the Fermi wavelength or, equivalently, the Bohr radius. In that case, no level repulsion and no chaotic regime is expected. The electronic states follow a regular pattern described by atomic-like quantum numbers 1S, 1P and so on. This regime has been mostly studied through tunneling spectroscopy on colloidal QDots by Scanning Tunnel Microscopy (STM) Mapping of the random or fractal structure of wavefunctions of QDots in the chaotic regime has not been achieved so far. As described above, this chaotic regime can be reached in large micrometer-sized QDots; however, STM studies of these micro-fabricated QDots is not possible. The chaotic regime can also be reached in nanometer-sized NCs of high carrier density such as metallic NCs where the Fermi wavelength is very small. In addition to level repulsion, more spectacular electronic correlations effects and electronic orders, such as superconductivity, can also be expected in NCs of high carrier density. The study of quantum confinement effects in high carrier density materials such as metallic and superconducting NCs is, however, challenging because of the short Fermi wavelength. For Pb, which has a Fermi energy E F = 9.4 eV, two Fermi surfaces FS 1 and FS 2 , of characteristics wave-vectors k F1 =7.01 nm -1 , k F2 =11.21 nm -1 and effective mass m * =1.2 m e ; one finds that at the temperature T = 1.3 K, i.e. thermal broadening k B T = 112 μeV, a discrete electronic spectrum is expected for NCs volume smaller than 650 nm 3 , i.e. a sphere or radius 5.5 nm. In this nanometer size range, discrete electronic levels in metallic grains have been observed through tunneling spectroscopy of nano-fabricated drain-source structures with evaporated aluminum grains STM is particularly well adapted to the study of quantum confinement effects in NCs. The instrument can provide both a topographic image of the NCs and spectroscopic data with atomic resolution. This should allow not only the observation of discrete electronic levels but also a mapping of the corresponding wave-functions. While numerous works exist on the STM study of Ultra-High Vacuum (UHV) grown metallic clusters strongly coupled to the substrate To enable the growth of high quality crystalline NCs, this second tunnel barrier should present a well-ordered surface. While tunnel barriers on a metallic substrate can be formed by oxidation or the deposition of a dielectric As first described in Ref. In the first section of the manuscript, we review the experimental data and the arguments leading to the identification of this new type of intrinsic tunnel barrier. In the second section, we describe our studies of quantum confinement in Pb NCs. We identified three distinct regimes of quantum confinement. In the largest NCs of volume about 100-200 nm 3 , one observes a Fabry-Perot regime characterized by discrete quantum levels with regular spatial structure and energy distribution. In the smallest NCs of volume about 1 nm 3 , i.e. atomic clusters, one observes an atomic-like regime characterized by well defined and well separated atomic-like levels. Finally, in NCs of intermediate volume about 10 nm 3 , one finds discrete electronic levels where the corresponding wave-functions have a random structure. This last regime corresponds to the chaotic regime as described by RMT. These observations confirm the system Pb NCs on InAs as the most suitable for the study of quantum confinement effects in metallic/superconducting NCs. As shown on the topographic images, Fig. In this manuscript, we will focus on the six NCs shown Fig. The shape of the NCs is mostly pyramidal as sketched Fig. To clearly understand the nature of the Pb/InAs interface and the peculiar nature of the tunnel barrier requires, first, to review the current understanding of metal/semiconductor interfaces; see Ref. On a semiconductor surface, the adsorption of a metal overlayer leads to band-bending as sketched Fig. where φ m is the metal work function, χ s is the semiconductor electron affinity, W ci is the energy of the bottom of the conduction band, W 0i is the charge-neutrality level and S φ = ∂φBn ∂φm is the slope parameter. This last parameter describes the dependence of the barrier height on the metal work-function. When no interface states are present, the barrier height is given by the well-known Schottky-Mott formula, φ Bn = φ mχ s , i.e. S φ = 1 in Eq. 2. In this case, the barrier height is proportional to the amplitude of the metal work function. In the other limit, when interface states are present, the barrier height is given by the Bardeen formula, φ Bn = W ci -W 0i , i.e. S φ = 0 in Eq. 2. In this case, the Fermi level is pinned by interface states at the charge neutrality level. The charge-neutrality level separates the electron-type levels from the hole-type levels. As described in Refs. A plot of the slope parameter measured experimentally for many distinct semiconductors, Fig. relation, where a large density of interface states is induced by the metal overlayer and leads to a pinning of the Fermi level. For most III-V semiconductors, the charge neutrality level lies within the band gap except for small gap materials like InAs and InSb, where the charge neutrality level has been found within the conduction band Pinning of the Fermi level can also occur at bare UHV cleaved surfaces as consequence of native surface defects. On InAs, this leads to the formation of an accumulation layer at (100) and (111) surfaces One remarkable consequence of the absence of Fermi level pinning is the possibility to shift the conduction band energy with the electric field induced by the STM tip. This leads to the formation of a QDot induced by the band bending generated by the STM tip, as sketched Fig. Fig. Fig. The addition energy, i.e. the energy for adding one electron into the NC, is given by : where the first term is the Coulomb energy, the sec-ond term depends on the parity of electron occupation number as a consequence of the formation of a Cooper pair Thanks to the quality of the tunnel barrier enabling very sharp Coulomb charging peaks, it has been possible to study, for the first time by STM, the evolution of the superconducting parity effect in the Coulomb charging energy across the Anderson limit 1 . As shown Fig. The observation of Coulomb blockade and quantum confinement in those Pb NCs raises the question of the nature of the tunnel barrier between the NCs and the substrate. As discussed above, no Schottky barrier is expected at metal-InAs interfaces In addition to the Coulomb peaks, the DC curves of Fig. To identify the origin of conductance peaks indicated by stars in Fig. The X-voltage coordinates of these states on the DC map Fig. For very small NCs, i.e. atomic clusters, such as NC VI, of volume about 1.5 nm 3 , the DC presents large conductance peaks that result from quantum confinement in all directions of the NC. This spectrum has an atomiclike look with large energy level separation about almost 1 eV as visible on Fig. To extract the amplitude of the wave-function for each state, we fit the spectrum on the voltage range [-0.275 V,-0.025 V] with the function 5, i.e. the sum of 6 Lorentzian describing the 6 levels centered at the energies ε i identified in the histogram and linewidth Γ = 13 meV : Following the fit of all spectra, we can plot maps of the amplitude A i of the Lorentzian as a function of the XY position, shown Fig 9c . These maps represent the amplitude of the wave-functions associated with the discrete electronic levels. While mapping wave-functions has already been done previously on InAs QDots 5 , where wave-functions of simple spherical or toroidal symmetry were observed, it is the first time that a map of the wave-functions of discrete levels in metallic NC is presented. In contrast to the QDot InAs, we find that the wave-functions in our metallic NCs have a random structure. This is actually not surprising. As shown Table While STM seems an ideal experimental method for the study of quantum confinement effects in highly crystalline NCs grown in UHV, its development was hampered by two contradicting requirements: first, the substrate should be conducting enough to provide a current path to the ground, second, the NC should be separated from this substrate by a tunnel barrier. Using an InAs substrate presenting an electron accumulation layer of large wavelength ∼ 20 nm, we found that NCs of lateral size smaller than this length are in the regime of Coulomb blockade. This results from the constriction of the electronic wave-function across this interface whose lateral size is smaller than the Fermi wavelength, implying that the electronic transmission across this interface drops below unity, even in the absence of any real insulating barrier at the interface between the NC and the InAs substrate. This highly clean tunnel barrier enabled the first STM observation of the superconducting parity effect 1 , an unambiguous test of the Anderson criterion for the existence of superconductivity 1 and finally, in this manuscript, the observation of discrete electronic levels due to quantum confinement in the Pb NCs. We identified three regimes of quantum confinement. In the largest NCs, we found a Fabry-Perot regime where regular quantum well states are formed due to quantum interference along the 111 direction of the Pb NC. In the smallest NC, i.e. atomic clusters, we found atomic-like electronic levels. Finally, in the intermediate regime, we found the signature of discrete electronic levels in the DC spectra for which we mapped the corresponding wave-functions. We found that these wave-functions had a random spatial structure as expected for NCs in the chaotic regime of RMT. Future works in this direction with higher energy resolution at lower temperature may enable extracting correlations effects from the wave-function amplitude, such as due to Fermi statistics, superconducting correlations or more generally, electron-electron interactions. This observation of discrete electronic levels in metallic Pb NCs establishes today Pb/InAs as the most suitable system for the study of quantum confinement effects in metallic/superconducting NCs. The STM images enable a clear identification of the ( Knowing the detailled shape of the NCs, tight binding model is used to calculate the electronic levels spectrum. The parameters are taken from Ref. Parameters for Pb (eV) E s 3.52800 E p 13.59901 ∆ 1.14900 V ssσ (1) -0.30900 V ssσ (2) 0.03000 V spσ (1) +0.47339 V spσ (2) -0.01000 V ppσ (1) +1.34301 V ppσ (2) +0.14600 V ppπ (1) -0.01278 V ppπ (2) -0.00200 n ∆ is the spin-orbit coupling. (