We present a compact and lightweight 1.5 μm lidar using a free-running single-photon detector (SPD) based on a multi-mode fiber (MMF) coupling InGaAs/InP negative feedback avalanche diode. The ultimate light detection sensitivity of SPD highly reduces the power requirement of laser, whilst the enhanced collection efficiency due to MMF coupling significantly reduces the volume and weight of telescopes. We develop a specific algorithm for the corrections of errors caused by the SPD and erbium-doped fiber amplifier to extract accurate backscattering signals. We also perform a comparison between single-mode fiber (SMF) coupling and MMF coupling in the lidar receiver, and the results show that the collection efficiency with MMF coupling is five times higher than SMF coupling. In order to validate the functionality, we use the lidar system for the application of cloud detection. The lidar system exhibits the ability to detect both the cloud base height and the thickness of multi-layer clouds to an altitude of 12 km with a temporal resolution of 1 s and a spatial resolution of 15 m. Due to the advantages of compactness and lightweight, our lidar system can be installed on unmanned aerial vehicles for wide applications in practice. Aerosols are the extended colloidal dispersion of solid or liquid particles in a gaseous medium such as smoke, fog, sea salt, soil dust, and combustion products. The occurrence, residence time, and physical and chemical properties of aerosols vary fast in space and time. For instance, clouds are essentially aerosols consisting of minute liquid droplets and frozen crystals suspended in the atmosphere, which fundamentally influence weather, air travel safety, sunlight illumination and climate. Lidar (light detection and ranging), including coherent lidar and direct detection lidar, provides an effective technology to detect aerosols with high resolution. Compared with coherent lidar, direct detection lidar can directly detect the intensity of backscattering signals with simple system design and data processing, which is well suited for cloud and aerosol detections. Commercial direct detection lidars widely use lasers at wavelengths of 532 nm, 910 nm and 1064 nm Since 1.5 μm laser has advantages of eye-safe, low atmospheric attenuation and low solar background energy, such wavelength is also an ideal candidate for lidar applications. The performance in terms of detection range of 1.5 μm direct detection lidar is considerably limited by the detection of ultraweak backscattering signals. For cloud detection, the reported ranges using 1.5 μm lidars a) C. Yu and J. Qiu contributed equally to this work. b) Electronic mail: hsia@ustc.edu.cn c) Electronic mail: zhangjun@ustc.edu.cn are only ∼ 6 km Near infrared free-running single-photon detectors (SPDs) have the ultimate light detection sensitivity, therefore, 1.5 μm lidars using SPDs can significantly increase the detection range and resolution of aerosols. There are currently three major free-running SPDs, i.e., superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs), up-conversion single-photon detectors (UC-SPDs), and InGaAs/InP SPDs using negative feedback avalanche diodes (NFADs), as lised in Table In practical applications, compactness and lightweight are the primary challenges for lidar system, and freerunning InGaAs/InP SPD is the most appropriate solution, due to the advantages of small size, multi-mode fiber (MMF) coupling, polarization-independent, and low cost In this paper, we present a compact and lightweight 1.5 μm lidar system using a MMF coupling free-running In-GaAs/InP SPD. We develop an algorithm for the corrections of SPD noises and amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noises to obtain accurate backscattering signals. Then we apply the lidar system for cloud detection, and the experimental results show that the lidar system can detect both the cloud base height and the thickness of multi-layer clouds to an altitude of 12 km with a temporal resolution of 1 s and a spatial resolution of 15 m. The setup diagram and photo of 1.5 μm lidar system are shown in Fig. The backscattering signals are coupled both to a SMF coupling NFAD with 9 μm diameter and 0.12 numerical aperture (NA) and to a MMF coupling NFAD (Princeton Lightwave) with 62.5 μm diameter and 0.275 NA. In order to guarantee that the receiver's field-of-view (FOV) is larger than the transmitter's FOV, the telescope diameters for SMF coupling and MMF coupling are designed to 70 mm with 50 μrad divergence angle, and 150 mm with 80 μrad divergence angle, respectively. The backscattering signals are detected by two free-running InGaAs/InP SPDs (SPD1 and SPD2), and the timing information of detection events is transmitted to a computer for realtime processing and corrections. The key parameters of the lidar system are listed in Table Inside the free-running InGaAs/InP SPD, the NFAD is cooled down to 223 K using thermoelectric coolers (TECs, Thermonamic), and the quenching circuit is similar to our previous work Fig. To extract backscattering signals with high signalto-noise ratio (SNR), device imperfections have to be corrected, including the contributions by hold-off time, DCR, afterpulse probability of SPD and the ASE noise of EDFA. The effect of hold-off time is often roughly cor-rected by where R(i), DCR(i) are the photon count rate and dark count rate at bin i, respectively, and τ is the hold-off time. However, in cloud lidar applications, due to the existence of sharp backscattering signal edges as shown in Fig. where f is system repetition frequency, i.e., 10 kHz. Eq.2 is particularly appropriate for fast-varying signal correction, and for slow-varying signal Eq.2 is equivalent to Eq.1. Further, the contribution of the afterpulsing effect can corrected as 19 where R ap (i) represents the afterpulse count rate at bin i. The detection events in other bins may contribute afterpulse counts at bin i, therefore, R ap (i) is calculated by where P (i, j) is the probability of a detection event at bin j inducing an afterpulse count at bin i. Such conditional probability consists of three parts, i.e., 1) there is no detection event between bin j and bin i; 2) there is no afterpulse between bin j and bin i; 3) an afterpulse is created at bin i. Then, P (i, j) can be calculated as 19 (5) where P ap (i) is the afterpulse probability at bin i that can be obtained from the characterized afterpulse probability distribution of SPD. After the above processes, the SPD errors can be corrected, as shown in Fig. The ASE noise of EDFA is another important error source in the lidar system. After sending a laser pulse, the spontaneous radiation in EDFA increases over time. In the data processing of lidar systems, optical flying time is related to radial distance, e.g., 1 μs time between the backscattering signal and the outgoing laser pulse corresponds to ∼ 150 m distance. Therefore, the intensity of ASE noise increases along the altitude. Fig. After performing all the corrections, the SNR of backscattering signal is significantly enhanced, particularly at the range of high altitude, as shown in Fig. Finally, we perform a continuous observation with the MMF receiver from 00:00 to 05:00 on March 24, 2018 to In summary, we have reported a compact and lightweight 1.5 μm lidar system based on a MMF coupling free-running InGaAs/InP SPD. The MMF coupling can significantly enhance the collection efficiency of backscattering signal. We have developed a specific algorithm to correct the noises contributed by SPD and EDFA. The lidar system has achieved the detection of multi-layer clouds to an altitude of 12 km with a temporal resolution of 1 s and a spatial resolution of 15 m. Due to compactness and light weight, the lidar system can be deployed on unmanned aerial vehicles for practical uses.