The previously discussed anomalous behavior (i.e. negative) of the thermal expansion coefficient obtained from the pair correlation function is examined in the context of the nearest-neighbor distance (bond length) distribution. The bond length distribution is obtained from a Voronoi tessellation analysis of the atomic structures obtained from both reverse Monte Carlo simulations of x-ray scattering data and molecular dynamics simulations. When a robust measure of central tendency (mean or median) is used a positive thermal expansion is obtained from the temperature-dependent bond length that has the same magnitude as that obtained from direct measurements of the volume as a function of temperature. The same is true when larger neighbor distances, as obtained in higher order peaks in the pair distribution function are tracked. This calls into question the recent claim that fragility of metallic liquids is embedded in these higher order peaks. It also shows that the previously reported anomalous contraction of the bond length arise from tracking the mode, which does not account for the skewness of the distribution. The static structure factor, S(q), and the related pair distribution function, g(r), obtained from experimental scattering data are routinely used to deduce the linear thermal expansion coefficient, where V is the volume, for crystalline systems by tracking the position of the first peak as a function of temperature. Following the same method, some studies in metallic liquids have shown an anomalous contraction of the first peak in g(r) with increasing temperature, indicating a negative thermal expansion coefficient. However, values of β obtained from direct measurements of the volume have been positive where ρ is the number density. This gives an effective nearest neighbor distribution that accounts for the increasing skewness, bypassing many of the issues arising with the use of peak positions. From the fit the mean bond length can be identified and tracked with temperature to obtain an approximate value for β. However, as the authors point out this approach is not without flaws. For multi-component alloys the main peak in g(r) will contain multiple partial pair correlation functions that may not be well described by a single SND. One option would be to fit each partial g(r) with a SND and then sum them with the usual weighting factors (e.g. Faber-Ziman 7 coefficients) to obtain the total g(r). This would then give an effective total NND distribution. Experimentally, however, it is typically difficult to obtain the needed information on all the pair correlation functions to perform this type of analysis. Here a more detailed examination of the NND distribution is presented that is based on RMC and MD modeling using a Voronoi tessellation. The main conclusion is that unlike g(r) the robust measures of central tendency for the NND distribution are well behaved, exhibiting only expansion, and give reliable information about the linear thermal expansion coefficient. Furthermore, it is shown that the rate of expansion obtained from the NND distribution is equal to the rate obtained from direct volume measurements. This calls into question a recent proposal that liquid fragility 8 (a measure of the deviation of the temperature dependence of the activation energy of the viscosity) is related to the temperature dependence of the peak positions of the 3rd and 4th peak positions in g(r) Equilibrium and supercooled liquid structural data was obtained at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory on beamline 6ID-D using the beamline electrostatic levitation (BESL) technique. Density and thermal expansion measurements were made from video images of levitated samples back-lit by a high-intensity LED. The details of these experimental methods can be found elsewhere Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were made for 10 compositions using the LAMMPS 15 software. Some simulations employed the GPU package of LAMMPS Reverse Monte Carlo simulations were made for 34 metallic liquids using the RMC++ where S ′ (q) is the structure factor calculated from the RMC atomic configuration, S(q) is the experimental data, and σ is the reliability of the data set. This minimization is achieved by moving atoms, which are chosen randomly, in a random direction and computing the new χ 2 from this configuration. If the χ 2 is reduced the move is accepted while if the χ 2 increases the move is accepted according to a Boltzmann probability. This procedure is then repeated until the χ 2 is minimized. The reliability of such minimally constrained simulation has been examined in a recent study. To generate sufficient statistics and determine error in the Voronoi tessellation each liquid was simulated seven times. Each RMC simulation consisted of 10,000 randomly generated atoms in a cubic box whose size is consistent with the experimental number density of the liquid, using periodic boundary conditions. Minimum cutoff distances and swapping positions between atoms of different elements were used to improve the convergence time. Convergence was assumed when both the magnitude and the change with time of the χ 2 were sufficiently small. Voronoi tessellation was performed on each RMC configuration using a Python extension of the Voro++ A more robust method for removing more distant nearest neighbors was developed using Gaussian mixtures modeling (GMM), which is a fuzzy clustering algorithm. This method assumes that the NND and face area data are composed of two Gaussian distributions coming from only the more distant "artifact" atoms and the "true" nearest neighbors. The data is then clustered into groups according to the probability of inclusion in each distribution. Using the Scikit-learn Python library 27 a single Voronoi tessellation was fit. This fit was then used to predict which distribution each NND and face area pair belong to for the remaining Voronoi tessellations. This method, though more reasonable than a strict cutoff using face area, is still only approximate. Other clustering algorithms that are not mode-seeking and that allow for different size and covariance of clusters could also be used. As mentioned in the preceding section a Voronoi tessellation often creates polyhedra with abnormally small faces. Figure A less subjective method to separate the distributions (mentioned previously) is to use GMM, in which one Gaussian is centered on the "artifact" atoms and the other represents the true distribution of NNDs and face areas. Figure From an examination of the peak positions in G(r) = 4πrρ[g(r) -1] a recent study concluded that the fourth coordination shell is correlated with kinetic fragility str used in the previous study reduce to the volume change between T g (the glass transition temperature) and 0K or 1/3 of this value, respectively, extrapolated from the liquid which is a statement that the expansivity is related to the fragility as in The expansion coefficients for the best case shown in Fig. The primary result of this study shows that to understand the change in the bond length as a function of temperature the nearest-neighbor distance distribution and robust measures of central tendency (such as the mean or median) should be considered, rather than g(r) or any of its various forms that have typically been used. It is also shown that in agreement with recent studies Liquidus (K) βMean (10 -5 K -1 ) β Median (10 -5 K -1 ) β Mode (10 -5 K -1 ) β (10 