Continuum electrolyte models represent a practical tool to account for the presence of the diffuse layer at electrochemical interfaces. However, despite the increasing popularity of these in the field of materials science it remains unclear which features are necessary in order to accurately describe interface-related observables such as the differential capacitance (DC) of metal electrode surfaces. We present here a critical comparison of continuum diffuse-layer models that can be coupled to an atomistic first-principles description of the charged metal surface in order to account for the electrolyte screening at electrified interfaces. By comparing computed DC values for the prototypical Ag(100) surface in an aqueous solution to experimental data we validate the accuracy of the models considered. Results suggest that a size-modified Poisson-Boltzmann description of the electrolyte solution is sufficient to qualitatively reproduce the main experimental trends. Our findings also highlight the large effect that the dielectric cavity parameterization has on the computed DC values. The electrical double layer (DL) is of primary importance in the field of energy conversion, as it plays a crucial role in devices such as supercapacitors and fuel cells Unfortunately, various limitations hamper atomistic simulations of the diffuse layer First, long simulation times are required in order to achieve statistically significant samplings of the solvent and electrolyte configurations, with the corresponding time-scales being often beyond the reach of standard first-principles molecular dynamics techniques. In addition, large simulation cells are necessary in order to capture the long-range screening of typical values of the surface charge densities. Continuum models represent an attractive alternative to fully-atomistic models of electrolyte solutions. A continuum description of the solvent and of the ions allows, in fact, to bypass the computationally-intensive configurational sampling of the solution's degrees of freedom. In particular, our focus here is on hybrid methods, where a first-principles modeling of an electrified surface is coupled to a continuum description of the solution (Figure Starting from highly simplified models of the double layer, which consist of a countercharge plane at a fixed distance from a charged metal surface of some form of the size-modified Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) equation have been shown to qualitatively or semi-quantitatively describe experimental data In this work, we tackle these issues by systematically analyzing the performance of a hierarchy of continuum diffuse layer models of increasing complexity. We show how the various models can be derived from similar expressions of a free-energy functional and how they can be implemented in the framework of DFT. We choose the differential capacitance various electrolyte models. In particular, we consider a Ag(100) surface in an aqueous solution as study system, motivated by the availability of accurate experimental data Results show that a size-modified Poisson-Boltzmann model is able to qualitatively capture the main features of experimental DC curves, including the minimum capacitance value at the potential of zero charge, and the two local maxima at higher and lower potentials. The choice of solvation cavity employed to separate the quantum-mechanical region from the continuum solvent region is also found to play an important role on the absolute value of the computed DC. The article is structured as follows. Section II reviews the theoretical background of the diffuse layer models considered and it presents the details of their computational implementations. Results on the computed DC values for the Ag(100) surface are then presented in Section III. In particular, the various electrolyte models are illustratively compared under vacuum conditions in Section III A, while their performance is better validated in Section III B by comparing results to experimental data. Finally, the conclusions are presented in Section IV. In the framework of continuum solvation models, the solvent's degrees of freedoms are smeared out in a continuum description and accounted for by means of a dielectric continuum. An important element in this class of models is represented by the so-called solvation cavity, which defines the boundary between the explicitly described solute region and the solvent region, where the dielectric continuum is located. This partitioning of the simulation cell can be formally defined through an interface function, s(r). We define here s(r) ≡ 1 inside the solute region, and s(r) ≡ 0 in the region of space characterized by the solvent dielectric constant ε 0 . In the field of material science and condensed matter physics, continuum models typically involve interface functions that smoothly switch between the two regions, as they turn out to provide a considerable improvement to numerical stability In a similar fashion, the interface function s(r) can be exploited to define the region of space that is accessible to the ionic species in the solution. In particular, the complementary interface function γ (r) defines the portion of the cell where the electrolyte solution is located: It is important to stress here that in the above equations we have expressed both the solvent and the electrolyte domains in terms of the same interface function. In principle, since the two domains are associated with the regions of space that are accessible to solvent and electrolyte particles, respectively, different interface functions should be required. For example, electrolyte ions that have strong solvation shells may be hindered direct access to the electrochemical interface, their closest distance from the substrate being increased by the thickness of the coordinating solvent molecules in what is known as the Stern layer In this section we describe the continuum electrolyte models considered and illustrate how they can be derived from specific free-energy functionals where we include all electrostatic and mean-field contributions (the usual non-interacting electron kinetic energy and the exchange-correlation energy terms are also included, but left out in the expressions for improved readability). In order to perform self-consistent DFT calculations for a system embedded in an electrolyte solution, energy contributions that explicitly depend on the solute electron density require the inclusion of corresponding terms in the Kohn-Sham (KS) potential. Furthermore, terms that explicitly depend on the solute's atomic positions give rise to analogous contributions to the atomic forces. All these contributions are reported in the Supplemental Material. In this work, we have neglected the solvent-related non-electrostatic contributions to the free-energy To first approximation, the electrolyte screening of the surface charge can be accounted for by introducing a countercharge plane at a given distance from the surface 4 . The presence of this external charge modifies the electrostatic energy of the system. When accounting for this electrostatic term, the free energy of the system embedded in the electrolyte solution can be computed as: Here ρ (r) is the total (i.e. electronic + nuclear) charge density of the solute, φ (r) is the electrostatic potential and ρ ions (r) is the external charge density that mimics the counterion accumulation. This model can be seen as a computational implementation of the Helmholtz model for the double layer 30 : the countercharge plane completely screens the surface charge in a region of space that can be chosen to be infinitely narrow. Note that the Helmholtz screening does not depend on the ionic strength of the solution; it is thus not surprising that the bulk electrolyte concentration does not appear in Eq. 3. A more physical description of the diffuse layer can be derived from a free-energy expression that accounts for the chemical potential and the entropy of the ions in the solution These terms allow one to introduce an explicit dependence on the local concentrations of the electrolyte species ({c i (r)}). For an electrolyte solution with p ionic species with charges {z i } and bulk concentrations {c 0 i }, such that the solution is overall neutral ( p i=1 z i c 0 i = 0), the free energy functional takes the following form Here μ i is the chemical potential of the i-th electrolyte species, T is the temperature, and s[{c i }] is the electrolyte entropy density per unit volume. The electrolyte charge density can be expressed in terms of the local electrolyte concentrations as ρ ions (r) = p i=1 c i (r) z i . Under the assumptions of a point-charge electrolyte and ideal mixing, the entropy density of the solution is: where k B is the Boltzmann constant. Note that the exclusion function γ (r), which sets the boundary between the electrolyte solution and the solute region, enforces a zero entropic contribution from the volume assigned to the quantum-mechanical region. In order to find an expression for the equilibrium electrolyte concentrations, the freeenergy functional in equation 4 is minimized with respect to c i (r). This procedure first leads to the condition: which allows one to obtain an expression for the chemical potential from the the bulk electrolyte region, where φ (r) = 0 and γ (r) = 1, obtaining: By substituting equation 7 back into equation 6 one then obtains the following expression for the equilibrium electrolyte concentration: By using this equilibrium electrolyte concentration, the free-energy functional expression significantly simplifies to: Minimization of the free-energy functional with respect to φ (r) now leads to the well-known Poisson-Boltzmann equation (PBE), which allows one to relate the equilibrium charge densities in the system to the the electrostatic potential of the system: For low electrostatic potentials, i.e. whenever z i φ (r) k B T , one can approximate the exponential dependence on φ (r) with a linear function: The expression of the electrolyte concentrations thus reduces to: which leads to the following linearized-version of the PBE (LPBE): The constant operator is related to the Debye length λ D of the electrolyte solution: The LPBE can be equivalently derived 27 by Taylor-expanding the exponential term in Eq. 9 up to second order in φ (r), and by subsequently minimizing the resulting energy functional, with respect to the electrostatic potential. The linear-regime of the PBE is expected to hold for a narrow potential range around the potential of zero charge (PZC). However, typical applications easily require the modeling of potential windows that extend for hundreds of mV, making it desirable to have efficient strategies to solve the full PB problem instead. If the interface between the solute and the electrolyte is suitable to a two-dimensional approximation, one can tackle the full PB problem by taking advantage of the reduced dimensionality of the interface. In particular, one can integrate out the dimensions in the surface plane and exploit the analytical solution of the PBE in one dimension can be integrated analytically for |x| ≥ x Stern . For the most common case of a diffuse layer composed by ions of equal concentrations c 0 and opposite signs, the electrostatic potential in the electrolyte region can be expressed as (see Supplemental material for the derivation): where c 2 = 32πk B T c 0 /ε 0 and c 1 is obtained by imposing continuity of the normal component of the electric field at the electrolyte interface (i.e. for x = x Stern ). Only the solution with the correct asymptotic behavior has been selected, ensuring that φ (|x| → ∞) = 0. This model effectively corresponds to the Gouy-Chapman (GC) model for the diffuse layer where c 0 can be obtained by imposing continuity of the normal component of the electric field at the electrolyte interface. For complex interfaces and general geometries, and for applications for which the linearregime of the PBE is not expected to hold, one needs to numerically solve the full non-linear PBE (Eq. 10) to find the electrolyte concentration that minimizes the energy of the solvated system. The standard PB model assumes point-like ions, and consistently overestimates the electrolyte countercharge accumulation at electrode surfaces. An improved model for the diffuse layer accounts for the steric repulsion between the ions, which opposes the electrostatic attraction towards the electrode surface and therefore limits electrolyte crowding. This is the so-called size-modified PB (MPB) model, which can be derived from the free-energy functional as in Eq. 4 but exploiting an entropy density expression that accounts for the finite-size of the ionic particles. particular, the volume of the continuum solution is divided into a three dimensional lattice, with each cell of the lattice being occupied by no more than one ion. Thus, the cell volume a 3 or, equivalently, the maximum local ionic concentration c 0 = 1 a 3 , sets the distance of closest approach between ionic particles in the solution. In this framework, the solute region is not part of the continuum solution and should therefore give zero contribution to the solution entropy density. Otani and Sugino, who focused on two-dimensional slab systems, naturally achieved this limit by setting the boundary for the continuum solution region at a fixed distance from the surface The first and second terms in Eq. 19 can be identified as the entropy contributions from the ions and the solvent, respectively. As in Eq. 5, the exclusion function γ (r) sets the boundary of the region that contributes to the entropy of the electrolyte solution. By minimizing the free-energy functional in Eq. 4 with respect to the ion concentration we obtain the following expressions for the electrolyte chemical potentials (cf. Eq. 7): and for the equilibrium ionic concentrations (cf. Eq. 8): The denominator in Eq. 21 renormalizes the concentration in the regions where the electrostatic interaction energy is comparable to or larger than k B T , and sets c max as the maximum electrolyte concentration. This parameter can be related to the effective ionic radius In the following, we will assume random close packing for the electrolyte particles and correspondingly set the packing efficiency P = 0.64. Note that the point charge limit of Eq. 21, which corresponds to c max → ∞, consistently leads to the equilibrium concentration as derived in the standard PB model (Eq. 8). By substituting Eqs. 19-21 into Eq. 4, one obtains the following expression for the MPB free-energy functional: where V is the simulation cell volume. Minimization with respect to φ (r) finally leads to the size-modified Poisson-Boltzmann equation (MPBE), which is analogous to the standard PBE (Eq. 10) where, however, c P B i (φ (r)) is replaced by c M P B i (φ (r)). The MPB model accounts for the steric repulsion between the ions in the solution, which limits electrolyte crowding. In addition, the solute and the ionic particles are expected to be surrounded by a solvation shell, where diffusing electrolyte particles are not expected to enter. The presence of this solvent-accessible but ion-free region, generally known as the Stern layer Such a spacing can be effectively introduced through an ad-hoc repulsive term between solute and electrolyte, φ (r) and subsequently appear in the expression for the equilibrium electrolyte concentration: As noted by Ringe et al. For a two-dimensional system like a metal slab, we find appropriate to use one-dimensional exponential functions to define the repulsion potential: where x 0 corresponds the x coordinate of the slab center and the parameters d and w set the position and decay rate of the potential, respectively. Baskin and Prendergast 20 have proposed a similar formalism to account for the specific adsorption of electrolyte species. In particular, they have used a Morse-like potential in a fully-continuum model to mimic anion adsorption on the electrode surface: where E ads is the anion adsorption energy and d now defines the distance between the surface plane and the adsorbed anion species. We have tested the introduction of such an interaction term in our mixed first-principles-continuum model. This description is computationally attractive as it bypasses the need for surface configuration and adsorbate coverage samplings. However, it is clear that such a model cannot be expected to capture electronic-structure changes of the metal surface beyond mean-field electrostatic effects. C. Computational Implementations For all the models presented here, calculations are performed in a symmetric setup: the electrode surface is modeled by means of a two-dimensional slab exposing two identical faces to the continuum solution. The computational setup thus involves two metal-solvent interfaces. Two charge distributions are added in front of the outermost atomic layers to compensate for the net charge of the surface, q. For numerical reasons, the sharp countercharge plane that characterizes the Helmholtz model for the diffuse layer is broadened to have a Gaussian-shaped profile along the surface normal direction x: where A is the surface area and the factor 2 at the denominator of the prefactor arises from the symmetric setup employed. The distance d from the slab center x 0 and the spread parameter ∆ constitute the only two parameters in the model. The countercharge distributions are straightforwardly added to the total charge of the system. The corresponding electrostatic potential does not require self-consistency, allowing for fast and stable simulations. In many ways, modeling the diffuse layer via the analytical one-dimensional solution to the Poisson-Boltzmann problem can be seen as a straightforward modification of the Helmholtz approach, in which the shape of the planar countercharges is no longer given by a Gaussian envelope of arbitrary spread, but rather obtained from a physically sound model. However, simply inserting the diffuse layer as a charge distribution in the simulation cell would incur significant numerical problems: the analytical results for the electrolyte concentrations can present very sharp features close to the interface, which cannot be described accurately with the standard numerical resolution of the electronic-structure calculation. Additionally, diffuse layers may have very long decaying length-scales, extending for tens of nanometers from the electrochemical interface, thus requiring large simulation cells. For these reasons, when possible a description in terms of the effects of the diffuse layer on the quantummechanical system, i.e. its electrostatic potential, is preferred. The assumption behind the model is the one of two sharp interfaces at a fixed distance x Stern from the slab center x 0 , above and below the slab: the quantum-mechanical system is fully contained within the two interfaces, while the diffuse layer is fully in the outer regions and is uniform along the yz planes perpendicular to the slab normal. With this setup, the net effect of the diffuse layer on the system would be a uniform shift, ∆φ DL , of the electrostatic potential in the quantum-mechanical region of space, provided that the latter is computed with open-boundary conditions (OBC) along the x axis. Thus, a possible definition of the full potential in the simulation cell is represented by where φ DL is given by Eqs. (17) or (18), and the shift is computed as Since the quantum-mechanical system is not bound to be perfectly homogeneous in the yz plane, its planar average, φ OBC yz (x) = A -1 φ OBC (r) dydz, is used in the above equation, where A is the surface area in the simulation cell. As a consequence, discontinuities can be present in the potential of Eq. ( Even though these discontinuities happen in a region of space which is not occupied by the quantum-mechanical system, they may be a source of numerical instabilities. To overcome this limitation, a slightly different path can be followed, where the diffuse-layer contribution to the potential is expressed as a one-dimensional continuous and smooth correction defined in the whole simulation cell, namely where The planar average of the potential on the right-hand side of the above equation can then be approximated by the one-dimensional potential of a planar-averaged charge distribution, namely where q is the total charge of the quantum-mechanical system and we have used the classical electrostatics result for the potential of a planar charge distribution. With the above formulation, the correction and its first derivative are both continuous at the interface. While the correction described here is similar in spirit to the 'electrochemical boundary conditions' from Refs. While the above correction is defined for open-boundary conditions, standard electronicstructure simulations usually exploit periodic-boundary conditions. In this case, an alternative expression of the electrostatic potential of the electrochemical interface can be obtained, which incorporates the handling of PBC artifacts and of the diffuse layer into a single continuous and smooth one-dimensional correction. In particular, an approximate OBC potential is obtained as and assuming a planar-averaged charge distribution a parabolic correction can be expressed where α 1D = π/3 is the Madelung constant of a one-dimensional lattice, V is the cell volume, q, d x , and Q xx are the monopole, dipole, and quadrupole moments along the x axis of the charge distribution. The corrected electrostatic potential can thus be easily expressed in terms of the PBC one as The above approach can be adopted for any situation where an analytical one-dimensional solution to the electrostatic problem is available. In the description of the diffuse layer, both the Gouy-Chapman model and its linearized version have analytical solutions that can be inserted into the φ DL (x) term. Although based on a planar-average approximation, this class of correction approaches has significant advantages, in terms of speed and stability, when compared to more advanced numerical solutions of the electrostatic equations. In order to tackle the linear-regime version of the PB problem, we solve the corresponding differential equation using a preconditioned gradient-based method as proposed by Fisicaro et al. using the following preconditioning operator: Therefore, instead of minimizing the residual function r (r) = b (r) -Aφ (r), one finds the solution of the problem by minimizing the preconditioned residual v (r) = P -1 r (r) = P -1 (b (r) -Aφ (r)). The algorithm has been proven to converge in a limited number of iterations for simple analytical cases where q (r) = ε (r)∇ 2 ε (r) and we have used The term q (r) can be evaluated only once and stored in memory. Once the terms r n (r) and v n (r) are computed, the evaluation of Av n (r) at each of the following iterations requires only vector-vector multiplications. The bottleneck of the algorithm is represented by the calculation of v n (r), which is calculated as 37 : The overall algorithm performance is thus highly dependent on the solution of the standard Poisson problem, which in our case is carried out in reciprocal space. The term r n (r) is computed instead from the knowledge of the residual function at the previous step r n-1 (r) and other quantities derived from the preconditioned residual v n (r) While the algorithm from Fisicaro et al. was tested in Ref. The preconditioned conjugate gradient algorithm from Ref. For the numerical solution of the full (size-modified) PB equation, we thus resort to the more robust Newton-based algorithm as proposed by Ringe et al. where G [φ n (r)] is the φ (r) functional derivative of the free-energy F [φ (r)]: Following Newton's iterative algorithm, the estimate for φ (r) at the the n-th step is obtained as: Here G [φ n (r)] is the Fréchet derivative of G [φ n (r)]: By rearranging the terms in Eq. 42, the following linear problem is recovered: Overall, the algorithm proceeds as follows: starting from an initial guess for φ (r), i.e. φ 0 (r), the charge and screening terms in Eq. 44 are evaluated. The new guess for the electrostatic potential, φ 1 (r), is then determined by solving the corresponding linear problem using the preconditioned conjugate-gradient procedure from Ref. All the electrolyte models discussed have been implemented in the developer version of the ENVIRON module All calculations have been performed using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchangecorrelation functional The Ag(100) slab has been constructed using 8 atomic layers at the bulk equilibrium lattice constant (4.149 Å). The slab has been fully relaxed only in vacuum. While electrolyteand solvent-related contributions to the atomic forces are accounted for and they in principle allow for fully self-consistent optimizations in the presence of the embedding continuum, test calculations for the present case show that further relaxations in implicit solvent negligibly affect the surface structure and the Fermi energy of the system. Particular care needs to be taken with respect to the simulation cell size when using the SSCS ('soft-sphere') cavity. If the diameter of the atom-centered spheres exceeds one of the cell lattice vectors, a sharp transition arises in the region where the spheres overlap with their neighboring periodic replicas, which can trigger numerical instabilities. In order to obtain a smooth interface function, one has to set the simulation cell size such that all the sphere diameters fit the simulation box. For this reason, calculations using the SSCS have been performed in a (2x2) supercell. We also note that the Ag sphere radii as part of the original SSCS parameterization The models characterized by a self-consistent optimization of the ionic countercharge density require large separations between periodic replicas of the slab along the surface normal. This is to account for the long-range electrolyte screening, whose typical length is the Debye length λ D . Due to the partial screening of the electrolyte charge by the dielectric, calculations that include implicit solvent require larger cell sizes along the surface normal. We have verified that Fermi energies are converged within few meVs for a 20 Å (60 Å) separation between periodic images for calculations in vacuum (implicit solvent). For calculations involving particularly low bulk ionic concentrations (≤ 0.04 M) we have doubled these spacings. Note that the planar-averaged implementation of the PB model does not require these large spacings, as one resorts to the analytical solution of the one-dimensional problem to set the electrostatic potential at the cell boundaries. Such calculations have been thus performed with a spacing of 20 Å between periodic images. For both the numerical and analytic electrolyte models, we have made use of the parabolic corrective scheme from Ref. While charge neutrality is often enforced by means of a Lagrange multiplier μ el in the search for the electrostatic potential φ (r) that minimizes the energy of the system We start by considering the differential capacitance (DC) of Ag(100) in a solution with the vacuum dielectric constant (ε 0 = 1), which allows us to disentangle the electrolyte effects from the role played by the dielectric medium. We first consider the planar-countercharge Helmholtz model (see Sections II B 1 and II C 1), which represents the lowest-rung diffuse layer model among the ones considered here. The inset shows the differential capacitance as a function of the potential, as calculated from the analytical derivative of the spline-interpolated charge-potential curves (same line styles as in the main plot). linear-regime PB model predicts a weak potential dependence of the DC, as also observed for the Helmholtz model, but the computed capacitance now depends on the electrolyte concentration. In particular, lower DC values correspond to lower ionic concentrations. ). As also observed for the linearized model, we find very good agreement between the capacitance curves computed with the planar-averaged approach, which exploits the analytical solution of the PBE along the surface normal, and the full numerical implementation. As illustrated in Figure The effect of the interface broadening on the DC is illustrated in Figure Figure Very similar DC-potential curves are obtained using the planar and SSCS cavities. The former produces slightly higher capacitance values, consistently with the electrolyte charge density more closely approaching interstitial surface regions with the soft-sphere interface. Both interfaces predict DC-potential curves that are asymmetric around the PZC, with slightly larger DC values at negative potentials as compared to the corresponding positive values. This is again consistent with the effective separation between the surface and the ionic density onset becoming smaller at negative potentials due to the larger electron density spilling towards the rigid electrolyte interface. Interestingly enough, the trend observed with the SCCS cavity is reversed. This density-dependent interface function, in fact, shifts the ionic density onset further away from the surface as the slab charge becomes more negative, effectively increasing the electrolyte-slab separation. Figure After having investigated the performance of the diffuse layer models in vacuum, we switch to simulations in implicit water and compare results to prototypical experimental data, presented in Figure to qualitatively reproduce the experimental potential trend, with the capacitance drop at the PZC and the DC saturation and decrease at large applied potentials. Instead, the Helmholtz and the linearized PB model fail to predict the capacitance minimum at the Concerning the cavity, the various interface functions have been found to give rise to overall similar capacitance values in vacuum, at least for parameterizations that lead to similar electrolyte charge distributions. The planar and SSCS cavities produce essentially identical results, and for this reason in the following we will consider only the latter, which better suits general interface geometries. The DC computed with the MPB model and the SCCS interface including the dielectric continuum are plotted in Figure As already observed in the vacuum environment, the MPB model predicts a DC drop at the PZC, which is more pronounced for the lowest electrolyte concentration simulated (c 0 = 0.04 M). This is in qualitative agreement with measurements. However, the overall absolute magnitude of the DC is severely underestimated, and the potential dependence computed is also much weaker than in experiments. where d 0 is the slab thickness. The adsorption energy E ads is varied in a range from 3k B T to 9k B T (i.e. from 80 meV to 230 meV at 300 K). Note that we simulate the asymmetric anion adsorption without accounting for solute-cation interactions. At the most negative potentials considered, where the electrostatic attraction of cations is much stronger than the imposed solute-anion interaction, the anion adsorption does not alter the computed DC. At the highest potentials simulated, the additional attractive interaction between surface and anions increases the electrolyte countercharge at the interface, thereby increasing the DC. At intermediate potentials, the anion adsorption shifts the DC minimum from the PZC towards negative potentials, where the electrostatic interaction compensates the anion attractive potential. The cavity parameterization is found to have a much larger influence on the absolute value of the computed DC. This is illustrated in Figure It is evident that none of the three SCCS cavities described so far is able to describe well experimental data: the original SCCS parameterization and the cation refit underestimate the measured DC, while the anion parameterization overestimates it. This is not surprising, considering that all three parameter sets have been fitted to solvation energies of isolated This last paramerization overall returns the best agreement with experimental data, even though it underestimates the measured DC in the potential region close to the PZC and more severely overestimates it for larger applied potentials. As clearly shown from the simulations in vacuum, the capacitance of the MPB model at large absolute potentials is strongly affected by the steric-repulsion between the ions (cf. Figure It is thus tempting to suggest that effective radii larger that the bare ones should be employed for the electrolyte particles, as also suggested in the literature on the basis of the strongly-bound solvent molecules surrounding ions in solution After having investigated the DC capacitance computed using density-based cavities, we now consider simulations performed with the SSCS interface function. Results are presented in Figure Figure recently achieved a similarly good description of the DC of Ag(100) with a soft-sphere-based continuum model Despite the overall good agreement with experimental data, the DC predicted using the SSCS cavity overestimates and underestimates the measured data at negative and positive potentials, respectively. The trend observed with the soft-sphere cavity in implicit solvent is consistent with the trends observed in vacuum with rigid cavities, which are found to predict an overall decreasing DC with increasing potential. In comparison, measurements exhibit slightly larger capacitance values at positive potentials, in better agreement with trends observed with the density-dependent SCCS cavity. Future work will clarify whether improved agreement with experimental data can be achieved by a specific refitting of the SCCS cavity. Regardless on the cavity employed, our findings suggest that the MPB model for the electrolyte is able to capture the main features of the experimental DC for Ag(100) in an ideally non-adsorbing ionic solution. We note in passing that in addition of being more physically sound, the MPB model is also more numerically stable than the standard PB model, as the extremely large ionic charge densities that the latter predicts at the boundary between the electrified surface and the solvent region are difficult to handle with the numerical solvers without the inclusion of a Stern layer. While avoiding such instabilities, the linearized-PB model is inadequate for describing the capacitance of a charged metal surface. As expected from the results in vacuum (Section III A), Figure Our results are in contrast with the finding from Ref. In summary, we have presented a hierarchy of electrolyte models that can be integrated in the framework of DFT to account for the presence of the diffuse layer in first-principles simulations of electrochemical interfaces. We have validated the accuracy of the models by Further accounting for solvent effects through a continuum dielectric allows for a direct comparison of computed DC values to experimental data. We observe a large influence of the choice of the dielectric cavity on the absolute DC values, consistently with previous findings While it is important to stress how the different approaches can be extended and tuned to improve the description of electrochemical systems, it is worth pointing out that the reported analysis is based on continuum models that only account for part of the physical phenomena occurring at electrified interfaces. At the center of the reported analysis is the description of the diffuse layer, of its shape and characteristics. Nonetheless, a more realistic model should account for the different sizes of the ions composing the electrolyte. Moreover, as it is also clear from the results reported, the dielectric properties of the liquid solution at the interface with a solid substrate need to be properly modeled in order for the continuum approach to be meaningful. The bare substrate and, even more, a charged interface will induce order and rigidity in the overlaying liquid, substantially affecting the dielectric permittivity over a distance of one or more solvation layers. The fact that current state-of-the-art continuum models are not able to describe with the same accuracy systems with different charge states, and in particular require a separate parameterization for anions, is clearly a limitation of the current techniques in dealing with electrified interfaces. Similarly, non-linear effects in the dielectric response of the liquid may account for some of the deviations observed at higher applied potentials. Other possibly minor effects that are not explicitly accounted for in the presented models are the ones related to the change in dielectric screening of the electrolyte solution for high concentrations of the diffuse layer. Cancellation of errors resulting from the parameterization of the model may lead to an approach that seems accurate, but lacks transferability. As more and more ingredients are added and carefully tuned, they will unlock the full potential of continuum models for electrochemical setups.