Compact optical detectors with fast binary photoswitching over a broad range of wavelength are essential as an interconnect for any light-based parallel, real-time computing. Despite of the tremendous technological advancements yet there is no such single device available that meets the specifications. Here we report a multifunctional self-powered highspeed ultrabroadband (250-1650 nm) photodetector based on g-C 3 N 4 /Si hybrid 2D/3D structure. The device shows a novel binary photoswitching (change in current from positive to negative) in response to OFF/ON light illumination at small forward bias ( 0.1 V) covering 250-1350 nm. At zero bias, the device displays an extremely high ON/OFF ratio of 1.2 × 10 5 under 680 nm (49 μWcm 2 ) illumination. The device also shows an ultrasensitive behaviour over the entire operating range at low light illuminations, with highest responsivity (1.2 AW 1 ), detectivity (2.8 × 10 14 Jones) and external quantum efficiency (213%) at 680 nm. The response and recovery speeds are typically 0.23 and 0.60 ms, respectively, under 288 Hz light switching frequency. Dramatically improved performance of our device is attributed to the heterojunctions formed by the ultrathin g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets embedded in the Si surface. Polymeric graphitic carbon-nitride (g-C 3 N 4 ) is an emerging two-dimensional (2D) layered material which is structurally congruent to graphene. It primarily constitutes of π-conjugated graphitic planes formed via sp schematically illustrates the exfoliation of the bulk g-C 3 N 4 powder into thin nanosheets upon ultrasonication in the ethanol solution for different exfoliation time periods of 2, 6 and 12 h. For gCN-12, the onset of the absorption spectrum is shifted to the deep UV region with suppression in intensity compared with that of the other samples. It is known that in g-C 3 N 4 ring, the lone-pair (LP) states are formed within the  band for sp 2 N, while it forms within  and * bands for sp 3 N. The oxidation states of the chemical constituents of the exfoliated nanosheets were determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The high-resolution XPS spectra of C 1s and N 1s are shown in Figure (C) 3 to C-N-C coordination were found to be 0.55 and 0.42 for bulk and gCN-12 samples, respectively, suggesting self-doping of tertiary N from the bridges with C. We must emphasize here that in the present case the bare p-Si, with similar silver contacts as the original device, did not show any photosensitivity under photovoltaic or photoconductive mode (shown in Supplementary Figure gives the schematic of the experimental setup used to measure the speed of the device. Figure These values are nearly 100 times faster than that of the recently reported hybrid photodetectors based on g-C 3 N 4. [16, 17] The performance of our photodetector is compared with the best-reported values for other hybrid photodetectors and are summarized in Table Furthermore, typical spectral response of commercial photodetectors are summarized in Velusamy et al. In summary, we have developed a multifunctional hybrid photodetector based on the g-C 3 N 4 /p-Si heterojunction. The built-in field at the n-p junction allows the device to operate over ultrabroadband region from 250 to 1650 nm in self-powered mode. Under zero bias, the device shows high photosensitivity, responsivity, detectivity, and fast response speed at lowintensity light illuminations. More importantly, we demonstrate for the first time binary photoswitching behavior over a wide region from 250 to 1350 nm at small bias in a single device. The high-performance photodetector, with the advantages of easy fabrication process and nobel binary behavior makes it suitable for light-based binary communications, optoelectronic interconnects for fast power-efficient computing and weak signal detections. From these observations, it is revealed that ultrathin g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets might potentially be also useful to improve the performance of Si solar cells significantly using the proposed technique. Preparation of g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets: The as-prepared g-C 3 N 4 yellow powder was commercially procured from Carbodeon Ltd Oy. The ultrathin g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets were exfoliated from the bulk powder using ultrasonication method. 60 mg of bulk g-C 3 N 4 was dispersed in 60 ml of ethanol (Alfa Aesar, 99% pure), and then the solution was sonicated in bath ultrasound sonicator for 2, 6 and 12 h. To maintain the temperature of solution during sonication, the water was changed at regular time intervals. Finally, the resulting sample solutions after exfoliation were labelled as gCN-2 (2 h), gCN-6 (6 h) and gCN-12 (12 h). The surface morphology of as-prepared exfoliated nanosheets and the fabricated device was characterized by scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. A UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer (Agilent CARY5000) was used to analyse the light absorption of the samples. The XPS spectra of the samples were studied by using a microfocused monochromatic Al K  X-ray source (1486.7 eV) and a seven channeltron hemispherical electron energy analyser (EA 125), under ultra-high vacuum conditions. The binding energy of the spectra were calibrated by considering the C1s peak position at 284.5 eV. Device Fabrication: To prepare g-C 3 N 4 /Si heterojunction photodetector, a highly doped 5 mm  5 mm, p-type silicon (100) wafer of resistivity 1-5  10 4 Ω was used as the substrate. Prior to deposition of gCN-12, the p-Si substrates were degreased using isopropanol (IPA) and acetone. Subsequently, HF acid (49%) was drop-casted on p-Si for a fixed interval to etch the top silicon dioxide surface. Immediately, after this step, the sample was thoroughly rinsed with DI water to remove any residual acid. Thereafter, gCN-12 solution was drop-casted on the etched p-Si surface for fixed time interval. Afterwards, HF was again used to firstly remove the loosely adhered nanosheets and secondly for underetching into Si. This helped to ensure that the remaining nanosheets were ultrathin in dimensions and were properly adhered to the Si substrate providing a good electrical conductivity. It is well established that HF does not react with the g-C 3 N 4 . Device Measurement: Steady-state photoconductivity (PC) measurements were performed at room temperature. The PC set-up constitutes Xenon and Quartz-Halogen lamps with a TMc 300 monochromator and a source meter (Keithley 2635B). The light intensity of the lamps was measured by using a calibrated Silicon (Si-DH) photodetector. In order to measure the speed of the device, the monochromatic light was modulated by a mechanical chopper and signal was measured by a high-speed digital storage oscilloscope (DSO).