The structural, vibrational, and electronic properties of Ni40Pd40P20 bulk metallic glass have been studied using ab initio molecular-dynamics simulations and total-energy optimization. Structural analyses of the resulting ab initio models show the presence of a few to no P-P bonds and two main building blocks, consisting of tricapped trigonal prism (TTP) and capped square anti-prism (CSAP) with P as the center of these blocks. The computed Pd and Ni K-edge spectra of extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) are found to be in good agreement with experimental data. The configurational averaged static structure factor and the generalized vibrational density of states are also observed to be in good agreement with experimental data. Metallic glasses (MG) are a class of amorphous metallic alloys that are produced by rapid quenching from a molten state at a sufficiently fast cooling rate so that crystal nucleation and growth can be avoided. The ability of a metal alloy to form a glass -the so called glass forming ability (GFA)depends on the critical cooling rate, which is defined as the slowest cooling rate at which the melt can be quenched into a glassy state. The smaller the critical cooling rate, the higher the GFA of a metallic alloy. In comparison to their crystalline metallic counterparts, BMGs possess unique properties such as higher strength, lower Young's modulus, improved wear resistance, good fatigue endurance, and excellent corrosion resistance, due mainly to the combination of metallic bonding and amorphous structure. Ni 40 Pd 40 P 20 was first prepared by Turnbull and coworkers, In this paper, we address the structural, electronic, and vibrational properties of Ni 40 Pd 40 P 20 bulk metallic glass using ab initio molecular-dynamics simulations based on densityfunctional theory by employing a bigger system size and relatively longer cooling rates. Thus far, only a few ab initio studies on the electronic and structural properties of Ni 40 Pd 40 P 20 have been reported in literature. The layout of the paper is as follows. In sec. II, we present the computational methodology that involves density functional theory based ab initio molecular-dynamics simulations, followed by total-energy relaxation. The results and associated discussions from our simulations are presented in sec. III, with an emphasis on the electronic, structural, and vibrational properties of the glass. Finally the summary and conclusions of our work are presented in sec. IV. Ab initio molecular-dynamics (AIMD) simulations and subsequent geometry relaxations were performed using the density functional theory code SIESTA. The Ni 40 Pd 40 P 20 simulations commenced with the generation of ten (10) independent initial random configurations, each comprising N = 300 atoms (120 Ni atoms, 120 Pd atoms, and 60 P atoms) placed in a cubic supercell at the experimental density 24 of 9.4 g/cm 3 . Each configuration was subjected to independent NVT runs by integrating the equations of motion using the velocity-Verlet algorithm, with a time step of ∆t = 1 fs. The temperature of the system was controlled by a chain of Nosé-Hoover thermostats. The vibrational density of states of each of the ten (10) geometrically-relaxed configurations was computed within the harmonic approximation. Small atomic displacements of 0.005 Å along six coordinate directions (±x, ±y, ±z) were applied to compute the total force on each atom. This corresponds to a total of 6N force computations, where N is the number of atoms. The dynamical matrix was constructed from the numerical derivatives of the forces with respect to the atomic displacement and diagonalized to obtain the vibrational eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors. The procedure was repeated for each of ten (10) configurations. All the properties presented in the sections to follow were averaged over the ten (10) independent configurations. While the total PCF exhibits a first minimum near 3.5 Å, the partial PCFs show varying first shell minima, from 2.3 Å for Ni-P to 3.8 Å for Pd-P and P-P. A direct implication of this variation is that there are virtually no or very little P-P bonds in the network. This is evident from the pair-correlation data in Fig. Figure where r jk = r k -r j is the vector from the position r j of the j-th atom to the position r k of the k-th atom (with periodic boundary conditions taken into account to mimic bulk effects), f j is the atomic form factor of the j-th atom, q is wave-vector transfer of magnitude q and symbol . indicates the rotational averaging of q of magnitude q over a solid angle of 4π where a j , b j , and c are atom-type specific empirical constants taken from Ref. 32. The match between the simulated structure factor with experiment in Fig. To further verify the credibility of the models presented in this work, we compare a key structural property, namely the extended X-ray absorption fine-structure spectroscopy (EX-AFS), of our simulated atomistic configurations to available experimental data. For a given configuration, 6 Å clusters centered on the absorber (that is the Pd or K atom) are carved out used as input to the FEFF9 ab initio multiple scattering code, where Ω(k) is the Hanning window function. In Figs. 7(a) and 7(b), the simulated K-edge k 2 χ(k) EX-AFS and the magnitude of its Fourier transform, | χ(R)| for Pd are depicted and compared recent experimental data due to Kumar et al. Depicted in Fig. The vibrational analysis of our models was based on the vibrational eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors obtained by diagonalizing the dynamical matrix. Specifically, we computed the atom-projected vibrational density of states (VDOS), total VDOS, generalized VDOS, and the inverse participation ratio (IPR). The vibrational density of states, g α (ω), projected on atoms of type α at frequency ω is given by where α=Ni, Pd or P, {ω i : i = 1, 3N } are the phonon eigenfrequencies, N α is the total number of atoms of type α, and |χ ij | 2 is the contribution of atom j to the square of the amplitude of the normalized phonon eigenvector corresponding to the i th phonon eigenfrequency ω i . From the definition of g α (ω), the total vibrational density of states, g(ω), inverse participation ratio, IPR(ω), and generalized vibrational density of states (GVDOS) where N is the total number of atoms, exp(-2W α ) is the Debye-Waller factor for the atom of type α, c α is the concen-tration of atoms of type α in the system, σ α is the total scattering cross-section of atom α and M α is the atomic mass of atom of type α. For this work, the weight factors w α (in equations 7 and 8) from the experimental work of Suck The structural, electronic, and vibrational properties of Ni 40 Pd 40 P 20 bulk metallic glass have been studied using ab initio molecular-dynamics simulations and total-energy minimizations. Since multi-component BMGs are characterized by a variety of atomic environments, an ensemble of ten (10) independent 300-atom structural configurations were simulated and studied in an effort to take into account the effect of configuration fluctuations on the geometric, electronic, and vibrational properties of glassy structure factor obtained from our simulations is found to be in excellent agreement with experimental data. Likewise, the simulated Ni and Pd K-edge EXAFS spectra, averaged over 10 independent configurations, are also observed to be in good agreement with experimental measurements. The structural analysis of the resulting 10 configurations shows the absence of P-P bonds, with the segregated P atoms acting as the centers for distorted tricapped trigonal prisms and capped square anti-prism geometries. An analysis of the electronic density of states indicates that P atoms form strong covalent bonds with Ni and P at low energies, while the bonding states near the (Color online) Comparison of the calculated generalized vibrational densities of states (GVDOS) with inelastic neutronscattering experimental data, due to Suck. We conclude this section with the following observation. A question of considerable importance that the current study could not address is the role of medium-range order on the nanometer length scale, which has been postulated as one of the qualities that give rise to the unique properties of BMGs. Although the presence of a few structural motifs in the glassy Ni 40 Pd 40 P 20 environment is indicative of the medium-range order, the limited size of the models does not permit us to address this issue directly from our simulations. Nonetheless, the approach presented here can be employed profitably to simulate larger models on the nanometer length scale by using small high-quality structural configurations as the basic building blocks, which has the correct short-range order and the local chemistry built into it. In future, we shall address this building-block approach by combining the small structural units developed here to form a super structure/unit and annealing the resultant the super structure through a series of temperatures. Such an approach would be computationally efficient and the resulting models should provide an accurate structural basis to address the nanoscale properties of bulk metallic glasses. FIG. 3. (Color online)