We recently demonstrated that the superconductor-to-insulator transition induced by ionic liquid gating of the high temperature superconductor YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) is accompanied by a deoxygenation of the sample [Perez-Munoz et al., PNAS 114, 215 (2017)]. DFT calculations helped establish that the pronounced changes in the spectral features of the Cu K-edge absorption spectra measured in situ during the gating experiment arise from a decrease of the Cu coordination within the CuO chains. In this work, we provide a detailed analysis of the electronic structure origin of the changes in the spectra resulting from three different types of doping: i) the formation of oxygen vacancies within the CuO chains, ii) the formation of oxygen vacancies within the CuO2 planes and iii) the electrostatic doping. For each case, three stoichiometries are studied and compared to the stoichiometric YBa2Cu3O7, i.e YBa2Cu3O6.75, YBa2Cu3O6.50 and YBa2Cu3O6.25. Computed vacancy formation energies further support the chain-vacancy mechanism. In the case of doping by vacancies within the chains, we study the effect of oxygen ordering on the spectral features and we clarify the connection between the polarization of the x-rays and this doping mechanism. Finally, the inclusion of the Hubbard U correction on the computed spectra for antiferromagnetic YBa2Cu3O6.25 is discussed. The use of electric fields to alter the conductivity of correlated electron oxides is a powerful tool to probe their fundamental nature as well as for the possibility of developing novel electronic devices. The electric double layer (EDL) technique has recently been demonstrated to be an ideal tool to study the physics of high T c cuprates enabling controlled changes of carrier concentration by making use of an ionic liquid as a gate dielectric The electronic structure and geometrical optimization have been performed using the pwscf utility of Quantu-mESPRESSO For vacancies created within the planes, we computed one atomic ordering for each stoichiometry. For δ=0.50, we considered alternating filled and empty chains (Figure The NEXAFS spectra are computed using the fully relaxed geometries described above and, for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , a 2×2×1 supercell was used with a 3×3×1 Monkhorst-Pack grid. We employ the Fermi's golden rule for the calculations of the transition probabilities that enter the expression of the x-ray absorption cross section. For this, we use single-particle Kohn-Sham states for both the initial and final states. Both the electric dipole and the electric quadrupole matrix elements were computed; however, here, the latter was found to be negligible and can be safely neglected. The initial state is the 1s orbital of Cu and the final states are unoccupied Kohn-Sham eigenstates derived from a self-consistent field computed within the excited electron and core-hole (XCH) approximation. The final state is computed self consistently using a core-excited pseudopotential for the excited atom and an extra electron added to the total number of ground-state valence electrons In YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , the Cu(1) atoms located in the CuO chains exhibit a square planar coordination in the yz plane while the Cu(2) atoms within the Cu 2 O planes exhibit a square pyramidal coordination (see Figure x -O(1) p x state also localized on the apical O(4) oxygen) and lying within the Mott gap (between 0 and 1 eV in the PBE+U band structure in Figure The XAS spectra measured under the external voltage are reported in Figure YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 exhibits two inequivalent Cu atoms as shown in Figure For YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.50 , since both Cu(1) in the oxygenempty and Cu(1) in the oxygen-filled chains have no neighboring O along x, their density of Cu p x states looks similar, which is also similar for Cu(1) in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (green curves in Figure These changes can be rationalized as follows. For YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , Cu(1) exhibits a four-fold coordination in the yz plane, and within ligand field theory, σ metalligand bonds along the y direction, i.e. Cu(1)-O(1) bonds, result from the overlap of Cu(1) 4p y with O(1) 2p y -derived σ y (and from Cu(1) 3d x2 -y2 with 2p y -derived states). These occupied σ bonds are not probed here while the corresponding σ * antibonding orbitals are allowed electric-dipole transitions probed at the white line. The main edge corresponds also to unoccupied σ * states arising from the CuO 2 planes. In the presence of O vacancies along y, the Cu(1) ligand field changes from square planar to linear, with Cu(1) atoms forming Cu-O bonds only along the z direction. As a result, nonbonding Cu(1) 4p y states are probed in the pre-edge region. As the number of vacancies increases, the number of available antibonding states from the chain decreases, reducing the transition probabilities. Accordingly, spectral weight is transferd from the main edge to the pre- edge as shown in Figure In the upper, middle and lower panels of Figure Next, we studied the two different vacancy orderings for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.50 and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.75 . The spectra reported in Figure in the lower panels of Figure The middle panel of Figure We notice that the structure of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.50 exhibits a signficant modification of the CuO bond lengths within the vacancy-doped plane. Shorter Cu(2)-O(3) bond lengths along x are found for O(2) vacancies along the y direction. This results in alternating chains (within the plane) of Cu atoms and CuO bonds along y whit CuO bond lengths along x of 1.86 Å and 2.06 Å (as a reference, the bond length of planar CuO in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 is 1.92 Å), respectively. Our analysis of the projected density of states indicates that the longer bonds of the Cu(2) atoms exhibits weaker bonding and lower antibonding states compared to YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , resulting in spectra peaked at lower energy, as illustrated in the second lower panel of Figure We also find a slightly larger charge on the atoms with shorter bonds, resulting from the absence of π backbonding donation. However, this feature contributes negligibly to a shift of the spectra as illustrated in the bottom panel of Figure Cu atoms contribute to the shift resulting in a more noticeable change of the whole spectrum. We computed the O vacancy formation energy for five configurations. For YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.75 in configuration (c) of Figure where E vac is the total energy of YBa 10 eV for iii), iv) and v), respectively, showing that two vacancies prefer to align on the same chain rather than in a checkerboard configuration. Again, even when vacancies align within the plane, they are thermodynamically less favorable then any computed chain configuration. Thus, for a bulk system and in absence of electric field, once an O vacancy is created in the chain, additional vacancies tend to localize next to it within the same chain. The lower panel of Figure As discussed above, for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.25 , an insulating antiferromagnetic phase is expected. However, even if we impose an antiferromagnetic G-type ordering using PBE, a metallic state is obtained. In order to open a gap, the self-interaction error intrinsic to standard functionals which mostly affects localized orbitals should be corrected. Here, we show, in agreement with previous results by Lopez et al. We report NEXAFS spectra computed for three different doping mechanisms of bulk YBCO: i) doping by O vacancies within the chain, ii) doping by O vacancies within the planes and iii) electrostatic doping. A purely electrostatic doping can be safely ruled out as the computed almost-rigid shift of the spectra does not correspond to the experimental observations. The spectral changes computed for O vacancies within the CuO chains best resemble the experimental data: a progressive increase in the intensity of the pre-edge features and decrease in the intensity in the white line is predicted and experimentally detected. When O vacancies are created within the chain, the Cu coordination of these Cu atoms change from four-fold to linear, resulting in the formation of non bonding 4p states (probed at the pre-edge) between neighboring Cu atoms along the empty chain and in the absense of antibonding CuO states along the chain (probed at the white line). O vacancies within the CuO 2 plane result in spectral features similar to the chain-vacancy case, however a clear red-shift of the white line is predicted but not measured. In the case of O vacancies located within the chain, we analyze the atomdecomposed contribution for better interpretation, the sensitivity of the spectral changes on the vacancy arrangements and on the orientation of the sample with respect to the polarization of the x-rays. Differencies in the computed vacancy formation energies also support the preferred chain-vacancy picture. This study suggests the electrochemical doping occurring upon EDL gating and reported in Ref. 