In recent years, single element two-dimensional (2D) atom crystal materials have aroused extensive interest in many applications. Blue phosphorus, successfully synthesized on Au (111) substrate by molecular beam epitaxy not long ago, shows unusual geometrical and electronic structures. We investigate the electronic structures and transport properties of zigzag blue phosphorene nanoribbons (ZBPNRs) by using a first-principles method, which can be obviously tuned via different groups (i.e., -H, -O, and -OH) passivation on the both edges. The ZBPNRs-H and ZBPNRs-OH present a wide gap semiconductor property. While the ZBPNRs-O are metallic. Interestingly, the current-voltage (I-V) curves of ZBPNRs-O show a negative differential resistive (NDR) effect, which is independent on the ribbon width. The electric current through the ZBPNRs-O is mainly flowing along the both outside zigzag phosphorus chains via the way of P-P bond current. Through modifying the both edges with various functional groups, the ZBPNRs can display some important functional characteristics and become a candidate of NDR devices. VER the past decades, some two-dimensional materials, such as graphene Phosphorene has a variety of allotropes based on their different atomic structure arrangement. It includes the common white, red, violet, and black allotropes, with the color defined by the bandgap. Phosphorene is studied with the hope of overcoming graphene's deficiencies, such as its zero bandgap. It has been emerged as a promising new two-dimensional material due to its intrinsic and tunable bandgap, high carrier mobility and remarkable in-plane anisotropic electrical, optical and phonon properties Zhu et al. In this work, we investigate the electronic structures and transport properties of zigzag blue phosphorene nanoribbons by a first-principles method, which can be obviously tuned through three different functional groups (i.e., -H, -O, and -OH) passivation on both edges. It makes them display semi-conductive and metallic characteristics, respectively. This edge-passivation way makes the blue phosphorous nanoribbons present more abundant electronic transport phenomena and can be useful for the design of phosphorous-based nano-electronic devices. We study the electronic transport properties of the ZBPNRs-based devices by density functional theory combined with the non-equilibrium Green's functions method (NEGF-DFT) The atomic structures are optimized until the absolute value of force acting on each atom is less than 0.01 eV/Å. The k-points grid 1 × 1 × 100 is used to sample the Brillouin zone of electrodes in the X, Y, and Z directions (transport direction), respectively. Fig. Up on structural optimization of the unpassivated ZBPNRs, the interior part of the nanoribbons experiences negligible structural change, but the edges of the nanoribbons show some degree of deformations Therefore, we try to stabilize the ZBPNRs by passivating the both edges with -H, -O, and -OH groups. ZBPNRs-H and ZBPNRs-OH have the comparable band gaps and may also have potential applications in the field of logic transistors More details of the calculation method can be found in the previous reports In order to further understand the electronic transport properties of ZBPNRs-O under limited bias voltages, the I-V curves of the ZBPNRs-O with various ribbon widths are calculated and depicted in Fig. It suggests that the ZBPNRs-O can be used as a candidate of NDR nano-devices, and have the potential applications in nano-electronics, e.g., high-frequency oscillators, multipliers, logic, and analog-to-digital converters. In general, for one-dimensional nanoribbons, their electronic structures (i.e., band structures) dominant the electronic transport behaviors. The NDR effect of the ZBPNRs-O can be understood most directly by the transmission spectra and band structures of the left and right electrodes under the biases of 0.3 and 1.0 V (see Fig. The To understand the intuitive electronic transmission mechanism of the ZBPNRs-O, we further analyzed the transmission eigenstates and transmission pathways (i.e. local currents) The arrows refer to the direction of electric current. As shown in Fig. In this paper, the electronic transport properties of zigzag blue phosphorene nanoribbons are investigated using first-principles method. Our calculations results demonstrate that, it can be tuned obviously through passivating the both edges of nanoribbons with some functional groups (i.e., -H, -O, and -OH). The ZBPNRs-H present a wide gap semiconductor property, and their indirect band gap changes little with increasing the ribbon width. While, the ZBPNRs-O display the metallic characteristics, and their I-V curves show an interesting NDR effect, which are independent on their ribbon widths. The electric currents through ZBPNRs-O are mainly flowing along the both outside zigzag phosphorus chains via the way of P-P bond current. The odd and even ZBPNRs-O have the parallel and symmetrical electron transmission pathways, respectively. Moreover, the ZBPNRs-OH also display a semiconductor property but with a direct band gap. Our results suggest that modifying the edges with some functional groups is an effective method to tune the electronic structures and transport properties of zigzag blue phosphorene nanoribbons. And the proposed ZBPNRs-O could become the candidates of the nanodevices with the NDR effect.