Hyperbolic polariton modes are highly appealing for a broad range of applications in nanophotonics, including surfaced enhanced sensing, sub-diffractional imaging and reconfigurable metasurfaces. The existence of this type of mode depends on extreme anisotropy in the optical properties of a natural or artificial material. However, due to their high in-plane momentum (short polariton wavelength), these hyperbolic polaritons cannot be launched by light propagating in free space. Here we show that attenuated total reflectance micro-spectroscopy (ATR) using standard spectroscopic tools can launch hyperbolic polaritons in a Kretschmann-Raether configuration. We measure multiple hyperbolic and dielectric modes within the naturally hyperbolic material hexagonal boron nitride as a function of different isotopic enrichments and flake thickness. This overcomes the technical challenges of measurement approaches based on nanostructuring, or scattering scanning nearfield optical microscopy. Ultimately, our ATR approach allows us to compare the optical properties of small-scale materials prepared by different techniques systematically. Hyperbolic polaritons are a class of polaritonic Due to the extreme anisotropy in the optical response, hyperbolic polaritons propagate through the volume of the material, analogous to plane waves in a dielectric medium, but provide exceptional wavelength compression (optical confinement) consistent with surface polaritons. Furthermore, hyperbolic polaritons can be supported at arbitrarily large wavevectors at a given frequency, but the propagation direction within the material is dictated by the dielectric function Traditionally hyperbolic behaviour was achieved by using artificial metamaterials consisting of superlattices of alternating sub-wavelength size metal and dielectric layers Consequently, hBN has two spectral bands where hyperbolic polaritons can be supported, of both Type I (spectral range ~740-825 cm -1 , the 'lower Reststrahlen band') and Type II (spectral range ~1360-1614cm -1 , the 'upper Reststrahlen band'). As the hyperbolic behaviour arises from the interaction of light with phonons, the scattering lifetimes are orders of magnitude longer than surface plasmons and thus result in substantially lower absorption losses Here we demonstrate how infrared attenuated total reflectance (ATR) spectroscopy using an ATR microscope objective, can efficiently launch and measure the properties of hyperbolic phonon polaritons (HPhPs) and anisotropic dielectric resonances in a Kretschmann-Raether In ATR spectroscopy a high refractive index prism provides a high in-plane momentum to couple into polariton modes, with wavevector k=k0n1sin(θ') (illustrated in Fig. The bright lines (corresponding to maxima in the imaginary part of the Fresnel coefficient) represent hyperbolic polariton modes. Note, this hyperbolic dispersion exhibits multiple branches, each with successively higher spatial confinement (wavelength compression) at the same frequency. This is a hallmark of hyperbolic media, with the number of branches and the corresponding slopes being strongly thickness dependent Reststrahlen regions. This provides strong motivation that this proposed approach can be used to systematically investigate polaritons in small flakes of 2D materials Our experimental approach to launching hyperbolic polaritons is based around a commercially available (Bruker Optics) ATR microscope objective, schematically shown in Fig 1a . A germanium prism (n1~4) with a base diameter of ~100um is mounted at the focal point of a 20x Cassegrain-type reflective microscope objective (NA=0.6). This prism is pressed onto the surface of the sample with a force 0.5 N, ensuring good optical contact between the sample and the prism. Any non-uniformities in this interface will lead to a small gap between sample and prism, however these will be extremely small compared with the incident wavelength and thus can be neglected. The as-manufactured ATR objective provides light at incident angles between approximately 22 and 37°, thus potentially broadening the range of polaritonic wavevectors that are simultaneously launched and collected. This would potentially produce significant angular broadening in the collected spectra. In order to reduce the effects of angular spreading, we added a custom-made aperture plate to the objective, which restricted the incident angle to θ=33±4° (as labelled in Fig Thus, the requirement of achieving TIR places stringent requirements on the possible substrates for the polariton film and must be taken into account for any experimental design. To address the choice of an appropriate substrate for the measurement, we consider the critical angle for TIR. The critical angle (θc) is defined in terms of the refractive index of the prism (n1) and of the substrate as (n2) ). ( Our samples consist of flakes of hBN, mechanically exfoliated onto a thick SiO2 layer grown on silicon. The critical angle for SiO2 (n~1.62) is 24°, and Si (n~3.4) is 58°, which means that ATR measurements can be performed on SiO2 and other low-index dielectric substrates, but that high index substrates such as silicon require incident angles that cannot be accessed within the current objective design. This has significant implications for sample preparation. For instance, while we exfoliated hBN layers onto thin films of SiO2 grown on silicon, it is also important to ensure the evanescent wave launched at the prism-SiO2 interface does not significantly interact with the silicon substrate. This is dictated by the decay length (l) of an evanescent field resulting from the TIR of the incident light with an incident free-space wavelength λ that is launched at the prism boundary and is given by the equation For the case of θ=30, n 1 =~4, n 2 ~ 1.62 and λ~7μm, the decay length is 950nm, so to ensure that no significant interactions with the silicon substrate occur, the oxide thickness must be a few times larger than this decay length. Thus, in our experiments we choose a SiO2 thickness of 3 μm for our sample. Three types of hBN crystals are studied in this work with natural isotopic concentration (~80% 11 B/ ~20% 10 B) A representative, p-polarized ATR reflectance spectra of a 490nm thick flake of naturally abundant hBN is provided in Fig. In addition to the hyperbolic modes, in s-polarized reflectance (Fig. highly anisotropic Mie resonances have not been measured previously, and could potentially be used for the creation of nanoscale dielectric Mie-type resonators in the IR As the angle of the incident light is difficult to vary in our microscope-based setup, we cannot systematically plot out the dispersion curve for a given flake as the in-plane momentum cannot be controlled. We note that with more advanced objective designs that a variable incidence angle could potentially be realized. Instead, we can study the dispersion of each mode using different thicknesses of boron nitride. Unlike in conventional polaritonic systems, where the mode frequency is relatively insensitive to film thickness, as mentioned above, hyperbolic modes are extremely sensitive to such changes. This is because each HPhP in the spectrum can be considered an 'etalon-like' mode since hyperbolic polaritons propagate within the bulk material at a distinct, frequency-dependent propagation angle To illustrate the potential of this technique for distinguishing different materials, determining their hyperbolic properties and the potential for extracting the IR dielectric function, we compare hBN with three different isotopic purities of boron; 20% 10 B, 80% 11 B (naturally abundant), ~99% 10 B and ~99% 11 B. In Fig. The significant absorption in thin films of hBN is attributed to the high photonic density of states in a hyperbolic material. By fitting the calculated absorption line (shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have proposed and demonstrated the ability to implement ATR micro-spectroscopy as a means for launching and probing hyperbolic polaritons and dielectric resonances in 2D materials. This approach relies on both careful definition of the incident angle and polarization state. Using this method, we measured three distinct HPhPs in the upper, and two in the lower Reststrahlen band of hBN, as confirmed by comparisons with numerical models. Furthermore, we observed highly anisotropy, extreme-index dielectric resonances that have not been detected previously. Subsequently, by measuring a range of flakes with different thicknesses, we were able to show the dispersing nature of hBN polaritons and that our technique can distinguish flakes of different materials, demonstrated here for varying isotopic purity hBN. Finally, we used electromagnetic simulations to show that this approach could be used to estimate the dielectric properties of hBN flakes. Whilst this technique has limitations, most notably the single incident angle, the broad spectral range allows flexible, simple investigations of a range of different materials of varying size, shape or polariton frequencies. This makes this technique the only means of providing quick, high throughput measurements of a range of different potential hyperbolic materials. 