Owing to the natural compatibility with current semiconductor industry, silicon allotropes with diverse structural and electronic properties provide promising platforms for the next-generation Si-based devices. After screening 230 all-silicon crystals in the zeolite frameworks by first-principles calculations, we disclose two structurally stable Si allotropes (AHT-Si 24 and VFI-Si 36 ) containing open channels as topological node-line semimetals with Dirac nodal points forming a nodal loop in the k z =0 plane of Brillouin zone. Interestingly, their nodal loops protected by inversion and time-reversal symmetries are robust against SU(2) symmetry breaking due to very weak spin-orbit coupling of Si. When the nodal lines are projected onto the (001) surface, flat surface bands can be observed because of the nontrivial topology of the bulk band structures. Our discoveries extend the topological physics to the three-dimensional Si materials, highlighting the possibility to realize low-cost, nontoxic and semiconductor-compatible Si-based electronics with topological quantum states. Silicon is the backbone of modern microelectronics due to its natural abundance, nontoxicity, propensity for doping, high-temperature stability, and native oxide passivation layer Cmcm-Si 24 Ignited by the successful theoretical design In this letter, we show by first-principles calculations that it is indeed possible to obtain the desired TSM in the all-silicon solids. Upon screening 230 candidate structures in zeolite framework, we identify two open-framework Si allotropes termed as AHT-Si 24 and VFI-Si 36 , belonging to TSMs. With all sp 3 bonding, these two structures show satisfactory stability, prevailing many other metastable Si allotropes. Both of them exhibit a novel TNLSM state with Dirac nodal points forming a closed loop within the k z = 0 plane of BZ, and the flat bands around the Fermi level projected on the (001) surfaces. Distinct from most of the known TNLSMs formed by heavy elements, the symmetry-protected nodal lines in these two phases are robust against the breaking of SU(2) spin rotation symmetry at temperature higher than 14 K because of the weak spin-orbit coupling (SOC) of Si element. The pioneering synthesis of Cmcm-Si 24 The atomic and electronic structures of these 230 all-Si candidate structures from the IZA database were computed using density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package Upon relaxation, all these hypothetic zeolite-like Si framework structures are well preserved. With such abundant Si crystal lattices, a rich variety of electronic properties is observed from the calculated PBE band structures, ranging from direct and indirect semiconductors, metals, to semimetals. The key data are listed in Table Finally, two zeolite-like Si structures, i.e., AHT-Si 24 and VFI-Si 36 with linear bands crossing near the Fermi level, are confirmed as semimetals. Hereafter, we will focus on AHT-Si 24 as a representative. This suggests that the AHT-Si 24 phase could also be synthesized by the high-pressure precursor method The calculated cohesive energy of AHT-Si 24 is 5.17 eV, which is less than that of d-Si by 0.25 eV/atom [Fig. is the Abelian Berry connection. For AHT-Si For a TNLSM, another key feature is the existence of flat surface bands which provides the possibility for experimental detection by angle-resolved photoemission measurement Table Si On the basis of the structural character of AHT-Si 24 , we constructed a hypothetical Na-Si system as the possible precursor, termed as AHT-Na 4 Si 24 . Upon fully optimization, AHT-Na 4 Si 24 can well maintain the crystal structure of pristine AHT-Si 24 at ambient pressure [see Fig. and Cmcm-Na 4 Si 24 , are also presented. Notably, the cohesive energy of AHT-Na 4 Si 24 is larger than that of P/6m-NaSi 6 by 0.9 eV per NaSi 6 , suggesting that when AHT-Na 4 Si 24 is fabricated, it would be even more stable than P/6m-NaSi 6 at ambient pressure. Furthermore, the stability of AHT-Na The optimized structure of VFI-Si 36 is shown in Fig. To guide the experimental observation of AHT-Si 24 and VFI-Si 36 , their X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were simulated. The results are plotted in Fig. 