Changes in lattice structure across sub-regions of protein crystals are challenging to assess when relying on whole crystal measurements. Because of this difficulty, macromolecular structure determination from protein micro and nano crystals requires assumptions of bulk crystallinity and domain block substructure. To evaluate the fidelity of these assumptions in protein nanocrystals we map lattice structure across micron size areas of cryogenically preserved three-dimensional peptide crystals using a nano-focused electron beam. This approach produces diffraction from as few as 1,500 molecules in a crystal, is sensitive to crystal thickness and three-dimensional lattice orientation. Real-space maps reconstructed from unsupervised classification of diffraction patterns across a crystal reveal regions of crystal order/disorder and three-dimensional lattice reorientation on a 20nm scale. The lattice nano-ripples observed in micron-sized macromolecular crystals provide a direct view of their plasticity. Knowledge of these features is a first step to understanding crystalline macromolecular self-assembly and improving the determination of structures from protein nano and microcrystals from single or serial crystal diffraction. The physical and chemical properties of a protein crystal depend in part on its underlying lattice structure. Changes in the packing of macromolecules within crystals perturb this structure as is exemplified by crystal polymorphism Direct views of a protein crystal lattice can be obtained by high resolution electron microscopy Macromolecular structures can be obtained from similar nanocrystals by selected area electron diffraction-based methods such as MicroED Structures determined by MicroED or similar approaches range in size from small molecules to proteins, including a variety of peptides In electron microscopy, greater control over illuminated areas is achieved by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), which scans a focused electron beam (typically <1nm) across a sample to produce images of relatively thick bio specimens In contrast, a scanning nanobeam diffraction experiment records diffraction patterns on a two-dimensional pixelated detector at each scan position across a sample. Each Scanx x Scany position of the scan has a Kx x Ky dimension in reciprocal space (diffraction image) resulting in a four-dimensional data set (4DSTEM) Here we analyse beam-sensitive three-dimensional peptide nanocrystals at liquid nitrogen temperatures by 4DSTEM. Our findings address a lack of direct estimates of nano-scale lattice variation in single protein crystals by other diffraction methodologies and their relationship to diffraction data quality. Our measurements reveal effects that may influence MicroED experiments and other nanocrystallography methods including those performed at x-ray free electron lasers To assess nanoscale lattice changes within single peptide crystals, we generated twodimensional maps of their lattice structure by 4DSTEM (Fig 1 .). We evaluated nanocrystals of a prion peptide segment with sequence QYNNQNNFV, whose structure has been previously determined (PDB ID 6AXZ) by MicroED to sub-Å resolution During 4DSTEM data collection, an approximately six nanometre electron beam (Supplementary Figure These parameters yielded diffraction patterns whose resolution extended beyond 1.4 Å (Supplementary Figure Diffraction patterns integrated over micron-sized regions of single crystals, matched MicroED patterns measured from a micron-sized selected area (Supplementary Figure Conventional electron counting in HRTEM is achieved by thresholding images acquired using a fast direct electron detector based on estimates of detector readout and Landau noise Raw patterns collected on a K2 direct electron detector at 400 frames per second were processed using a workflow that involves background subtraction, normalization, thresholding, and pixel-level stepwise counting (Supplementary Figure Pixel-wise processing of data also allowed us to correct diffraction pattern shifts due to beam scanning using centre of mass alignment (Supplementary Figure To better understand changes in the pattern of Bragg reflections observed across different areas of a single crystal, we performed unsupervised classification of patterns in each scan (Fig. The number and intensity of Bragg reflections varied across classified patterns (Fig. To obtain context for the spatial distribution of changes in lattice structure in peptide crystals we observed by 4DSTEM, we performed HRTEM of similar crystals in search of similar effects Fourier Transforms of whole crystal images showed clear variation in Bragg reflections when different crystallites are imaged or when comparing crystalline features to empty regions within holes or regions of carbon support (Supplementary Figure To reveal the lattice substructure within beam-sensitive three-dimensional crystals, we performed 4DSTEM on peptide nanocrystals at cryogenic temperatures. In contrast to the semi-crystalline polymers studied previously by 4DSTEM Unlike other methods of protein crystal characterization The changes in diffraction we observe across micron-sized regions of peptide nanocrystals point to inhomogeneities across a single crystal. These differences are not only diagnostic of regions with strong and weak diffraction within individual crystals, but also point to changes in the orientation of the lattice within a crystal. These lattice nano-ripples in sub-micron regions of a single nanocrystal are difficult to detect by methods that make use of selected area electron diffraction, as well as those that integrate diffraction from whole crystals. This is especially true after data from multiple crystals is merged The lattice nano-ripples observed by 4DSTEM differ from conventional domain blocks. Whereas conventional mosaic blocks have discrete boundaries and a semi-random distribution of orientations, we observe a more gradual, progressive change in orientation as a function of spatial localization. Presently, our library-based orientation assignment acts on the average diffraction over clustered patterns and requires known cell constants, but improved interpretation of single sparse patterns and ab initio indexing of electron diffraction patterns may alleviate one or both of these limitations. Despite present limitations, nanoscale lattice changes in our crystals are more readily identifiable from 4DSTEM scans than from HRTEM images of similar nanocrystals owing to the higher contrast of Bragg peaks captured by diffraction. Transforms of sub-regions within a 3D lysozyme nanocrystal have shown similar lattice differences across a single crystal Interpretation of our own images of frozen-hydrated peptide nanocrystals presents similar challenges (Supplementary Figure Lastly, by allowing nanoscale (20nm) interrogation of lattice structure in macromolecular crystals, 4DSTEM offers a potential way to shrink the number of molecules required for structure determination by electron diffraction from single or serial crystal data. Crystals were grown as previously described Crystal suspensions were diluted two-fold in water or crystallization buffer before being dispensed onto holey carbon grids (Quantifoil 2/4, #300 copper; Ted Pella Inc) and allowed to air dry. Samples were introduced into the TEAM I microscope (FEI Titan) with a Gatan 636 Cryo holder, cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures throughout all data acquisition. The TEAM I microscope was operated at 300 keV in STEM mode with a convergence half-angle of 0.5 mrad resulting in a ~6nm convergent beam (Supplementary Figure The total dose imparted per 4DSTEM scan step was estimated as follows: The convergent probe was imaged in TEM mode at high magnification using a Gatan US1000 CCD detector with an exposure time of 10 seconds and all other beam settings the same as those used for data acquisition (Supplementary Figure All data processing was performed using custom scripts written in the MATLAB (MathWorks) programming language. Patterns belonging to a single area scan were jointly processed to achieve hybrid counting as follows. We computed an average pattern from all of the images within each dataset (Supplementary Figure To recover some of the dynamic range lost due to coincident electron events we implemented a 'hybrid counting' approach. Here we divided all pixel values by the calculated threshold and the floor function of these values was taken to give an estimate of the degree of coincident electron events occurring at individual pixels on the detector. (Supplementary Figure The horizontal and vertical shift of diffraction patterns induced by beam tilt during these relatively low magnification scans was corrected by tracking the centre of mass of the transmitted beam. As the signal to noise in a single pattern was not sufficient to calculate this accurately we separated the problem into two steps, independently correcting shifts in the x-scan and y-scan directions. A strip wise average of patterns was taken along the direction to be corrected; for example, for a 72x50 scan we would first average patterns along the first dimension to give 1x50 strip wise averaged patterns. The centre of mass of the transmitted beam was used to give an estimate of the pixel shift for each strip and individual datasets within this strip were shifted to a common centre based on this. This process was repeated in the second dimension. For most datasets, just one round of shift correction was sufficient but in cases where the shift was particularly problematic several rounds were necessary (Supplementary Figure Crystal thickness was estimated using the log-ratio formula typically employed in EELS for inelastic scattering: Where Zxy is the thickness of the crystal at scan location xy and  is the mean free path of electrons through the peptide crystals. A lambda value of 332nm was used based on estimates previously determined from equivalent crystals A monodisperse solution of QYNNQNNFV crystals was applied onto holey carbon grids (Quantifoil 1/4, #300 copper; Ted Pella Inc) and plunge-frozen using a Vitrobot Mark IV robot (ThermoFisher Scientific). Data was collected on a CS aberration corrected FEI Titan Krios (ThermoFisher Scientific) operated at 300 KeV. Super-resolution movies were recorded using a Gatan K2 Summit direct electron detector. The nominal physical pixel size was 1.04 Å/pixel (0.52 Å/pixel in super-resolution movie frames) and dose per frame was 1.39 e -/Å 2 . A total of 20 frames were taken for each movie resulting in a final dose of 27.8 e -/Å 2 per image. Super-resolution movie stacks were corrected for gain and beam-induced motion using MotionCorr2 These parameters were used to correct for anisotropic magnification in MotionCorr2. Frames were subsequently aligned without using patches, dose-weighted, and down-sampled by two. Before lattice mapping individual diffraction patterns were binned 8-fold to increase their SNR. The central beam was then masked out to remove the influence of transmission from the lattice mapping; we noticed that without this step the lattice maps produced matched variations in the thickness of the crystal too closely. We used k-means clustering to sort diffraction patterns from a single 4DSTEM dataset into different clusters based on their Euclidian distance from the average pattern within a particular cluster: Where K is the number of clusters determined using an implementation of the G-means algorithm with a = 0.001 For real space images collected by HRTEM a similar procedure was followed with the following modifications. First 128 by 128 sub-images were cropped from the larger HRTEM images with no overlapping regions. We estimated K by the elbow method To assess the underlying lattice reorganization that could account for the changes in diffraction observed from the clustering, we indexed the cluster averages via library matching (Supplementary figure To match the experimental patterns to the simulated library, the positions of all possible peaks that could arise within the bounds of the HAADF detector were identified, excluding the central disk. These peak locations were then used to create a list of intensities by integrating all pixel values within a 4-pixel radius centred around each peaks kxky position. For each cluster average and simulated pattern, the listed intensities were scaled to be a ratio of the most intense peak within that pattern. Intensity lists were then compared by RMSD of intensity values at all peak positions within a given pair of patterns such that: Where p represents an individual peak position from the set of peak positions P, μi is the ith averaged cluster pattern and Simj is the jth pattern within the simulated library. The orientation of the simulated pattern with the lowest RMSD to the current cluster average was then assigned to the orientation of the lattice within that region. To improve the contrast of the average lattice images captured by HRTEM Fourier filtering was performed in a similar manner to Erickson and Klug 