We derive an expression for the effective Josephson coupling from the microscopic Hubbard model. It serves as a starting point for the description of phase fluctuations of local Cooper pairs in d x 2 -y 2wave superconductors in the framework of an effective XY model of plaquettes, the Josephson lattice. The expression for the effective interaction is derived by means of the local-force theorem, and it depends on local symmetry-broken correlation functions that we obtain using the cluster dynamical mean-field theory. Moreover, we apply the continuum limit to the Josephson lattice to obtain an expression for the gradient term in the Ginzburg-Landau theory and compare predicted London penetration depths and Kosterlitz-Thouless transition temperatures with experimental data for YBa2Cu3O7-x . Since the discovery of High-T c superconductivity 1 many types of competing orders have been considered In this work, we apply a truncated description, coarse graining, which is a very general and powerful tool that allows for a replacement of a microscopic by a macroscopic description with microscopically defined parameters. The prototype procedure in the theory of magnetism has opened the way to a quantitative theory of magnetism for real materials The one-band Hubbard model where t(k) are the Fourier-transformed hopping parameters and U is the interelectron Coulomb repulsion parameter on site r. c † rσ and c rσ , (c † kσ and c kσ ) are electron creation and annihilation operators in site (momentum) representation, respectively, and n rσ = c † rσ c rσ . We use the nearest neighbor hopping of the square lattice |t| as energy unit and for the next-nearest neighbor hopping t /t = -0.3 for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x which has interlayer hopping of d x 2 -y 2 symmetry and is generic for cuprates. For Eq. ( To address the specific problem of Josephson coupling in cuprates, we consider a local U (1) rotation that changes the phase of the plaquette's dSC order parameter, similar to a rotation of an effective moment attributed to a two-by-two plaquette and keeps the amplitude of the local order parameter constant, see Fig. i.e. an effective XY model of plaquettes. i, j are plaquette indices, and θ i is the phase of the order parameter of plaquette i. The principal goal of our work is to obtain the Josephson coupling parameters J ij based on the Hubbard model solution of the well-established CDMFT , where i is the index of the plaquette and α = 0...3 labels the sites within the plaquette, see Fig. The explicit microscopic expressions of J ij is derived by calculating the microscopic variation of the thermodynamic potential Ω of the system under small variations of the dSC phases, and comparing the result with Eq. (4). Ω depends on the lattice Green function that we can ex-press via the Dyson equation Where the last term is the local self-energy of the CDMFT (Appendix B). The superscripts p and h denote particle and hole components of the Nambu-Gor'kov representation, respectively. The anomalous parts of the self-energy S and Green function F are matrices in plaquette sites α and describe local dSC pairing via the order parameter Φ CDMFT dSC = 2T Tr ω F 01 with F 01 = -F 02 , according to d-wave symmetry In order to find the variation of the free energy Ω dc = Tr ΣG -Φ, with the Luttinger-Ward functional where δ * denotes the local variation of the self-energy Σ without taking into account its variation due to the CDMFT self-consistency, and G is the CDMFT Green function without variation. We omit matrix indices of intra-plaquette and Nambu space for simplicity. Eq. ( We design the variation as an infinitesimal change of the local phase δθ i in a homogeneous environment. Therefore, it reads in that the third Pauli matrix σ z acts in the Nambuspace. This variation affects only the phases of the anomalous part of the local self-energy. We substitute Eq. ( We keep terms up to second order in δθ, and since we are interested in the trace, we omit off-diagonals in Eq. (10). Eq. ( The trace goes over Matsubara frequencies and over the sites within the plaquette (α). Furthermore, the matrices form matrix-products in the α-space whereas they are diagonal in Matsubara frequencies. In order to obtain Eq. (11) we have also used the lattice symmetry G ij = G ji . The term ∝ δθ 2 i vanishes which reflects the gauge invariance of the theory (Sec. C). The remaining term is that of only non-local phase fluctuations ∝ δθ which by comparison with Eq. (4) defines J ij . Thereby, we obtain the following expression of the Josephson lattice parameters which is essentially the main result of the present work. Effective Josephson couplings have been applied to investigate experiments in that interplane Josephson coupling has an essential role Jr as a function of doping δ (left) and interlayer hopping t ⊥ (right) for different plaquette translations r at T = 1/52 δ = 0.1, respectively. All couplings diminish at large dopings, δ > 0.1. We observe in Sec. IV that this stems from the diminishing of the local orderparamter (amplitude) of the dSC. In the range up to t ⊥ = 0.45, t ⊥ has a diminishing effect on all in-plane J r , shown in Fig. The first term of Eq. ( In order to study macroscopic observables of the Josephson lattice model, we take the continuum, longwavelength limit of Eq. (4). In this limit, the interaction becomes the superconducting stiffness (Appendix D) with the effective Hamiltonian For our model I ab consists of an in-plane I and a perpendicular I ⊥ component. I ⊥ is non-zero only in the (3D) case of interlayer hoppings t ⊥ > 0. Eq. ( We start the discussion of the dSC stiffness for the 2D case of t ⊥ = 0. The temperature dependence of the dSC stiffness can be divided into two, qualitatively different, regions depending on the hole-dopings of the copper planes δ, see Fig. Regarding the accuracy of the local-force theorem, it is important to check whether the saturation of the local order parameter Φ CDMFT dSC with respect to decreasing temperature is reached. If this is the case, the the phase fluctuations are effectively decoupled from the Higgs mode and can be considered independently. Otherwise, amplitude fluctuations of the dSC can become stronger and vertex corrections, that we neglect, become significant In Fig. I is closely related to the London penetration depth λ has been measured in several experiments on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x , also at different oxygen dopings x. The low-temperature values lie in the range of λ ab = 0.1 -0.24 μm and λ c = 0.6 -7.8 μm In 2D, the XY model of Eq. ( This proportionality of transition temperature and dSC stiffness can explain the Uemura relation 11 that has been measured in underdoped copper-oxides, via the muon spin relaxation rate. At T < T KT there is no real longrange order in the system but power-law decay of the correlation function of the superconducting order parameter. In this sense, interlayer tunneling is essentially important to allow for a dimensional crossover and longrange order The suppression of the dSC by phase fluctuations is most pronounced at small dopings. This is where local Cooper-pairs, according to CDMFT, are well defined, up to half-filling. At half-filling the system is a Mott insulator We have derived a mapping from the Hubbard to the Josephson lattice model, i.e. Eq. ( we note that the complicated structure of YBCO which consists of bilayers with the intra-bilayer hopping of the order of 0.65 in units of t results in a splitting between bonding and anti-bonding bands with the value of the splitting being much larger than the individual bandwidth of each of those. This is the reason why it is possible in the first approximation to consider an effective one (anti-bonding) band model. In this section we compare the effects of the bandstructures on the dSC stiffness also for a simple perpendicular hopping. The 2D dispersion is that of the square lattice t 2D (k) = 2t (cos(k x ) + cos(k y )) -4t cos(k x ) cos(k y ), (A1) then, for three dimensions we can compare a simple perpendicular hopping model (3Ds) with a more elaborated projection 39 (3D) (A3) In Eq. (A1) to Eq. (A3) k is in the full Brillouin zone. For a cluster formulation k has to be in the reduced Brillouin zone according to the reduced translational symmetry. The bandstructure shown in Fig. with t 0 = t ⊥ /4, t 1 = t ⊥ /16, t 2 = t ⊥ /8 and t -r = t r . The entries correspond to the clustersites, labeled according to Fig. lattice Green function that is the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (B1). The chemical potential for a certain doping can be found by solving only Eq. (B2) iteratively. But this is an additional quantity that has to converge with the CDMFT cycles. To make the CDMFT more efficient in that regard, we set a certain chemical potential μ as the parameter rather than the doping. This gives a nonuniform mesh in the temperature-doping phase diagram and requires a postprocessing of two-dimensional interpolation. CDMFT maps the lattice problem to a multiorbital Anderson impurity model, in that the different orbitals also represent the sites of the cluster. The Anderson impurity model of arbitrary local interactions can be solved exactly by the use of the continous-time quantum Monte-Carlo method (CTHYB). The bath of that model is dynamical and so is the mean-field of CDMFT. But the temporal correlations exist only locally, i.e. on the cluster. Therefore the self-energy between clusters vanishes. Using the symmetry of the plaquette, the local Green function has the blockstructure where we labeled the plaquette orbitals according to the same transformation properties of the high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone of the squarelattice. The transformation from site-space to plaquette orbitals is a unitary transformation with In principle antiferromagnetic order can also be considered, but it would reduce the blockstructure of Eq. (B3) and will be computationally more expensive. In our CDMFT approximation the self-energy exists only within the cluster and not between clusters. In order to obtain the lattice Green function one could try to interpolate the many-body correlations between the clusters. This procedure is ambiguous. Following the idea of strong correlations within the plaquette being crucial, we do not interpolate the self-energy. The locality of the self-energy is required for the applicability of the local force theorem. In that aspect the CDMFT we use and the local force theorem are perfectly compatible as they make the same assumptions. Therefore the lattice Green function reads where r are cluster-translations and iω, μ, t(k) and Σ(iω n ) are matrices in Nambu plaquette-orbital or sitebasis. k is in the reduced Brillouin zone according to During the CDMFT loops we perform partial updates of the self-energy using a mixing parameter of 0.5. For the dSC symmetry breaking we initialized the CDMFT cycles with a symmetry breaking seed in the self-energy. A success of the DMFT is the description of the Mott insulator, an insulator of odd-integer filling, that is gapped by local correlation effects induced by U . It can be characterized by the vanishing quasiparticle residue of that k-point, whose energy corresponds to the Fermi energy and at T = 0. Furthermore we have the quasiparticle energy whose zeros can indicate the Lifshitz transition we assume a rather uniform spatial profile of the lowenergy modes. Therefore it is reasonable to interpolate linearly between the plaquettes (i, j) as we move them infinitesimally close together and take the continuumlimit In this limit the Hamiltonian reads with the d-dimensional unit-cell volume V and the superconducting stiffness We substitute R = r -r and insert the Fourier representation of J: with Next we have to evaluate the derivative. After performing the derivative with respect to q, we can substitute k = k -q and perform a partial integration that leads to and in Eq. (D5) finally to with the effective Hamiltonian Note, that the physical units of the dSC stiffness are restored by In particular for numerical purposes we express the derivatives in terms of derivatives applied to inverse Green functions since it reduces the differentiation to that of the electron dispersion G -1 (k) ∼ t(k), that can be performed analytically. Regarding the number of k-points per dimension and Matsubara frequencies ω n we choose N k = N iωn = 64 which is sufficient for an accuracy of ∼ 10 -7 , see Fig. and insert it into the Maxwell equation for the current This gives a differential equation describing the exponential decay of the vector potential into the superconductor with the penetration depth Note that both, I and λ are matrices in Eq. (E7). Furthermore, Eq. (E5) assumes a certain geometry of the setup. The supercurrent j that expells the magnetic field B = rotA inside the superconductor and B are directed along the main axes of the superconductor. The penetration depth λ describes how far the magnetic field or, equivalently, the supercurrent extent into the superconductor. Thus, the direction of the penetration depth is orthogonal to both, that of j and of B. Appendix F: Details of the stiffness dependence on the electronic bandstructure Fig. Since I can be sensitive to the lattice dispersion it is interesting to examine its dependence on the hopping parameters further. Fig. A similar analysis is presented in Fig. 