We demonstrate a classical analogy to the Fano anti-resonance in levitated optomechanics by applying a DC electric field. Specifically, we experimentally tune the Fano parameter by applying a DC voltage from 0 kV to 10 kV on a nearby charged needle tip. We find consistent results across negative and positive needle voltages, with the Fano line-shape feature able to exist at both higher and lower frequencies than the fundamental oscillator frequency. We can use the Fano parameter to characterize our system to be sensitive to static interactions which are ever-present. Currently, we can distinguish a static Coulomb force of 2.7 ± 0.5 × 10 -15 N with the Fano parameter, which is measured with one second of integration time. Furthermore, we are able to extract the charge to mass ratio of the trapped nanoparticle. Resonance is of significant importance in a wide variety of fields within Physics, with the phenomena found in both classical and quantum systems. In 1961, Fano discovered that, in optics, an asymmetric line-shape arises by the interference between a discrete localized state and a continuum of states Fano interference has been demonstrated in numerous quantum mechanical systems including semiconductor nanomaterials Although the Fano anti-resonance phenomena has been widely acknowledged as an effect in quantum systems, it is a general wave phenomena, meaning it can manifest itself in numerous classical systems also. Studies on the classical interpretation of the Fano effect have been undertaken Levitated nanoparticles have recently emerged as very promising candidates for measuring extremely small forces. This is typically done by measuring the resonant response to a perturbation on its motion In this letter we experimentally demonstrate Fano antiresonance in levitated optomechanics. The characteristic Fano anti-resonance is induced with a static Coulomb interaction by charging a stainless steel needle close to a charged nanoparticle in a gradient force optical trap. We show we can tune the Fano parameter by varying the voltage applied to the needle tip, and use the asymmetry in the line-shape to characterize a method of static force detection. The advantage of this method is precise force sensing irrespective of the resonant frequency. Consistent Fano parameter results were found for positive and negative applied voltages. In addition we are able to extract the charge to mass ratio of the trapped nanoparticle. We also give a phenomenological model to describe the Fano line-shape and extract a characteristic rate. We consider a polarizable nanoparticle trapped in an optical trap which has been described in The potential generated by the optical field can be arXiv:1810.12680v3 [quant-ph] 17 Jan 2019 FIG. where m is the mass of the nanoparticle, P is the laser power, σ L = πw 2 0 is the effective laser beam cross section area, w 0 is the mean beam waist radius, z R is the Rayleigh length, ρ is the particle density, χ is an electric susceptibility of the particle, c is the speed of light, and η quantifies the dominant non-linearity of the trap The scattering force has only one non-zero component F scatt (z) which is given in where λ , and λ is the wavelength of light. Consider now also a nearby charged needle which generates a Coulomb potential ) is the position of the needle tip. For the experimental situation described in this paper only the linear contribution is relevant, specifically, expanding the Coulomb potential to and including order O(z) one readily finds where Q is the charge on the needle tip, q is the charge on the nanoparticle, and 0 is the permittivity of free space. In addition, we apply sinusoidal modulations of the laser power P to cool the center-of-mass motion (c.m.) of the nanonparticle, namely, parametric feedback cooling Taking into account the feedback term one obtains the following dynamics: where the total effective potential is given by U eff = U opt + U scatt + U el . We have also included a damping term with coupling γ coll , which is the gas collisions rate, and a noise term ξ. We now combine Eqs. ( Eq. ( We are left to discuss the noise term ξ. Suppose the noise is invariant under time-translations, has zero mean, and is fully quantified by the two point correlation function f (τ ) = E[ξ(t + τ )ξ(t)], where E[ • ] denotes the average over different noise realizations. Exploiting the Wiener-Khinchin theorem , where f denotes the Fourier transform of f (τ ), and Γ is an effective damping rate comprising γ coll as well as an additional damping contribution due to feedback term. Furthermore, assume that f has two distinct noise sources: one related to gas collisions ∝ γ coll , and one related to the Coulomb force ∝ qQ. The term related to gas collisions, which is commonly present in optomechanical systems, leads to the usual Lorentzian power spectral density: Here, we also find a noise source ∝ qQ. Here we limit the analysis to a phenomenological description of the effect, leaving a proper derivation for future work. We make the following ansatz for the power spectral density associated to the noise perturbed Coulomb force where f = ±e 2 0 /(qQ) is a number, e 0 denotes the unit charge of one electron, and γ el is a characteristic rate. This ansatz has been inspired by the asymmetric Fano line-shape 1 and we will refer to f as the Fano parameter. We speculate that S el (ω) could originate from a non-Markovian noise, self-induced by the motion of the nanoparticle, i.e. the motion of the nanoparticle could be perturbing the charges on the needle tip and on the particle, which would perturb back the motion of the nanoparticle on a time scale ∝ f -1/2 γ -1 el . Another possibility is the noise could originate from vibrations in the silica nanoparticle Adding all the contributions from Eqs. ( where A, B, and C are free parameters, i.e. fitting constants which account for the finite noise floor and normalizations. The order of magnitude of A and B can be first fixed when the charge on the needle is absent. This leaves two free parameters, C and γ el . The experimental setup consists of an optical gradient force trap, which is generated by tightly focusing a 1550 nm laser with a high numerical aperture (N.A.) paraboloidal mirror The voltage applied to the needle is swept from 0 kV to 10 kV, with one second of data taken for each voltage interval, and the effect this has on the shape of the z frequency spectrum is shown in Fig. We have fitted Eq. ( )UHTXHQF\+] The power spectral density of a levitated nanoparticle with 0 kV applied to the needle (green) and 10 kV (blue). The 0 kV peak is fitted with a standard Lorentzian distribution from Eq. ( average characteristic rate, γel , of 3.2 ± 0.3 GHz (positive Fano parameter) and 3.7 ± 0.8 GHz (negative Fano parameter), respectively. We find excellent agreement at low voltages (< 5 kV), with slight deviation at higher voltages (> 5 kV) which might be due to additional noise sources such as the ripple voltage in the high voltage power supply. The application of an electric field also results in a shift in the average position z 0 . Specifically, in the experimentally considered regime we find an approximate expression for the minimum position . Furthermore, as the laser intensity is different in the new equilibrium position z 0 there is also a corresponding shift in oscillation frequency ω m . This frequency shift is generally highly dependent on both the scattering force and the nonlinearities in the gradient force potential , where ω 0 is given below Eq. ( where B = ( depend only on the trapping laser field, the optics, and the intrinsic particle properties, i.e. density ρ and the electric susceptibility χ; all these parameters can be estimated independently. Furthermore, we can also estimate the charge Q on the needle tip from the applied voltage V using COMSOL Multiphysics; we have tested the reliability of the numerical simulation by comparing with analytical methods used in previous works From the experimental data in Fig. of static perturbations, further data at < 1 kV voltage on the needle is needed (or a smaller particle charge). The needle setup can also be used for electrical statebased feedback control, such as cooling, of the motion of a charged nanoparticle In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated Fano anti-resonance in levitated optomechanics by introducing an electrostatic perturbation to a charged levitated nanoparticle's potential, with the ability to tune the Fano parameter by varying the applied voltage on a nearby charged needle. We have experimentally extracted the charge to mass ratio of trapped nanoparticles. Furthermore, we have shown that we can use the induced Fano parameter as a tool to quantify static interactions which perturb the nanoparticle's trapping potential, with a static detectable force of 2.7 ± 0.5 × 10 -15 N reported. Although our results aren't yet comparable to the 10 aN static force sensitivity reported elsewhere 