We design and investigate the physical properties of new indium compounds AInX3 (A = alkali metals, X = F or Cl). We find nine new In based materials in their ground state that are thermodynamically stable but are not reported in ICSD (Inorganic Crystal Structure Database). We also discuss several metastable structures. This new series of materials display multiple valences, charge and bond disproportionation, and dimerization. The most common valence of In is 3+. We also find two rare alternatives, one has In 2+ with In-In dimerization and the other shows valence disproportionation to In 1+ and In 3+ with bond disproportionation. We study the possibility of superconductivity in these new In compounds and find that CsInF3 has a transition temperature about 24 K with sufficient hole doping and pressure. Progress in theory and algorithms, coupled with increased computational power is now accelerating the discovery of new materials with useful physical properties. A notable recent success is the theory led discovery of high temperature superconductivity of hydrogen sulfide under pressure In this paper we apply material design methodology to find new indium halide compounds. There are multiple motivations for this study. One is the intrinsic interest in finding new mixed valent compounds, a condition that is very rare in the solid state, but has been a focus of interest for many years Indium compounds tend to form in an oxidation state of In 3+ , and the valences In 1+ and In 2+ are not typical In the beginning, we would like to summarize a material design workflow introduced in Ref. The first step is the quantitative calculation of the electronic structure. It explores how to go from a well defined crystal structure of a material to the physical or chemical properties. The second step is the prediction of the crystal structure given a fixed chemical compo-sition. There are a number of structure prediction techniques Once the (thermodynamically) stable crystal structure is found, the electronic structure is calculated again with more elaborated DFT methods like hybrid functionals, the modified Becke-John (mBJ) exchange potential, and GW methods to obtain more accurate physical properties. This paper is organized as follows: the detail computational method of each step for material design is provided in Sec. III. The computational results are presented in sequence of the material design workflow. Section IV A summarizes the initial qualitative idea (zeroth order step) and its validation (first step). The prediction of crystal structures (second step) of the indium halide compounds and their thermodynamic stabilities (third step) are presented in Sec. IV B and Sec. IV C, respectively. The details of electronic structures and superconducting properties (post-process) are provided in Sec. IV D. The paper closes with brief summary and conclusions in Sec. V. To obtain low-energy crystal structures of AInX 3 (A = alkali metals, X = F or Cl), we employed the ab initio evolutionary algorithm After the low-energy crystal structures were obtained, the corresponding total energies were calculated by us-ing DFT pseudopotential code VASP The all-electron full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave (FP-LAPW) method implemented in WIEN2k We used the linear response method A. Initial idea and its validation We conceived the idea that new indium halide compounds have physical and chemical similarities with BaBiO 3 The possible candidates for low-energy crystal structures of AInX 3 (A = alkali metals, X = F or Cl) obtained by USPEX are summarized in Fig. The crystal structures having the lowest energy are tetragonal structures with space group I4/mmm (No. 139) for AInF 3 (A = Li, Na, K, and Rb) (see Fig. For CsInF 3 , five space groups, C2/m-a, R 3, P 1-a, F m 3m, and I4/m are candidates for the lowest energy structure and have tiny energy differences within 1 meV/atom (which corresponds to ∼10 K in temperature) to each other (Fig. The crystal structure with the space group I4/mmm-a has the lowest energy for LiInF 3 and NaInF 3 , however, it has higher energy as the alkali metal gets heavier as shown in Fig. The possible candidates for low-energy crystal structures of AInCl 3 have been also investigated along with AInF 3 . Since fluorine and chlorine atoms belong to the same halogen group in the periodic table, AInCl 3 is expected to have close resemblances to AInF 3 structurally and electronically. To check the possible low-energy crystal structures for AInCl 3 , we examined the total energies of the crystal structures listed in Fig. We construct the ternary phase diagrams for AInF 3 compounds as shown in Fig. We are now in a position to discuss the possibility of synthesis of suggested AInF 3 materials. To do that, we made a probabilistic model to estimate the existence probability of a material Figure candidate space groups, C2, C2/m-c, R 3, and P 1-a. For RbInCl 3 and CsInCl 3 , two candidate space groups, P 1-b and C2/m-b, also have tiny energy differences (within 5 meV/atom) between them. Therefore AInCl 3 (A = Li, Na, Rb, Cs) could be synthesized into one of the candidate structures depending on the synthesis condition. Otherwise, the material exists in several different polymorphs. For CsInCl 3 , the third lowest-energy structure (I4/m) has a small energy difference of ∼8 meV with the lowest one and still has a possibility to form due to the considerable existence probability of 0.48 as shown in Table . II. We have calculated the electronic structures of AInF 3 compounds and found several similarities and differences among them. In Fig. Figure The electronic structures of other low-energy AInF 3 compounds including I4/mmm-a NaInF 3 , I4/mmm-b KInF 3 , and I4/mmm-b RbInF 3 (not shown) are quite similar to that of I4/mmm-a LiInF 3 except for the different size of the band gap. The sizes of the indirect band gap for Na, K, and Rb compounds obtained from the mBJ method are 3.89, 3.91, and 3.67 eV, (GGA results give 1.77, 1.90, and 1.90 eV), respectively, which are smaller than that for LiInF 3 . For CsInF 3 , the five candidate structures, which are C2/m-a, I4/m, R 3, P 1a, and F m 3m, also have similar electronic structure in the following manner: (i) In s and F p orbitals are well separated in the energy window (In s and F p orbitals lie -1 ∼ 7 eV and -7 ∼ -4 eV, respectively), (ii) quite small hybridization between In s and F p orbitals is realized, (iii) multivalent In 1+ (5s 2 ) and In 3+ (5s 0 ) valence skip configuration is clearly shown, and (iv) the five candidate structures have similar band gaps of ∼4.0 eV (GGA results give almost same band gaps of ∼3.0 eV). Both I4/mmm-a LiInF 3 and C2/m-a CsInF 3 show an insulating behavior, however, the insulating mechanism is different (The insulating mechanism of the Na, K, and Rb compounds is essentially same as the Li compound). As shown in Fig. The electronic structures of all AInCl 3 compounds show insulating behavior as well (not shown). AInCl 3 could be classified into two groups: LiInCl 3 and NaInCl 3 are in the same group and KInCl 3 , RbInCl 3 , and CsInCl 3 belong to the other group. For each group, they share the same low-energy candidate structures: both LiInCl 3 and NaInCl 3 have four candidate structures with space groups of C2, C2/m-c, R 3, and P 1-a, and KInCl 3 , RbInCl 3 , and CsInCl 3 have two candidate structures with space groups of P 1-b and C2/m-b. Not only the electronic structures but also the size of the band gap are almost the same among the candidate structures for each AInCl 3 compound. The band gaps obtained from the mBJ method are 3.5, 3.5, 4.2, 4.3, and 4.3 eV for Li, Na, K, Rb, and Cs compounds, respectively (GGA gives the band gaps of 2.8, 2.7, 2.9, 3.0, and 3.0 eV, respectively). For both LiInCl 3 and NaInCl 3 , their four candidate structures possess two different sizes of InCl 6 octahedra (bond disproportionation) and show the multivalent In 1+ (5s 2 ) and In 3+ (5s 0 ) valence skip configuration. Note that In s and Cl p orbitals are well separated in the energy window and only a small hybridization between them is realized. Since the Cl p orbital has higher energy than the F p orbital, the hybridization between In s and Cl p σ orbitals is somewhat bigger than that between In s and F p σ orbitals. However, the hybridization between In s and Cl p is still quite small, hence the ligand hole pairs condensation scenario is safely ruled out and valence/charge disproportionation is clearly realized. Interestingly, two s bands originating from In 1+ and In 3+ atoms are almost flat (their bandwidths are smaller than 1 eV) and are located at near the Fermi level and ∼4 eV, respectively. For KInF 3 , RbInF 3 , and CsInF 3 compounds, their candidate structures with space groups of P 1-b and C2/m-b have symmetrically equivalent In atoms in the unit cell. Therefore, valence/charge disproportionation is not possible in their candidate structures. Alkali metal (K, Rb, Cs) and Cl atoms strongly prefer the valence states of 1+ and 1-, respectively, leading to In atoms having 2+ valence state. The insulating mechanism of these compounds is essentially the same as the one discussed in LiInF 3 , and the band gap is formed between the fully occupied ssσ bonding and totally empty ssσ * anti-bonding states. As discussed earlier, all AInX 3 (A = alkali metals, X = F or Cl) compounds have insulating behavior with a significant band gap of approximately 4 eV (based on the mBJ method). Hence, these compounds are not suitable for photovoltaic materials (appropriate band gap size is ranged from 1 to 2 eV) without any band gap tuning like, for example, applying strain or pressure. Now, we discuss the possible superconductivity in these new In compounds. As shown in Fig. We calculated the electron-phonon coupling constant λ in 10 % hole-doped I4/mmm-a LiInF 3 . We found that λ = 0.324 and the logarithmic average phonon frequency ω log = 304 K, which gives the superconducting transi-TABLE III. Phonon related physical parameters for 0.5 holedoped simple cubic CsInF3 under pressure P = 32 GPa. The reduced electron-phonon matrix element (REPME), the total electron-phonon coupling λ, the average phonon frequency ω log , and the superconducting transition temperature Tc are evaluated in both GGA and HSE06 methods. The REPME is obtained for the F stretching mode shown in Fig. Figure Conventional electronic descriptions based on LDA/GGA underestimates the electron-phonon coupling constant λ in Ba 1-x K x BiO 3 and fail to explain its high-temperature superconductivity Using computational methods we identified nine new In compounds AInX 3 (A = alkali metals, X = F or Cl) and investigated their crystal structures and physical properties. Two distinct insulating mechanisms are realized in the new In compounds. For the compounds that have different sizes of InX 6 octahedra (bond disproportionation), which are CsInF 3 , LiInCl 3 , and NaInCl 6 , they show multivalent In 3+ (5s 0 ) and In 1+ (5s 2 ) valence skip configuration. The insulating phase is induced from bond and valence disproportionation. The other In compounds, AInF 3 (A = Li, Na, K, Rb) and AInCl 3 (A = K, Rb, Cs), have symmetrically equivalent In sites in their unit cell and hence both bond and valence disproportionation are not possible. These In compounds have the divalent valence state of In, which is very rare but thermodynamically stable. In these compounds, two adjacent In atoms are dimerized to produce ssσ bonding and ssσ * antibonding states. Each s-electron in In 2+ completely fills the ssσ bonding states. Therefore, the band gap sizes in these compounds indicate the splitting between ssσ bonding and ssσ * antibonding states. These compounds are a new arena for investigating charge, valence, and bond disproportionation. They are similar to the CsTlX 3 (X = F or Cl), which had also been predicted theoretically and synthesized experimentally 