We theoretically investigate the rigid body dynamics of an optically levitated nanodumbbell under parametric feedback cooling and provide a simplified model for describing the motion. Differing from previous studies, the spin of the nanoparticle about its symmetry axis is considered non-negligible. Simulations reveal that standard parametric feedback cooling can extract energy from two of the five rotational degrees of freedom when the nanoparticle is levitated using a linearly polarized laser beam. The dynamics after feedback cooling are characterized by a normal mode describing precession about the laser polarization axis together with spin about the nanoparticle's symmetry axis. Cooling the remaining mode requires an asymmetry in the two librational frequencies associated with motion about the polarization axis as well as information about the two frequencies of rotation about the polarization axis. Introducing an asymmetric potential allows full cooling of the librational coordinates if the frequencies of both are used in the feedback modulation and is an avenue for entering the librational quantum regime. The asymmetry in the potential needs to be large enough for practical cooling times as the cooling rate of the system depends non-linearly on the degree of asymmetry, a condition that is easily achieved experimentally. Optically levitated mesoscopic particles Much progress has been made in cooling the translational degrees of freedom (DOF) An alternative path to the ground state and a tool for torque sensing In this paper, we seek to investigate the intrinsic coupling between the rotational DOF by considering the classical rigid body dynamics of an optically levitated nanodumbbell with and without parametric feedback cooling. As shown below, for symmetric top-like particles, the spin of the nanoparticle about its symmetry axis, at an angular freqency of ω 3 , couples the two librational coordinates. This coupling results in two precessional modes amounting to a combination of libration and precession about the polarization axis. In the small angle limit, the equations of motion are of the same form as a charged particle in a two-dimensional harmonic oscillator plus a magnetic field. Previous investigations have dismissed the coupling that leads to precession This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the classical kinetic and potential energy associated with rotations and provides a simplified model describing the motions. In Sec. III the signals of two common experimental methods to measure the orientation are calculated utilizing an incident Gaussian laser beam. Section IV investigates the effects of parametric feedback cooling with linear and elliptical polarization. Simulations of power spectral densities of the measured orientation before and after cooling are also presented. Section V addresses the effects of laser shot noise and gas collisions. The system under consideration is a nanodumbbell optically trapped in a laser field. The particle's center of mass is fixed at the origin so that only rotations are considered. The nanodumbbell is composed of two spheres each with mass M s and radius R. The spheres are aligned along the z -axis and touching at the origin, where the triple prime indicates the particle frame coordinate system (see Fig. The rotational dynamics are governed by the classical equations of motion described by the Euler angles (α, β, γ) The kinetic and potential energy are where is the nanodumbbell polarization vector in the lab frame and ↔ R is the rotation matrix. The α j (j = x, y, z) The attractive potential, Eq. (2), causes the particle to oscillate about the polarization axis in two joint motions (see Fig. where The first term on the right hand side of Eqs. ( The transformation of the z -axis into the lab frame, where in the last step the small angle approximation was made. It is seen that ξ and η play the role of the y and z coordinates defining the location of the tip. By introducing a vector that specifies the projection of the z -axis on the y-z plane, ρ z =< 0, ξ, η >, it is possible to combine Eqs. ( where ω c = ω c x = (I z /I x ) ω 3 x. The last term in Eq. ( where k B is the Boltzmann constant. While ω ∼ 100 kHz -1 MHz ω c , the coupling that results due to the ∼10 kHz frequency is a resolvable feature in the power spectral density and is a non-negligible effect when considering parametric feedback cooling, as will be discussed in Sec. IV. The librational frequency ω scales with the radius as ω 2 ∼ 1/R 2 suggesting that a particle of smaller size is beneficial for ground state cooling. However, the polarizability and moment of inertia scale as α j ∼ R 3 , I j ∼ R 5 implying that the particle will be less confined and more unstable in the optical trap as the size decreases. In effect, a smaller radius will be more likely to escape the trap and will produce a broader power spectral density. Further, ω c ∼ 1/R 5/2 showing that as the size of the particle decreases the precessional phenomenon is more pronounced. Equations ( with , and the A ± , δ ± determined by initial conditions. Each mode circles the polarization axis at a particular frequency with the (+) mode advancing clockwise and the (-) mode counterclockwise. The superposition of the two modes results in the libration and precession mentioned above. Thus, as will be discussed in Sec. IV C, the power spectral density of ξ or η should exhibit two peaks at ω ± . Since the coordinates α and β completely describe the location of the nanodumbbell's tip projected on the lab frame axes, it is possible to track the rotational evolution about the polarization axis while simulating the full equations of motion. Figure It is possible to determine the orientation of the nanoparticle with respect to α and β through different types of measurements. A common method of measuring α libration The Gaussian beam is defined with ω 0 the beam waist, , and ψ(z) = arctan(z/z R ). The scattered light is determined by the electric and magnetic fields for a dipole in the far field where r is in the direction of observation, c the speed of light, and Z 0 the impedance of free space. After exiting a collimating lens where E x,y are the x and y components of the total electric field following the collimating lens and ê± designate the two split polarization states after the PBS. The magnetic field undergoes a similar transformation. A measurement is performed by taking the difference between the two signals measured at their respective detectors where is the Poynting vector. Performing the integration gives a homodyne term that is proportional to the y-component of the polarizability from Eq. ( Considering that α → 0 + ξ and β → π 2 -η, which is the angle describing the extent to which the nanoparticle's long axis has deviated from the polarization axis in the x-y plane. Following the same procedure above, after the collimating lens a split detection measurement is performed (which is often used to track the transverse translational motion which is the angle describing the extent to which the nanoparticle's long axis has deviated from the polarization axis in the x-z plane. Thus, both angles that will be required for parametric feedback cooling in the next section can be detected. Note that it is not possible to measure γ directly using these methods since it is not contained within the polarization vector in Eq. (3). Whereas the detection of translational motion relies on the π/2 Gouy phase shift from ψ(z) in Eq. ( However, the signal may become real, and therefore larger in magnitude, if the particle is not centered at the origin, but pushed away from the focus by the laser beam in the axial direction. In Appendix B the size of the displacement in the z-direction is estimated by considering the radiation pressure on a nanodumbbell in the point dipole limit. Relative to the Rayleigh range, z R , the displacement z d is where α is a unitless parameter defined in the polarizability as α 0 = 4π 0 R 3 α. For α = 0.59, λ = 1550 nm, NA = 0.45, R = 85 nm, z d /z R ∼ 0.14. This ratio becomes important for measurements as e iz d /z R ∼ (1 + iz d /z R ) is a prefactor in the polarizability matrix when considering ψ(z) in Eq. ( Parametric feedback cooling utilizes a laser beam to trap a particle and cool its motion simultaneously through modulation of the laser power at twice the particle's oscillation frequency The analyses here assume perfect and instantaneous measurements of q q, which cannot be achieved in practice. Shot noise heating due to photon scattering and the effects of gas collisions are also not included to simplify the analysis. While the heating mechanisms do determine the lowest energy attainable for a fixed cooling power, the dynamical effects of gas collisions do not become important for pressures ∼ 10 -3 Torr or lower and photon shot noise does not become important until the heating rate is near the cooling rate. See Sec. V for further discussion of these effects and the inclusion of noise. The results that follow thus provide a fundamental limit to cooling, irrespective of the limitations set by quantum mechanics or practical experimental parameters such as orientation detection efficiency. It is also worth mentioning that since the equations of motion for γ are unaffected by the trapping potential, with the dynamics determined largely by the conserved ω 3 , parametric feedback cooling only directly affects the α, α and β, β DOF. For this reason, the focus will be on the motions associated with α and β (ξ and η), as it is not possible to cool the nanoparticle's spin about its symmetry axis using parametric feedback cooling. The equations of motion for the dumbbell in the small angle approximation from Sec. II. Eqs. (4) (5) under feedback cooling become ξ = -ω 2 (1 + χR 2 q q)ξ -ω c η, ( where χ is the cooling strength that sets the amplitude of the power modulation. Choosing to measure and feedback q q = ξ ξ into Eqs. ( Inserting Eqs. ( which implies that cooling is effective until one mode is removed from the motion. As t → ∞ the particle will fully precess about the polarization axis with no libration (see Fig. Using the conserved quantity together with Eqs. ( This condition shows that as one mode is cooled completely, the second mode ceases to be time dependent, facilitating the notion that there is a limit to how much energy is removed from the motion. To investigate the extent of possible cooling, a nanodumbbell is initially prepared with a thermal distribution at T = 300 K and several thousand cooling runs are simulated using the full equations of motion. The simulations are run using a fourth order Runge-Kutta adaptive step algorithm and γ is initialized as a uniformly distributed random number between 0 and 2π. Figure The issue with the previous section's strategy for cooling is the coupling between η and ξ due to the spin about the symmetry axis and their similar frequencies of rotation about the polarization axis. To cool further requires breaking the symmetry between the two DOF responsible for the precession motion. In this section this symmetry is broken by introducing a potential that produces different librational frequencies for the two coordinates η and ξ. This can be acheived through elliptical polarization, using two perpendicular laser beams incident on the nanoparticle, or general asymmetries found in a focused laser beam's gradient where ω 2 ξ = ω 2 cos 2 θ -sin 2 θ , ω 2 η = ω 2 cos 2 θ. The normal modes and further details of this system are described in Appendix C. Feedback cooling using either q q = ξ ξ or q q = η η gives the following average cooling rates where the y i , z i (i = 1, 2, 3) are positive and constant for a fixed electric field strength (see Appendix C) and reduce to Eq. ( Also affecting the cooling rate is the frequency separation between ω ξ and ω η . A slight difference in frequency will allow cooling, but the rate is much larger when the frequency difference is larger. In Fig. The above analysis has shown that it is theoretically possible to cool the librational motion through parametric feedback cooling within a classical approximation that does not include sources of noise or heating. However, real experiments will encounter unavoidable shot noise, gas collisions, measurement uncertainty, and quantum limits. The effects of a non-zero measurement uncertainty has been addressed in One may think it possible that gas collisions could induce an asymmetry between the librational coordinates which would allow further cooling. To test this hypothesis the effects of shot noise and gas collisions in our simulations were included for linearly polarized light. Laser shot noise was included using the methods of For P =760 Torr, the nanoparticle is unable to be cooled. The final energies conform to a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution as it thermalizes with the surrounding gas at 300 K. Here, increasing the cooling strength χ, with hope to overcome energy exchange with the gas, heats the particle as its motion is more Brownian than periodic. For P = 10 -3 , and 10 -7 Torr, the main results of Secs. II and IV A hold, with final energy distributions and PSD's similar to that of Fig. We have theoretically studied the rotational dynamics of an optically trapped nanodumbell with and without parametric feedback cooling. A relatively simple model describing the motions in a small angle approximation has also been provided. The nanoparticle oscillates about the polarization axis as a superposition of two modes resulting in a combination of libration and precession motions. The librational motion is due to the laser field's potential while precession arises from the non-zero spin of the nanoparticle about its symmetry axis. The equations of motion describing the location of the tip of the nanoparticle in the small angle approximation are seen to have the same form as a charged particle in a harmonic oscillator potential and a static magnetic field. The effect of parametric feedback cooling using a linearly polarized beam is to remove one of the two modes, resulting in pure precession. In this geometry, it is not possible to extract energy from more than two degrees of freedom and not possible to cool to the quantum regime even when information about both librational modes is available. Evidence of these dynamics may be found in the power spectral density with two peaks converging toward normal mode frequencies during the cooling process, with the smaller of the two peaks' magnitude reducing to zero. Using a potential energy that sets different frequencies of libration allows cooling to much lower energies when information about both librational modes are available, theoretically approaching the quantum regime in this classical analysis. The setup for cooling may be acheived experimentally by using elliptical polarization or using two perpendicular laser beams incident on the nanoparticle and feeding back both coordinate frequencies. If a single librational coordinate frequency is used in the feedback, the particle will ultimately heat. The rate of cooling is largely determined by the cooling strength and the separation between the two librational frequencies. In this case, the power spectral density will show two peaks converging toward the two normal mode frequencies with both magnitudes decreasing to zero over time. After submission of this manuscript, Ref. 