We report the structural, static, and dynamic properties of Cr0.5Fe0.5Ga by means of powder x-ray diffraction, DC magnetization, heat capacity, AC susceptibility, magnetic relaxation, and magnetic memory effect measurements. DC magnetization and AC susceptibility studies reveal a spin-glass transition at around T f 22 K. An intermediate value of the relative shift in freezing temperature δT f 0.017, obtained from the AC susceptibility data reflects the formation of cluster spin-glass states. The frequency dependence of T f is also analyzed within the framework of dynamic scaling laws such as power law and Vogel-Fulcher law. The analysis using power law yields a characteristic time constant for a single spin flip τ * 1.1 × 10 -10 s and critical exponent zν = 4.2 ± 0.2. On the other hand, the Vogel-Fulcher law yields the characteristic time constant for a single spin flip τ0 6.6 × 10 -9 s, Vogel-Fulcher temperature T0 = 21.1 ± 0.1 K, and an activation energy Ea/kB 16 K. The value of τ * and τ0 along with a non-zero value of T0 provide further evidence for the cluster spin-glass behaviour. The magnetic field dependent T f follows the de Almeida-Thouless (AT) line with a non-mean-field type instability, reflecting either a different universality class or strong anisotropy in the spin system. A detailed non-equilibrium dynamics study via relaxation and memory effect experiments demonstrates the evolution of the system through a number of intermediate metastable states and striking memory effects. All the above observations render a cluster spin-glass behaviour in Cr0.5Fe0.5Ga which is triggered by magnetic frustration due to competing antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic interactions and magnetic site disorder. Moreover, the asymmetric response of magnetic relaxation with respect to the change in temperature, below the freezing temperature can be explained by the hierarchical model. In the past years, alloys showing spin-glass (SG) behaviour have been widely pursued in order to study exchange bias effect, slow dynamics, memory effect, aging effect etc. 1-8 SG is basically a disordered ground state where the spins are frozen along arbitrary direction, below a critical temperature. It is commonly believed that SG appears in systems where magnetic longrange-ordering (LRO) is disturbed by site disorder and magnetic frustration. The iso-structural alloys CrGa and FeGa crystallize in a Cr 5 Al 8 -type rhombohedral structure (space group R 3m) with lattice constants [a = 12.625 (8) Å and c = 7.785 (10) Å] and [a = 12.4368 (11) Å and c = 7.7642 (10) Å], respectively. In this work, we carried out a comprehensive study of the structural and magnetic properties of Cr 0.5 Fe 0.5 Ga. The 50 % Fe substitution at the Cr site induces atomic disorder in the lattice, preserving the original crystal structure. It is found to be a magnetically frustrated system which undergoes a SG transition at low temperatures. The DC magnetization along with the AC susceptibility data render the system a cluster SG-type. Finally, the magnetic memory effect in the system has been demonstrated by the magnetic relaxation and memory effect measurements. Polycrystalline Cr 0.5 Fe 0.5 Ga sample was synthesized by the conventional solid state reaction technique, taking the constituent elements in the desired stoichiometry. The elements (Fe, Cr, and Ga) used here are of high pure (99.99%) obtained from Sigma Aldrich. The stoichiometric amounts were sealed in a quartz tube in Ar atmosphere. The ampoule was first heated at 1050 0 C for 3 days and then at 850 0 C for 5 days. The powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out (PANalytical powder diffractometer with CuK α radiation) as a function of temperature using a low temperature attachment (Oxford Phenix). DC and AC magnetization (M ) measurements were performed using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) attachment to the physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). Heat capacity (C p ) was measured using the heat capacity option in the PPMS, adopting the relaxation technique. In order to confirm the phase purity and to detect the structural transition, if any, powder XRD was measured at different temperatures. Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern was carried out using the FULLPROF package. variation of V cell was fitted by the equation 14 where V 0 is the cell volume at T = 0 K, K 0 is the bulk modulus, and γ is the Grüneisen parameter. U (T ) is the internal energy which can be expressed in terms of the Debye approximation as, Here, p is the number of atoms in the specimen and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Using this approximation (see the fit in the lower panel of Fig. Figure where C and θ CW represent the Curie constant and CW temperature, respectively. The obtained values are C 1.2 cm 3 K/mol and θ CW -5 K. The negative value of θ CW signifies the presence of dominant AFM interaction in the system. From the value of C, the effective magnetic moment μ eff (= 3k B C/N A , where N A is the Avogadro's number) was calculated to be ∼ 3.1μ B . In spin systems, according to the mean-field theory θ CW represents the sum of all the exchange couplings. Our estimated value of θ CW is much smaller compared to T f , which possibly reflects that the system is frustrated due to competing AFM and FM interactions, where A is the amplitude, T f (0) is the value of T f in the absence of a magnetic field, and Φ is the crossover exponent. In the mean-field model it has a value Φ = 3. In our system, only one irreversible line was observed which could be fitted by Eq. ( ) etc, the authors have reported a mean-field type behaviour. Figure calculate the Debye temperature (θ D ) using the standard expression θ D = (12π 4 mR/5β) 1/3 . The value of θ D is calculated to be ∼ 377 K which is close to the value obtained from the V cell vs T analysis. A large value of γ is reported for several cluster SG systems but the effect of disorder on the density of states is not yet understood. In order to understand the underlying nature of the transition and to study the dynamics of the SG state, AC susceptibility was measured at different frequencies (ν) and at a fixed excitation field of H AC = 5 Oe, after cooling the sample in zero field. The real part of the AC susceptibility (χ ) as a function of temperature is plotted in the upper panel of Fig. sition shifts towards higher temperatures and the height of the peak decreases with increasing ν, consistent with a glassy transition with freezing temperature T f 22.5 K. AC susceptibility was also measured under different DC fields (H DC ) fixing the AC excitation at H AC = 5 Oe and ν = 200 Hz. As one can see in the lower panel of Fig. For the sake of completeness, we measured AC susceptibility at different frequencies for a fixed DC field of 0.25 T and a fixed AC field of 5 Oe. As shown in the upper panel of Fig. The relative shift in freezing temperature (δT f ) per decade of frequency is often used as a parameter to com-pare different SG systems. We calculated this parameter using the relation where ∆T f = (T f ) ν1 -(T f ) ν2 and ∆log(ν) = log(ν 1 )log(ν 2 ). δT f is also known as the Mydosh parameter. The frequency dependence of freezing temperature T f obtained from the real part of the AC susceptibility is presented in the lower panel of Fig. where the characteristic time τ describes the dynamical fluctuation time scale and corresponds to the observation time (t obs = 1/2πν), τ * is the relaxation time of a single spin flip of the fluctuating entities, T g is the static freezing temperature as ν tends to zero, z is the dynamic critical exponent, and ν is the critical exponent of the correlation length ζ = (T f /T g -1) -ν . The dynamic scaling hypothesis connects τ to ζ as τ ∼ ζ z . To fit the data, the power law in Eq. ( In the lower left panel of Fig. where τ 0 has the same physical meaning as τ * and E a /k B is the average activation energy of the relaxation barrier. The activation energy basically measures the energy barrier in which the metastable states are separated and the Arrhenius law accounts for the time scale to overcome the energy barriers by the activation process. Our attempt to estimate τ 0 and E a /k B from the linear fit of the ln(τ ) vs 1/T f data in zero field yields completely unphysical values [τ 0 2.1 × 10 -62 s and E a /k B (3120 ± 68) K]. This failure adds further support to the argument that the dynamics in our system is not simply due to single spin flips, rather it is a cooperative character due to inter-cluster interactions. Another dynamical scaling law in spin-glass freezing is the phenomenological Vogel-Fulcher (VF) law which takes into account the interaction among the spins. According to this law, the frequency dependent T f can be described by where T 0 is the empirical VF temperature, which is often interpreted as the interaction strength among the dynamic entities. For the purpose of fitting, it is convenient to rewrite Eq. ( Here, we show that the variation of T f in the frequency range, which has been experimentally accessible to us, can be described by this formula. In the lower right panel of Fig. From the above assessment, it is clear that the change of relaxation time τ in our experimental frequency range can be described equally well by both power law [Eq. (7)] and VF law [Eq. (10)]. The obtained value of τ * from the power law is about an order of magnitude smaller than τ 0 obtained from the VF law. Such difference in characteristic time constant using two dynamical scaling laws are also reported in many cluster-SG systems e.g. Fe 2 O 3 , closer to T 0 (and T g ), the VF law can be adjusted to match the power law through the relation 42 Using E a /k B 16 K, obtained from the VF law and T f 22.5 K for ν = 200 Hz in Eq. ( Different types of glassy systems are characterized by their magnetic relaxation behaviour. To investigate such a behaviour, magnetic relaxation measurement was performed at different temperatures (T = 5 K, 10 K, and 15 K) in the ZFC condition. The sample was cooled under zero applied field from 50 K (PM state) to the desired temperature, which is below T f . After a waiting time of t w = 60 s, a magnetic field of 200 Oe was applied and the time evolution of magnetization [M (t)] was measured. The results are presented in Fig. where M 0 is an intrinsic magnetization, M g is related to a glassy component of magnetization, τ is the characteristic relaxation time constant, and β is the stretching exponent, which has values between 0 and 1 and is a function of temperature only. Although the above function has no specific theoretical justification, it has been widely used to fit the magnetic relaxation data of SG systems. In order to examine the presence of non-ergodicity in the alloy and to gain new information on the low temperature dynamics, magnetic memory measurements were performed following the FC and ZFC protocols. The results are depicted in Fig. To study the memory effect in further details, we performed the relaxation memory measurements for both negative and positive T -cycles as discussed below. Negative T -cycle : The relaxation behaviour was recorded for the negative T -cycle for both ZFC and FC conditions and the results are shown in Fig. As shown in the insets of Fig. Positive T -cycle: Similar to the negative T -cycle, both ZFC and FC relaxation behaviours were also recorded for the positive T -cycle and are shown in Fig. The memory effect in SG systems has been widely studied via magnetization measurements. This phenomena is usually discussed in the framework of two theoretical models: the droplet model 6 and the hierarchical model. Experimentally, these two models can be distinguished by studying the influence of T -cycling on magnetic relaxation. In the droplet model, the original spin configuration is restored after a T cycling i.e. one would expect a symmetric behaviour in magnetic relaxation with respect to the positive/negative T -cycling. On the other hand, in the hierarchical model, the original spin configuration is destroyed after a positive T -cycling and one would expect an asymmetric response (or, no memory effect) in magnetic relaxation. Thus, based on the above criteria, our observed asymmetric response in the positive T -cycle during both ZFC and FC processes supports the hierarchical organization of the metastable states in the cluster-SG system. Since the hierarchical organization requires a large number of degrees of freedom to be coupled, it can not be produced simply by the independent behaviour of individual spins and consequently highlights the important role played by inter-particle/intra-cluster interactions. In summary, we present a detailed and a systematic study of the structural and magnetic properties of Cr 0.5 Fe 0.5 Ga. No evidence of any structural disorder was found from the temperature dependent powder XRD measurements down to 15 K. The temperature dependent DC magnetization shows the onset of a SG transition at low temperatures which is caused by magnetic site disorder and magnetic frustration due to competing AFM and FM interactions. The SG transition is further justified by AC susceptibility measurements. The results clearly indicate that the fitted parameters, as obtained from the relative shift in T f and the dynamical scaling laws, are consistent with that expected for cluster SG systems. The activation energy of the metastable states is estimated to be E a /k B 16 K. A clear signature of the magnetic memory effect was observed below the freezing temperature in both FC and ZFC processes further demonstrating the cluster-SG behavior of the compound under investigation. In the positive T -cycle, a small heating reinitializes the relaxation process and the magnetization is unable to restore its initial value. Such an asymmetric response of magnetic relaxation with respect to positive temperature change favours the hierarchical model. The Debye temperature estimated from the low temperature C p (T ) data is consistent with that obtained from the V cell (T ) analysis. Although our experimental results point towards the formation of cluster SG state, the underlying mechanism behind such a formation is not yet understood. Further studies preferably neutron scattering and μSR experiments may provide useful insite. V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT