Among the recent achievements of sodium-ion battery (SIB) electrode materials, hybridization of two-dimentional (2D) materials is one of the most interesting appointments. In this work, we propose to use the 2D hybrid composites of SnS 2 with graphene or graphene oxide (GO) layers as SIB anode, based on the first-principles calculations of their atomic structures, sodium intercalation energetics and electronic properties. The calculations reveal that graphene or GO film can effectively support not only the stable formation of hetero-interface with the SnS 2 layer but also the easy intercalation of sodium atom with low migration energy and acceptable low volume change. The electronic charge density differences and the local density of state indicate that the electrons are transferred from the graphene or GO layer to the SnS 2 layer, facilitating the formation of hetero-interface and improving the electronic conductance of the semiconducting SnS 2 layer. These 2D hybrid composites of SnS 2 /G or GO are concluded to be more promising candidates for SIB anodes compared with the individual monolayers. Recently, inorganic two-dimentional (2D) materials have attracted remarkable attention for various energy applications including energy harvesting and energy storage devices due to their unique structural and electrochemical properties Many of 2D materials such as rGO Designing hetero-layered architectures by coupling graphene or GO with TMD or TMO 2D materials has emerged as an effective strategy to enhance the Li/Na binding strength and reduce the volume change as well In this work, we make a modeling of hybrid SnS 2 /G and SnS 2 /GO composites, together with 2D bilayered SnS 2 , for conducting comparative and systematic study by using firstprinciples calculations within the density functional theory (DFT). Performing the structural optimizations, we analyze the detailed atomic structures of these 2D layered compounds, such as interlayer distance and bond lengths. The activation barriers for the in-plane atomic migrations of sodium atom are calculated in these composite systems of SnS 2 /G and SnS 2 /GO, and in the SnS 2 bilayer. The local density of states (LDOS) and electronic charge desity differences are analyzed. Based on the calculation data, we reveal the crucial role of hetero-interface behind the Na-storage enhancement of SnS 2 /GO hybrid. Regarding the atomistic modeling, three kinds of 2D systems, i.e., SnS 2 , SnS 2 /G and SnS 2 /GO, were built using the corresponding supercells. The SnS 2 crystal has the hexagonal structure (P 3m1 space group) with the lattice constants of a = 3.649 Å and c = 5.899 Å All the calculations in this work were carried out using the pseudopotential plane-wave method as implemented in QUAN-TUM ESPRESSO package (version 6.2) To calculate the activation barriers for sodium migration, we applied the climbing image nudged elastic band (NEB) method In order to estimate the binding strength between the layers, we calculated the interlayer binding energy per atom as follows where E(d = d eq ) and E(d = d ∞ ) are the DFT total energies of the supercells with the interlayer distance at equilibrium (d eq ) and infinity (d ∞ ), respectively, and N is the number of atoms included in the supercell. Due to the numerical limitation, d ∞ was approximated to be ∼15 Å, over which the total energy of the supercell is scarcely changed and the interaction between the layers becomes negligible. The possibility of interface formation can be estimated by calculating the formation energy per unit area defined as, where E SnS 2 /G (GO) and E G (GO) are the total energies of the supercells including the hybrid SnS 2 /G (GO) bilayer and graphene (GO) monolayer, and E bulk SnS 2 is the total energy per formula unit of unit cell of the crystalline SnS 2 bulk. N SnS 2 and N G (GO) are the numbers of SnS 2 formula units included in the layer and of the graphene (GO) monolayers, and A is the interfacial area in x-y plane. Since the supercell models include two equivalent interfaces between the SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers as can be seen in Figure To estimate the stability of sodium-intercalated compounds, we calculated the sodium intercalation energy E int as follows, where E sub+Na and E sub are the total energies of the supercells for the sodium intercalated compounds and the pristine substrates (SnS 2 , SnS 2 /G and SnS 2 /GO), and E bcc Na is the total energy per atom of the unit cell of the sodium crystal in bodycentered cubic (bcc) phase. We first optimized the crystalline structure of SnS 2 bulk in hexagonal phase (P 3m1 space group, see Figure Then, we performed atomic relaxations in the supercells of the individual SnS 2 , graphene and GO monolayers, of which 2D x-y planes include (2 × 2) cells for SnS 2 layer and (3 × 3) cells for graphene and GO layers (see Figure In order to determine the optimal interlayer distance and the corresponding binding energy between the layers, we estimated the total energy differences of the supercells as varying the interlayer distance. In accordance with the variation of interlayer distance, the supercell length c was also varied to preserve the vacuum layer thickness as 15 Å. Two different interlayer bindings can be distinguished as those between the neighboring SnS 2 layers (homo-interface) and between the SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers (hetero-interface), while four different interlayer distances can be thought as d Sn-Sn , d S-S , d C-S and d C-C as depicted in Figure Table The interlayer distances between the graphene layers (d C-C ) in the hybrid SnS 2 /G and SnS 2 /GO composites were calculated to be 13.96 and 13.87 Å, indicating that the epoxy groups of GO leads to a contraction of the total interlayer distance. The calculated formation energies of the interfaces from the SnS 2 bulk and graphene or GO monolayer were turned out to be positive, suggesting an endothermic feature of the interface formations. And it can be said from the magnitudes of their formation energies that the hetero-interface in SnS 2 /G or SnS 2 /GO is easier to form than the homo-interface in SnS 2 , and of the two heterointerfaces the SnS 2 /GO is easier than the SnS 2 /G. To study the sodium intercalation into these SnS 2 composites containing the interfaces, we considered two different scenarios: (1) sodium intercalation into the middle interspace between the neighboring SnS 2 layers, forming substrate-Na-mid compounds, and (2) sodium insertion into the hetero interspace between the SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers, forming substrate-Na-het compounds, as illustrated in Figure In each way of sodium intercalation, we identified the energetically favorable anchoring site of sodium atom by comparing the total energies of the supercells with different sodium insertion sites. In the cases of middle intercalation, two different sites might be thought: (1) Na atom can sit on the top of S atom of the below SnS 2 layer while at the center of S-triangle of the upper SnS 2 layer, leading to a formation of NaS 4 tetrahedron (tet site), and (3) Na atom can be placed at the spherical center of SnS 6 octahedron (oct site). In energetics the Na middle-intercalated SnS 2 supercell in the tet site was found to be about 0.39 eV higher than that in the oct site, possibly due to a stronger bonding of Na atom with the surrounding S atoms (see Figure (1) Na atom can sit on the top of Sn atom placed at the center of S-triangle in the below SnS 2 layer while on the side of C-C bond of the upper graphene (GO) layer (top site), (2) on the hollow site at the center of S-triangle in the below layer (hollow site), and (3) at the center of carbon hexagon ring of the upper layer (center site). Among these sodium hetero-intercalation sites, the top site was found to have the lowest total energy (see Figure Figure We then investigated the diffusion of sodium atom by calculating their activation barriers, which can give a suggestion of the rate capability and cycling stability of electrode materials in SIB application. For the cases of middle intercalation, we considered the sodium migration path from the site determined by atomic relaxation to the adjacent image site, which consists of 7 NEB image configurations. It should be noted that the interval of the neighboring image points was set to be around 1 Å, and the migration paths were determined to be almost straight line along the a direction on the x-y plane, as shown in Figure In Figure Figure To further understand such enhancement of sodium insertion by hybrid of SnS 2 with graphene or GO and make it clear the role of hetero-interface, we carried out the analysis of electronic properties such as density of state (DOS) and electronic charge density differneces. Such electronic properties can provide us valuable insight for the interaction between the layers and charge transfer in the event of hetero-interface formation, which can be useful for understanding the enhancement of electrochemical properties in the 2D hybrid materials. To obtain an intuitive insight for charge transfer between SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers during the interface formation, we calculated the electronic charge density difference (∆ρ) as follows, where ρ SnS 2 /G (GO) , ρ SnS 2 and ρ G (GO) are the charge densities of the hybrid composites, individual SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers, respectively. In Figure We present the local density of state (LDOS) integrated on x-y plane and thus along the z axis in the right panel of Figure In this work we provide a valuable understanding of material properties of 2D hybrid composites composed of SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers that can be used as effective anode materials of sodium-ion battery. Various supercell models of the pristine SnS 2 bilayer and the hybrid SnS 2 /G or GO composites have been suggested, and their atomic structures and energetics were investigated by using first-principles calculations. Through the analysis of the calculated interlayer distances and binding and formation energies, it was revealed that the heterointerface between the SnS 2 layer and graphene or GO layer can be formed, while oxidation of graphene can enhance the interaction between the layers. Furthermore, we have devised two different models for sodium intercalation such as middle intercalation into the interspace between the SnS 2 layers and hetero intercalation into the interspace between the SnS 2 and graphene or GO layers, and it was found that the hetero-intercalation is more probable due to higher intercalation energy, lower migration energy and smaller volume change. To gain a deep understanding of material properties of these 2D composites, the electronich charge density differences and integrated local density of state were investigated, demonstrating the electron transfer from the graphene layer to the SnS 2 layer and the improvement of electronic conduction by formation of hybrid composites. In conclusion, the 2D hybrid SnS 2 /G or GO composite including the hetero-interface can be a promising candidate for anode material of sodium-ion battery. We used C.pbesol-n-kjpaw psl.0.1.UPF, O.pbesol-n-kjpaw psl.0.1.UPF, Sn.pbesol-dn-kjpaw psl.0.2.UPF, S.pbesol-n-kjpaw psl.0.1.UPF, and Na.pbesol-spn-kjpaw psl.0.2.UPF, which are provided in the package.