We prove the existence of solutions of the reduced Hartree-Fock equations at finite temperature for a periodic crystal with a small defect, and show total screening of the defect charge by the electrons. We also show the convergence of the damped self-consistent field iteration using Kerker preconditioning to remove charge sloshing. As a crucial step of the proof, we define and study the properties of the dielectric operator. A point charge Q placed in vacuum creates an electric potential Q 4πr , r being the distance to the charge (in units where the permittivity of the vacuum ε 0 is taken to be 1). By contrast, when an defect is placed in a material, the material reorganises itself: a positive charge creates an energetically favorable region for the electrons, which flock towards the defect. At equilibrium, they form a "shield" of negative charge, effectively screening the Coulomb interaction at long range. Phenomenologically, insulators and metals exhibit a different screening behavior. In insulators, electrons are tightly bound to the nuclei, and cannot deviate too much from their equilibrium position to move towards the defect. Accordingly, the long-range behavior of the total potential, including the effects of the electrons, is Q/(4πεr), where ε > 1 is the dielectric constant of the material. Thus, effectively, the charge Q is scaled by the dielectric constant ε: this is called partial screening. In metals, however, electrons are free to move in response to the defect and totally screen it, so that the total potential becomes effectively short-range. A simple model for the total potential is the Yukawa potential where 1/k is the screening length. At low temperatures however, V displays an oscillatory behavior with a power-law decay, called Friedel oscillations. The purpose of this paper is to justify the total screening of small defects in the reduced Hartree-Fock (rHF) model at finite temperature. This is to be contrasted with the partial screening of insulators at zero temperature obtained in The Coulomb operator v c is given by the convolution ρ(y) |x -y| dy or in Fourier space v c ρ(q) = ρ(q) |q| 2 . The potential-to-density mapping F ε F is given by where the Fermi-Dirac distribution f ε F is , with T the temperature and k B the Boltzmann constant. The density matrix f ε F (H) is defined through the functional calculus of self-adjoint operators, and f ε F (H)(x, x) is the associated density (see This convexity also means that it is possible to justify rigorously the thermodynamic limit for periodic systems where v per ρ is the unique periodic solution of -∆(v per ρ) = ρ - 1 |Γ| ́Γ ρ ́Γ(v per ρ) = 0 The periodic model with zero temperature was studied in A very natural iterative method to solve this equation is the simple self-consistent iteration. Unfortunately, as is well-known, this algorithm does not necessarily converge, not even locally for small α. It is not a priori clear why this iteration, based on an arbitrary splitting of the self-consistent equation, should converge, even for small α > 0. We prove that this is the case (recall that L 2 per is the space of R-periodic functions that are square-integrable over the unit cell Γ) Furthermore, for all 0 < α ≤ α 0 , the iteration (3) with W 0 ∈ W converges to W (W nucl ) in L 2 per . Note that the Jacobian of the fixed-point mapping (3) is We show in Lemma 4.1 that the Jacobian F ε F (W ) is bounded, self-adjoint and non-positive from L 2 per to itself. Since v per F ε F (W ) is the product of a non-negative and a non-positive selfadjoint operator, it has non-positive spectrum, and therefore J α will have spectrum between -1 and 1 for α small enough, proving Theorem 1.1. To analyze F ε F (W ), we use a contour integral formulation which allows us to prove sum-over-states expressions for the derivatives. A similar method was used in We next study defects. The model for defects for insulators at zero temperature was introduced in for V , with G(V ) the renormalized potential-to-density mapping Here V is the total change in potential created by the addition of the defect V def . We note that, to our knowledge, neither this defect model nor even the periodic model has been derived from a thermodynamic limit for the rHF model at finite temperature (see It is natural to try to solve this equation by a procedure similar to (3): However, in contrast to the periodic case, the operator v c is not bounded. This is easily seen by noting that v c acts in Fourier space as a multiplication operator by 1/|q| 2 . The iteration This can be fixed by using a more elaborate numerical method. The Newton method applied to (4) is where There is an intimate link between the Jacobian J(V ), describing the behavior of iterative algorithms, and the linear response properties of the system. The operator χ 0 = G (0) is called the 1 This reasoning also holds true for more complex methods. The Jacobian of the system has a condition number proportional to L 2 , and therefore we expect simple methods to require a number of iterations proportional to L 2 , and Krylov-type methods such as Anderson acceleration to require a number of iterations proportional to L independent-particle susceptibility operator. It describes the linear response of the density of a non-interacting system of electrons to a small defect potential. It can be computed through the Adler-Wiser sum-over-states formula Since J(V ) or even J(0) is difficult to compute, an approximation has to be found, yielding a preconditioned scheme. A simple approximation can be found using the Thomas-Fermi theory of the free electron gas where x + = max(x, 0). In this case we simply have χ 0,TF = G TF (0) = -3 2 √ ε F . Therefore, the operator ε TF = J TF (0) = 1 -v c χ 0,TF takes the simple form of a multiplication operator in Fourier space The 1/|q| 2 divergence for low wavelengths created by Coulomb interaction is the cause of charge sloshing. One can then simply take the inverse of this Thomas-Fermi Jacobian as a preconditioner. In practice, the unknown constant χ 0,TF is estimated according to the system under consideration (in this paper we take it equal to -1 for simplicity). This choice, or in operator form K = -∆ 1-∆ , is known as Kerker preconditioning which is found in practice to substantially improve the convergence of self-consistent algorithms. We now turn to the related matter of screening. Expanding (4) to first order in V def , we obtain formally As mentioned previously, the operator is the dielectric operator. In the case of the homogeneous Thomas-Fermi model, χ 0 is a negative constant, and ε -1 TF is a Fourier multiplication operator given by , and so the Fourier transform of a short-range Yukawa potential The Thomas-Fermi theory of screening beyond linear response was discussed in Our main result is Theorem 1.2. Fix W per ∈ L 2 per and ε F ∈ R. There are α 0 > 0 and neighborhoods V def and V of 0 in v c H -2 and L 2 respectively such that, for all V def ∈ V def , there is a unique solution Furthermore, for 0 < α ≤ α 0 , the iteration We have the expansion Here the space In this case, our theorem states that when Q is small enough, the screened potential V (V def ) is in L 2 , and therefore decays faster than V def . When the defect potential is the Coulomb potential generated by a localized charge density ρ, we expect from the analysis of the Thomas-Fermi model that V (V def ) will have the same decay properties as ρ (because q → ε -1 TF (q) |q| 2 is smooth). To quantify this, we define the weighted Lebesgue and Sobolev spaces (see Section 2 for more details): for every n ∈ R, N ≥ 0, We then have ) decays faster than any polynomial. To prove Theorem 1.2, we need to generalize the results of the Thomas-Fermi model to our setting. The first obstacle is the more complicated nature of the potential-to-density mapping G. This is handled by using a contour-integral formulation, which allows for the computation of response functions (derivatives of G). The second is the absence of translation invariance, and therefore of the simple decomposition of operators in Fourier space. However, the periodicity of the underlying crystal allows the use of the Bloch transform, which replaces the Fourier transform used in the homogeneous case. We also need to establish the invertibility of the operator εK, which is done by studying the low-wavelength behavior of the independent-particle susceptibility operator χ 0 , and relating it to F ε F (W per ). Finally, the improved decay estimates in Theorem 1.3 are obtained by considering the off-diagonal decay of the resolvent of the periodic Hamiltonian, a property related to the well-known locality of the density matrix Remark 1.4 (Exponential decay). It follows from our estimates that the operator ε -1 v c representing the linear response of the screened potential to a defect charge density has an exponentially decaying kernel. Indeed, from the proof of Lemma 5.2 one can see that its fibers are analytic in a strip in the complex plane, and therefore ε -1 v c maps exponentially decaying charge densities to exponentially decaying potentials. The exponential decay rate depends in particular on the temperature. Proving this for the non-linear mapping V (V def ) requires the use of more involved functional spaces quantifying exponential decay, and we do not do it in this paper. Remark 1.5 (Zero temperature limit). The results above are to be compared with those of The discussion above in terms of wavelengths is complicated by the fact that these operators do not commute with all translations but only with those of the crystal lattice, and so are not diagonalized by the Fourier transform but by the Bloch transform. Because of the appearance of the inverse, the behavior of ε -1 for low wavelengths is not determined only by that of χ 0 for low wavelengths. This discrepancy is sometimes called "local field effects" in the physical literature. However, the conclusions above are qualitatively correct, although the proper treatment of these effects is more involved, as we will see. This work is only concerned with the finite-temperature case. Physically, this has the effect of making every material metallic, in the sense that there are free electrons available to move towards the defect. Mathematically, this allows response functions to be derived straightforwardly from contour integrals. The case of the zero-temperature limit of metals remains open (although see Remark 1.6 (Energy methods). In this work, we are concerned with the convergence of fixedpoint iterations, and screening in the small defect regime. Therefore, we use a fixed-point approach to the existence of solutions of the defect equations, and do not exploit the existence of an energy. This limits our range of applicability to small defects, and cannot ensure the uniqueness of solutions. It would be interesting to prove the existence of solutions outside of the perturbative regime through energy methods. The use of an energy sheds some light on the convergence of the damped fixed-point iteration, which decreases the (free) energy of the system for small enough damping parameter. Similarly, the non-positivity of the derivative of the potential-to-density mapping, which we obtained by direct computation, can also be seen through energy methods. For concreteness, we sketch this argument now in a periodic system at fixed Fermi level. Consider a periodic system of noninteracting electrons in a periodic potential W . Define the free energy (per unit cell) of a density matrix γ where Tr is the trace per unit cell (see is concave, being the infimum of affine functionals. Its gradient is computed using an Hellmann-Feynman-type argument as and it follows that F ε F , being the Hessian of a concave functional, is self-adjoint and nonpositive. Remark 1.7 (Kohn-Sham density functional theory). We consider here the rHF model, which neglects any exchange-correlation effects. In the case of the Kohn-Sham model under the local density approximation (LDA), the equation becomes is the exchange-correlation potential (the gradient of the exchange-correlation energy). The dielectric operator is then where Crucially, K xc is not in general a positive operator, since the exchangecorrelation energy is not convex. It is then not a priori clear that the operator 1 -(v c + K xc )χ 0 is invertible, even for a finite system. This property however holds at a non-degenerate local minimum of the energy The structure of the paper is as follows. We first introduce our notations in Section 2 and recall properties of the Bloch transform and of periodic operators. In Section 3 we state general theorems and prove some estimates on resolvents and densities of operators. Then we study the periodic rHF model in Section 4, establishing properties of the response operators and proving Theorem 1.1. We finally study the defect model in Section 5, culminating in the proof of Theorems 1.2 and 1.3. Let R be a periodic lattice in R 3 , R * = {K ∈ R 3 | ∀R ∈ R, e iK•R = 1} be its dual lattice, Γ be a unit cell of R, and Γ * = B be a unit cell of R * . By abuse of language we call B the Brillouin zone. Both Γ and B are considered to have the topology of a torus: this means that, for instance, a continuous function on Γ extends to a continuous and R-periodic function on R 3 . We let k B T > 0 be a fixed temperature, and set the Fermi-Dirac occupation function. We recall that f is decreasing on R and analytic on R + i(-πk B T, πk B T ). L 2 is the usual Lebesgue space on R 3 , and L 2 per ∼ L 2 (Γ) is the space of R-periodic functions. For s ∈ R, H s is the Sobolev space on R 3 and H s per ∼ H s (Γ) the Sobolev space on the torus Γ, defined via Fourier transform and Fourier series respectively. All these spaces are Hilbert spaces with their usual inner product. We normalize the Fourier series, transforms and Bloch transforms to consistently have unnormalized decompositions: for a function u ∈ L 2 per , we have where ffl Ω = 1 Ω ́Ω is the normalized integral. For a function w ∈ L 2 we have The Bloch transform for w ∈ L 2 is The map k → u k belongs to the space L 2 (B, L 2 per ), by which we mean the space of functions u k : R 3 → L 2 per that are locally L 2 and satisfy the pseudo-periodicity condition u k+K (x) = e -iKx u k (x) for all K ∈ R * . This space is equipped with the norm The Bloch transform is, up to normalization, unitary from L 2 to L 2 (B, L 2 per ). Recall that -i∂ x i w has Bloch transform k → (-i∂ x i +k i )u k , and that x i w has Bloch transform k → i∂ k i u k . Let x = 1 + |x| 2 . For every n, N ∈ R, let the weighted Sobolev spaces ) is defined as above (see for instance If A is a bounded operator on a Banach space, we call A its norm, σ(A) its spectrum and r(A) = lim n→∞ A n 1/n = sup{|z|, z ∈ σ(A)} its spectral radius. We denote by S p the space of Schatten-class operators on L 2 . The spaces S p equipped with their norm A Sp = (Tr |A| p ) 1/p are Banach spaces (Hilbert space for p = 2). In particular, the cases p = 1, 2, ∞ correspond to trace-class, Hilbert-Schmidt and bounded operators respectively. We say that a bounded operator A on L 2 (R 3 ) is a periodic operator if it commutes with the translations of the lattice R. As is well-known We call the operators A k the fibers of A. The smoothness of the fibers of operators reflect the off-diagonal properties of their kernel: if an operator A has fibers A k that are smooth from R 3.1. General results. We recall the following classical properties Lemma 3.1. Let X be a Banach space and A, B be bounded operators on X. Then σ(AB) \ {0} = σ(BA) \ {0}. Proof. Let λ / ∈ σ(AB) and λ = 0. Then (λ -BA) is invertible with inverse and λ / ∈ σ(BA). The proof follows by interchanging A and B. Lemma 3.2. Let X be a Banach space and A a bounded operator on X. Then for every ε > 0, there is a norm Proof. See We will make use of the following variant of the Banach fixed point theorem: Theorem 3.3. Let X, Y be two Banach spaces, U and V be two neighborhoods of x * ∈ X and y * ∈ Y , and M : U ×V → X be a continuously differentiable mapping such that M (x * , y * ) = x * , and Then there are neighborhoods U ⊂ U and V ⊂ V of x * and y * such that, for all y ∈ V , the iteration with x 0 ∈ U converges to a solution x(y) of M (x(y), y) = x(y) in U . This solution is unique in U . Furthermore, x(y) is differentiable, and Proof. Applying Lemma 3.2 to A = ∂M ∂x (x * , y * ) and using the continuous differentiability of M , we see that, for all ε > 0, there is an equivalent norm • ε on X such that It follows that, for ε small enough, there is a neighborhood U × V of (x * , y * ) such that, for every y ∈ V , M (•, y) maps U to itself and is a contraction for the • ε norm. The convergence of (10) (in the • ε and therefore in the • norm), as well as the uniqueness of x(y) follows from the Banach fixed-point theorem. The differentiability follows as in the proof of the implicit function theorem. Remark 3.4. The implicit function theorem also shows the existence of x(y) under weaker assumptions (that 1-∂M ∂x is invertible). The main difference is that the implicit function theorem uses the Newton-like iteration x n+1 = x n + (1 -∂M ∂x (x * , y * )) -1 (M (x n , y) -x n ) instead of the simpler iteration Recall that in general r( ∂M ∂x ) < ∂M ∂x for general non-normal operators, and therefore M is not necessarily a contraction. In the following, we want to prove that products of resolvents and potentials have certain trace properties, in order to define potentials-to-density mappings via contour integrals. The following equality, a building block of the general Kato-Seiler-Simon inequality Similarly, for f ∈ L 2 , g ∈ L 2 per , f (-i∇)g(x) S 2,per = (2π) -3/2 f L 2 g L 2 per . Proof. The proof of the first assertion is standard, see e.g. and therefore For the second, we first note that, if f ∈ 2 (R * ) and g ∈ L 2 per , then f (-i∇)g(x) is an operator on L 2 per . By writing its kernel (matrix in the basis of the 1 √ |Γ| e iKx for K ∈ R * ), we get (see In particular, since f (q) = (1 per . This can be amplified to prove that both L 2 and L 2 per potentials are -∆bounded with relative bound zero, so that, for V ∈ L 2 + L 2 per , -∆ + V is self-adjoint on L 2 (R 3 ) with domain H 2 (R 3 ). In particular, the resolvent of -∆ + V is the resolvent of the Laplacian, modulo a bounded operator: is bounded, with Proof. In this proof and others in the sequel, C denotes a constant whose value might change from line to line. The following argument is classical, see e.g. [3, Let c > 0. For V ∈ L 2 , we have that while similarly for W ∈ L 2 per we have ) with C large enough, we get and so (z -(H + ic)) -1 (1 -∆) is bounded uniformly in V and z. The result then follows from 3.3. Density of an operator. The following lemma gives a useful condition for an operator to have a density in L 2 , or for a periodic operator to have a density in L 2 per . Lemma 3.7. There is Similarly, if A per is a periodic operator such that A per (1 -∆) ∈ S 2,per , then A per (x, x) ∈ L 2 per , with where f above is interpreted as a multiplication operator. The proof is similar in the periodic case. Given a nuclear potential W nucl ∈ L 2 per , we look for a solution of the equations Recall that the existence and uniqueness of solutions of this equation have been proved in For any ρ ∈ L 2 per , v per ρ was defined in (2) as the solution of the periodic Poisson equation with zero mean: It is a bounded non-negative self-adjoint operator on L 2 per . It is the pseudo-inverse of the negative Laplacian on L 2 per , in the sense that -∆(v per ρ) = ρ for all ρ ∈ L 2 per with ρ ⊥ e, and v per e = 0, where the constant function e(x) = 1 spans the kernel of -∆. We first investigate the mapping F ε F and its derivative. The last property that F ε F (W ) + β∆ is positive for all β > 0 is recorded for future use in the case of defects. Lemma 4.1. For all ε F ∈ R, the map is analytic from L , and H = -∆ + W . Recall that H is periodic, with fibers H k = (-i∇ + k) 2 + W . We label the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of H k (a self-adjoint operator on L 2 per with compact resolvent) by where the (ε nk ) n∈N are ordered by increasing order. We have By standard comparison arguments, there are a ∈ R, b > 0 such that ε nk ≥ a + bn 2/3 . By the Sobolev embedding ) for some C > 0, uniformly in k ∈ B, and it follows from the exponential decay of Contour C used to differentiate the potential-to-density mapping. Note that this differs from standard rectangular contours because we need to ensure that (z -H) -1 remains Hilbert-Schmidt uniformly in z ∈ C. Step 2: Let C be the contour given by Figure increases at the same rate as Re(z), it follows from Lemma 3.6 that independently of z ∈ C (note that this would not be true for a rectangular contour). From the Kato-Seiler-Simon equality, there is therefore We can expand f ε F (H + δW ) as bounded operators: For all n ≥ 1, we have that and therefore that F ε F is analytic at W . Step 3: F ε F is self-adjoint and non-positive. From the previous computations, we have The absolute convergence of this sum in L 2 per follows from the estimates above. For completeness, we give a more direct proof. Let e K (x) = e iKx √ . The (e K ) K∈R * form a Hilbert basis of L 2 per , and we have the property e K , δW e K = 1 √ which is bounded uniformly in k ∈ B, z ∈ C. The result follows by a Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Performing the contour integration, we obtain the following sum-over-states formula where f nk = f ε F (ε nk ), and with the convention that arising from the double pole (z -ε mk ) -2 when ε nk = ε mk . F ε F (W ) is therefore self-adjoint and, since and f ε F is decreasing, it follows that F ε F (W ) is non-positive. Step 4: F ε F (W ) + β∆ is negative. Assume that F ε F (W ) + β∆ is not negative. This means that there exists a sequence W n of potentials with W n L 2 per = 1 such that Let e ∈ L 2 per be the constant function: e(x) = 1. We have Up to a subsequence, we can assume that e, W n → c, with c ∈ C. It follows from W n = P e W n + P e ⊥ W n that W n → ce in L 2 , and that |c| = 1 √ . Then, where we have used that per is bounded uniformly in k. 4.1. Self-consistent Fermi level. We now solve the equation ́Γ F ε F (W ) = N el for ε F . Lemma 4.2. For all W ∈ L 2 per and N el > 0, the equation ́Γ F ε F (W ) = N el has a unique solution ε F (W ). The map per to L 2 per . Its differential F (W ) is self-adjoint and non-positive, and satisfies F (W ) • e = 0 where e is the constant function. be the total number of electrons with Fermi level ε F . Then by the previous lemma N is analytic on R × L 2 per , with For all W ∈ L 2 per , N (•, W ) has limit 0 at -∞ and +∞ at +∞, so that there is a unique solution ε F (W ) of N (ε F , W ) = N el . From the implicit function theorem, we get that ε F (W ) is analytic on L 2 per and and therefore In particular, F (W ) • e = 0 and F (W ) is self-adjoint. The expression above is of the form F (W ) = A -1 e,Ae |Ae Ae|, with A = F ε F (W ) bounded, self-adjoint and non-positive on a Hilbert space H and e ∈ H. In particular, F (W ) is selfadjoint, F (W ) • e = 0, and we compute, for all x ∈ H, by the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, from where it follows that F (W ) is non-positive. We now look for solutions W ∈ L 2 per of the equation We are ready for the In particular, M α is analytic from L 2 per to itself. From Theorem 3.3, we only need to check that the spectral radius of the operator is smaller than 1 for α small enough. This is ensured by the fact that v per and F (W * ) are bounded operators on L 2 per and v per is non-negative, so that, from Lemma 3.1, This last operator is a non-positive self-adjoint bounded operator on L 2 per , hence the result. In this section we fix W per ∈ L 2 per and ε F ∈ R. Let H per = -∆ + W per be the background periodic Hamiltonian. We first investigate the renormalized potential-to-density mapping. Lemma 5.1. There is a neighborhood V of 0 in L 2 in which the map Proof. Step 1: the case N = 0. The proof of this step is similar to that of Lemma 4.1. We take a contour C enclosing the spectrum of H per with the same shape as in Figure ) is invertible, and we have with C uniform in z ∈ C and the decay properties of f ε F , it follows that the expansion (13) converges absolutely. Therefore, , and G is analytic in a neighborhood of 0. Step 2: Bloch structure of the expansion of the density at all orders. We first note that For q small enough, we then have and, from the previous estimate, R z,k is analytic in the • (1 -∆) S 2,per topology, uniformly in z ∈ C and k ∈ B. For z ∈ C, let We first consider the first-order term D z . Let V = ́B e iqx V q (x)dq ∈ L 2 . Elementary computations show that if A is a periodic operator with fibers A k , then e -iqx Ae iqx is a periodic operator with fibers A k+q , and that e iqx A has density Similarly, in the general case, Step 3: the case N > 0. Since for i = 1, 2, 3 and R z,k is analytic for the • (1 -∆) S 2,per topology, uniformly in z ∈ C, k ∈ B, the repeated application of ( for all N ≥ 0, with C independent on N , this bound being uniform in z ∈ C. It follows that, for V L 2 ≤ 1 2C , for all N , we have the absolutely convergent expansion Consider terms of the form z,k+q V (1) z,k+q 1 V (2) where R z,k , R z,k are R z,k or their derivatives, and V q , V (2) q are V q or its derivatives. Performing the change of variable q 1 = q -q 1 , we obtain where the quasi-periodicity of the Bloch transform implies that q 1 → V q-q 1 -q 2 is R * -periodic, and therefore that we can integrate q 1 over B rather than q -B. This shows that we can transfer the q dependence from V (1) to V (2) in the convolution-like terms of the form Let p 2N be a polynomial of degree 2N . Applying (n) z (V ) and using the above procedure to the divide the 2N derivatives between V (1) q and V (2) q , we obtain that (p 2N (x)D (n) z (V )) q contains terms of the form (16) with V (1) q and V (2) q being derivatives of V q of order at most N . Using the analyticity of k → R z,k , we obtain a bound of the form where C is independent of N , the bound being uniform in z ∈ C. The result follows. Recall that the operator v c is given by the convolution ρ(y) |x -y| dy. In Fourier space, this is a multiplication by 1 |q| 2 . This is an unbounded non-negative self-adjoint operator on L 2 . We denote its formal inverse by v c -1 = -∆, also an unbounded non-negative self-adjoint operator on L 2 . v c -1 does not have a spectral gap at zero, but -χ 0 + v c -1 does: Lemma 5.2. Let N ≥ 0. The operator -χ 0 + v c -1 is self-adjoint and positive on L 2 , and its inverse is bounded from H -2 N to L 2 N .The operator ε = 1 -v c χ 0 is invertible in L 2 N , with bounded inverse The operator Kε is therefore bounded and invertible on L 2 N . Proof. We have, for V ∈ L 2 with Bloch transform V q and therefore χ 0 is fibered, with fibers χ 0,q W = 1 2πi ˆC f ε F (z) B (R z,k+q W R z,k )(x, x)dkdz f n,k+q -f m,k ε n,k+q -ε m,k W 1 u m,k , u nk+q u nk+q , W 2 u m,k dk converging absolutely, from where it follows that χ 0,q is self-adjoint and non-positive on L 2 for all q, and therefore that χ 0 is too. It follows from the regularity of R z,k and ( is bounded away from zero for k small, and therefore for all k. Therefore, there is c > 0 such that as quadratic forms, from where it follows that (-χ 0 + v c -1 ) -1 ≤ 1 c (1 -∆) -1 as quadratic forms and then that, for all V ∈ L 2 , (-χ 0 + v c -1 ) -1 V L 2 ≤ 1 c (1 -∆) -1 V L 2 . The operator (-χ 0 + v c -1 ) -1 is therefore bounded from H -2 to L 2 . Its fibers are (χ 0,k + v c,k -1 ) -1 and, for q small enough, (χ 0,k+q + v c,k -1 ) -1 = n≥0 (χ 0,k + v c,k -1 ) -1 (χ 0,k+q -χ 0,k ) n (χ 0,k + v c,k -1 ) -1 which shows that the family (χ 0 + v c -1 ) -1 k is analytic on B as operators from H -2 per to L 2 per , and therefore that (χ 0 + v c -1 ) -1 is bounded from H -2 N to L 2 N . It then follows that ε is invertible on L 2 N , with inverse Finally, we have hence the result. We are now ready for the Proof of Theorem 1.2. We proceed as in Theorem 1.1, and apply Theorem 3.3 to analytic in a neighborhood of 0 in L 2 × v c H -2 to L 2 , with Jacobian at (0, 0) J α = 1 -αK + αKv c χ 0 = 1 -αKε. Since Kv c = (1 -∆) -1 is bounded, self-adjoint and non-negative on L 2 , we have σ(Kv c χ 0 ) \ {0} = σ( Kv c χ 0 Kv c ) \ {0}. It follows that by taking α 0 small enough, we can impose that σ(J α ) ⊂ (-1, 1]. Since from Lemma 5.2 the operator Kε is invertible on L 2 , we even have that σ(J α ) ⊂ (-1, 1), hence the result. Proof of Theorem 1.3. The proof is based on a bootstrap argument on the equation satisfied by V (V def ). For the base case N = 1, we prove that V (V def ) ∈ L 2 1 by applying Theorem 3.3 to M (V, V def ) = ε -1 (V def + v c (G(V ) -χ 0 V )), an analytic map from L 2 1 ×v c H -2 1 to L 2 1 with Jacobian 0 at (0, 0). It follows from the uniqueness of V (V per ) that V (V per ) ∈ L 2 1 . We then use the fact that M (•, V def ) maps L 2 1 to L 2 2 to conclude from (18) that V (V per ) ∈ L 2 2 . Repeating this argument, we obtain that V (V per ) ∈ L 2 N . Note that if other occupation functions are used, the contour may need to be modified. For instance, Gaussian smearing