Recent experimental studies confirmed that a long searched conventional superconducting phase in graphene can be induced via lithium deposition. However, the canonical character of the lithiumdecorated graphene (LiC6) superconductor postulated therein, as defined by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, is ambiguous due to the moderate electron-phonon coupling constant and low Fermi energy in this material. Herein, this issue is addressed within the Migdal-Eliashberg formalism and beyond it via the first-order electron-phonon vertex corrections, to account for the potentially pivotal effects, hitherto not captured. The conducted analysis yields similar value of the metal-superconductor transition temperature as in the previous studies (TC ∼ 6 K), yet for a weaker depairing electron correlations, which magnitude in the non-adiabatic regime approaches predictions of the Morel-Anderson model. Moreover, the characteristic ratio of the pairing gap and the inverse temperature is found to notably exceeds estimates of the BCS theory. In a results, it is argued that the superconducting state in LiC6 may have non-canonical character strongly influenced by the nonadiabatic and retardation effects. Moreover, discussed phase appears as a vital case study, which suggests that other two-dimensional superconductors of hexagonal structure may exhibit similar non-canonical behavior as LiC6. Since its discovery, the two-dimensional (2D) carbon allotrope known as graphene Among multiple attempts to induce superconductivity in graphene Nonetheless, the fundamental understanding of superconducting phase in LiC 6 is still raising some questions, despite numerous studies in this field To address above ambiguities, herein the complementary analysis of the order parameter, the Coulomb pseudopotential, and the transition temperature in LiC 6 superconductor is provided within the Migdal-Eliashberg theory and beyond it. In particular, the Eliashberg equations are employed with The numerical results obtained self-consistently within the in-house developed procedures According to the obtained estimates, depicted in subfigures 1 (A) and (C), it can be qualitatively observed that both sets of results exhibit the same general behavior, which indicates that the inclusion of vertex corrections leads to the decrease of μ * in the entire range of the ∆(T, μ * ) function, regardless of the employed Eliashberg function type. Naturally, results in sub-figures 1 (A) and (C) differ from each other, what should be attributed to the differences in the shapes of the Eliashberg functions assumed for calculations. However, it can be argued that the μ * values presented in sub-figure A notable changes due to the vertex corrections can be also noticed for the order parameter as a function of temperature for μ * = μ * C , see sub-figures 1 (B) and (D). In general, the vertex corrections cause decrease of the T C value and increase of the ∆(0, μ * C ) level, for all considered The functional dependency of the order parameter in LiC6 on the Coulomb pseudopotential (μ) at 3.5 K ((A) and (C)) and the temperature (T ) at the critical values of μ * ((B) and (D)). Results obtained within the Eliashberg formalism with (E+V) and without (M-E) the first-order vertex corrections to the electron-phonon interaction are marked by the open and closed symbols, respectively. First row presents estimates obtained for theoretically calculated electron-phonon spectral function given in cases. Interestingly, in the framework of the M-E formalism the T C estimates for both considered Eliashberg functions are the same and equal to 6.2 K. Likewise, the inclusion of the vertex corrections differentiate both values only slightly and gives 5.8 K and 5.9 K for the theoretically and experimentally derived α 2 F (ω) functions, respectively. In this context, the M-E estimates are higher than reported in In summary, the analysis of the superconducting state in LiC 6 , as conducted here within the M-E and E+V models, reveals pivotal role of the non-adiabatic and retardation effects for the proper description of the discussed phase. The presented calculations clarify the observed interpretational ambiguities and provide complementary characteristic of the LiC 6 superconductor. In particular, analyzed material is suggested to be a non-conventional phonon-mediated superconductor with a moderate Coulomb pseudopotential value and the critical temperature at the level of ∼ 6 K. To this end, presented results shed a light on other 2D superconductors of hexagonal structure, which also present non negligible ω D /E F ratios (see Supplemental Material). In other words, present analysis can be considered as a case study of such materials, and a suggestion that superconducting state in hexagonal 2D superconductors is strongly nonadiabatic.