We report a topological semimetal W2As3 with a space group C2/m. Based on the first-principles calculations, band crossings are partially gapped when spin-orbit coupling is included. The Z2 indices at the electron filling are [1;111], characterizing a strong topological insulator and topological surface states. From the magnetotransport measurements, nearly quadratic field dependence of magnetoresistance (MR) (B [200]) at 3 K indicates an electron-hole compensated compound whose longitudinal MR reaches 11500% at 3 K and 15 T. In addition, multiband features are detected from the high-magnetic-field Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillation, Hall resistivity, and band calculations. A nontrivial π Berry's phase is obtained, suggesting the topological feature of this material. A twoband model can fit well the conductivity and Hall coefficient. Our experiments manifest that the transport properties of W2As3 are in good agreement with the theoretical calculations. The research of new topological phases such as topological insulator (TI), topological superconductor, and topological semimetal (TSM) is a hot spot in recent years in condensed matter physics. Among them, topological semimetals are widely studied because there are many types, including Dirac semimetals Recently, transition-metal dipnictides MPn 2 (M = Nb or Ta; Pn = As or Sb) with C2/m structure have attracted great attention because of extremely large magnetoresistance (XMR), negative magnetoresistance and other interesting properties These interesting properties in the compounds with C2/m structure have attracted much research attention. Here we report on a topological material W 2 As 3 with C2/m structure and nontrivial Z 2 indices [1:111] which belongs to a strong TI family Single crystals of W 2 As 3 were synthesized by an iodinevapour transport method. Firstly, polycrystalline W 2 As 3 was prepared by heating the mixture of W powder and As powder with a stoichiometric ratio of 2:3 at 1173 K for 2 days. Then iodine with a concentration of 10mg/cm 3 was mixed with the reground polycrystalline W 2 As 3 , and they were sealed in an ampoule to grow single crystals for 7 days in a two-zone furnace, where the temperature gradient was set as 1323-1223 K over a distance of 16 cm. All the experimental processes were carried out in a glove box filled with pure Ar, except the heating processes. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were collected by a PANalytical x-ray diffractometer (Empyrean) with a Cu K α1 radiation. We used energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to analyze the composition ratio of W and As element. Longitudinal resistivity and Hall resistivity was measured by a standard six-probe technique. Transport measurements below 15 T were performed on an Oxford-15T cryostat, and a pulsed magnetic field up to 60 T was employed to obtain apparent quantum oscillations in the Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center (WHMFC -Wuhan). The first-principles calculations were performed with Vienna Abinitio Simulation Package (VASP) E n e r g y ( e V ) logical indices Z 2 were calculated by the method of parity check The crystal structure (a unit cell) of W 2 As 3 is presented in Fig. The band structures of W 2 As 3 without and with spin- (0,0,0) orbit coupling (SOC) are shown in Fig. A m p l i t u d e ( a . u . ) with the parity at the time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM) multiplied up to the highest valence band, similar to the cases of LaBi We now turn to the transport properties of W 2 As 3 . The temperature-dependent ρ xx of different samples S1, S2, and S3 all exhibit a typical metallic behavior, and the corresponding residual resistance ratio [RRR = ρ xx (300K)/ρ xx (1.5K)] is 291, 311, and 372, respectively. Therefore, the sample S3 is chosen to perform further studies. The giant MR of about 11 500% at 15 T and 3 K is displayed in the inset of Fig. In order to extract more information about the Fermi surface of W 2 As 3 , a pulsed magnetic field experiment up to 60 T is performed. In Fig. where Boltzmann constant and B is the average field value where A n is the FS cross section area of the Landau level (LL) n. γ -δ = 1 2 -φ B 2π -δ is the phase factor, where φ B is the Berry phase and δ is a phase shift induced by dimensionality [δ = 0 for two dimensions (2D), or δ = ± 1 8 for three dimensions (3D)]. The Landau-level index is fitted by the LO formula in Fig. The measurements of ρ xx (B) and ρ yx (B) provide further insight on the transport properties, as seen in Fig. where n e , n h , μ e , and μ h are electron-type carrier density, hole-type carrier density, electron-type mobility, and hole-type mobility, respectively. Both the electron and hole mobility decrease monotonously as temperature increases, as seen in Fig. suggest that the two-band model fits the experimental data reliably. It is apparent that the absolute value of R H changes little below 14 K and becomes large with increasing temperature, then becomes small again above 100 K, at which temperature the slope of ρ yx (B) reaches the maximum [Fig. In summary, we have discovered a topological semimetal W 2 As 3 with Z 2 indices [1;111] which has a strong TI feature. The electron-hole compensation leads to a colossal MR which is as large as 11 500% at 3 K and 15 T and is unsaturated even up to 60 T. A nontrivial Berry's phase of π is obtained from F h3 , F h4 , and F h5 , suggesting the nontrivial topological characteristic. A two-band model is effective to fit the Hall conductivity and Hall coefficient. The transport properties are in good agreement with the band structure calculations.