The Casimir Effect is a physical manifestation of quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic vacuum. When two metal plates are placed closely together, typically much less than a micron, the long wavelength modes between them are frozen out, giving rise to a net attractive force between the plates, scaling as d -4 (or d -3 for a spherical-planar geometry) even when they are not electrically charged. In this paper we observe the Casimir Effect in ambient conditions using a modified capacitive MEMS accelerometer. Using a feedback assisted pick-and-place assembly process we are able to attach various micro-structures onto the post-release MEMS, converting it from an inertial force sensor to a direct force measurement platform with pN resolution. With this system we are able to directly measure the Casimir force between a silver-coated microsphere and gold-coated silicon plate. This device is a step towards leveraging the Casimir Effect for cheap, sensitive, room temperature quantum metrology. One of the most commonly used technologies enabled by micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) is the accelerometer. In this work we show that by attaching a silver-coated microsphere to its proof-mass, a MEMS accelerometer can directly measure the Casimir force-a quantum fluctuation force that exists between conducting surfaces separated by hundreds of nanometers. The main advantage of a modified accelerometer is the pre-optimized design of the MEMS and the supporting integrated circuitry simplify the device fabrication and apparatus immensely. Despite using an external piezomounted plate, we are able to clearly see the Casimir force in ambient conditions. Compared to AFM, the size and cost is superior by orders of magnitude and the linear transduction of an applied force to an electronic output signal is a built-in feature of the accelerometer. The ability to measure the Casimir Effect with commercial MEMS accelerometers is an exciting prospect because it indicates that this effect could be used as a practical, controllable engineering tool within a MEMS system. For example, it has been suggested that a MEMS oscillator parametrically driven by the Casimir force would exhibit a gain that scales as one over the Casimir cavity size to the fifth power or as applied DC voltage to the tenth power. Micro-gluing onto post-release MEMS Because the modification involves bonding objects to a post-release MEMS device, great care must be taken in keeping mechanical forces exerted on the freely moving proof-mass to a minimum. We present a technique that allows us to glue microspheres directly to the proof-mass of the accelerometer without compromising the functionality of the MEMS. In this work we use an accelerometer from Analog Devices (ADXL203). Outlined in figure Once these "legs" are formed, one can then attach a wide variety of micro-scale objects providing they don't interfere with the MEMS and are able to be picked up and placed gently. For example, it is possible to place a submm neodymium rare-earth magnet on top of the support spheres for high resolution gradient magnetometry. The functional component of our device is a conductive microsphere attached to the proof-mass that forms one half of the Casimir cavity. The sphere is 55 μm in radius and made of hollow borosilicate glass coated with 50 nm of Ag and has a mass of roughly 0.1 μg. It was found that Ag-coated hollow spheres had much lower surface roughness than Au-coated solid spheres (supplementary information S1), so an Ag sphere was used in the Casimir cavity while two smaller Au spheres (about 0.5 μg each) were used as supports. It should be noted that the mass added to the accelerometer proof-mass does not affect the functionality of the device at DC. For dynamic measurements however, the added mass does lower the overall bandwidth of the device. One requirement in any Casimir device is the ability to control the electric potential on the interacting surfaces. This is due to the presence of residual electrostatic forces, which are caused by trapped charges, adsorbates, and the poly-crystalline nature of the metallic surfaces. The second half of the Casimir cavity is formed from a Au-coated plate mounted on a linear piezoelectric actuator. For the device used in this paper, the plate approaches the sphere along the X axis of the accelerometer. The entire setup is mounted on an optical breadboard and contained in a temperature controlled enclosure on top of an active vibration isolation table. A schematic of the device and apparatus can be seen in figure Electrostatic forces are used to measure the residual potential difference, V0, between the sphere and the plate and to calibrate the force sensitivity, γ, which relates the accelerometer output voltage, S, to the applied force according to F = γS. In figure The data in figure The separation dependence of the residual potential is a well-known occurrence Because the plate is held at the same ground as the accelerometer it will deflect fringe field lines from this applied voltage and result in an out of plane force exerted on the grounded fingers. It is interesting that the measured data is modeled more accurately by the ideal Casimir theory (root mean squared error of 7.4 pN) compared to the corrected theory (root mean squared error of 10.5 pN). While the ideal theory overestimates the measured force in the 80 nm to 200 nm range the corrected theory underestimates it by far greater. Considering random measurement errors, the linear fits shown in figure The reason for this discrepancy is most likely due to the assumptions of the geometry of the cavity, both at the microscale (i.e. sphere and plate shapes and arrangement) and at the nanoscale (surface roughness). The sphere radius, R, is used in both the electrostatic calibration analysis as well as the theoretical Casimir fits. In both cases, we use R in the framework of the Proximity Force Approximation (PFA) which assumes a perfectly spherical surface and an infinite plane in the d << R limit. Because the PFA assumes an infinite plane, this asymmetry may result in a systematically overestimated force sensitivity of the device. The surface roughness also becomes very important in Casimir interactions at separations less than ∼100 nm. The purpose of this work was two-fold: First, we have successfully integrated a Casimir cavity onto a MEMS system which is capable of resolving pN forces. This system provides the experimenter with a customizable apparatus for investigating the Casimir Effect with non-trivial geometries, materials, or surface morphologies such as nanostructures or chiral metamaterials. The fundamental building block of our Casimir measurement system is a MEMS accelerometer from Analog Devices (ADXL203)-a two-axis capacitive accelerometer with analog voltage outputs for the in-plane X and Y directions with a sensitivity of ∼1 V/g along both axes. To assemble this device, the following process (outlined in figure The plate is fabricated from a 300 μm thick silicon wafer, etched into a tapered shape using photolithography and DRIE, then coated with 10 nm Cr adhesion layer followed by 150 nm of Au using electron beam evaporation. The modified ADXL203 is mounted on an XY translation stage attached to an optical breadboard. On the same breadboard is another XYZ stage on which the plate is mounted. This stage has its Z position controlled by a Newport Picomotor stick-slip piezoelectric actuator. An additional Newport NPC3SG piezoelectric stack actuator controls the fine position of the plate in the X direction. The apparatus is contained inside a polystyrene foam container along with a 1000 kΩ power resistor and resistance temperature detector for PID controlled temperature with a 28°C setpoint. Due to building heaters cycling on and off, the maximum temperature variations inside the enclosure over long periods of time are ∼12 m°C however for shorter time periods (two hours or less) the temperature can be held to within ∼3 m°C (see supplementary information S3). The container is set upon an active vibration isolation table (Herzan TS-140). The potential between the sphere and plate is controlled by grounding the plate and applying a voltage on the sphere through the nano-ribbon wire using a 1 mV resolution power supply (Keithley Instruments). Due to a proprietary polymer coating on the ADXL203 MEMS and the insulating UV curable epoxy, there is no electrical connection between the sphere and the proof-mass. The accelerometer output is fed directly into a low-pass filter (Stanford Research Systems SR650) with a 3 Hz cutoff frequency and unity gain. The filter output is then sampled by an ADC (National Instruments NIDAQ). As discussed previously, electrostatic forces are present between the sphere and plate metal surfaces, even when the two metals are shorted together. By applying a voltage equal and opposite to the residual potential, this unwanted electrostatic effect can by minimized. Additionally, by applying known electrostatic forces between the plate and the sphere, the force sensitivity of the output can be calibrated. The forces acting on the sphere are assumed to be only due to electrostatic and Casimir interactions. For the following equations we define the separation: d = xp -xs where xp is the absolute position of the plate and xs is the absolute position of the sphere. Assuming a simple electrostatic model, we can write: Where ε0 is the permittivity of free space, V0 is the residual potential, Vbias is the applied DC voltage between the sphere and plate, and R is the radius of the sphere. Equation 1 uses the PFA for a sphere-plate geometry which assumes d << R. At large separations (typically > 200 nm) and large applied voltages (V0 + Vbias > 100 mV), the Casimir force term is negligible, and the force scales as Vbias 2 . The residual potential can be measured by sweeping the bias voltage and finding the value of Vbias at which the force is minimized. At this minimum, the applied bias is equal and opposite to the residual potential. The accelerometer outputs an analog voltage, so to get a measurement in units of force, a calibration must be performed. Because of the linear response of the device, the output signal, S, is proportional to the force on the proof-mass by a constant, γ: For large separations and voltages, we can ignore the Casimir term in equation 1 and can now write: We can then write γ in terms of the curvature of the signal with respect to Vbias: (3) From these relations, the residual potential and force sensitivity can be measured by fitting the raw signal data, S, to the function S = c1Vbias 2 +c2Vbias+c3. Using the returned fitting parameters we can calculate: provided we are in a region where the electrostatic force is dominant over the Casimir force. The procedure for a single measurement is as follows-first the plate is stepped towards the sphere until the accelerometer senses contact. The plate is retracted by 1 μm and Vbias is swept, tracing out a parabola as shown in figure Every data point is the average of 50,000 samples taken in 0.5 seconds by the ADC with standard deviations between 0.6 and 0.7 mV. The whole electrostatic measurement takes 3.5 minutes. Over this period of time, thermal drift is negligible (see supplementary information S3). Fitting a second order polynomial to these data sets provides measurements of the residual potential, V0, as well as the sensitivity, γ, according to equations 5 and 6. These values are plotted in figure For ideal conditions (absolute zero temperature and perfectly smooth infinitely conducting surfaces) the Casimir force between two plates of area A is given by ref. 6 as: (5) Where ħ is Planck's reduced constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum, and A is the overlap area between the surfaces. Using PFA for a sphere-plate geometry, this becomes: provided d << R, as in the electrostatic case. In addition to this ideal case, we consider a corrected model from Geyer et al. which accounts for more realistic physical effects such as non-zero temperature and the finite conductivity of both metallic surfaces. Here, ζ is the Reimann Zeta function, t is a parameter given by t = (ħc)(2kBTd) -1 , and δ and κ are optical parameters given by: (10) Where δAu and δAg are the effective penetration depths of the electromagnetic oscillations into each metal film given by ħc/ωp in which we have used ωp = 9 eV for Au and ωp = 8.6 eV for Ag. Where Ar is the stochastic RMS roughness amplitude of both surfaces. The surface roughness of the plate and sphere surfaces were found to be 2 nm and 8 nm respectively, using AFM (supplementary information S1). The total RMS roughness used in this model is Ar = (Ar,sphere 2 + Ar,plate 2 ) 1/2 = 8.25 nm. Immediately following the electrostatic measurement, the plate is retracted back 1 μm away from the sphere and then stepped forward by 1 nm increments as Vbias is adjusted according to the linear fit, ensuring that the first term of equation 1 is minimized at every position. At each plate position, 50,000 samples are taken in 0.5 seconds using the ADC. This measurement takes 20 minutes which requires that the enclosure temperature remain within 3 m°C to avoid unwanted thermal drift (see supplementary information S3). After subtracting the zero-force signal (c3), the measured data is scaled to units of force using the calibration factor γ(d) measured from the electrostatic data. It is then fit to either the ideal Casimir theory (equation 8) or the corrected Casimir theory (equation 12) with xs as the only free parameter. These results can be seen in figure S2: Data illustrating the effect of the plate height on the accelerometer output due to interactions with the fringe feilds of the sensing electrodes. These scans were taken with the plate starting at approximately 12 μm above the proof-mass (black) and decreasing in height by 1 μm for each dataset. At each height, the plate is scanned by 3 μm in the X direction with the piezo stack actuator. Data was taken over a portion of the proof-mass far away from the sphere with the sphere and plate both grounded. S1: SEM and AFM characterization of typical spherical and planar surfaces used in the modified accelerometer device. The gold spheres had abnormally distributed roughness and tended to contain large (> 1 μm) debris and were therefore only used for structural purposes. The silver spheres and gold coated silicon plate showed much lower RMS roughness and were used to construct the Casimir cavity. The data shown are taken of samples prepared in the same manner as those used in the experiment but are not scans of the specific surfaces in our Casimir cavity. S3: Stability of the temperature and the accelerometer output in the temperature controlled enclosure over a 6.5 hour period. The periodicity of both datasets is a result from the heaters in the building turning on and off every two hours. Long term drift in the ADXL signal is also apparent. Between these unstable periods (red inset), our PID system is able to hold the temperature to within 3 m°C for 0.5 hours with is the length of a full experiment. For this data, the plate is placed 1 μm away from the sphere and a bias of 1 V is applied between the two surfaces resulting in an applied electrostatic force of approximately 1 nN.