Solid oxide fuel/electrolyzer cell (SOFC/SOEC) converts energy between chemical and electrical forms inversely. Yet electrolyte degradation takes place much more severe for SOEC than SOFC during long-term operations. By solving transport equations, we found very large oxygen potential gradients and sharp oxygen potential transitions at grain boundaries of polycrystalline SOFC/SOEC electrolyte. Surprisingly, an inversion of oxygen potential transitions was identified, suggesting a fundamentally different transport mechanism for minor electronic charge carriers. Such findings could be critical to understand and eliminate SOFC/SOEC degradations in practical applications. Solid oxide electrochemical cell (SOC) It is typically operated between 600 to 1000 o C, which enables flexible fuel selections and high efficiency. On the other hand, due to the high operation temperatures and slow heat-up cycles, continuous operation over thousands of hours is preferred, which places a strict requirement on its long-term stability. Therefore, understanding and eliminating the degradation are of great interests The solution of oxygen potential distribution is based on transport equations In practical applications, SOC can be operated reversibly, either as a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) utilizing chemical fuels for power generation or as a solid oxide electrolyzer cell (SOEC) using electricity to produce fuels. Faster degradation rate has been identified for SOEC than SOFC, leading to observable pore/oxygen bubble generations and line-ups along grain boundaries inside the electrolyte Strikingly, Graves et al. We shall consider an YSZ cell with hydrogen electrode (the electrode with a low oxygen potential) on the left and oxygen electrode (the electrode with a high oxygen potential) on the right, and define x direction pointing from the left to the right. (Here we treat the transport as a one-dimensional problem for simplicity.) Under SOFC mode, the oxygen electrode is the cathode and the hydrogen electrode is the anode; the ionic current flowing from anode (left-hand side) to the cathode (right-hand side) is positive, while the electronic current flowing from cathode (right-hand side) to anode is negative (left-hand side); the total current is also positive since the ionic current is much larger than the electronic one in an YSZ fuel cell. Under SOEC mode, the oxygen electrode is the anode and the hydrogen electrode is the cathode; both the ionic and electronic currents are negative, flowing from cathode (right-hand side) to the anode (left-hand side); hence, the total current is also negative. Under the open circuit voltage (OCV), the ionic current flowing from anode (left-hand side) to the cathode (right-hand side) is positive, while the electronic current flowing from cathode (right-hand side) to anode is negative (left-hand side); they are opposite in sign and equal in magnitude, hence the total current is zero. Now given the oxygen potentials ), we seek to solve the oxygen potential distribution inside the electrolyte. Phenomenologically, there are four species to be considered, i.e. oxygen ion O 2-, oxygen molecule O2, electron e and hole h. Under local equilibrium, the two chemical relate the four potentials by At steady state, we assume no internal chemical reactions between ionic and electronic species (no generation/consumption of molecular oxygen inside the dense electrolyte), so both the ionic current density 2 O I -and the electronic current density eh I remain constants throughout the electrolyte. Under SOFC mode, Eq. ( where eh i 1 tt =-. Under OCV, Eq. ( where L is the thickness of the electrolyte. Finally, the oxygen potential distribution can be obtained by integrating And the oxygen potential distribution can be obtained from While the above two methods are mathematically equivalent, the second one turns out to be numerically much simpler for solving the considered polycrystalline problem (a multilayer problem) and will be used to obtain numerical results in Section III. Numerical results were obtained to illustrate the effect of grain boundaries for two The calculated oxygen potential distributions and gradients for Case (1) and (2) are shown in Fig. Lastly, and most interestingly, the oxygen potential transitions at grain boundaries are inverse and the gradients have opposite signs under SOFC vs. SOEC modes. Obviously, the oxygen potential transitions at grain boundaries come from the different transport properties of the grain boundary with the bulk. To maintain constant ionic and electronic current densities across the electrolyte, a larger electrostatic potential gradient is spent at the more O 2-blocking grain boundaries and a Now we come to the question: why there is an inversion of oxygen potential transition at grain boundaries in SOFC/SEOC? To address this, one should first notice that ionic and electronic currents flow along the opposite directions in SOFC but along the same direction in SOEC In comparison, SOEC operates under an applied voltage across an oxygen potential difference. By definition, the integral of electrostatic potential gradient should be larger than the Nernst voltage. Therefore, the electrical part is larger than the chemical part in the electrochemical potential of electrons and holes, and ionic and electronic currents flow in the same direction. Back to the polycrystal problem, under both SOFC and SOEC modes, we have positive oxygen potential gradient in the bulk (Fig. To this point, it is interesting to note such oxygen potential transitions have the same characteristics with the electrode overpotential. In SOFC, oxygen potentials at electrode/electrolyte interfaces are bounded by the two gaseous atmospheres. At both hydrogen electrode (left electrode in our definition)/electrolyte interface and oxygen electrode/(right electrode in our definition)/electrolyte interface, oxygen potential is lower on the left-hand side than the right-hand side. The same trend applies to grain boundaries: oxygen potential is lower on the left-hand side than the right-hand side as shown in Fig. (1) By solving transport equations in polycrystalline electrolyte, we identified a sharp oxygen potential transition at grain boundaries and their directions are inverse when operated under SOFC and SOEC modes. (2) Ionic and electronic currents flow along opposite directions in SOFC and along the same direction in SOEC, which is rooted in the different (electro-)chemical forces that drive ionic and electronic current under SOFC/SOEC operations. The inversion of oxygen potential transitions has the same origin. (3) It is suspected the inversion of oxygen potential transitions lead to different stress states at grain boundaries under SOFC/SOEC modes, which is related to their contrasting degradation kinetics. (4) Oxygen potential could be un-bounded by two terminal ones for polycrystalline electrolyte operated under SOEC mode and internal oxygen pressure could be the highest at the grain boundary of the electrolyte next to the oxygen electrode. (5) Modifying grain boundary conductivities could weaken or eliminate oxygen potential transitions at grain boundaries and provides better stability of electrolyte materials.