Fabrication, characterization, and analysis of an ultra-broadband lithography-free absorber is presented. An over 94% average absorption is experimentally achieved in the wavelength range of 450-1400 nm. This ultra-broadband absorption is obtained by a simple annealed tri-layer metal-insulator-metal (MIM) configuration. The metal used in the structure is Manganese (Mn), which also makes the structure costeffective. It is shown that the structure retains its high absorption for TM polarization, up to 70 degrees, and, for TE polarization, up to 50 degrees. Moreover, the physical mechanism behind this broadband absorption is explained. Being both lithography-free and cost-effective, the structure is a perfect candidate for large-area and mass production purposes. Broadband absorbers (BBAs) have gained a lot of interest in the recent decade due to their vast range of applications in photovoltaics In this work, through annealing the MIM structure, we experimentally obtain over 94% average absorption in the ultra-wide range of 450-1400 nm that is a very promising result for a simple tri-layer lithography-free absorber. It is shown that annealing the sample leads to more than a twofold enhancement in the absorption bandwidth. We show that this is due to the fact that, after annealing, the top layer deforms into a metal-air composite with randomly sized, distributed and shaped nanoholes that support different Localized Surface Plasmon (LSP) resonance modes. The collective effect of the resonances of all random nanoholes leads to a significant absorption enhancement. The other feature contributing to such a broad absorption by such a simple structure is the optical properties of Mn that makes it an excellent candidate for broadband absorbers Let us start with investigating the physical mechanism of the MIM resonant absorbers. Figure The Fabry-Perot resonance condition is as follows where λ res , n i ,, φ b , φ t , m denote the resonance wavelength, refractive index of the dielectric material, phase-shift due to the reflection from the bottom metal, phase-shift due to the reflection from the top metal, and an integer number corresponding to the resonance order, respectively. The term n i d i is the optical beam path traveled by the beam trapped inside the cavity, in each half-round of a full round-trip. It can be observed from the equation that nidi (or the dielectric layer) mainly determines the spectral location of the absorption band, i.e. λ res ,. It is noteworthy that typically, dielectric oxides such as SiO 2 , Al 2 O 3 , HfO 2 , and TiO 2 have an almost constant refractive index in our desired wavelength range (visible and NIR). This means that for fixed metal layers, one can almost freely choose the dielectric material which determines n i , and accordingly adjust the value of d i . to obtain the desired beam path inside the cavity, and consequently determine the absorption band location. In other words, different dielectric oxides can lead to the same optical beam path and absorption band location, by having the needed thickness. Since we can freely choose the dielectric oxide as explained above, we have chosen to use Al 2 O 3 . The main reason for this choice is that this oxide can be coated using the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method. ALD devices perform atomic layer-by-layer depositions that in comparison with the physical evaporation-based deposition methods, result in much more conformal thin films. Moreover, by using this method, we have control over each atomic layer of the depositing material which provides us with a very high precision in obtaining the desired thickness Simulations have confirmed that, to have strong absorption in the desired wavelength range that starts from visible and exceeds to NIR, for the case of using Mn and Al 2 O 3 , the optimal dimensions are as dt = 5 nm and di = 70 nm. Obviously, increasing the value of di leads to a red-shift in the absorption band (see Eq. 1), and decreasing it exerts a blue-shift (similar changes in n i also lead to similar results). However, in our previous work, it has been shown in detail that the absorption of the broadband MIM structure has a good fabrication tolerance for relatively small changes in the value of di. In other words, changes in the order of a few nanometers seem not to have any significant effect on the absorption band and the response of the structure is almost robust to minor deviations of the dielectric layer thickness from its desired value The measured and calculated absorption spectrum of the absorber before annealing, at normal incidence is shown in Fig. In order to obtain randomly sized and distributed nanoholes in the top metal layer that can support LSP resonances which lead to the absorption enhancement, we can use the dewetting method Figures It can be observed from the electric field magnitude pattern in Fig. The absorption intensity patterns shown in Fig. where ω is the angular frequency, |E| is the electric field magnitude, and ɛ is the permittivity of the material. It is obvious that the absorption will be zero for the air regions inside the nanoholes, and for a constant wavelength, i.e. constant ω, the absorption intensity in the metallic parts with the same metal will only be a function of |E| 2 . This is the reason why the absorption intensity patterns of the metallic parts in Fig. In summary, an ultra-broadband tri-layer MIM absorber is fabricated and characterized. We have shown that, through annealing, an above 94% average absorption is experimentally achieved in the wide range of 450-1400 nm, which is a very promising result compared to the simplicity of the structure. It is explained that this is due to the deformation of the top layer into metal-air composite that includes random nanoholes with the potential of supporting different of LSP resonance. Moreover, it is shown that at different wavelengths, different nanoholes get excited and a collective effect of all nanoholes contributes to such a significant absorption enhancement. It is experimentally demonstrated that this absorber has very low angle sensitivity for the TM polarization up to 70 degrees, and for the TE polarization up to 50 degrees. The structure is lithography-free and cost-effective, so it is a perfect candidate for large-area production and utilization in photovoltaic and solar cell applications.