The self-polarization of PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 thin film is switched by changing film thickness through the competition between the strain relaxation-induced flexoelectric fields and the interfacial effects. Without an applied electric field, this reversal of self-polarization is exploited to control the magnetic properties of La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 by the competition/cooperation between the charge-mediated and the strain-mediated effects. Scanning transmission electron microscopy, polarized near edge x-ray absorption spectroscopy, and half-integer diffraction measurements are employed to decode this intrinsic magnetoelectric effects in La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 /PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 heterostructures. With PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 films < 48 nm, the self-polarization-driven carrier density modulation around La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 /PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 interface and the strain-mediated Mn 3d orbital occupancy work together to enhance magnetism of 14 unit cells La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 film; with PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 layers > 48 nm, the strain-induced the change of bond length/angle of MnO 6 accompanied with a modified spin configuration are responsible for the decrease in Curie temperature and magnetization of 14 unit cells La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 film. Artificially designed multiferroic heterostructures of ferromagnetic (FM) /ferroelectric (FE) layers draw significant interests due to the rich physics of magnetoelectric (ME) coupling and potential applications Several mechanisms, including strain-mediated effects As reported previously In this work, we report an integrated study on the intrinsic ME coupling in (001) SrTiO 3 (STO)/La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 (LSMO, fixed at ~14 unit cells) /PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 (PZT, 0-130 nm) heterostructures without an applied electric field. La 1-x Sr x MnO 3 , as a metallic bottom electrode, can be used to induce the self-poling of PbZr 1-x Ti x O 3 thin films LSMO/PZT bilayer heterostructures were fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on (001) SrTiO 3 (STO) single crystal substrates. LSMO thin film was deposited at 750°C under background oxygen pressure of 200 mTorr. The PZT thin film was grown on the top of LSMO at 550 °C under 50 mTorr oxygen pressure. The laser fluence was kept at 1~2 J/cm 2 and the pulse repetition frequency was 3Hz. After deposition, the sample was cooled down to room temperature at 15°C/min in a 1 Torr oxygen atmosphere. The thickness of LSMO was fixed at ~14 unit cells (u.c.), which was determined by considering both the dead layer thickness and interfacial charge screening length. It is known that metallic La 1-x Sr x MnO 3 has a carrier density of 10 21 -10 22 /cm 3 , yielding a screening length of less than 1 nm The structural and ferroelectric properties of PZT depend on the film thickness, which was chosen as 4, 8, 16, 48, 96 and 130 nm. Magnetic properties were measured by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), using beamline 4-ID-C of Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory, USA. Piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM) was used to measure the self-polarization of as-grown PZT thin films. Crystal structure was determined by high-resolution x-ray diffraction using synchrotron x-ray sources at the x-ray development and demonstration (XDD) beamline of Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS) and beamline 12-ID-D of APS, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The room temperature x-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) measurement was performed using linear polarized x-ray at beamline 20-ID-B of the APS, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The total fluorescent yield was detected and XANES normalization was conducted using the program Athena. High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) and annular bright field (ABF) in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) were performed using the double aberration-corrected JEOL-ARM200CF microscope with a cold-field emission gun and operated at 200 kV, at Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA. The microscope is equipped with JEOL and Gatan HAADF detectors for incoherent HAADF (Z-contrast) imaging, Gatan GIF Quantum ER Energy Filter with dualEELS for EELS. As shown in Figures Both PFM and STEM results reveal that the direction of self-polarization changes with PZT film thickness, as summarized in Figures Combining above considerations, the changing trend of self-polarization in the whole thickness range is illustrated with a proposed competition between E int and E flexo in Figure La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 (LSMO) is chosen as a ferromagnetic component in the multiferroic heterostructure due to its good half-metallic behavior with a high curie temperature and a high spin polarization The measurement of magnetic hysteresis loops at 120 K is shown in Figure The variation of M s as a function of PZT thickness at 120 K is found to be consistent with that measured at 10 K. The reversal of FE polarization-controlled magnetic and electrical properties of FM thin films has been reported. For temperature-dependent resistance cures of La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 /BaTiO 3 system by Cui et al It has been demonstrated that the out-of-plane FE polarization is screened in the manganite within a few unit cells from the interface, leading to two possible interfacial states: depletion or accumulation of charge carriers These observations indicate a decrease in the averaged valence state of Mn with 8 nm PZT, as compared to that of pure LSMO. It is in line with above results that 8 nm PZT in the P down state would electrostatically induces the accumulation of electrons (depletion of holes) in interfacial region of LSMO (Figure Although the depletion interface (LSMO with 8 nm PZT) indeed enhance magnetism as supported by SQUID, this calculated change of Mn moment from the charge screening effect is smaller than that measured by SQUID (an increase of 0.46  0.12  B /Mn), as shown in Figures From the XANES, an averaged valence state of Mn is found to vary with PZT thickness-dependent self-polarization. LSMO with 8 nm PZT (in P down state) has the lowest valence state. Nevertheless, the enhanced magnetic properties from the interfacial charge screening may not be quantitatively explained by the valence-modulated spin state of Mn. In addition, the suppressed magnetic properties of LSMO with 130 nm PZT cannot be explained by the charge screening effect. The layer-resolved EELS results suggest the non-uniformity of the electronic structures in LSMO film due to the interfacial coupling. Considering the strong correlation between the electronic structure and crystal structure, additional mechanisms, such as the strain-mediated effects including the MnO 6 octahedral rotation and orbital reconstruction across the LSMO/PZT interface, may be responsible for the change of magnetism in our study. Due to the intrinsic strong coupling between the strain and polarization in FE materials, the strain-mediated effects may apply to LSMO through the lattice mismatch, octahedral connectivity, atomic displacement, and orbital hybridization across the LSMO/PZT interface The depth profile of the out-of-plane lattice constants of LSMO, which vary across the LSMO/PZT interface, strongly depends on the thickness of overlying PZT films (see the details in Figure It is well-known that in the framework of double-exchange interaction, T c in metallic manganite is proportional to the electron hopping probability between where ( i ) is the probability of the e g electron transferring from the  i orbital of i Mn ion ( ) to an O 2p orbital, and ( j ) is the probability of the e g electron hopping from an O 2p orbital to the  j  orbital in the neighboring j Mn ion. V pd is the matrix element between p and d orbitals and it is proportional to the 3.5 Mn O d   and n x 2 -y 2 is the ratio of electron occupancy in Mn The transfer intensity ( i ) and ( j ) may refer to previous studies By use of localized techniques such as STEM imaging and EELS (as summarized in Figure In summary, we develop the thickness-dependent self-polarization of PZT films, leading to noticeable effects on intrinsic magnetoelectric coupling in LSMO/PZT heterostructures. The competition model of the built-in electric field and the flexoelectric field is proposed to explain the self-polarization switching. With thin PZT films (< 48 nm), the self-polarization-driven valence modulation and strain-mediated Mn 3d orbital occupancy work together to enhance magnetism of LSMO thin films; with thick PZT films (> 48 nm), the straininduced modifications of bond length/angle of MnO 6 associated with a modified spin configuration are responsible for the suppressed Curie temperature and magnetization in LSMO thin films. The study of competition/cooperation of charge-mediated and strain-mediated effects in LSMO/PZT heterostructures sheds light on the entangled interplay between the charge, lattice, orbital and spin in strongly correlated oxides. Our work provides a practicable means to induce desirable magnetoelectric effects in FM/FE heterostructures, with promising potentials in applications such as spintronic memory and logic devices. shown in Figures accompanying with the downward polarized domains. The schematic illustrations of E int and E d in LSMO with 8 nm, 48 nm and 130 nm PZT are shown in Figure The out-of-plane lattice constants of PZT are derived from the (002) diffraction angle as 4.124 Å, 4.111 Å and 4.076 Å for 130nm, 48nm and 8nm samples, respectively. The out-of-plane lattice constant of 130 nm PZT film is close to the value of bulk PZT (c tetragonal = 4.139 Å) According to computed variation of crystal lattice parameters as a function of PZT composition ratio, the lattice constant linearly decreases in the rhombohedral region and the lattice parameter is found as a r ≈ 4.075Å near the MPB of bulk PZT It was experimentally demonstrated that the thickness dependent transition from a tetragonal structure to a rhombohedral structure in PbZr 0.52 Ti 0.48 O 3 8 nm PZT is partially relaxed while 130 nm PZT are totally relaxed. We assumed that strain penetration lengths in PZT films are 8 nm for 8 nm PZT, 16 nm for 16 nm PZT and 48 nm for 48 nm PZT and 130 nm PZT. In order to obtain more quantitative information, we estimated the strain gradients by Williamson-Hall (W-H) plots due to the error bar or the localized probe of EELS. The lower valence state in the interfacial LSMO than that of bulk thin film layer is revealed by the almost missing pre-peak feature in the O K-edge spectrum at the LSMO/PZT interface (Figure The change of out-of-plane lattice spacing as a function of distance from STO substrate to PZT was determined by fitting the positions of atoms from STEM-HAADF images. As shown in Figure In LSMO thin films (~14 u.c.), the thickness of antiferromagnetic (AFM) layers may be very small, leading to the weak AFM anisotropy Table SII: Summary of half-integer diffraction peaks of three samples from the experiment and the calculation. ), as shown in Figures the Mn 3d and O 2p orbitals. The PZT thickness-dependent strain-mediated effects on the Mn-O bond length, Mn-O-Mn bond angle and Mn 3d orbital occupancy may modulate the electron hopping and therefore T c of LSMO, according to the following equation