We demonstrate an enhancement of the spin-orbit coupling in silicon (Si) thin films by doping with bismuth (Bi), a heavy metal, using ion implantation. Quantum corrections to conductance at low temperature in phosphorous-doped Si before and after Bi implantation is measured to probe the increase of the spin-orbit coupling, and a clear modification of magnetoconductance signals is observed: Bi doping changes magnetoconductance from weak localization to the crossover between weak localization and weak antilocalization. The elastic diffusion length, phase coherence length and spin-orbit coupling length in Si with and without Bi implantation are estimated, and the spin-orbit coupling length after the Bi doping becomes the same order of magnitude (L so = 54 nm) with the phase coherence length (Lφ = 35 nm) at 2 K. This is an experimental proof that the spin-orbit coupling strength in Si thin film is tunable by doping with heavy metals. Silicon (Si) is an attracting material for spintronics Si possesses a low spin-orbit coupling because of the small electric charge of its nucleus and a lack of an internal electric field due to the lattice inversion symmetry, which allows devices with spin transport but limits new device-designing possibilities with the spin-charge conversion effects-the SHE and the ISHE mentioned above. However, if it can be engineered to possess a significant spin-orbit coupling, the SHE and the ISHE in Si can be used for spin injection/detection. Such additional functionality will pave the way to create all-Si spin devices consisting of injector, detector and transport medium made of Si-a breakthrough for semiconductor spintronics and significant advance in applied physics. The purpose of this study is to create a sizable spin-orbit interaction in Si by implantation of a heavy element, bismuth (Bi). To probe the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, quantum corrections to the conductivity at low temperatures were measured in Si with and without Bi implantation. The enhancement of the spin-orbit interaction is discussed using the spin-orbit coupling length extracted from the measurements. Samples were fabricated using an intrinsic silicon-on-insulator (SOI) substrate with a 100 nm-thick Si channel isolated from the backside bulk Si by 200 nm-thick layer of SiO 2 . The Si channel was doped with phosphorus (P) by ion implantation to assure ohmic contacts for electrical measurements. The doses and energies of ion beam necessary to reach a homogeneous profile of 1×10 20 cm -3 -which exceeds the degenerate limit of 3.5×10 18 cm -3 for P-doped Si Table Step n° Energy (keV) Dose (×10 Application of a magnetic field introduces an additional phase factor that destroys interference and leads to suppression of the conductance change due to the WL and WAL effects. Thus, both effects result in magnetoconductance, however, its polarity is reversed between systems with a strong spin-orbit coupling (WAL case) and a week spin-orbit coupling (WL case) The magnetoconductance measurements were carried out using Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design): the longitudinal voltage between terminals 3 and 5 (see FIG. , where G 0 is conductance quantum, e is the elementary charge, is the reduced Planck constant. Figures where Ψ is the digamma function defined as: ; the characteristic fields Bφ, B so and B e are connected to the characteristic lengths Lφ, L so and L e , respectively , where the suffix i stands for φ, SO, e; p is the coefficient describing strength of the parabolic contribution due to the classical magnetoconductance. We stress that the classical magnetoconductance was considered even at low magnetic field: it was evaluated using magnetoconductance data at the magnetic field |B| > 2 T at each temperature and then included as a fixed parameter in the fitting function (Eq. ( magnetoconductance close to the zero magnetic field. The crossover between the WL and the WAL was observed-rather than full polarity reversal of magnetoconductance correction-since the spin-orbit coupling length (L so = 54 nm at 2K) is still higher than phase coherence length (35 nm), as was also shown in the previous studies For spintronics applications, one of the key parameters that characterizes material is the spin diffusion length-the mean distance between spin-flipping events. Long spin diffusion length characterizes how far spin can carry information and is crucial for device application. The exact relation between the spin diffusion length and the spin-orbit coupling length in Si is complicated because of the anisotropic band structure In conclusion, we demonstrated a control over the strength of the spin-orbit coupling in Si channel using Bi doping. Magnetoconductance measurements were carried out on the Hall-bar-shaped P-doped Si devices with and without Bi doping. Strong modification of electrical transport properties after Bi doping-an increase in resistivity despite increased carrier concentration and decrease of mobility and modification of its temperature behavior-indicated enhanced impurity scattering. Quantum corrections to conductance were strongly modified by Bi doping: a WL signal of 1.18±0.04% at 2 K was suppressed to 0.22±0.01% after the doping. Also the temperature dependence of WL amplitude is reversed between 2 K and 5 K for SOI:P and SOI:P:Bi respectively. Moreover, close to the zero magnetic field, we observed a beginning of polarity reversal of magnetoconductance in Bi-doped samples-a signature of a significant spin-orbit coupling in our Si devices. By using the magnetoconductance fitting by the Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka model, we demonstrated a spin-orbit coupling length of 54 nm at 2 K in SOI:P:Bi. Our result paves the way for control over the spin-orbit coupling in Si by using doping with heavy elements, which opens new possibilities in designing Si spintronics devices with enhanced spin-orbit coupling enabling a use of spin-charge conversion via the spin Hall effects.