Thermal spike model (TSM) is presently a widely accepted mechanism of swift heavy ion (SHI) -matter interaction. It provides explanation to various SHI induced effects including mixing across interfaces. The model involves electron-phonon (e-p) coupling to predict the evolution of lattice temperature with time. SHI mixing is considered to be a result of diffusion in transient molten state thus achieved. In this work, we assess this conception primarily via tuning the e-p coupling strength by taking a series Pd1-xNix of a completely solid soluble binary, and then observing 100 MeV Au ion induced mixing across Pd1-xNix/Si interfaces. The extent of mixing has been parametrised by the irradiation induced change ∆σ 2 in variances of Pd and Ni depth profiles derived from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The x-dependence of ∆σ 2 follows a curve that is concave upward with a prominent minimum. Theoretically, e-p coupling strength determined using density functional theory has been used to solve the equations appropriate to TSM, and then an equivalent quantity L 2 proportional to ∆σ 2 has been calculated. L 2 , however, increases monotonically with x without any minimum, bringing out a convincing disparity between experiment and theory. Perhaps some mechanisms more than the TSM plus the transient molten state diffusion are operative, which can not be foreseen at this point of time. While interacting with a solid, swift heavy ions (SHI's) are known to transfer a large amount of energy predominantly in the electronic subsystem of the solid. The TSM is mathematically described by the following two coupled partial differential equations, which are basically the constituents of the so-called two temperature model (TTM) and govern the diffusion of the energy brought in by the ion into the electronic and lattice subsystems: Here, C e , C l and K e , K l stand for specific heats and thermal conductivities of the electronic and lattice subsystems, and T e and T l are the electronic and lattice temperatures, respectively. G(T e ) is the electronic temperature dependent e-p coupling strength, and A e (r, t) is the energy density per unit time supplied by the incident ions to the electronic system at time t and at radius r from the ion path in such a way that the integral 2πrA e (r, t) dr dt is equal to the electronic energy loss S e , defined as the energy deposited by the ions in the electronic subsystem per unit length travelled in the solid. A direct experimental proof of the validity of the TSM has hitherto not been possible because of the extremely short time scales involved. A number of ion fluence dependent SHI induced effects observed experimentally have been used to coarsely derive the latent track radii, which have been found comparable with those calculated roughly from the mathematical equations pertaining to the TSM. K e is related with C e via electronic thermal diffusivity D e (T e ) by a relation and G(T e ) is determined using Here, g(ǫ F ) is the eDOS at the Fermi energy ǫ F , and k B is the Boltzmann constant. The phonon contribution to the e-p coupling strength appears in the form of the speed v s of sound in the solid. However, a couple of reports on 120 MeV Au induced mixing in Si/M/Si (M = V, Fe, Co, Mn, Nb) layered structures and where h is the Planck's constant and f (ǫ, T e ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function given by f (ǫ, The electron band mass enhancement factor λ If the TSM is valid, the use of equations ( Prior to depositing the Pd 1-x Ni x (x = 0, 1) alloy thin films on Si substrates, the alloys were first prepared by Ar arc melting. Palladium wire of 99.9% purity and nickel foil of 99.994% purity were melted together to prepare the alloys. The alloyed ingots were flipped and remelted to improve the homogeneity. Subsequently, Pd and Ni metals, and two compositions x = 0.40 and 0.78 of Pd 1-x Ni x alloys were deposited onto pre-cleaned Si substrates by electron beam evaporation. The pressure during deposition was ∼ 1.7 × 10 -7 torr, and the deposition rate ranged from 0.1 to 0.3 Å/s. The thicknesses of the four Pd 1-x Ni x (x = 0, 0.40, 0.78 and 1) films were in 25 -40 nm range, as determined from Rutherford backscattering spectra (RBS) and XPS depth profiles to be discussed in the following sections. For all the samples, 1 cm × 1 cm pieces were taken out for irradiation by 100 MeV Au ions each at 1× 10 14 ions/cm 2 fluence using the 15 UD Pelletron accelerator at Inter University Accelerator Centre (IUAC), New Delhi. The electronic (S e ) and nuclear (S n ) energy losses of the ions in Pd are 34.10 keV/nm and 0.09 keV/nm, respectively, as calculated from the SRIM software. The DFT computations were performed using the code Wien2K, From the eDOS's as computed from the DFT method described above, C e (T e ) and G(T e ) were calculated using equations ( A. XRD X-ray diffraction patterns of all the samples before and after irradiation are shown in Figs. RBS spectra of all the pristine and irradiated samples were recorded to determine the compositions and thicknesses of the thin films, and also to examine whether there is any interface mixing occurring as a consequence of the irradiation alone. The spectra and their fits using the code SIMNRA 35 are shown in Figs. All the samples have been analyzed using depth profiling XPS paired with 1 keV Ar + ion sputtering to collect Pd3d, Ni2p and Si2p high-resolution spectra. A large number of sputtering cycles were used for the study so that the film/substrate interface is reached in about 35 -40 cycles. A comparison of these many number of sput- ter cycles (to reach the interface) with the depth of the interface (i.e., the film thickness) indicates that the XPS spectra have been recorded at the interval of 0.5 -0.6 nm. This is likely to provide a (minimum) depth resolution of 0.5 -0.6 nm for elemental depth profiling, a spatial depth resolution at least an order of magnitude better than the RBS depth resolution mentioned above, and hence to enable us to observe any small amount of SHI induced interdiffusion (or intermixing) of Pd or Ni into Si and vice-versa. It should be noted here, though, that the Ar + ion sputtering process itself can induce an additional interface mixing. Figure Figure The Pd and Ni depth profiles have been roughly fitted with error function, and the fits are shown overlapping with the data. The squared interface width, or variance, σ 2 has then been calculated using 45 where m ′ (z) is the gradient of the fitted interface profile. The change ∆σ 2 in variance on irradiation for a particular depth profile is then given by the difference in the variances after and before irradiation. The value 265±30 nm of ∆σ 2 for Ni in Si for the case of x = 0.40 can be compared with (18 nm) 2 -(10.8 nm) 2 ∼ 208 nm 2 , as obtained using the PPMI versus SC plots discussed above. These values are fairly close to each other. Figure The strategy for doing the calculations is as follows: (i) Assume the validity of TSM. (ii) Use the TTM equations ( Table I enlists the additional input parameters that have been used in the TTM equations ( Since we are interested in finding out only the x variations of the derived quantities, we can look at the evolution of lattice temperature with time, at a common radial distance, say 1 nm, for all x. This is plotted in Fig. Plots of the diffusion coefficients thus calculated are shown in Fig. The thermal spike model of SHI -matter interaction has been assessed via its applicability in SHI mixing by comparing the results of (i) 100 MeV Au ion irradiation of Pd 1-x Ni x thin films deposited on Si, and (ii) calculations based on density functional theory and the model. The key concept behind the calculations is the well accepted notion that SHI mixing is a result of diffusion in transient molten state created by the SHI. Although no mixing has been detected in RBS spectra, a considerable amount is observable on Ar + ion sputtering based depth profiling associated with XPS characterizations. This is proposed to be possible due to both the high spatial resolution obtainable from XPS and the sputtering assisted mixing. Since the latter has to be uniform in all the samples, its role can be ignored in the study of x dependence of mixing, which has been the prime focus of the work. The irradiation induced change in the variance of the depth profile determined from the XPS spectra follows an x variation which is concave upward with a pronounced minimum. DFT has been used to derive the x dependences of electronic specific heat and electronphonon coupling strength. These data have been used as an input to the TTM equations appropriate to the thermal spike model to calculate the evolution of lattice temperature with time at various radial distances from the ion path. Finally, a quantity L 2 proportional to the variance is calculated, and its variation with x is derived. If the TSM, along with the conception that mixing is a result of molten state diffusion is valid, L 2 must also vary with x along a curve which is concave upward with minimum. However, L 2 increases monotonically with x without any minimum, and thus is not in accordance with the experimental observations. Even the crystallite size variation, as determined from the XRD patterns, can not account for the observed x-variation of σ 2 . This leads to the conjecture that the combination of the TSM and the molten state diffusion is probably an insufficient description of SHI mixing, and hence the underlying mechanism requires further considerations. 