Identifying the symmetry of the wave function describing the Cooper pairs is pivotal in understanding the origin of high-temperature superconductivity in iron-based superconductors. Despite nearly a decade of intense investigation, the answer to this question remains elusive. Here we use the muon spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) technique to investigate the underlying symmetry of the pairing state of the FeSe superconductor, the basic building block of all iron-chalcogenide superconductors. Contrary to earlier μSR studies on powders and crystals, we show that while the superconducting gap is most probably anisotropic but nodeless along the crystallographic c-axis, it is nodal in the ab-plane, as indicated by the linear increase of the superfluid density at low temperature. We further show that the superconducting properties of FeSe display a less pronounced anisotropy than expected. High transition-temperature T c superconductivity in Febased materials is an intriguing emergent phenomena in modern condensed matter physics research In this work, we have used the μSR technique to reveal the symmetry of the superconducting gap along the crystallographic c-axis and ab-plane of FeSe single crystals. The measurement of the field distribution in the vortex state by μSR is one of the most direct and accurate methods to determine the absolute value of the magnetic penetration depth λ and its temperature dependence The sample used in these experiments was an 1 cm 2 mosaic of around 30 single crystals, all of them carefully aligned along the three nominal crystallographic axes a, b and c. Details about the crystal growth are described in Ref. Three sets of TF-μSR experiments were performed with the magnetic field H applied parallel to three crystallographic axes. Figure The muon spin depolarization rate σ can be determined by fitting the TF-μSR asymmetry spectra collected with H a/b-axis using damped spin precession functions where A 0 and A bg are the initial asymmetries of the sample and background signals, respectively, γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio Figure Here λ (0) is the value of the penetration depth at T = 0 K, ∆ 0,i is the value of the i-th (i = 1 or 2) superconducting gap at T = 0 K and ω is the weighting factor of the first gap. Each term in Eq. ( s + d wave ∆1=1.8(1), ∆2=1.0(1) 1.81 and ω=0.44 where is the Fermi function, φ is the angle along the Fermi surface, and , where g (φ) describes the angular dependence of the gap. g (φ) is 1 for s wave and s + s wave gaps, |cos (2φ)| for a d wave and [1 + a |cos (4φ)|] for anisotropic s wave gap. An approximation to the temperature dependence in ∆(T ) can be written as δ (T /T c ) = tanh 1.82 [1.018 (T c /T -1)] 0.51 For the superfluid density in the ab-plane, i.e. 1/λ 2 ab (T ) (H||c-axis) we need to introduce a nodal d wave gap along with an isotropic s wave gap in order to reproduce the linear increase of the superfluid density close to zero temperature. We find that the s + d wave model gives a much lower χ 2 reduced value than others. Our results strongly suggest that FeSe is indeed a multigap superconductor. The experimentally obtained superfluid density in the basal plane shows properties of a nodal superconductor irrespective of the field direction. These findings differ qualitatively from earlier reports on the μSR studies of FeSe evidencing nodeless superconductivity in this material To draw conclusions from the measured in-plane and outof-plane penetration depths beyond the general statement of presence or absence of nodal behavior in certain directions, we also present microscopic calculations of the penetration depth. For this purpose, we start from a recently proposed model for the electronic structure with the eigenenergies Ẽμ (k) that is consistent with a number of experimental investigations on FeSe is the momentumdependent quasiparticle weight that is obtained from the quasiparticle weights of the orbitals Z s and the matrix elements a s ν (k) for the orbital to band transformation Table The observation of line nodes in the basal plane of FeSe superconductor is the main finding of our paper. This conclusion does not require a specific theoretical model, but is directly related to the observed low temperature behavior of 1/λ 2 (T ), which shows saturation in the out-of-plane and linear increase in the basal plane as the temperature decreases to absolute zero. Such a linear increase of superfluid density reflects the presence of low-energy excitations and thus confirms nodes in the superconducting gap structure of FeSe. To the best of our knowledge this is the first direct experimental demonstration of the existence of nodes in the superconducting gap structure of FeSe using a microscopic bulk probe. These finding offers new insights into the still mysterious superconducting mechanism in iron-based superconductors and may be pivotal to obtain a general understanding of the mechanism of superconductivity among high-T c iron-based and cuprate superconductors. In this supplemental material we present the characterisation measurements of the FeSe single crystals using a SQUID magnetometer. Details about the experimental methods and data analysis are also presented here. We further compile a summary of the theoretical modelling and calculations that otherwise need to be looked up from various references. Susceptibility measurements were performed using a SQUID magnetometer (MPMS). Figure T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) . a, b, c and d Susceptibility of FeSe crystals with the magnetic field applied along the three crystallographic axes. Both fieldcooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) measurements were performed in an applied magnetic field of 1 mT. d χ(T ) in an applied magnetic field of 2 T, applied along the three crystallographic axes. μSR technique makes use of polarized positive muons, which act as very sensitive local magnetic probes in the host material μSR EXPERIMENTS Zero-field (ZF) and transverse-field (TF) μSR experiments were carried out using the Dolly spectrometer at the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), Villigen, Switzerland. In ZF-μSR, data were collected with the muon polarization both in parallel and perpendicular to the ab-plane of the crystals. Any residual field was actively compensated to better than 0.001 mT in any direction. In TF-μSR, the sample was field cooled to base temperature in a magnetic field of 12 mT, applied along the three nominal crystallographic axes with the muon spin polarization always perpendicular to the applied field, and μSR spectra were collected upon warming the sample. An additional set of μSR spectra were also collected in an applied field of 50 mT ( c-axis) to compare with the 12 mT data. The typical counting statistics were ∼ 20 million muon decays per data point. The ZF-and TF-μSR data were analyzed using the free software package MUSRFIT ZF-μSR time spectra collected above and below T c with the muon spin polarization P μ aligned both parallel to a-and c-axis were evaluated using the Kubo-Toyabe relaxation function where A 0 and A Cu are the initial asymmetries of the sample and background (due to some muons stopping in the copper foil) signals, respectively, σ Cu is the muon spin relaxation rate of the Cu nuclear moments, and Λ is the muon spin relaxation rate of the electronic moments present in FeSe. Since we expect that the contribution from the Cu nuclear moments will be similar above and below T c , σ Cu was kept as a common parameter for both pair of data sets. For P μ a-axis, the fits yield A 0 = 0.169 TF-μSR asymmetry spectra collected for H applied parallel to the a-, b-axis were analyzed using an oscillatory term with a Gaussian decay envelope, where A 0 and A bg are the initial asymmetries of the sample and background signals, respectively, γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio In order to account for the highly asymmetric nature of p(B), TF-μSR asymmetry spectra collected for H applied parallel to the c-axis were analyzed using the skewed Gaussian (SKG) field distribution, defined as ) where B 0 is the field corresponding to the peak value of p SKG (B), σ + and σ + are the Gaussian widths of the SKG field distribution above and below B 0 , respectively. The first and second moments of p SKG (B) can be written as and (S5) TF-μSR asymmetry time spectra were fitted by transforming from the field domain to the time domain via TF-μSR asymmetry spectra were fitted in two steps. First the data were fitted at each temperature with A 0 , A bg , B , B bg and σ as common variables. The fits were checked over the entire temperature range to ensure that physical values were obtained for all the parameters at each temperature point. As expected, we found the values of A 0 and A bg are mostly temperature independent. To ensure stability of the fits, averaged values of A 0 and A bg were then used to refit the data at each temperature point. We obtained A 0 = 0.078(1) and A bg = 0.116 We have also analyzed the data using the standard 1component Gaussian equation, often used for powder samples (an oscillatory term with a Gaussian decay envelope, Eq. S2 in the text). While the quality of the fit to the data is worse for this model, we find the temperature dependence of sigma (shown below) very similar to the one extracted from our skewed Gaussian field distribution model. In our third attempt, we have determined the second moment of the magnetic field distribution by fitting the muon time spectra using a sum of N = 3 Gaussian components: where φ, A i , σ i , and B i are the initial phase, asymmetry, relaxation rate, and mean field (first moment) of the ith Gaussian component, respectively. A bg and B bg are the asymmetry and field, respectively due to background contribution, mainly originating from the muons that miss the sample and hit the Cu sample holder. For N = 3, the first and second moments of p(B) are given by and (S9) Figure Within the Ginzburg-Landau theory of the vortex state, E. H. Brandt where Φ 0 = 2.068 × 10 -15 Wb is the flux quantum. λ -2 (T ) is proportional to the effective superfluid density, ρ s ∝ λ -2 ∝ n s /m * (n s is the charge carrier concentration, and m * is the effective mass of the charge carriers) and its temperature dependence bear the signature of the symmetry of the superconducting gap. For a highly anisotropic superconductor, the effective penetration depth for the magnetic field applied along the i th principal axis is then given as [7] This is still true for any anisotropic superconductor such that we can set λ a = λ b for FeSe in the following. The inplane component of the magnetic penetration depth λ ab can be obtained from σ c sc and combining Eq. S10 and Eq. S11 as Similarly, the out-of-plane component of the magnetic penetration depth λ c can be calculated from σ For the theoretical calculations presented in this section, we start from a multi-band Hamiltonian given by the tightbinding model where c † σ (k) is the Fourier amplitude of an operator that creates an electron in Wannier orbital with spin σ and t k is the Fourier transform of the hopping. Next, we use a modified spin-fluctuation theory that takes into account the reduced coherence of electronic states in certain orbitals where Ẽμ (k) are the renormalized band energies and a μ (k) are the matrix elements of the unitary transformation from orbital to band space. with the true eigenenergies Ẽμ (k). In Fig. For the following, we use a gap function ∆ k = ∆ 0 g(k) with a suitable prefactor ∆ 0 (T ) and a function g(k) that exhibits nodes on the ε sheet following the behavior evidenced by the bulk μSR measurements as presented in the main text. Note that this small change from nodeless to nodal can be easily understood in terms of slightly different magnitudes of the angular harmonics that are usually referred to as sign changing s-wave and d-wave in the tetragonal system. For the calculation of the penetration depth that reflects the properties of low-energy excitations in the system, we follow where E ν,k = Ẽν (k) 2 + |∆ k | 2 are the Bogoliubov quasiparticle energies and Zν (k) = ( |a ν (k)| 2 √ Z s ) 2 are the quasiparticle weights of band ν near the Fermi surface. For our calculation, we use the superconducting gap function ∆ k as discussed above with a mean field like T dependence of the order parameter ∆ k = g(k)∆ 0 tanh(1.76 • T c /T -1) As outlined from the previous paragraph, all relevant quantities to calculate the penetration depth are already fixed by other experiments, such that there is in principle no free parameter within this theoretical model. One exception might however be the influence of the δ pocket that contributes in the calculation, but has not been observed with spectroscopic probes so far. In Figure Finally, to make connection to experimental results for the 1/λ 2 as obtained from measurements on twinned crystals, we simply calculate the geometric average in the a-b plane 1/λ 2 av = 1/(λ x λ y ) for the two cases discussed above. The correctness of Eq. (S10, S11) and finally also (S12,S13) has been checked by solving the London equation in the vortex state as summarized in the next section. Following Ref. where μ 0 is the Bohr magneton and m ik are the elements of the mass tensor. The mass tensor M is symmetric and can be diagonalized in the crystal frame and is normalized to one m 11 m 22 m 33 = 1 such that λ is the geometric mean of the penetration depth in the 3 directions. For arbitrary (external) field directions, we can rotate the coordinate system around an arbitrary axis by a rotation matrix D which will transform the mass tensor according to M = D T M D. The anisotropic London equation for this general case in presence of vortices with flux φ 0 at positions r ν is then given by k,l,s,t,j=1 mkl lsi ktj ∂ 2 H j ∂x s ∂x t + δ i3 ν φ 0 δ( rr ν ). (S18) Using ∇ • H = 0 and the symmetry ∂ 3 H i = 0, one obtains ∂ 1 H 1 = -∂ 2 H 2 that can be used to simplify the equation above. Assuming a flux line lattice, one can solve the differential equation by Fourier transformation where the sum runs over the reciprocal lattice vectors of the vortex lattice. The resulting algebraic equation can be written as with C = (0, 0, φ 0 ) and a matrix where G 2 = G 2 1 +G 2 2 and n ik = λ 2 mik . This equation has the solution H G = A -1 C such that the field in real space can be calculated by performing the lattice sum in Eq. (S19). We assume a distorted hexagonal lattice that is parametrized by two parameters there is no such limitation of the applied field along c-axis. Therefore, we have collected another set of TF-μSR data at a higher field of H = 50 mT applied parallel to the c-axis to compare with the data collected at H = 12 mT. Figure Here again we find that s + d wave model gives much lower χ 2 reduced value than any other models. All the fitted parameters for this set of data are consistent with data data collected at H = 12 mT which further suggest the presence of a nodal gap in the basal plane of FeSe superconductor. This also proves that an applied field of 12 mT was sufficient enough to produce stable vortices in the superconducting state of FeSe. The estimated n ab s (0) ≈ 6.6 × 10 20 cm -3 is again consistent with the previous value. TABLE I. Fitted parameters to the λ -2 ab (T ) and λ -2 c (T ) data of FeSe using the different models described in the text. s + d wave ∆1=1.86(8), ∆2=0.73(8) 391(16) 1.