We demonstrate microwave-free eddy-current imaging using nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond. By detecting the eddy-current induced magnetic field of conductive samples, we can distinguish between different materials and shapes and identify structural defects. Our technique allows for the discrimination of different materials according to their conductivity. The sensitivity of the measurements is calculated as 8×10 5 S/m √ Hz at 3.5 MHz, for a cylindrical sample with radius r 0 = 1 mm and height h = 0.1 mm (volume ∼ 0.3 mm 3 ), at a distance of 0.5 mm. In comparison with existing technologies, the diamond-based device exhibits a superior bandwidth and spatial resolution. In particular, we demonstrate a flat frequency response from DC to 3.5 MHz and a spatial resolution of 348 ± 2 μm. Magnetic induction measurements have proven to be useful in biomedicine Here, we demonstrate eddy-current imaging using magnetic sensing with nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond. Compared to other sensors, diamond-based devices operate in a wide temperature range and may have nanoscale-resolution In Fig. The setup consists of a microwave-free diamond magnetometer in AC-mode (discussed in detail in the following paragraph), a driving coil to induce eddy currents and a 3D-translation stage to make spatially dependent eddy-current measurements i.e. to create a conductivity image. The setup is shown in Fig. The magneto-metric scheme we followed for this measurements enables all-optical detection of AC fields. As it is shown in Fig. ductivity. Figure One of the advantages of NV-based sensors is their spatial resolution. For eddy-current imaging, for a constant conductivity, the smaller a material is, the smaller the amplitude of the secondary field it produces. As a test of spatial resolution, we image fifteen 1 mm-diameter 35 μm thick dots made out of aluminum. The amplitude and phase response of the magnetic field sensor caused by these dots is shown in Fig. Figure Using the high bandwidth and spatial resolution of the device we are able to image intricate structures on printed circuit boards (PCBs). Figure To calculate the sensitivity of the device we have to make assumptions about the sample to be imaged. We assume a primary field of B prim. = 91 μT with frequency of 3.5 MHz, a cylindrical material with radius r 0 = 1 mm and height h = 0.1 mm (volume ∼ 0.3 mm 3 ). The sensor is placed at a distance d = 0.5 mm from the material. We calculate the minimum conductivity σ that the material should have in order to produce a field strong enough to be detected with our magnetic field sensor (current sensitivity ∼ 10 μT/ √ Hz). The secondary magnetic field can be calculated using the expression for the electromotive force (EMF) where ∆Φ is the magnetic flux and 1/∆t = ω = 2πf, f being the modulation frequency of B prim. , E is the electric field and r is the distance from the center of the imaged sample. Using Biot-Savart's law, the field produced by the eddy-currents (i.e. secondary field, B sec. ) and the minimum σ able to be detected can be calculated. For the example presented it would be ∼ 8×10 5 S/m/ √ Hz. Enough to detect small pieces of materials like copper and aluminum, (σ copper = 5.96×10 7 S/m, σ aluminium = 3.77×10 7 S/m) will be visible with our sensor. We have demonstrated eddy-current imaging using NV centers in diamond. The magnetic sensitivity is with an all-optical method that is robust to misalignment and makes use of the NV-NV cross-relaxation feature in the PL as function of the magnetic field. The bandwidth extends to 3.5 MHz. The spatial resolution is 348 μm ± 2 μm. The sensitivity of the device is calculated as 8×10 5 S/m √ Hz at 3.5 MHz, for a cylindrical sample with radius r 0 = 1 mm and height h = 0.1 mm (volume ∼ 0.3 mm 3 ) at a distance of 0.5 mm. Combining the above characteristics our device can be used, to distinguish between different materials, detect structural defects, and image complex structures on PCBs. The technique can be further improved by closer proximity to the imaged sample, which can be achieved using a thinner diamond or one with a shallow implanted NV layer. Compared to measurements with atomic vapor cells, the current NV-based method has superior bandwidth and spatial resolution. Comparing with coil-based commercial devices, it features superior bandwidth (e.g. Zetec, MIZ-22, bandwidth 50 Hz to 2 MHz) and sensitivity (5×10 5 S/m). With its high bandwidth and spatial resolution, if combined with state-of-the-art NV sensors 9,10 the sensitivity (on the order of 10 pT/ √ Hz) would be sufficient for applications in biomedicine to distinguish between different tissues, or even healthy and unhealthy tissues, because of their different conductivities (ranging from 0.5 mS/cm to 13.7 mS/cm) 