A free standing transparent film of solid state polymer electrolyte based on PEO/PAN + NaPF6 with different compositions of nano sized TiO2 in weight percent (x = 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20 ) is synthesized by using standard solution cast technique. The homogeneous surface of above polymer composition is examined by FESEM. The microscopic interaction among polymer, salt and nanoceramic filler has been analyzed by Fourier Transformed Infra-Red (FTIR) spectroscopy. The reduction of ion pair formation in polymeric separator is clearly observed on addition of nanofiller in the polymer salt complex film. Electrical conductivity has been recorded of the prepared polymeric separator which is of the order of ~10 -3 Scm -1 after addition of nanofiller (15% wt/wt) which support the FTIR results. Electrochemical potential window has been observed of the order of ~6V by the cyclic voltammetry results. The observed data of the prepared separator are at par with the desirable value for device applications. Sodium is light alkali metal with single electron in outermost shell. This metal exhibit unexpected complexity properties The factor responsible for that are: low ambient ionic conduction, concentration polarization, poor stability (thermal, mechanical and electrochemical) In experiment the pure polymer blend of composition (PEO + PAN) films complexed with NaPF 6 salt prepared by solution cast technique. The weight percent ratio such as 50 weight percent of PEO, PAN, and salt of O/Na ratio is 20 mixed by a solution casting technique using DMF as solvent. Whereas in another samples the same polymer blend doped with different composition of nano-filler (TiO 2 ) was prepared in different proportion such as 1, 2, 7, 10, solution mixed properly. The obtained polymer blend nanocomposites were cast onto polypropylene dishes and left for evaporation at room temperature. The final product of polymer blend nanocomposites was dried under vacuum at 10 -3 mbar pressure for 2-3 days. Finally we got free standing film of pure and doped polymer electrolyte. Impedance spectroscopy was carried out for conductivity measurement with CH Instruments electrochemical workstation over the frequency range 1MHz, the sample sandwiched between stainless steel electrodes. FTIR analysis of the sample was done to detect the presence of various functional group. Surface morphology of the sample was observed by scanning electron microscopy. Working voltage range evaluated by cyclic voltammetry. The conductivity (σ) of the polymer electrolyte was calculated from the following formula. σ = L /R b A, where L is thickness of polymer electrolyte film (cm), and A is the area of crossection of electrode (cm 2 ) For electrochemical devices such as batteries, capacitors and electrochromic devices the electrochemical stability window curve is prime requirement. The cyclic voltammetry has been performed of the prepared cathode materials. This process was observed in the potential range of ~6V at current density of 0.00004 to -0.00025 through blocking electrode of stainless steel. Electrochemical stability window curve is obtained in the range from about ~6V, which is an acceptable voltage range for device application Fourier Transfer infrared microscopy analysis of the sample was done to detect the presence of various functional groups. FTIR spectrum was observed in the range of 600-4000 cm -1 as shown in fig. Free standing film was prepared by using PEO/PAN as polymer blend complexed with NaPF 6 salt with different concentration of TiO 2 (0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20) as nano filler. From impedance spectroscopy the value for maximum conductivities is 1.8 Х 10 -4 Scm -1 for 15wt. % of TiO 2 concentration which further decrease with the more addition of nano-filler. Electrochemical stability for our film is obtained in the potential range from ~6V which is good for device application. FTIR spectroscopy confirms the salt, polymer, and nano-filler interaction. Author is thankful to Central University of Punjab for providing material, instrumental and Laboratory facility.