Van der Waals heterostructures have been lately intensively studied because they offer a large variety of properties that can be controlled by selecting 2D materials and their sequence in the stack. The exact arrangement of the layers as well as the exact arrangement of the atoms within the layers, both are important for the properties of the resulting device. However, it is very difficult to control and characterize the exact position of the atoms and the layers in such heterostructures, in particular, along the vertical (z) dimension. Recently it has been demonstrated that convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) allows quantitative three-dimensional mapping of atomic positions in three-dimensional materials from a single CBED pattern. In this study we investigate CBED in more detail by simulating and performing various CBED regimes, with convergent and divergent wavefronts, on a somewhat simplified system: a 2D monolayer crystal. In CBED, each CBED spot is in fact an in-line hologram of the sample, where in-line holography is known to exhibit high intensity contrast in detection of weak phase objects that are not detectable in conventional in-focus imaging mode. Adsorbates exhibit strong intensity contrast in zero and higher order CBED spots, whereas lattice deformation such as strain or rippling cause noticeable intensity contrast only in the first and higher order CBED spots. The individual CBED spots can be reconstructed as typical in-line holograms, and the resolution of 2.13 Å can be in principle achieved in the reconstructions. We provide simulated and experimental examples of CBED of a 2D monolayer crystal. The simulations show that individual CBED spots can be treated as in-line holograms and sample distributions such as adsorbates, can be reconstructed. Individual atoms can be reconstructed from a single CBED pattern provided the later exhibits high-order CBED spots. The experimental results were obtained in a 2 transmission electron microscope (TEM) at 80 keV on free-standing monolayer hBN with some adsorbates. Examples of reconstructions obtained from experimental CBED patterns, at a resolution of 2.7 Å, are shown. CBED technique can be potentially interesting for imaging individual biological macromolecules, since it provides a relatively high resolution and does not require scanning procedure or multiple image acquisition and therefore allows minimizing the radiation damage. In convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) Recently, CBED imaging of two-dimensional crystals was demonstrated A 2D monolayer crystal is a perfect test model to explain the intensity distributions formed in the zero and higher-order CBED spots. A general scheme of convergent beam electron diffraction experimental arrangement is shown in Fig. In this section we explain and compare the intensity contrast due to lattice deformations, such as out-of plane or in-plane ripples, when imaging in underfocus and overfocus regimes. The distribution of the scattered wave in the far-field   UR is given by where  is for divergent/convergent wavefront,   , , , Far-field wavefront distribution of the scattered wave was simulated by calculating the sum where   Lr is the distribution of atomic positions, i runs through all the atoms in the lattice,   ,, are the coordinates of the atoms, and  is calculated by simulation diffraction of the spherical wavefront on a limiting aperture (second condenser aperture) positioned at a plane where   0 ar is the aperture function. CBED pattern was then calculated as , . x y x y In the next subsections we derived the phase shifts introduced by in-plane and out-of-plane sample ripples, when imaging in both convergent and divergent modes. A corresponding sketch for atomic shifts is shown in Fig. For convergent mode, 0 f  , the wavefront scattered by an atom at   ,, r x y z  is given by Eq. 2: Wavefronts scattered by atoms positioned at The corresponding phases of the wavefronts are: and the phase difference is given by: where we applied . The sketch of the optical path difference is shown in Fig. For divergent mode, 0 f  , the wavefront scattered by an atom at   ,, r x y z  is given by Eq. 2: Wavefronts scattered by atoms positioned at The corresponding phases of the wavefronts are: and the phase difference is given by: where we applied The sketch of the optical path difference is shown in Fig. For convergent mode, 0 f  , the wavefront scattered by an atom at   ,, r x y z  is given by Eq. 2: Wavefronts scattered by atoms positioned at   and a is the lattice period, are given by: The corresponding phases of the wavefronts are: ,, and the phase difference is given by: When 0, x  the phase shift 2, and we obtain: , 2 , which corresponds to the position of the n-th-order diffraction peak The phase shift due to a lateral shift x  is given by   2 , sin which is an odd function of . x K Thus, for 0 x  there will be additional phase shift in opposite CBED spots, as for example in the spots   1010 and   10 10 , and these phase shifts will be of opposite sign. The sketch of the optical path difference is shown in Fig. For divergent mode, 0 f  , the wavefront scattered by an atom at   ,, r x y z  is given by Eq. 2: Wavefronts scattered by atoms positioned at   and a is the lattice period, are given by: The corresponding phases of the wavefronts are: and the phase difference is given by: and we obtain: , 2 , which corresponds to the position of the n-th-order diffraction peak The phase shift due to a lateral shift which is an odd function of . x K Thus, for 0 x  there will be additional phase shift in opposite CBED spots, as for example,   1010 and   10 10 , and these phase shifts will be of opposite sign. The shift introduced by the lattice deformation into the probing electron wave, calculated at the detector plane. For these simulations the bubble height is z = 2 nm the imaged area is about 30 nm in diameter, the number of pixels is 512 × 512 and The scale bars in (c) -(f) correspond to 2 nm -1 . In this section we will explain the intensity contrast formation caused by the presence of adsorbates such as patches of a second layer or individual molecules when imaged in underfocus and overfocus regimes. We will also demonstrate how adsorbates can be reconstructed from individual CBED spots and discuss the achievable resolution. One might think that CBED imaging at 0 f  and 0 f  should provide the same results. This is correct except for when the imaged object is a weak phase object, in which case the CBED 11 patterns acquired at 0 f  and 0 f  exhibit opposite contrast. This effect can be explained as follows. The interference pattern is given by , where , where During reconstruction procedure, the object term  and the twin term A schematics of the positions of the reconstructed object and its twin image is shown in Fig. give rise to the same CBED pattern. The following happens when the same object is imaged in divergent/convergent modes. For a weak phase object Positioning the same object at 0 z  , that is measuring it in CBED 0 f  mode gives an interference pattern described by which is a spatially centro-symmetrical-flipped distribution, and when added to constant intensity term 2 R U it creates to an inverted intensity distribution. This effect of inversion of the contrast and centro-symmetrical flipping of the distributions within CBED spots is evident in the simulations shown in Fig. m is the relativistic mass of electron, e is an elementary charge, and h is Planck's constant. For example, for graphene, at a radius of 0.1 Å the projected atomic potential of a carbon atom is 0.215 kV•Å and the interaction parameter  is 1.008 radian/kV•Å at a beam energy of 80 keV. This means that a single carbon atom will produce a total phase shift of 0.22 radians, As an example, we simulated and reconstructed CBED pattern of monolayer graphene (G) with a patch (P) on top, the results are presented in Figure where 0 ( , ) xy  is the incident wavefront calculated as defined by Eq. 4, , where j r is 13 coordinate of j-th atom and sum is performed over all atoms in the sample; , iz vr is projected potential of a single carbon atom, it is calculated as explained in Ref. The complex-valued wavefront   , xy U K K was calculated according to Eq. 28 by applying single FFT. The CBED pattern was then calculated as     2 ,, , shown in Fig. Next, the zero-order and a first-order CBED spots were reconstructed individually as in-line holograms. It was assumed that the wavefront phase distribution in the detector plane is known. This was done to create an ideal situation (without twin image term), and to see what values of phase and amplitude are reconstructed in such an ideal case. The reconstructions were obtained by solving the following integral transformation which was calculated by applying two FFTs as explained in Ref. ,, u x y z and   Arg , , u x y z   , respectively. To interpret the contrast formation in an individual CBED spot and its reconstruction we apply the following consideration. For a graphene monolayer with adsorbates residing on top, weak phase object approximation applies and the transmission function can be written as: The wavefront in the far-field can be represented as a sum of three terms: that correspond to the three terms in the transmission function as described by Eq. 30. The resulting intensity distribution is given by   Each CBED spot can be interpreted as an in-line hologram which is formed by interference between a reference and an object waves. In the zero-order CBED spot the reference wave is provided by the non-diffracted wave (term "1" in Eq. 30) and the object wave is provided by the diffracted wave (term " " in Eq. 30). In the higher-order CBED spots there is only diffracted wave (no term "1"), so that the reference wave is provided by the wave scattered on the graphene layer and the object wave is provided by the wave diffracted on the adsorbates layer (term " Before reconstruction the selected CBED spot was multiplied with apodization function which blurs the sharp edges and set the values around the spot to a constant value, this helps to avoid effect of diffraction on edges (concentric fringes) superimposed onto the reconstruction The reconstruction obtained from the zero-order CBED spot is shown in Fig. The reconstruction obtained from the first-order CBED spot is shown in Fig. The reconstruction obtained from individual CBED spots exhibit resolution limited by the CBED spot size and a higher resolution can be in principle achieved when reconstructing the entire CBED pattern at once. The intensity distribution of a CBED pattern can be written in form of "holographic" equation: where G U and P U are the far-field distributions of the waves scattered by graphene monolayer and the patch, correspondingly. Here G U can be considered as a "reference" wave, whose distribution can be simulated for a perfect (no defects or ripples) graphene monolayer. Square root of the CBED pattern distribution multiplied with the phase distribution of G U provides a good estimation of By propagating backward the wavefront from the detector plane to the object plane we obtain the patch reconstruction as a weak phase object (Eq. 30): The reconstruction consists of the following steps: (1) Squared root of CBED distribution multiplied with the phase distribution of the reference wave (2) The resulting wavefront is backward propagated to the sample plane by taking inverse FT of the result of (1). (3) The phase distribution   , xy  is extracted from the result of (2), and the phase distribution of the patch is calculated as x y As an example, a CBED pattern of a rotated graphene patch on graphene lattice, shown in Fig. When the positions of atoms are irregular, as in the patch shown in Fig. CBED patterns were acquired in a probe side aberration corrected Titan ChemiSTEM operated at 80 keV and a convergence semi angle, , of ~6 -8 mrad. The convergence angle provides the expected lateral resolution of about Å when reconstructions are obtained from the zeroorder CBED spot; it should be noted that the resolution does not depend on the defocus distance. During experiment the convergence angle was kept constant, and the sample height was changed by moving the sample along the optical axis. The images were acquired with a 16 bit intensity dynamic range detecting system. The present study is not aimed to consider one material in particular, but periodical or hexagonal materials in general. The simulations were done for graphene and the experimental images were obtained on hBN. These two materials are only different in 1.8% of the lattice constant and slightly different scattering amplitudes. Since the chemical specificity of the scattering 20 amplitudes was not accounted for in the simulation, the simulated images in the case of hBN would be the same as in the case of graphene, only re-scaled by 1.8%. Acquired experimental CBED patterns of a hBN monolayer sample at different f  are shown in Fig. ). The hBN monolayer sample exhibits some occasional patches of adsorbates, as evident from the high angle annular dark field (HAADF) images shown in Fig. Adsorbates and crystal deformations can be easily distinguished from each other by comparing the intensity distribution in the zero-order and higher-order CBED spots. For example, CBED pattern at 2 μm f  (Fig. Experimental CBED patterns of the same region of hBN sample acquired at 5 μm f  and are shown in Fig. In the CBED patterns shown in Fig. Zero-order CBED spot of a CBED pattern can be treated as an in-line hologram and by calculating reconstruction integral as given by Eq. 29, the amplitude and phase distributions of the transmission function of the sample cab be obtained. Below we provide several examples of such reconstructions. Example 1. HAADF images of the sample acquired before TEM studies are shown in Fig. Two more examples of sample distributions reconstructed from the zero-order CBED spot are shown in Fig. In the reconstruction obtained from an entire CBED pattern the resolution of the reconstructed structures is given by the order of the available CBED spots. For example, if CBED pattern exhibits spots only up to the first order, no atomic resolution can be expected in the reconstruction. For such CBED patterns, reconstruction of only zero-order CBED spots is meaningful; this is the case for all CBED patterns shown in Fig. At the moment of the experimental acquisition we were not aware of these conditions, and we did not acquire CBED patterns with higher-order CBED spots. An attempt to obtained highresolution reconstruction from CBED pattern which exhibit up to the second-order CBED spots is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we showed that CBED of two-dimensional monolayer crystals allows imaging adsorbates and lattice deformations in one single acquisition. Any shift of an atom from its ideal position in the lattice directly translates into enhanced or reduced intensity value. The symmetry of the intensity distribution can be traced back to whether the atomic shift occurred in lateral or in axial directions. By comparing the intensity distributions in zero-and higher order CBED spots, the contributions from adsorbates and lattice deformations can be clearly separated. When the probing wavefront is changed from convergent to divergent, weak phase adsorbates cause a contrast 31 inversion in the CBED spots intensity distributions. It is known that in-line holography (also called defocus imaging) is the best approach to acquire weak phase shifting objects: weak phase objects create a high contrast interference pattern, while they exhibit no contrast when imaged in in-focus mode. A prominent example was imaging DNA molecules embedded into ice, reported by Matsumoto et al, where the in-focus image exhibited too weak contrast but presence of DNA molecules could be identified in their in-line holograms 