The frozen internal polarization-induced electric fields due to broken inversion symmetry in all conventional blue and green nitride semiconductor light emitting semiconductor quantum well heterostructures point in a direction opposite to what is desired for efficient flow of electrons and holes. This state of affairs has persisted because of the desire to have p-type hole injectors on top of the quantum well active region. Because of the internal polarization fields in nitride heterostructures, there exist four permutations of doping and polarization for the realization of such light emitters. Which permutation is the most desirable for efficient light emission? In this work, we answer this question by demonstrating a fundamentally new approach towards efficient light emission with bottom-tunnel junctions. The bottomtunnel junction design aligns the polarization fields in a desired direction in the quantum well, while simultaneously eliminating the need for p-type contacts, and allowing efficient current spreading. By preventing electron overshoot past quantum wells, it disables carrier recombination in undesired regions of the quantized heterostructures, and opens up the possibility for new geometries of integrating and stacking multiple light emitters. Due to the inherent advantages, the bottom-tunnel junction light emitting diode enables a 200-300% increase in the light emission efficiency over alternate heterostructure designs. Quantum well semiconductor heterostructures based on the Gallium Nitride (GaN) semiconductor system have made it possible to realize revolutionary photon emitters in the visible and ultraviolet wavelengths These effects become more severe at high current injection and determine the lower limit for threshold of laser diodes (LDs). Since laser-lighting is being investigated as an energy-efficient replacement of LEDs, fresh ideas rooted in the physics of the semiconductor heterostructures are needed to achieve high efficiency photon sources for the future. One of the most important distinguishing features of III-nitride semiconductor heterostructures is the presence of built-in electronic polarization due to the lack of inversion symmetry in the wurtzite crystal structure For vertical LEDs, spontaneous and piezoelectric fields can either enhance or weaken the emission performance of the final device Lack of highly conductive p-type substrates requires n-type electron injection from the bottom n-type substrate into the quantum well active regions. Being restricted to an n-type substrate, the choice of crystal growth direction -Ga vs N polar -determines whether the polarization field in the quantum wells points in the same or opposite direction to the p-n junction field, and to the direction of current flow. It has been long believed that higher energy efficiencies are possible in nitride light emitters if the quantum well heterostructures are grown in the N-polar rather than the Ga-polar orientation. The reasons for this are discussed later -but at first glance it may seem that the polarity of the crystal heterostructure should have no effect on the IQE of the quantum wells. After all, if one considers just photoluminescence from the quantum wells in undoped structures, a N-polar quantum well heterostructure is equivalent to a Ga-polar heterostructure physically turned upside down, and indeed there is no reason to expect a difference in the IQE between the two structures. However, when a quantum well heterostructure is grown along the N-polar (000-1) direction of the crystal, it is found to have a drastically lower IQE than a structurally identical Ga-polar (0001) counterpart To utilize the advantages of the higher perfection of growth along the Ga-polar [0001] direction along with the preferred polarization field orientation (available for p-up LEDs grown along the N-polar [000-1] direction), tunnel junctions (TJs) must be used on n-type substrates Additionally, growth of such structures by MOVPE is complicated, because success to effectively activate buried p-type layers is still limited The samples were processed using optical lithography into vertical diodes of different die sizes ranging from 20 μm x 20 μm to 300 μm x 300 μm. Several higher aspect ratio dies were also fabricated in order to observe current spreading, with the largest aspect ratio device measuring 100 μm x 500 μm. ICP-RIE mesa etching in Chlorine based chemistry was used to isolate individual devices. Though not exploited in this work, we point out that the use of bottom-TJ structures offers a unique advantage of lowering the p+/n+ tunneling contact resistance by exploiting a much larger cross-section area than the LED mesa, something that is not possible in the top-TJ LED structure. After mesa isolation, a top circular Ti/Al ohmic contact of radius 25 μm for the 80 μm x 80 μm and larger devices was deposited at the center of the top of the mesas. Finally, a common bottom contact was deposited on the back of the n-type substrate. Prior to metallization, a surface treatment consisting of O2 plasma ashing, HCl, and HF cleans were performed to remove undesired chemical residues. The same 25 nm Ti/100 nm Al metal stack was deposited by ebeam evaporation for both the top and bottom n-type contacts. Such a contact stack has been shown to have very low contact resistance to n-type GaN From this point on, top and bottom TJ samples will be compared using opposite bias directions (as indicated in Fig 3 ) to enable quantitative comparison in their natural bias conditions. The processed samples were measured on-chip by grounding the bottom contact and putting a probe on the top contact of the selected devices. The electroluminescence (EL) spectrum was collected from the top using an optical setup utilizing a monochromator and a photodiode. The measured I-V characteristics of the four 80 μm x 80 μm devices are shown in Fig. Due to the limitations of on-chip measurements, an exact comparison of the intensity between the topand bottom-TJ diodes is not straightforward due to differences in alignment of probes, etc. Nonetheless, at an injection current density of at 20 A/cm 2 , the bottom-TJ LEDs showed ~2.5X higher peak intensity than the top-TJ for the green LEDs, and this enhancement was ~13X for the bottom-TJ blue LEDs. The quantitative differences between the enhancement for green and blue emitters can be attributed to differences in active regions and electron blocking layer (EBL) design, but irrespective of the details, the bottom-TJ structures for both wavelengths demonstrate the important advantages offered by this conceptual change in the LED design. For the higher In content LEDs (Fig Irrespective of the location of the TJ, all LED devices showed good current spreading: the small circular metal contact on the top was enough to spread the current throughout the entire device mesas far larger To further analyze the origin of the high energy peak in the EL spectra for top-TJ structures, the heterostructure devices were modeled by self-consistently solving the energy band diagrams with current transport through the structure. The experimentally investigated structures utilizing top-and bottom-TJ were simulated by one-dimensional drift-diffusion model using SiLENSe: only the part of the structures marked `green LED' or `blue LED' in Fig 3 (excluding the part denoted "TJ") were simulated, while setting the orientation as Ga-and N-polar, respectively. This procedure works well for modeling physical differences between the top-and bottom-TJ LEDs as long as a) the TJ resistance is low in both cases, b) the TJ is not affected by the polarization field direction (e.g. by using a homojunction), and c) does not degrade the LED active region quality. The calculated energy-band diagrams, carrier concentrations and radiative recombination profiles are shown in Fig 7 . These plots present results obtained at 20 A/cm 2 for the green LED structures A (top TJ) and B (bottom TJ) and 20 A/cm 2 for the blue LED structures C (top TJ) and D (bottom TJ). As seen in the energy band diagrams, the top-TJ and bottom-TJ LEDs behave quite differently under forward bias. In the top-TJ, the built-in polarization field in the QW lowers the effective band offset for electrons and holes, enabling the carriers to exit the QW and overshoot to the other side. This increases the escape of carriers from QWs, leading to higher carrier concentrations outside of the QW for the top-TJ structure, compared to the abrupt drop of carrier overshoot for the bottom TJ structure, as seen in Fig In this work, a fundamentally new approach of using bottom-tunnel junctions for polar GaN based lightemitting diodes and lasers has been demonstrated. A clear experimental assessment of the impact of the polarization-induced electric fields and their relative orientation with the p-n diode junction fields on LED performance was possible for the first time with the bottom-TJ approach. Electroluminescence measurements on top-TJ and bottom-TJ LEDs emitting in blue as well as green-yellow spectrum indicate that the bottom-TJ LEDs achieve superior injection efficiency (in a Ga-polar p-down structure, which effectively mimics a desired N-polar p-up LED structure). Corroborating device simulations explain the experimental trends observed in the EL spectra such as higher emission intensities at high injection currents for bottom-TJ over top-TJ structures: the polarization induced electric fields present in the bottom-TJ structures are in a direction that assists carrier injection, while effectively separating electrons and holes in the vicinity of the QW, suppressing parasitic carrier recombination. Further supporting capacitance-voltage measurements confirm the experimental observation of significantly thinner depletion widths and better injection efficiency for the bottom-TJ LEDs compared to the top-TJ counterparts. Based on the comparative study, we conclude that the bottom-TJ LEDs present an intriguing alternative to standard Ga-polar LEDs for achieving high efficiencies, monochromaticity, and for high frequency direct modulation of the photonic output. Combining the above advantages with the excellent current spreading by using a thick n-type GaN layer on the top, the first realization of a bottom-tunnel junction GaN LED presented here paves a new unexplored path for GaN-based photonic devices.