High temperature cuprate superconductors consist of stacked CuO2 planes, with primarily two dimensional electronic band structures and magnetic excitations [1,2], while superconducting coherence is three dimensional. This dichotomy highlights the importance of out-of-plane charge dynamics, believed to be incoherent in the normal state [3,4], yet lacking a comprehensive characterization in energy-momentum space. Here, we use resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) with polarization analysis to uncover the pure charge character of a recently discovered collective mode in electron-doped cuprates [5-7]. This mode disperses along both the in-and, importantly, out-of-plane directions, revealing its three dimensional nature. The periodicity of the out-of-plane dispersion corresponds to the CuO2 plane distance rather than the crystallographic c-axis lattice constant, suggesting that the interplane Coulomb interaction drives the coherent out-of-plane charge dynamics. The observed properties are hallmarks of the long-sought acoustic plasmon, predicted for layered systems [8-13] and argued to play a substantial role in mediating high temperature superconductivity [13-15]. The charge dynamics of systems with periodically stacked quasi-two dimensional (2D) conducting planes are drastically affected in the presence of poorly screened interplane Coulomb interactions. In a simple layered electron gas model with conducting planes separated by dielectric spacers [8-10], the dispersion of plasmons, the collective electronic modes of the charge dynamics, evolves from optical-like to acoustic-like as a function of out-of-plane momentum qz [Fig. 1(a)], a behavior distinct from that in either pure 2D or isotropic 3D systems. For superconducting cuprates, similar charge dynamics have been postulated since they consist of conducting CuO2 planes stacked along the c-axis with poor out-of-plane screening energy-momentum dispersions at qz = 0 Experimental evidence of this previously undetected component and its characterization in energy-momentum space can shed new light on long-standing proposals that connect out-of-plane charge dynamics to superconductivity. For instance, it has been proposed that 20% of the observed value of the cuprates' high Tc can be attributed to the presence of acoustic plasmons In this letter, we focus our attention on the enigmatic "zone center" excitation previously discovered by RIXS in the electron-doped cuprate Nd2-xCexCuO4 (NCCO) (x = 0.15) We first identify the character of this excitation by determining the associated magnetic and charge contributions to the RIXS spectra. This can be uniquely achieved by resolving the polarization of both the incident and scattered photons A second key insight can be obtained from a comprehensive mapping of the energymomentum dispersion in all three dimensions of reciprocal space, in contrast to prior RIXS experiments that explored the projected in-plane momentum without focusing on the qz dependence Evidently, such finding calls for a more detailed investigation along the out-of-plane direction. Fig. These results can be rationalized by doubling the out-of-plane Brillouin zone size, implying that the crystallographic unit cell with lattice constant c does not set the periodicity of the zone center excitation, but rather d = c/2: the nearest neighbor CuO2 plane spacing [Fig. ]. Hence, a new index l* in units of 2p/d appropriately describes the Brillouin zone "felt" by the zone center excitation and establishes the proper periodicity of the dispersion. An obvious candidate which can induce such a Brillouin zone "reconstruction" in a quasi-2D system is the interplanar Coulomb interaction. These striking features are reminiscent of acoustic plasmon bands theoretically proposed in the aforementioned layered electron gas model [Fig. Interestingly, the data shown in Figs. . At q = (0.025, 0, l* = 0.925), i.e. close to the equivalent zone center (0, 0, l* = 1), the plasmon linewidth of approximately 0.5 eV [Fig. Our results reveal comprehensive information about the charge dynamics of electrondoped cuprates. The collective charge modes propagate in all three dimensions of reciprocal space with different in-and out-of-plane dynamics. They are not quasi-2D, as one may have anticipated from the single-particle spectrum, and the out-of-plane momentum dependence highlights the importance of interplane Coulomb interaction. Significant structural and electronic analogies between electron-and hole-doped materials imply a similar three dimensionality would be expected in the latter's charge dynamics. While previous RIXS studies on hole-doped compounds primarily focused on magnetic, orbital, and other high energy excitations The c-axis oriented LCCO thin films with Ce concentrations of x = 0.11, 0.13, 0.15, 0.17, 0.175, and 0. Determinant quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) , where d is the interplane spacing and q and qz are the in-plane and out-of-plane components of the momentum transfer, respectively. H I , the sole free parameter of our calculation, is adjusted to give a roughly 1eV mode for qz = 0 and the smallest nonzero q = (0.0625, 0); its value is not varied with doping. values, together with the anti-symmetrized Lorentzian fit profiles of the zone center excitation (red shades) and the sum of all contributions fitted to the spectra (solid black lines, see also Supplementary Figs. 