Systematic spectroscopic ellipsometry investigations have been performed in order to elucidate the asymmetric insulator-to-metal transition in thin VO 2 films. The comprehensive analysis of the obtained macroscopic optical response yields a hysteretic behavior, and in particular its asymmetry, when performed in the framework of an anisotropic effective medium approximation taking into account the volume fraction of the metal inclusions as well as their shape. We reveal microscopic details of the percolation transition, namely that the shape of the metal inclusions goes through several plateaus, as seen in the evolution of the shape factor on both sides of the transition region and resulting in different critical volume fractions at the transition for the heating and cooling cycles. Vanadium dioxide undergoes an insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) at around 68 • C that is accompanied by a structural transformation from a dimerized, monoclinic (P2 1 /c) lattice below the critical temperature to a (P4 2 /mnm) structure above. Additional complexity is introduced by the hysteretic behavior of the transition, observed for example in resistivity In this Letter, we demonstrate that the IMT of VO 2 can be described in all details by an anisotropic BEMA with varying both the filling and the shape factor. The shape factor departs from spherical inclusions around the transition region and has different values for heating and cooling. The critical volume fraction is therefore different leading to the pronounced asymmetric hysteretic behavior. In the framework of the BEMA, the macroscopic optical response is consistently reproduced over the whole transition region and microscopic details of the percolation transition are unveiled. We investigated vanadium dioxide thin films deposited by radio frequency sputtering using a metallic V target in a reactive process with an Ar/O 2 gas mixture on an Al 2 O 3 substrate of 510 μm thickness, with the c-axis (0001) perpendicular to the plane. During deposition, the gas pressure was about 3.4×10 -3 mbar and the ratio of the mass flows O 2 /Ar was adjusted to 3.1%. The growth temperature was kept at 550 • C over the full deposition period of 60 min. For spectroscopic measurements we utilized a Woollam RC2-UI ellipsometer since its wide spectral range (λ = 210 to 1690 nm) allows determining the dielectric properties of the sample with high precision by modeling measured ellipsometric parameters Ψ and ∆. Figure To further investigate the asymmetry of the transition, we consider the raw data of the ellipsometric measurement, i.e. the parameters Ψ and ∆ that define the complex reflectance coefficient ρ = r p /r s = tan{Ψ} exp{i∆} and allow us to extract the complex dielectric properties. A proper model accounts for the presence of the substrate and simultaneously fits both ellipsometric parameters as a function of the wavelength and temperature. The Bruggeman effective medium approximation describes the material from the perspective of a composite, with inclusions of given shape (clusters of metallic phase) embedded in an isotropic matrix with known dielectric properties (insulating phase): 29 where ε i , ε m are the complex dielectric functions of the insulating and metallic phases, f is the volume fraction of the metallic inclusions and L is their shape factor. ε eff is the effective dielectric function of the composite. A Cauchy model accounts for the optical properties of the Al 2 O 3 substrate for both polarizations. Since it is double-side-polished, its birefringence induces strong depolarization from incoherent back reflection at oblique incidence, The BEMA model is based on the assumption that the optical behavior of the composite is fully determined by its constituents, i.e. the insulating and metallic phases. In a first step we thus determined their optical properties at T = 23 and 90 • C, since at these temperatures the films form a homogeneous single phase, respectively. We start with the insulating phase. Despite the polycrystalline nature of the film, the strain induced by the substrate results in uniaxial properties of the film. To obtain the dielectric response of both in-and out-of-plane optical axes, we performed ellipsometric measurements by varying the angle of incidence from 25 • to 65 • . The in-plane response is modelled with a Tauc-Lorentz function with a band gap of E g = 0.56 eV and two Gaussian functions at energies E 1 = 3.3 eV and E 2 = 8.3 eV to account for the interband transitions; this is in accord with previous reports. The properties of the metallic phase are reproduced by adding a Drude term to the previous model to account for the free charge carriers contribution. The band gap closes and the Tauc-Lorentz terms become simple Lorentzian oscillators along both axes with vanishingly small amplitude. For the charge-carriers we determine a density of 9.7 × 10 21 cm -1 , their mobility is 0.5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and their effective mass m * /m e = 1.4; other experiments 5,33 confirm our findings. The interband transition shifts with respect to the insulating phase, both for in-plane and out-of-plane axes with (E 1 = 3.27 eV, E 2 = 8.34 eV) and (E 3 = 3.11 eV, E 4 = 8.12 eV), respectively. While in-plane, the interband transition is slightly reduced, for the out-of-plane direction we observe a strong increase governed by induced strain over the transition. The normal-incidence spectra simulated with these two models perfectly describes our data obtained for both phases by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy. The shape factor L is a correction of the local field accounting for the geometry of the particle. Inclusions smaller than the wavelength can be approximated by ellipsoids with fixed revolution axis having a shape factor L = (L ⊥ , L , L ). The out-of-plane term of the shape factor can be expressed as: 35 where r 2 = x 2 /z 2 -1, the ratio of the in-plane and outof-plane radii of the ellipsoid, x and z, respectively. The in-plane part is given by L = 1 2 (1 -L ⊥ ). For a sphere one finds L = ( The resulting fit of Ψ and ∆ with such a model is displayed in Fig. Fig. We now can determine the critical shape and volume fraction at the transition temperatures obtained by impedance measurements. The geometry and filling fractions of the metallic inclusions are different at their respective critical temperatures indicated by dashed lines in Fig. It is interesting to note that percolation theory predicts In summary, a detailed analysis of our temperaturedependent ellipsometric measurements of VO 2 films in the framework of an anisotropic Bruggeman effective medium approximation allows us to determine the microscopic geometry of the constituents and to explain the asymmetric percolation transition in VO 2 . In the course of the IMT the metallic inclusions continuously change in shape flattening at large temperatures and acquire distinct shapes at critical temperatures during heating and cooling. This explains the observed asymmetry of the hysteresis loop. We are now able to describe accurately the temperature dependent dielectric constant when passing through the phase transition. Financial support is provided by the DFG via the GRK (Research Training Group) 2204 'Substitute Materials for sustainable Energy Technologies'.