For opto-electronic and photo-voltaic applications of perovskites, it is essential to know the optical properties and intrinsic losses of the used materials. A systematic microscopic analysis is presented for the example of methylammonium lead iodide where density functional theory is used to calculate the electronic band structure as well as the dipole and Coulomb matrix elements. These results serve as input for a many-body quantum approach used to compute the absorption, photoluminescence, and the optical and Auger losses for a wide range of application conditions. To illustrate the theory, the excitonic properties of the material system are investigated and numerical results are presented for typical photo-voltaic operation conditions and for the elevated carrier densities needed for laser operation. Perovskite crystals containing organic cations have gained a lot of attention in recent years, especially for solar cell applications. While high efficiency has been reached, the relatively short life-time of perovskite based solar cells currently still constitutes a significant challenge In the current study, we investigate the optical properties of the tetragonal phase of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI 3 ). This material system has a band gap of approximately 1.64 eV at room temperature 10 and is one of the most intensively analyzed perovskites for solar cell applications. The band structure of MAPbI 3 was previously studied using density functional theory (DFT) There have been several studies investigating the optical properties of MAPbI 3 in order to understand the details behind the good energy conversion in these materials. A significant range of values has been reported for the static and the high-frequency dielectric constants Under many conditions, the operation of optoelectronic devices are limited by intrinsic carrier loss processes such as spontaneous emission and/or Auger recombination. Several experimental studies analyzed the strength of the spontaneous emission and Auger processes in MAPbI 3 , yielding spontaneous emission coefficients in the range of 6•10 -11 cm 3 /s to 2•10 -9 cm 3 /s In this work, we use an approach that combines DFT 33 calculations for the electronic properties of MAPbI 3 with a microscopic many-body approach to compute optical properties such as carrier density dependent absorption and photoluminescence spectra as well as the temperature and density dependent spontaneous emission and Auger loss coefficients. This approach has previously been successfully used to study a wide range of III-V semiconductor material systems The DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) From the wave functions, the dipole and Coulomb matrix elements are calculated. Together with the band structure these are needed as input for calculating the optical properties. Absorption and gain are calculated using the semiconductor Bloch equations where is the electron (hole) density and are the electron (superscript λ) and hole (superscript ν) energies that are re-normalized due to the Coulomb interaction. In these equations the energy dispersion and Coulomb matrix elements obtained from DFT calculations enter in ε k k k and V k k k-q q q , respectively. Furthermore, Ω k k k is given by where the first term describes the interband dipole coupling to the laser field E(t) and the second term describes again a re-normalization caused by the Coulomb interaction V k k k-q q q . Here, the dipole matrix elements d k k k and the Coulomb matrix elements V k k k-q q q obtained from DFT calculations enter. In our current study, we investigate Coulomb effects. While phonon-carrier scattering in principle can be included in the scattering term of Eq. 1, this is challenging due to the strong phonon coupling present in the perovskite materials For the calculation of the photoluminescence the semiconductor luminescence equations are evaluated which are derived in Ref. More details on the underlying microscopic many-body approach can be found in Ref. Our DFT calculations yield a Γ-point band gap of E g = 1.48 eV which is significantly smaller than the band gap found by Tao et al. The top of Fig. From the onset of the free-particle absorption which corresponds to the band gap E g and the position of the exciton peak, the exciton binding energy can be com- puted. The position of the peak and its height depend on the choice of the dephasing constant. For Fig. In the case of CsSnX 3 (X = Cl, Br, I), Huang and Lambrecht Here, we estimate how our computed exciton binding energies are modified by the inclusion of significant phonon screening. Since for the exciton binding energy E b ∝ ε -2 applies, our results obtained from using the high-frequency dielectric constant, need to be downscaled by a factor of (ε 0 /ε ∞ ) 2 . Figure In Fig. The obtained B values are plotted in Fig. With the exception of the ΓZ direction (grey line), in the low density limit the Auger coefficients for all directions are very similar. Generally, C in ΓX direction (green line) is somewhat larger than compared to the other directions. For increasing densities, more and more states are filled and eventually resonances in the Auger coefficient are visible. These resonances occur whenever carriers can make a transition to higher bands without momentum transfer in k-space. Since for the five directions considered here, the effective masses differ, these resonances show up at different carrier densities. With increasing temperatures (dotted line → dashed line → solid line; shown for the ΓA direction, i.e. in blue), the resonances are shifted to even higher densities (not shown). While at low carrier densities the Auger coefficient increases with temperature, it is almost equal from roughly n c ≈ 5 • 10 17 / cm 3 on to higher densities. All in all, these results are in good agreement with experimental findings that reported Auger coefficients in the range of 10 -28 cm 6 /s to 10 -27 cm 6 /s. In conclusion, we used an ab initio based approach combining density functional theory calculations for the electronic properties and microscopic many-body computations to obtain optical properties of MAPbI 3 . We find a strong direction dependence for the absorption which is largest for the ΓM direction. Our calculations yield exciton binding energies (21 meV to 65 meV) well in the range of reported values that depend on the choice of the highfrequency dielectric constant. Additionally, we compute the reduction of the exciton binding energy in the case when screening due to phonons needs to be accounted for We extend the experimental results by also calculating the dependence on the carrier density. This is especially strong in the case of the Auger coefficient C. For the complete range of densities used (10 15 -10 19 cm -3 ) we note that the loss current due to spontaneous emission is by about one order of magnitude larger than the loss current due to Auger recombination, independent of temperature or direction. The Marburg work was funded by the DFG via the GRK 1782 "Functionalization of Semiconductors"; computing time from HRZ Marburg, CSC Frankfurt and on the Lichtenberg high performance computer of the TU Darmstadt is acknowledged. The Arizona work was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award numbers FA9550-16-1-0088 and FA9550-17-1-0246.