The topochemical transformation of single crystals of Sr3Ir2O7 into Sr3Ir2O7F2 is reported via fluorine insertion. Characterization of the newly formed Sr3Ir2O7F2 phase shows a nearly complete oxidation of Ir 4+ cations into Ir 5+ that in turn drives the system from an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator with a half-filled J ef f = 1/2 band into a nonmagnetic J = 0 band insulator. First principles calculations reveal a remarkably flat insertion energy that locally drives the fluorination process to completion. Band structure calculations support the formation of a band insulator whose charge gap relies on the strong spin-orbit coupling inherent to the Ir metal ions of this compound. Topochemical transformations have long been harnessed to control the properties of a broad array of quantum materials. Post growth transformations of bulk single crystals are often utilized to achieve a number of unconventional electronic states ranging from quantum spin liquids 1 to charge density waves 2 to superconductivity One area of interest is the potential of exploring new electronic states in spin-orbit assisted Mott materials. These are systems where the interplay between strong crystal field energies, spin-orbit coupling, and on-site Coulomb interactions cooperate to stabilize a Mott insulating state comprised of spin-orbit entangled electrons Modifying the host lattices of these unusual spinorbit Mott insulators via topochemical transformations has recently shown promise. Chemical reactions driving postgrowth transformations have stabilized spin liquid formation The development of novel routes of controlling the electronic states and lattice architectures of R.P. strontium iridates is of interest for a variety of reasons. For instance, doping holes into Sr n+1 Ir n O 3n+1 is a proposed route to realizing unconventional superconductivity Here we report the fluorine-driven transformation of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 crystals into Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 , which in turn raises the valence of Ir ions in the lattice from Ir 4+ to Ir 5+ and drives the system from an antiferromagnetic J ef f = 1/2 Mott state into a nonmagnetic J = 0 spin-orbit driven band insulator. Soft postgrowth reaction of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 crystals in a low temperature fluorine environment drives a rapid expansion of the unit cell's long-axis (by ≈ 16%) as F -ions intercalate within the SrO rocksalt layers of the structure. The reaction diffuses to completion (incorporating two F atoms per formula unit) throughout the bulk of the crystal due to a low insertion energy and shallow chemical potential gradient with increasing F content. Experimental data combined with first principles calculations characterize the resulting Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 state as a highly distorted spin-orbit driven insulator, and our combined results demonstrate Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F x as a unique material that can be driven from a J ef f = 1/2 into a J = 0 spin-orbit entangled ground state. Single crystals of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 were grown via a halide flux growth technique similar to earlier reports Once single crystals were extracted from the boule, their phase purity was verified with x-ray diffraction measurements, and crystals were then loaded into an alumina boat and buried within CuF 2 powder. The crucible was placed inside of a tube furnace under argon gas flow and heated to 250 • C over the course of 30 minutes. This temperature was then held for 2 hours and the reaction was stopped by quenching the crucible in air. For reaction times substantially less than this, crystals were found to be mixed phase containing both the Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 and Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 structures, and for reaction times appreciably greater than this, samples began to show local decomposition into SrF 2 . We note here that similar fluorination could be achieved via reaction in sealed quartz ampoules containing XeF 2 , indicating that the F insertion process is driven via exposure to F 2 gas and not a more complicated process of anion exchange involving direct contact with the CuF 2 . Neutron diffraction measurements were performed on the HB3A diffractometer at the High Flux Isotope Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. A Si-220 monochromator (1.546 Å) was utilized and a 2D Anger camera detector collected the scattering intensity. All data were corrected for neutron absorption through WinGX Charge transport measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (DynaCool PPMS) with an AC resistance bridge. Crystals were mounted in a four wire configuration and silver paint used to create contacts. Transport data were collected with current flowing within the bc-plane. Magnetization measurements were performed within a SQUID-based Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3), and crystals were mounted on a quartz paddle with a small drop of varnish. Magnetization data were collected with the field applied within the bc-plane. Optical reflectivity measurements were also performed to characterize the electronic structure of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 . The bc-plane reflectivity spectra R(ω) was measured in the energy region between 5 meV and 1 eV by using an in-situ overcoating technique X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurements were performed at Beamline A2 at CHESS. Crushed single crystals were prepared on three layers of Kapton tape, with an average sample thickness corresponding to nearly two absorption lengths. Measurements were collected at the Ir L 2 (2p 1/2 → 5d) and L 3 (2p 3/2 → 5d) absorption edges. The energy of the incident x-ray beam was selected using a double-crystal diamond (1, 1, 1) monochromator. XAS measurements were performed at room temperature in transmission geometry to directly measure the linear x-ray attenuation coefficient, μ(E), using a series of three ion chambers. The sample was mounted between the first two, and IrO 2 powder was mounted between the last two ion chambers as a reference to ensure the energy calibration did not drift. 19 F NMR data were acquired at room temperature on a Bruker Advance 500 MHz (11.7 T) wide-bore NMR spectrometer and at a Larmor frequency of -470.6 MHz. The data were obtained under 50 kHz magic angle spinning (MAS) using a 1.3 mm double-resonance probe. Theoretical results utilized density functional theory (DFT) within the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) Following reaction of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 crystals within a bed of CuF 2 powder, the reacted crystals were initially ground into a powder and checked with x-ray diffraction to explore whether the reaction spanned the bulk of the crystals. Powder data collected from crushed crystals refined with a Lebail fit to a global structure in space group C2/c with a = 24.2068(1), b = 5.45033(8), c = 5.50633 (7), α = 90, β = 90.032(1), γ = 90. This is consistent with the large a-axis expansion expected for the transformation from Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 into Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 depicted in Fig. To further parameterize the insertion of fluorine, quantitative Under the optimized conditions reported here, the average fluorine content of the crushed crystals is measured to be Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 1.9 and the secondary SrF 2 -like environment was too weak to be reliably quantified (ie. <≈ 3% molar fraction). This small secondary peak could arise from either a slight overexposure to F 2 gas or from residual contamination of CuF 2 on the surface of one of the crystals crushed for analysis. Given this uncertainty and the inability to perform NMR measurements on the volume of a single small crystal, we will reference the compound as Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 for the purposes of this paper. As will be shown later, this is supported by DFT calculations which demonstrate that the fully intercalated compound containing two F atoms per formula unit is the most stable, and any F deficiencies averaged across of crystal likely arise from phase separated Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 regions. A single Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 crystal was also measured with a combination of single crystal x-ray and neutron diffraction, and the structure was refined in the same twinned C2/c unit cell as the parent Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 material. Metal-oxygen and metal-fluorine bond lengths and bond angles determined via neutron diffraction agreed within error with the those of x-ray measurements, and the atomic positions are summarized in Table Electron transport and magnetization measurements were performed on single crystals of both Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 and Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 in order to characterize the evolution of the electronic ground state as the iridium valence is shifted from Ir 4+ to Ir 5+ . Temperature dependent resistivity data with current flowing within the basal bc-plane are plotted in Fig. Exploring the gap structure further, optical conductivity measurements are plotted in Fig. Naively, in the single-ion limit, the formation of a J = 0 state should have excited states with a first excited triplet J = 1 band and a higher J = 2 energy level. The splitting of these states should be on the order of λ ≈ 0.2 eV and 3λ ≈ 0.6 eV respectively, assuming a value for the spin-orbit coupling strength ξ = 0.4 eV where λ = ξ 2S . At a minimum, the optical data demonstrate the formation of a band insulating phase as the system transitions from an 5d 5 into a 5d 4 valence state. To test whether or not this insulating state is reflective of a J = 0 ground state whose character is primarily driven via the strong spin-orbit coupling inherent to the Ir 5+ cations, x-ray absorption measurements (XAS) were performed. XAS data collected at the Ir L 3 and L 2 absorption edges are plotted in Fig. Magnetization measurements collected on a single crystal are plotted in Fig. Oe Ir and a Curie constant C = 9.227 × 10 -7 μBK Oe Ir yielding an effective moment of 0.203 ± 0.002 μ B and Weiss temperature Θ W = -2.5 ± 0.3 K. This weak local moment response is commonly observed in Ir 5+ octahedrally coordinated compounds The formation of the Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 structure was explored via calculations of partially-fluorinated structures in DFT calculations. Intermediate levels of fluorination were calculated by adding single fluorine atoms to the Sr-327 unit cell: from 0 (unfluorinated Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 ) to 8 (fully fluorinated Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 ). All symmetry-inequivalent sites were tested for each F atom added, and the structure was then fully relaxed (starting based on a linear interpolation of the two relaxed endpoints, Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 and Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 ). The fluorine site leading to the lowest energy after relaxation was chosen, and that site was kept occupied as further atoms were added. This allows for the absorption energy for n fluorine atoms within the Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 matrix to be determined as follows: The chemical potential of fluorine (referenced to fluorine gas in the dilute limit) was then determined to be μ F = -0.797 eV based on the vapor pressure of CuF 2 at 200 • C, These quantities are shown as a function of x = n/4, the number of fluorine atoms per formula unit, in Figure Electronic structure calculations were also performed to investigate the band structure of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 . The Brillouin zone was sampled using a 1 × 4 × 4 Γ-centered grid-only a single k-point point is needed in the k z direction because of the size of the long-axis lattice parameter and the quasi-2D nature of the material. Using U = 1.6 eV, the resulting band structure is plotted in Figure While topochemical transformations of R.P. phases via F insertion have been explored for a number of transition metal oxides, iridates are rather underexplored. One obstacle has been the difficulty of preparing phase pure powder specimens of Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 -powder can only be stabilized under high pressure conditions The change in Ir-O bond lengths and the increased distortion of the IrO 6 octahedra observed in scattering data are consistent with DFT calculations of the relaxed structure; however more precise comparisons of changes in the Ir-O-Ir bond angles upon F insertion are prohibited by the large uncertainties inherent to the single crystal neutron diffraction data. This uncertainty is largely driven by a broadened crystal mosaic created by the F insertion process. Upon F insertion, the crystal mosaic (defined by the full width at half maximum scattering intensity distribution of crystallites) increases from < 0.5 • to ≈ 3 • in the larger (several mg) crystals suitable for neutron diffraction measurements. DFT calculations show that the origin of the charge gap is predicated on the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling in the model, and spinorbit coupling effects on the electronic ground state are further confirmed by XAS measurements that reveal a strongly enhanced branching ratio at the Ir L 3 and L 2 absorption edges. This is consistent with the formation of a J = 0 ground state within the low spin 5d 4 valence electrons, despite the strong deviation of the local crystal field from perfect cubic symmetry. A number of other octahedrally coordinated Ir 5+ systems have also been observed to manifest a J = 0 ground state in lattice geometries varying from corner sharing double perovskites We have demonstrated that single crystals of the J ef f = 1/2 Mott insulator Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 can be converted into the J = 0 band insulator Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 F 2 via the insertion of fluorine into the crystal matrix. Reaction of crystals embedded within CuF 2 powder proceeds rapidly and converts the entirety of Ir 4+ cations into Ir 5+ with negligible anion exchange observed. F atoms insert within the SrO interstitial planes between the bilayers of the lattice, resulting in a strong perturbation to the IrO 6 octahedral environments away from an ideal cubic symmetry. Despite this distortion, x-ray absorption measurements and first principles calculations are consistent with the formation of a spin-orbit entangled J = 0 electronic ground state that possesses a charge gap reliant on the strong spin-orbit coupling inherent to the Ir cations. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS