Second harmonic conversion from 1550 nm to 775 nm with an efficiency of 400% W -1 is demonstrated in a gallium phosphide (GaP) on oxide integrated photonic platform. The platform consists of doubly-resonant, phase-matched ring resonators with quality factors Q ∼ 10 4 , low mode volumes V ∼ 30(λ/n) 3 , and high nonlinear mode overlaps. Measurements and simulations indicate that conversion efficiencies can be increased by a factor of 20 by improving the waveguide-cavity coupling to achieve critical coupling in current devices. Parametric nonlinear processes such as frequency conversion play a critical role in several established and emerging technological applications In this work, we study SHG in a gallium phosphide (GaP) on oxide platform that asphalts the path for achieving high-efficiency frequency conversion in robust, compact, and wide bandwidth integrated cavities. In particular, GaP-on-oxide ring resonators were designed for quasi-phasematched SHG from the telecommunication C band (1550 nm) to the near-infrared (775 nm). This work represents at least an order-of-magnitude improvement over prior SHG GaP devices In addition to its significant χ (2) second-order nonlinear susceptibility (∼100 pm/V GaP has a high index of refraction (n = 3.31 at 637 nm At low input powers, the effect of down conversion on the efficiency and power requirements for achieving SHG in a doubly resonant cavity is negligible Here, Q k , Q ik , and Q ck denote the loaded, intrinsic, and coupling quality factors of mode k = {1, 2}, where mode 1 is the fundamental and mode 2 is the second harmonic. The coefficient β is the dimensionless nonlinear overlap of the fundamental and second harmonic modes, a generalization of the familiar phase matching figure of merit Previous work with GaP photonics on diamond A ring resonator topology was chosen to allow control over mode properties and independent coupling to on-chip waveguides with minimal design variables. To ensure sufficient confinement at 1550 nm, a 427 nm thick photonics layer of (100) GaP on a thermal SiO 2 substrate was used. The ring structure imposes rotational symmetry on resonator modes. However, in (100) GaP, the effective nonlinear susceptibility changes sign every 90 • , so quasi-phase-matching is required to avoid back-conversion. Also, because only mutually perpendicular field components contribute to β in GaP, the fundamental mode must be transverse-electric (TE) and the second harmonic mode must be transverse-magnetic (TM). To allow straightforward device optimization under these constraints, Eq. 2 was translated to cylindrical coordinates: ] r dr dz where m k is the azimuthal mode number of mode k. In this coordinate system, it is readily aparent that β vanishes if the quasi-phase-matching condition 2m 1 = m 2 ± 2 is not satisfied. Due to the relatively small θ field component, both β + and β -depend primarily on E 2 1r E * 2z , with the main contributions to β +(-) weighted toward the outside (inside) edges of the ring. The resonator design process was based on two-dimensional eigenmode simulations of a ring cross-section. First, the fundamental TE 00 at λ 1 = 1550 nm was simulated for a ring of radius on the order of ten microns. Higher-order TM modes with similar effective index were simulated for λ 2 = 775 nm, and the mode with the highest | β +/-| was selected. The ring width and radius was then modified via a gradient algorithm to minimize the phase-mismatch parameter (|2m 1 -m 2 | -2) for the selected modes. Through this process, high-efficiency resonator design candidates could be found with minimal computational resources and without bias toward higher-order harmonic modes. A final ring design of width w = 840 nm and radius r = 7.14 μm (measured from the center of the waveguide) was found, corresponding to an antisymmetric TM 03 second harmonic mode shown in Fig. To allow testing of large device arrays on a single chip, the ring resonator was evanescently coupled to waveguides terminating in nearby grating couplers, as shown in Fig. A 427 nm-thick GaP layer on a 300 nm Al 0.8 Ga 0.2 P sacrificial layer was grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a GaP substrate. A (2.5 mm) 2 area GaP membrane was released from the substrate and transferred to a 10 μm thermal SiO 2 -on-Si substrate. Before transfer, the oxide surface was cleaned and treated with hexamethyldisilazane vapor. The GaP membrane was released from the sacrificial AlGaP layer in 3:100 HF:H 2 O and transferred to DI water. The membrane was then captured on a water droplet on the oxide substrate. A drying step at 80 • C completed the membrane transfer. The described transfer process was used due to its compatibility with transfer to mm-scale diamond chips for quantum information applications using the process described in Refs. In our devices, the resulting GaP-on-oxide chip was patterned with electron beam lithography, using ∼100-nm-thick HSQ as a resist. A final Cl/Ar/N 2 (1.0/6.0/3.0 sccm) reactive ion etch step was used to transfer the mask into the GaP-on-oxide substrate. Single wavelength transmission measurements at 1550 nm (775 nm) were used to measure the grating coupler efficiency as well as bulk transmission through the microscope set-up at each A cross-section of the mode profile is inset. The telecom resonance was measured on an infrared power meter with a tunable laser input, and the near-infrared resonance was measured using a supercontinuum laser and spectrometer. wavelength. A description of the grating coupler and microscope loss characteristics can be found in Appendix A. The telecom (SHG) grating couplers were designed for 33% (24%) efficiency at 1550 nm (775 nm). The measured efficiencies at the experimental resonances were 22% at 1523 nm (3.2% at 761 nm) in SHG01 and 19% at 1549 nm (7.5% at 774 nm) in SHG02. All measured values are derived by assuming identical efficiencies for the input and output gratings. For SHG measurements, the telecom input grating is used to excite the fundamental mode. Input power is continually monitored by a reference photodiode. Simultaneously, the SHG signal is collected from one of the SHG grating ports (both are tested). Any detuning between the fundamental and SHG excitation wavelengths and their respective resonant modes reduces conversion efficiency. To realize mutual resonance, the device is tested on a temperaturecontrolled stage. Heating the device causes both resonances to redshift at different rates, allowing relative tuning. SHG conversion efficiency is measured as a function of input wavelength at multiple temperatures to find the maximum conversion efficiency. Quasi-phase matched resonances were found in device SHG01 at a fundamental wavelength of 1523.1 nm and in SHG02 at 1549.1 nm. The quasi-phase matching condition was identified by the strong and highly temperature-dependent second harmonic conversion of light at the fundamental resonance, as shown in Fig. Device SHG02 exhibited both a higher maximum efficiency of 400% W -1 as well as a more complex dependence on the temperature and fundamental wavelength (Fig. Fig. Rewriting Eq. 1 in terms of the T 1 and T 2 , we obtain in which the + signs correspond to the case where both modes are overcoupled, Q c > Q i , and thesigns to the case where both modes are undercoupled Q c < Q i . Using the measured Q's and T's in Table To further investigate the coupling regime, the coupling regions of both devices were imaged and measured by scanning electron microscopy and simulated by finite-difference-time-domain and supermode analysis (Appendix B). Within the measurement uncertainty, the coupling quality factor for the 775 nm mode could be as low as 1.2 × 10 3 and as high as 1 × 10 6 , so overcoupling of this mode is plausible. The lowest reasonably attainable coupling Q 1c for the 1550 nm mode was 1.5 × 10 5 , significantly higher than the measured loaded quality factors. This analysis indicates the fundamental mode is most likely undercoupled, in which case theoretical calculations predict much lower conversion efficiencies than observed. Due to this uncertainty in the coupling factors, we are unable to reconcile the experimentally measured efficiencies with these simulations at this time. However, theoretical calculations do not include the effect of surface roughness or sidewall angles so other coupling mechanisms may be a factor. In summary, we observe near 400%/W SHG conversion efficiency in waveguide-integrated GaP resonators. The high conversion efficiency is achieved with resonant enhancement of both the fundamental and second harmonic modes, meeting the quasi-phase matching requirement, and achieving high mode-overlap in small mode-volume structures. These experimental results indicate two areas in which device performance can be immediately and significantly improved. First, the coupling should be decreased to achieve critical coupling. Assuming intrinsic quality factors Q i of 10 5 (consistent with our current measurements), the expected SHG efficiency exceeds 8000%/W. Reducing the diameter of these simple rings to 5 μm should increase | β| 2 by a factor of 3. Under such a regime of operation, pump depletion would occur at modest powers << 1 mW, avoiding heating-induced optical bi-stability. Critical coupling to such small rings may prove challenging, but recent theoretical results utilizing inverse design methods have demonstrated single waveguide couplers capable of achieving critical coupling at multiple frequencies All reported SHG conversion efficiencies are on-chip efficiencies, i.e. based on input and output power in the on-chip waveguides. On-chip powers were derived from off-chip efficiency measurements. Grating coupler efficiency was measured by comparing the transmission spectrum from each coupling photonic circuit to a reflection spectrum from the thermal oxide substrate. In Fig. Excitation polarization was adjusted using a λ/2 plate directly before the objective to excite TE (1550 nm) or TM (775 nm) modes. Reflected excitation light was filtered from the collection path using both a cross-polarizer and a spatial filter (a pinhole) to select the output grating coupler. The efficiency of a single grating was calculated from the power transmission spectrum assuming identical input/output grating couplers and negligible on-chip losses. This assumption of identical couplers is reasonable for SHG01 in which the SHG efficiency is similar when exciting either telecom grating coupler. There is a temperature-dependent discrepancy for SHG02 which is attributed to the splitting of the resonances due to backscattering For SHG experiments, the SHG power is measured at the visible photodiode (VisPD). In these measurements there is no pinhole in the collection path. Transmisson measurements through the bulk optics for both H and V polarized light (corresponding to the two grating orientations) were measured. Including the grating efficiency, for SHG01 we find the SHG power inside the waveguide corresponds to 114 × P VisPD (71 × P VisPD ) for H (V) polarized light, while for SHG2 the power inside the waveguide is 48 × P VisPD (30 × P VisPD ) for H (V) polarized light. Simulations of these devices are based on as-fabricated device dimensions measured using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Measured features are illustrated in Fig. where θ is the angular length of the waveguide wrap. In our devices, the telecom (SHG) coupling where R is the ring radius, λ 0 is the free-space wavelength of the resonance, and n g is the group index of the ring resonator mode. Coupling strengths and quality factors were simulated over the range of measured device dimensions summarized in Fig. SHG01 847 ± 23 nm 26, 500 ± 1500 13, 600 ± 5400 0.44 ± 0.10 0.50 ± 0.05 SHG02 847 ± 17 nm 40, 700 ± 10700 16, 800 ± 3200 0.81 ± 0.05 0.52 ± 0.02