Superionic hydrogen was previously thought to be an exotic state predicted and confirmed only in pure H2O ice 1-3 . In Earth's deep interior, H2O exists in the form of O-H groups in ultra-dense hydrous minerals, which have been proved to be stable even at the conditions of the core-mantle boundary (CMB) 4-11 . However, the superionic states of these hydrous minerals at high P-T have not been investigated. Using first-principles calculations, we found that pyrite structured FeO2Hx (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and δ-AlOOH, which have been proposed to be major hydrogen-bearing phases in the deep lower mantle (DLM), contain superionic hydrogen at high P-T conditions. Our observations indicate a universal pathway of the hydroxyl O-H at low pressure transforming to symmetrical O-H-O bonding at high-P low-T, and a superionic state at high-P high-T. The superionicity of hydrous minerals has a major impact on the electrical conductivity and hydrogen transportation behaviors of Earth's lower mantle as well as the CMB. Hydrogen, the most abundant element in the solar system, plays a pivotal role in Earth 12- 15 . It forms water that covers 70% of Earth's surface, it is the unique biochemical ingredient that makes Earth a living planet, it has drastic effects on physical and chemical properties of minerals and rocks, and it is the dominant component of volatiles that dictate Earth's evolution processes. Our knowledge on the nature of hydrogen in Earth's deep interior is quite limited and depends upon studies of mineral physics 4- 11,16,17 . Very recent discoveries of a series of high-pressure ultradense hydrous phases, including the δ-AlOOH 4,5 and phase H 6 hydrous aluminum magnesian silicate FeO2H In the superionic state the hydrogen ion is no longer bonded to an oxygen ion, and it moves freely within the crystal lattice, leading to greatly improved ionic and electronic transport properties and effortless removal of hydrogen. Superionic hydrogen was proposed and observed in H2O ice Here we investigate two archetypal phases, pyrite FeO2H and δ-AlOOH, and discover superionic hydrogen to be a common behavior of hydrogen-bearing compounds, thus opening a new paradigm in DLM. Fe-O binary compounds have previously been investigated using crystal structure searches combined with first-principles calculations, and the cubic FeO2 structure has been identified as a stable phase Furthermore, along the FeO2 and FeO2H convex hull line, we found that FeO2Hx can be stabilized as either a ground state (FeO2H0.75) or a meta-stable state (FeO2H0. 5 and FeO2H0.25). The inset in Fig. Hydrogen in FeO2H possesses symmetric O-H-O bond, which are equivalent to those in ice X At low temperatures protons in the hydrous phases undergo small mean-square displacements (MSDs) which do not increase with time and simply vibrate about their lattice positions, demonstrating that the material is an ordinary solid. Increasing the temperature leads to highly diffusive protons with the MSD increasing monotonically during the simulation, while the O, Fe and Al ions vibrate harmonically and adopt centered lattice positions, indicating a superionic state. A further increase in temperature leads to melting of the lattice and the ions diffuse away from their equilibrium positions and their MSDs increase with simulation time (Extended Data Fig. In order to calculate diffusion coefficients and ionic conductivity of py-FeO2Hx (x=1 and 0.5) we performed AIMD calculations with long simulation runs (15 ps) at pressures around 80 and 130 GPa. Using the MSDs (Extended Data Fig. From the point of view of geoscience, with the essentially unlimited iron reservoir in the core and the water brought by subduction from the crust and the primordial water in the mantle During the formation of py-FeO2Hx, certain amount of hydrogen vacancies are generated in the lattice Water from different origins has different abundances of isotopes for both H and O. When py-FeO2Hx, δ-AlOOH, and/or other hydrous minerals transform to their superionic states, H + and D + become highly diffusive like liquid while other ions (O, Fe, and Al et al.) remain close to their initial positions. H + and D + can be fully mixed during this procedure, but O isotopic compositions will derive from the same origins. As a result of this process, H and O circulations in Earth are separated, and hydrogen reservoirs with uniform isotopic composition form in the lower mantle and CMB. The protons released from the hydrous minerals incorporate other mantle minerals which can be transported back to Earth's surface and complete the hydrogen circulation. Coincidentally, eliminating the contribution of sea water, the H isotopic composition is homogeneous, in contrast to the isotopic composition of elemental O, in mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORB) with a D value of -80±10 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functionals, in particular the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-coorelation functional DFT calculations for the structure relaxation and molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Geometry optimizations were performed using conjugate gradients minimization until all of the forces acting on the ions were less than 0.01 eV/Å per atom. K-point mesh with a spacing of ca. 0.03 Å -1 was adopted. Considering the strongly correlated nature of the Fe 3d electrons a Hubbard-type U correction was used Structural relaxations were performed at various constant volumes and the calculated energy-volume data at zero Kelvin was fitted to a third-order Birch-Murnaghan equation of state (EOS): where E0 denotes the intrinsic energy at zero pressure, V0 is the volume at zero pressure, B0 is the bulk modulus, and B0' is the first pressure derivative of the bulk modulus. The fitted parameters at zero Kelvin are shown in Extended Data Table The pressure-volume relations at higher temperatures are plotted in Extended Data Fig. xFeO2H Calculations of the proton migration path and barrier activation energy for a proton in a py-FeO2Hx lattice at different pressures were obtained using the Climbing-image nudged elastic band (CINEB) method 45 in a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell containing 128 atoms. With fixed starting and end points, this approach duplicated a series of images (seven in our calculations) between the starting and end point of the migration of the ion so that the intermediate states could be simulated. For the large supercell adopted in the CINEB calculations, which tests showed to be sufficient for drawing qualitatively correct conclusions. The calculated proton migration paths and a barrier energy in py-FeO2Hx are illustrated in Extended Data Fig. To calculate the H + diffusion coefficient we performed AIMD simulations 1-3,46-50 using a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell (128 atoms) for FeO2Hx and a 2 × 2 × 4 supercell (128 atoms) for δ-AlOOH. It is worth to note that a bigger supercell does not change the simulation results. The simulations used the canonical ensemble with a time step of 1 fs, with the simulations lasting 7ps and 15 ps at temperatures from 1250~K to 3500~K. This approach is suitable for evaluating the activation enthalpy of ion migration and identifying the ion transport mechanism. To study superionic transport rigorously, we calculated the diffusion coefficient for H + transport and the mean-square displacement (MSD) of the ionic positions. The diffusion coefficient is defined as: where d is the dimension of the lattice on which ion hopping takes place. The MSD , is averaged over all protons, and r i ⃗ ⃗⃗(t) is the displacement of the ith proton at time t, and N is the total number of protons in the system. In practice, D is obtained by a linear fit to the time dependence of the average MSD. The value of D obtained at various temperatures can be fitted with an Arrhenius equation: where ∆H is the activation enthalpy, A is a pre-exponential factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The calculated proton diffusion coefficients in py-FeO2Hx and δ-AlOOH are plotted in Extended Data Fig. in which σ is the electrical conductivity, f is a numerical factor approximately equal to unity, D is the diffusion coefficient, c is the concentration of H + vacancies, q is the electrical charge of H + , k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The superionic state of py-FeO2Hx is also seen clearly in the 15 ps simulations and in the MSDs and the trajectories of the protons (Extended Data Fig. shows the anisotropic proton diffusion with a higher proton MSD along the [001] direction as shown in Extended Data Fig. 