The effects of uniaxial compressive stress on the normal state 17 O nuclear magnetic resonance properties of the unconventional superconductor Sr2RuO4 are reported. The paramagnetic shifts of both planar and apical oxygen sites show pronounced anomalies near the nominal a-axis strain εaa ≡ εv, that maximizes the superconducting transition temperature, Tc. The spin susceptibility weakly increases on lowering the temperature below T 10 K, consistent with an enhanced density of states associated with passing the Fermi energy through a van Hove singularity. Although such a Lifshitz transition occurs in the γ band, formed by the Ru dxy states hybridized with in-plane O pπ orbitals, the large Hund's coupling renormalizes the uniform spin susceptibilty, which, in turn, affects the hyperfine fields of all nuclei. We estimate this "Stoner" renormalization, S, by combining the data with first-principles calculations and conclude that this is an important part of the strain effect, with implications for superconductivity. The physics of the unconventional superconductivity (SC) of Sr 2 RuO 4 For several reasons, the normal-state physics of Sr 2 RuO 4 is equally topical. It was anticipated at a very early stage that electron-electron interactions are controlled by the Hund's rule coupling An additional feature is the proximity to a 2D Lifshitz point With these issues in mind, we set out to verify experimentally that the same strain at which T c peaks indeed corresponds to a maximum in DOS, and to assess, as quantitatively as possible, the change in DOS and Stoner enhancements to the susceptibility under strained conditions. To this end, NMR measurements inform on the details of the normal state, through site and orbitally specific hyperfine couplings. Indeed, the enhancement is evident in the results presented, and moreover, the inferred enhancement semi-quantitatively accounts for the transport results in Ref. Single crystalline Sr 2 RuO 4 used for these measurements was grown by the floating-zone method Most of the NMR measurements were performed at fixed temperature T =4.30(5) K and carrier frequency f 0 =46.8 MHz (B 8.1 T), using a standard Hahn echo sequence. Spectra, including satellite transitions, were collected in field-sweep mode, whereas a close examination of the central transition (-1/2↔1/2) for both in-plane and apical sites was carried out under fixed-field conditions. Some field and temperature dependence was explored, too. The application of NMR in conjunction with the piezoelectricdriven in situ strain is particularly challenging, because of the severe constraints on sample size. As a result, some modifications to standard resonant tank circuit configurations were adopted. For insight into the strain-induced changes to the NMR shifts, and particularly those associated with the vHs, Density Functional calculations using the Linear Augmented Plane Wave package WIEN2k The geometry of our experiment is depicted in Fig. The most relevant orbitals for the 17 O couplings are Ru 4d t 2g , which hybridize with O p states to form the quasi-2D γ band, predominantly from the d xy orbital, and similarly the quasi-1D α and β bands from the d zx,yz orbitals, Fig. is most relevant to vHs at Y. In metals, the NMR shift is governed by three main contributions resulting from spin and orbital responses to the applied field: (i) isotropic coupling from the Fermi contact interaction and core polarization, (ii) anisotropic coupling of the dipolar field generated by the electronic spin away from the nucleus, and (iii) fields generated by orbital currents. For computational purposes, this partitioning of the hyperfine field contributions can be summarized as where s is the spin moment of an electron, and L its orbital moment. Real space integration results in the total local field. Note that h s has no anisotropy, while h d gives no isotropic contribution (h o has both). The net spin magnetization is written as where the full uniform spin susceptibility χ s can be expressed using the Stoner factor S where χ DF T s0 is the noninteracting spin susceptibility proportional to (neglecting spin-orbit effects) the DFT density of states, and the factor of m * /m 0 arises from mass renormalization beyond the scope of DFT. Writing S in the Random-phase approximation (RPA) where N (E F ) is the actual DOS. Then, the total uniform magnetic field is the sum of the external field and the induced response, the latter being enhanced compared to the noninteracting case by the factor S. Note that the orbital moment L in Eq. ( In addition, there is another orbital term (paramagnetic van Vleck), which is not enhanced in the same way as χ s . While usually considered small Symmetry considerations indicate that only O(1)p x orbitals couple with Rud xy states at Y, and therefore, only the O(1)p x orbitals are expected to be directly sensitive to the vHs (see Fig. Experimental evidence for the narrow vHs and its influences on physical properties is shown in Fig. FIG. tively consistent with comparable energy scales for Zeeman, thermal, and vHs terms, where, for instance, the broadening of the Fermi distribution progressively weakens the sensitivity of thermodynamic properties to the vHs, even when it is situated precisely at the chemical potential For a semiquantitative evaluation of the Stoner enhancement and the subsequent impact on the observable quantities, the data were contrasted to the results of the DFT calculations. As stated, the inherent deficiency of the DFT calculations for such a strongly correlated material as Sr 2 RuO 4 forced deviations from the usual procedure. The standard calculations, such as those presented in Ref. Therefore, the qualitative conclusions from the experiments and in comparing to the DFT calculations are as follows: Expanding further on point (3) above, the straindependent enhancement of S provides a natural explanation to the recently reported resistivity measurements on stressed samples Finally, some comments on the data collected for field aligned parallel the c-axis are in order. In principle, one would expect similar behavior to that for the in-plane field, however, it appears that K c s behave in a way difficult to rationalize in total. For strain ε aa ≤ -0.63%, a single absorption peak at ∼ 0.29% shift is observed for O(1,1 ), with only a small increase in the range of ε v . For larger strain, ε aa = -0.72%, the peak broadens considerably, and could be construed as exhibiting two components, but with drastically reduced first moment. The drop in intensity is likely a T 1 effect, a consequence of a (relatively) rapid pulse repetition rate (see Fig. It is possible that the orbital contributions play a more important role for this field orientation (B c). Interestingly, for the orbital part of K 1c , and to some extent, of K 1 c , the calculations predict a sizeable enhancement, suggesting that the van Vleck contribution is not dominant, or, at least, less prominent here than for the inplane fields, and, conversely, the SOC induces sizeable orbital Knight shifts. Moreover, the sign of this orbital contribution is opposite to the spin shifts, so there is a tendency toward cancellation. It is believed that correlation effects enhance the SOC in Sr 2 RuO 4 by about a factor of two It is demonstrated, by means of the NMR spectroscopy under uniaxial stress, and corresponding density functional calculations, that there are two different effects associated with the strain-induced vHs, which both need to be taken into account, namely the enhancement of the DOS associated with the γ-band Fermi energy passing through the vHs at the Y point of the Brillouin zone, and a substantial Stoner enhancement S. Associated with the enhanced S is an intensification of ferromagnetic spin fluctuations and strong nonlinearities in the spin susceptibility to the lowest temperatures studied. This finding has immediate ramifications for superconductivity. Namely, first, the DOS is enhanced near the vHs point. In the first approximation, this effect strongly favors some singlet pairings, such as extended s, d zx ±id yz or d x 2 -y 2 , mildly favors the d xy pairing, and less so any triplet pairing. However, this enhancement of the DOS, through the Stoner factor, boosts FM spin fluctuations, which favors a triplet states and would seem to disfavor singlet pairing. Experimentally and theoretically, these two effects are comparable, and therefore it is unclear which is stronger. More information will be gained by studying NMR in the superconducting state as a function of strain. The experiments and calculations clearly demonstrate the importance of Stoner renormalization near the critical strain, but this is evaluated only semiquantitatively. For example, the RPA-like Eq. ( Fig. Figure A photograph of the uniaxial stress apparatus. The stress/strain effect is applied through a set of piezoelectric actuators. The forces are applied uniaxially, and the strain response is measured using a capacitive dilatometer. A small coil is made in-situ surrounding the sample that is bonded between two pairs of titanium plates. (b) Electronic specific heat divided by temperature of the Sr2RuO4 samples before and after 17 O enrichment. Superconducting transitions are clearly visible at about 1.44 K. (c) Strain dependence of superconducting transition from ac magnetization measurements, with critical temperatures T on c and T mid c defined in the inset. Maximal Tc is realized near the strain εaa=-0.6%. The top-right frame displays the profile of T * reproduced from Ref. The quality of the Sr 2 RuO 4 sample measured is characterized by specific heat measurements, as shown in Fig. O ( 1 ' ) O ( N M R i n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) where Î=( Îx , Îy , Îz ) is nuclear spin operator, Q is nuclear quadrupole moment, and η=(V xx -V yy )/V zz is the asymmetry parameter with V xx , V yy and V zz being the components of the EFG tensor. Here we adopt the convention V zz ≥V xx ≥V yy , and V xx +V yy +V zz =0. In Sr 2 RuO 4 , V zz is along Ru-O bonding Other components of NQR frequencies conform to the formula: where θ and φ are respectively polar and azimuthal angles as defined in regular xyz-frames, see Fig. Table Under strain, the peaks of O(2) sites remain essentially unchanged, while both O(1) and O(1 ) change drastically. In particular, for B c, the satellite peaks of O(1) and O(1 ) merge "coincidentally" when ε aa =-0.55%, implying that the two move at different rates under strain. The strain dependencies of ν Q and η are displayed in Fig. O ( we shall consider them separately. The ionic term can be calculated by (in SI unit): where nuclear spin I=5/2, quadruple moment Q=-0.026×10 -28 m 2 , and γ ∞ refers to the Sternheimer antishielding factor which accounts for the contribution from the distortion of the O ion both by the local EFG and by the quadrupolar field of the nucleus The on-site hole contribution ν hole Q is proportional to the hole content (n) in each O orbitals, and the latter can be obtained from DFT calculations by integrating the partial density of states up to Fermi energy, viz. The variation of n for each O orbitals are displayed in Fig. The calculated quadrupolar frequencies ν Q and the associated asymmetry pramaeter η are shown in Fig. Comparison can be made for ν Q and η between measured (Fig. Additional evidence for a vHs comes from the measurements of the spin-lattice relaxation rate [T 1 T ] -1 of Sr 2 RuO 4 as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. In order to investigate the magnetic fluctuations of Sr 2 RuO 4 , we also consider the Korringa ratio α≡S K /(K 2 s T 1 T ), where S K =( /4πk B )(γ e /γ n ) 2 with γ e =2.8025×10 4 MHz/T being electron gyromagnetic ratio. The standard analysis assumes an isotropic hyperfine interaction and a single susceptibility. Then, for the case of uncorrelated electrons, α=1 