Chalcogen vacancies are generally considered to be the most common point defects in transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) semiconductors because of their low formation energy in vacuum and their frequent observation in transmission electron microscopy studies. Consequently, unexpected optical, transport, and catalytic properties observed in 2D-TMDs have been attributed to deep ingap states associated with point vacancies, even in the absence of direct experimental evidence. Here, we combine low-temperature non-contact atomic force microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, and state-of-the-art ab initio density functional theory and GW calculations to determine both the atomic structure and electronic properties of the most abundant chalcogen-site point defect common to 2D-TMD semiconductors. Surprisingly, we observe no ingap states for the chalcogen defects. Our results and analysis strongly suggest that the common chalcogen defects in monolayer MoSe2 and monolayer WS2, prepared and measured in standard environments, are substitutional defects, where a chalcogen atom is substituted by an oxygen atom, rather than vacancies. Crystal defects are known to modify semiconductor functionality and are expected to have particularly strong impact on the properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials, where screening is reduced compared to bulk systems Chalcogen vacancies are believed to be the most abundant point defects in 2D-TMD semiconductors, and they are theoretically predicted to introduce deep in-gap states (IGS) Sulphur vacancies, and their corresponding IGS, have been held responsible for unexpected catalytic activity in hydrogen evolution reactions reported in MoS2 Combining complementary techniques that allow access to the material at the atomic-scalelowtemperature non-contact atomic force microscopy (nc-AFM), STM and STS -together with parallel state-of-the-art first-principles ground-and excited-state calculations -using DFT and many-body perturbation theory within the GW approach, respectivelyenables a comprehensive interrogation of the system. In this work, we demonstrate how the combination of these methods can reveal the structure of the most abundant type of defect in our 2D-MoSe2 and 2D-WS2 samples. We directly relate atomic and electronic structure through combined nc-AFM and STM/STS measurements of individual point defects in monolayer MoSe2 grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and in monolayer WS2 grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) (see Methods). Although our nc-AFM and STM images of chalcogen defects appear to be consistent with vacancies, a comparison with our DFT and GW calculations can establish these defects as substitutional oxygen, consistent with the lack of IGS. Our comprehensive joint experimental and theoretical study reveals substitutional oxygen as a prolific point defect in 2D-TMDs and provides critical insight for future defect engineering in these systems. Large-scale STM images measured on single layer of MoSe2 and WS2 show predominantly two types of point defects structures (see Supplementary Information, Figure Structural defects are well-known to alter the electronic structure of a semiconductor via additional localized states. We study the LDOS of the same type of point defects in MoSe2 and WS2 using STM dI/dV spectroscopy. Figure To validate our observation, we perform a series of control experiments on both MoSe2 and WS2 to exclude various scenarios that might prevent IGS from being observed by STS. We are able to rule out orthogonality of the wavefunctions of the tip and defect states leading to a vanishing tunneling matrix element; dynamic and static charging of the defect and the influence of the graphene substrate (see Supplementary Information for details). The control experiments on both MoSe2 and WS2 establish that IGS are not associated with the most abundant type of defects in our TMD samples. Since our STS data curves do not feature IGS, we turn to first-principles DFT and GW calculations for further insight. Prior calculations of S vacancies and substitutional point defects Standard DFT calculations are well known to underestimate bandgaps and quasiparticle energy levels We first relax the atomic coordinates of a monolayer of MoSe2 with several different point defect types, including a Se vacancy and substitutional atoms, using DFT within the local density approximation (LDA) Interestingly, since both H and O substituents are recessed into the chalcogen layer, the simulated nc-AFM contrast in images from all three types of atomic defects is equally compatible with the measurements in Fig. To identify which defects are likely observed in Fig. We compare the measured spatial distributions of the LDOS around the top OSe defect and the calculated wavefunctions for both the Se vacancy and the OSe defect. Figure Taken together, our analysis suggests that the most commonly observed point defects in MoSe2 and WS2 are O substitutions at Se and S sites, respectively. A number of TEM and STM studies have investigated point defects on various TMD samples Although oxidation has been observed in TMD semiconductors In conclusion, we use a combination of experiment and theory to identify substitutional oxygen as a prolific point defect in 2D-MoSe2 and 2D-WSe2, directly correlating atomic structure and local spectroscopy. Relevantly, we show how neither of the described isolated methods -nc-AFM, STM and STS -could reveal the structure of the most abundant type of defect in our 2D-MoSe2 and 2D-WS2 samples. Our calculations predict that oxygen substituted in the chalcogen sublattice does not form deep in-gap states, consistent with STS measurements. Our findings suggest that substitutional oxygen point defects, and not just chalcogen vacancies, will play an important role in determining TMD photophysics and guide current efforts of the scientific community towards device functionality. Single layers of MoSe2 were grown by molecular beam epitaxy on epitaxial bilayer graphene (BLG) on 6H-SiC(0001). The growth process was the same as described in Ref.52 Calculations proceed in two steps. First, we perform DFT-LDA calculations for a single vacancy or substitutional defect in a large 5x5 supercell, corresponding to a small defect concentration of 2%. In this large supercell, which includes 74 atoms and 15 Å of vacuum, the defect density is low enough so that interactions between them can be safely neglected. Our DFT-LDA calculations use norm-conserving pseudopotentials, and we explicitly treat of 4s and 4p semi-core electrons in Mo. (Full details of our DFT-LDA calculations appear in the SI.) Second, we perform one-shot G0W0 calculations on our relaxed defect structures, starting from DFT-LDA. To increase accuracy, our GW calculations rely on a fine non-uniform sampling of reciprocal space The 2D-MoSe2 sample was grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on bilayer graphene (BLG) on SiC. In order to protect the MoSe2 monolayer from contamination or adsorbates during the transport in air to the UHV-STM chamber, we deposited a Se capping layer with a thickness of about 10 nm, which subsequently was removed by annealing the sample at about 600K in the UHV-STM and then transfer to the STM for surface characterization. We explore the most abundant type of point defects on MoSe2 and identify substitutional oxygen in a Se atom site (OSe) as argued in the paper and outlined in detail below. Figure Neither of those methods could reveal the structure assignment alone. Importantly, ab initio calculations were essential to establish a sound foundation for the structure assignment. Our structure assignment is based on the entirety of the following observations: (i) Both the top and bottom defect version exhibit an identical electronic defect signature as measured by STS (see Fig. Several options, including defect charging (see Fig. Note that similar STM features have been previously discussed as vacancies or substitutional atoms of different kinds in 2D-TMDs, indicating the challenging structure assignment of TMD defects and the current inconsistency in the community and the understanding of they real influence on their electronic properties of the materials As outlined in the manuscript, there are several known mechanisms that can preclude detecting a localized in-gap state to be detected by STS, particularly due to dynamic or static charging of the defect. In Figure To study the effect of point defects on the presence of localized in-gap state in monolayer MoSe2, we perform Density functional theory (DFT) calculations. All DFT calculations were performed within the Quantum-ESPRESSO Figure 