Memory formation in matter is a theme of broad intellectual relevance; it sits at the interdisciplinary crossroads of physics, biology, chemistry, and computer science. Memory connotes the ability to encode, access, and erase signatures of past history in the state of a system. Once the system has completely relaxed to thermal equilibrium, it is no longer able to recall aspects of its evolution. Memory of initial conditions or previous training protocols will be lost. Thus many forms of memory are intrinsically tied to far-from-equilibrium behavior and to transient response to a perturbation. This general behavior arises in diverse contexts in condensed matter physics and materials: phase change memory, shape memory, echoes, memory effects in glasses, return-point memory in disordered magnets, as well as related contexts in computer science. Yet, as opposed to the situation in biology, there is currently no common categorization and description of the memory behavior that appears to be prevalent throughout condensed-matter systems. Here we focus on material memories. We will describe the basic phenomenology of a few of the known behaviors that can be understood as constituting a memory. We hope that this will be a guide towards developing the unifying conceptual underpinnings for a broad understanding of memory effects that appear in materials. Memories come in many forms and strike us in odd and seemingly unpredictable ways. We experience this daily: we have long-term memories of our childhood, we have short-term memory of where we left our overcoat, we have muscle memory of how to walk or ride a bicycle, we have memories of smell. The list goes on and is overwhelming in its variety. While memory is acutely present in our consciousness, it is less well recognized as an organizing principle for studying the properties and dynamics of matter. However, once we acknowledge this possibility, we realize that there are, as in our experience of consciousness, many forms of memory that are stored in untold numbers of ways in the matter surrounding us. Some are obvious and mundane while others require a much greater degree of sophistication and ingenuity to encode or retrieve from a material. In contrast, memory loss seems to be less problematic and we often take it for granted. However, these aspects of memory retention and loss are intrinsically linked; neither are simple processes. As Twyla Tharp, the dancer and choreographer, proclaimed in the epigraph above, each form of memory should be an "inspiration" for asking new questions. When we apply this dictum to memory in materials, it gives us a chance to examine the nature of far-fromequilibrium behavior in a new light. As we will show, there are a great many ways in which materials can retain an imprint of their previous history that can be read out at a later time by following protocols that often are specialized to the type of information encoded. While undeniably we take inspiration from the idea of memory in our world of consciousness, we will focus not on such phenomena but rather on its counterpart in the material world. Our aim in this review is to indicate the great variety of issues that can be addressed in this context. In the physical world, we find many different forms of memory formation. We are taught early on to store certain memories by making pencil marks on a sheet of paper. In a more sophisticated fashion, media such as compact discs store information as binary markings. In one form of computer memory, digitized information is stored in the form of magnetic bits. On paper or a computer, one can store unlimited amounts of information by increasing the system size. However, some forms of memory can encode only small amounts of information. For example, a common feature of glassy physics is that a system can retain an imprint of what was the largest strain that was applied to it either by compression or shear in a specified direction. Similarly, a system can store the time over which it has been subjected to an applied stress. As these examples suggest, memory engages us in a study that targets phenomena related to transient or farfrom-equilibrium behavior. A system that has not yet fully relaxed to equilibrium may retain memories of its creation while one that is in equilibrium has no memory of its past; the very process of reaching equilibrium erases memory of previous training. In the study of evolving systems, such as in geophysics and on an even grander scale, in cosmology and astrophysics, one uses information from the local terrain or the current state of the Universe to infer previous conditions. Disordered, out-of-equilibrium systems are often described by a vast rugged potential or free-energy landscape. This allows a memory to be formed by falling into a recognizable state in this terrain. Some memories that are encoded in this way include, among others, the Hopfield paradigm of associative memory and the memories caused by oscillatory shear of a jammed system. Similar considerations underlie the deep neural networks now used in machine learning Memories may be stored in a myriad of different systems: from solids to fluids; from paper to stone; from atomic positions to spin orientations; from chemicalreaction pathways to avalanches in transition dynamics. Memories can be encoded in time, as in the spacing between pulses in a spin echo; in position, as in the spacing of particles in a sheared suspension; in temperature as in the rejuvenation, aging and memory of glassy systems; or in chemical bonding, as in a chemically-controlled soup of colloids with designed inter-particle interactions. For each of these forms of information there are specific training protocols; some systems may need only a single training pulse while others may require repeated cyclic training before a signal can be read out reliably. This last is reminiscent of training by rote that many of us have experienced in school to learn the alphabet. Although many materials exhibit memory of past conditions by some form of history dependence, we will focus here on examples where a readout method also exists that recovers the encoded information with some fidelity; in the examples we consider there is a protocol for recovering as well as storing a specific input. Each form of memory is a stimulus for asking new questions and for examining the nature of far-fromequilibrium materials in a new light. The observation that memories can be stored in a seemingly countless number of ways raises the question of whether different kinds of memories share common principles. Other questions can be asked: What constitutes a memory? Are there different categories of memory and can they be enumerated? How many memories can be stored in a system-that is, what is the capacity of the memory storage? How fast can a memory be stored or retrieved? What is the entropy associated with a memory? What gives rise to plasticity, that is, the ability of a system to continue to store new memories? A study of these questions can be an entrée for understanding the nature of the non-equilibrium world. As an invitation into this study, this article outlines a set of memory behaviors. We describe a collection of distinct physical systems, and show how their responses may be considered as memories. The set of behaviors and systems described here are not meant to be exhaustive. In particular, we will not attempt to cover the vast range of technology associated with memory storage in computers, nor the fascinating array of memory effects in biological function such as in the immune system A. Memory of a direction One of the simplest memory phenomenologies is when a material remembers the most recent direction in which it was driven. A well known application of this behavior is digital magnetic storage, where an external field puts individual magnetic regions in one of two polarities to represent a 1 or a 0. Yet, the same phenomenology occurs in other materials where it is not commonly associated with information storage, such as amorphous materials made of large particles, from suspensions of non-Brownian particles in a liquid (e.g., cement) to packings of dry grains. For example, this behavior has been studied in a Couette cell holding a sample of neutrally-buoyant hard spheres as illustrated in Fig. The same gross phenomenology was discovered in the electrical response of charge-density wave conductors and has been called "pulse-sign memory" In materials science, the Bauschinger effect also displays a memory of the last direction of driving The above examples deal with bulk materials that are inherently disordered, but the same phenomenology can be seen in an even simpler system: the coupling between two gears. Suppose the left gear in Fig. Our discussion of this simple form of memory has raised several themes that will appear again as we consider more complicated memory behaviors. One theme is that similar memory phenomena can occur in systems that seem very different, such as a slurry or a chargedensity wave. Some memories also have a counterpart at the macro-scale that is material independent, as in the example of the gears given above. We will show several more examples of such phenomena throughout the text. These observations may prompt us to ask how deep the connections are among such systems: when does similar memory behavior imply similar underlying physics? There is also a distinction that can be made: in some systems memories persist for extremely long times, whereas in others the memories are constantly fading and must be continually reinstated to preserve them. In a colloidal suspension, the memory of the previous shear direction is eventually lost as the particles diffuse, losing their positional correlations. In contrast, in a granular material, because the energy for any particle rearrangement is much larger than thermal energy, the memory will remain until the system is disturbed. In computers too, there is so-called "volatile memory," which refers to a device that only retains data when provided with power, in contrast to non-volatile memory such as magnetic storage, optical discs, or punched cards, which do not change their state when left alone. Finally, the ability of many disordered materials to remember a direction highlights another theme: memories can have important practical consequences. When performing rheological characterization, sample preparation must be done carefully so as to avoid influencing the measurements because of the material's history. This memory is one facet of the complex history-dependence displayed by emulsions, slurries, and dry grains, which can complicate their industrial handling and transport, since their effective bulk properties may depend on what was previously done to them We have just discussed how a material may remember one aspect of its most recent driving. Slightly more complex is the ability of many physical systems to retain a memory of the maximum value of any previously applied perturbation. For memories of this type, when the system has been trained by application of an input of a given magnitude, it shows reversible behavior as long as the input is kept below that initial training magnitude; in this range, varying the input leads to reproducible behavior. However, if that input value is exceeded, the system evolves to a new state so that the system now displays a new response curve. This curve is itself reproducible as long as the input does not exceed the new maximum value. One example, which is particularly easy to visualize, is a very thin crumpled sheet confined by a piston of mass, m, under gravity in a vertical cylindrical tube The training of the system is accomplished using a mass m = M 1 . Because it is not feasible to wait until all relaxation has stopped, the training is done for a fixed initialization time. Once the training is finished, the mass As long as m < M 1 , the measurements are reproducible as shown for a Mylar sheet in Fig. If the crumpled sheet is now trained at M 2 (either by allowing it to sit under this mass for a long time or by cycling the mass multiple times up to m = M 2 ), then a new reproducible curve is found for h(m < M 2 ) as shown by the green squares in the figure . The crumpled sheet has a memory of the largest weight to which it has been subjected. When the system is pushed into a new regime into which it had never been previously exposed, it changes irreversibly. σ ε FIG. The case of the crumpled sheet is not the earliest example of this rather ubiquitous effect. It has been observed in many other systems and goes by different names depending on the material and the measurement. The Kaiser Effect was originally observed in the acoustic emission of a metal under strain Another example of this type of behavior is the Mullins Effect, which occurs in rubber after it has been stretched A different type of memory where a single input value is remembered is the Kovacs effect This aspect of the Kovacs effect has a simple phenomenology (i.e., a single value is remembered), but the mechanism is more subtle than the memories presented in sections II.A and II.B. Because it also has some features in common with echoes, we wait until Sec. VII.C to describe the Kovacs effect in more detail. In Sec. II, we considered a system that remembers the most recent direction of driving, and we modeled it as being in one of two states. We can build on this simple kind of hysteresis by considering a system that responds to a scalar field H-perhaps from an electrical current in a magnetic coil-and can be in a "+1" or "-1" state. The two values H + and H -are properties of the system that specify when it switches states. Conventionally, H + > H -for a dissipative system; in this case the system is always in the +1 state when H > H + , and always in the -1 state when H < H -, but in between, the state depends on the driving history. (We assume the driving is quasistatic, meaning H is varied much more slowly than the system's response.) These systems are basic elements of hysteresis, sometimes termed "hysterons." One conceptually simple and important application of such hysterons is in digital memory storage. If H + > 0 and H -< 0, the hysteron retains its state even after the field is removed and in the presence of noise, thereby storing a single bit of information indefinitely. In the case of magnetism the state sets the direction of a magnetic field made by the hysteron itself; a nearby probe can read the bit. This models a building block of digital magnetic memory-the hard disks and tapes that currently store most of the world's data When they make up a larger system, these hysterons can give rise to a rich behavior called return-point memory, which describes the system's ability to recall a previ-ous state when H is returned to a previous value There is an important side effect of the erasure of history at H = H B : as we continue past H B toward H A there is a transition from behavior that depended on recent history (i.e. the excursion to b) to behavior that does not. Here, we exit the sub-loop delimited by states (b, B) and rejoin the older outer loop delimited by states (a, A). There is a subtle change in slope at point B where we first switched from increasing H to decreasing it. Analogous to the Mullins effect, discussed in Sec. II and illustrated in Fig. Simple memories of one or two quantities, like the Mullins and Kaiser effects, seem exceptional given the disorder and many degrees of freedom within most nonequilibrium matter. Return-point memory gives us our first example of multiple memories. We can see this by applying the definition of return-point memory recursively. In Fig. Many types of matter can be modeled as collections of subsystems that are individually hysteretic. It should therefore come as no surprise that return-point memory is observed in a wide range of systems beyond ferromagnets, from spin ice We can also demonstrate the generality of return-point memory by finding it in a perhaps unexpected context: the backlash between gears from Sec. II (Fig. Just as in the other systems we can encode multiple memories by repeatedly reversing the direction of the first gear. Each time we reverse, we rotate by a smaller amount so that we progressively manipulate fewer and fewer gears. For each reversal, a pair of gears is left dis-engaged by some fractional amount we choose-we can place a distinct memory in each of the N -1 couplings. This same principle is used in a single-dial combination lock to store multiple values from the history of a single input. We can then read out half the memories without disassembling the gearbox using the same method as in Fig. The memories discussed so far may be written by applying a deformation or changing a field just once. But repeated cyclic driving is also ubiquitous: buildings and bridges are repeatedly loaded and unloaded, temperatures change between day and night, and we practice a skill repeatedly in the hope of learning it. These forms of driving may create memories. Driving that lasts for multiple cycles may also be used to store multiple values, by varying its parameters (e.g. strain amplitude) from cycle to cycle. In the previous section we encountered one way that a system can remember multiple values of a single variable. By considering the case of cyclic driving, we will be able to talk about these various behaviors using similar language. When some systems are driven repeatedly, e.g., by shear, electrical pulses or temperature, they eventually reach a steady state in which the system is left virtually unchanged by further repetitions. This behavior is astonishingly common among non-equilibrium systems, including granular matter It is natural to suspect that the steady state contains a memory of the driving that formed it over many cycles. An early and important example is a charge-density wave conductor end of each pulse with a rush of current An accessible recently-studied example is a suspension of particles in a liquid when inertia and Brownian motion are negligible Memories formed over many cycles of driving are sometimes termed "self-organized" When the driving is varied from one cycle to the next, some of these systems are known to retain memories of multiple values, but only before the transient selforganization has finished. This behavior, called multiple transient memories, was first seen in charge-density waves when the duration of the pulses was varied self-organization is completed for [0, γ 2 ], the system's response is uniform (no collisions) in this interval. There is no way to read or write the memory of γ 1 , and only the memories at 0 and γ 2 remain. Thus at long times and without noise, systems with multiple transient memories recover the Mullins-or Kaiser-effect memory of the extrema of driving. Remarkably, this long-term memory loss can be avoided. Adding noise to the charge-density wave and suspension systems The examples of charge-density waves and non-Brownian suspensions show that two very different systems, one electronic and one fluid, can show this same type of memory. It must therefore be a canonical form of encoding inputs. We describe a third physical example (albeit at a macroscopic scale) that drives this point home. Consider the lawn of a small park, with several benches arranged in a row as shown in Fig. Multiple transient memories in a suspension were associated with particles moving to positions where they no longer made any contact with their neighbors during a shear cycle. As the particle density is increased, the system may no longer be able to find such positions. Thus, one might expect that a steady state with memory of a shear-cycle amplitude could no longer be formed. However, even in this higher-density regime, one can still observe memory formation with a surprisingly similar phenomenology to that of the sheared suspensions, but with crucial differences. At sufficiently high density, the system undergoes a dramatic transition: it jams and becomes rigid Simulations of these systems further in that direction. 3. Application of cyclic shear deformation with di↵erent amplitudes to a trained (at multiple amplitudes) system Similar to the case of single memory, we wish to investigate the e↵ect of applying cyclic deformation at a new amplitude in a multiply trained system. The system is trained at two di↵erent amplitudes 1 = 0.06 and FIG. 17. The MSD is plotted as a function of read for different numbers of retraining cycles. A single cycle of shear deformation with amplitude 3 = 0.02 is applied to the system trained at 1 = 0.06 and 2 = 0.04. The new configuration has memory at 3 = 0.02 and 1 = 0.06 but no distinct memory of 2 = 0.04. Memory signatures at 1 = 0.06 remains robustly even after a large number of retraining cycles at 3 = 0.02. while the memory at 1 = 0.06 is weak but present. In addition, a strong signature of memory at 3 = 0.05 ap- Multiple memories in a jammed solid. Readout of memories of two strain amplitudes in a simulation of a jammed, amorphous solid, adapted from Adhikari and Sastry (2018) with permission. The system was trained by alternating between strain amplitudes γ1 = 0.06 and γ2 = 0.04, for 30 repetitions of the pattern. Readout involves applying cycles of increasing strain amplitude γ read , starting from zero, and comparing the state of the system after each cycle to the state after training. Here mean-squared displacement (MSD) of particles is used to measure differences. The system returns to the same state when γ read = γ2, and shows a sharp change in behavior past γ read = γ1. Systems at densities just below jamming can show similar behavior We note that in systems with "native" return-point memory that need no training, the disorder is quenched: the hysterons, their interactions, and their coupling to an external field cannot ordinarily change. In contrast, these properties are generally not as stable in systems that require extended training to learn one or more inputs; there must be some mechanism by which quenched disorder emerges Various researchers have proposed the use of pure polymer stents in place of metal stents Shape-memory polymers (SMP) have gained increased attention over the last several years as a proposed biomaterial for minimally invasive surgical devices Utilizing the shape-memory effect reliable way to deliver a large polym minimally invasive manner. The ste programmed to activate at body tem in natural deployment without need fo (Fig. Tert-butyl acrylate (tBA), di(ethylene glycol) d states Utilizing the shape-memory effect is an elegant and reliable way to deliver a large polymer scaffold in a minimally invasive manner. The stents can be preprogrammed to activate at body temperature, resulting in natural deployment without need for auxiliary devices (Fig. Tert-butyl acrylate (tBA), di(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate (DEGD-MA), poly(ethylene glycol) n dimethacrylate (PEGDMA) with typical molecular weights of M n 1⁄4 550 and 875, and photoinitiator 2,2- Another dramatic instance of a material remembering its past is the phenomenon of "shape memory." Figure At the heart of the effect is a phase transformation Shape memory alloys may also be reprogrammed to learn a different shape. This is done by forming the austenite phase when the rod is in a new configuration (typically by clamping the sample tightly, raising it to a much higher temperature, and cooling rapidly). In this way, the bond network in the austenite phase is re-wired to prefer a different shape. Thus, these materials may learn new memories while forgetting old ones. This simplified picture gets at the essence of the "oneway effect," but it ignores other rich aspects of real shape memory alloys. For instance, the samples generally require multiple thermal or mechanical training cycles to learn a particular shape, in order to coax crystal defects and grain boundaries into desirable configurations. Figure How does shape memory compare to the other memories we have considered? In this case, the memory is stored in the network topology of the constituent atoms, namely, the set of bonds between the atoms. If the material is not deformed too far, the bonds remain intact, which allows the atoms to return to their original positions upon heating. In this sense, the behavior is not so different than the simple "memory" of an elastic solidthe familiar and commonplace phenomenon that an elastically deformed solid will return to its rest state when loading is removed. What makes shape-memory materials different from typical elastic solids is a mechanism for temporarily arresting a deformed configuration. This is achieved by mixing together different symmetry-broken domains of the martensite phase to assume a different macroscopic shape, as we described in Fig. A similar shape memory effect can occur in polymers Due in part to their relatively low cost, shape-memory polymers are finding use in a wide range of applications. Figure While more expensive, shape-memory alloys can withstand much larger loads than polymers, and they are used as sensors and actuators in a variety of aerospace, automotive, and biomedical settings A very different type of memory can form in spin glasses, which are magnetic materials with quenched disorder, arising for instance due to a mixture of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic bonds. One way of probing these materials is by their response to an applied magnetic field via the magnetic susceptibility, χ. This quantity may be measured continually to monitor the material as a function of temperature and time. Figure Further experiments show that multiple memories may be stored simultaneously within a single sample The origin of this memory behavior is not yet fully understood. In principle, numerical simulations of spinglass models could provide valuable insight into the relaxation processes and the relevant length-scales involved. Unfortunately, reproducing the phenomenon on a computer has proven difficult, and several studies have reported different interpretations of the situation If this memory behavior only occurred in spin glasses, while very interesting it might be just an isolated phenomenon. However, one can also observe this behavior in molecular glasses An eventual explanation of this memory behavior must address how the memory is stored and survives so that it can be read out at a later time. One promising view is that aging coarsens the system, organizing it over larger and larger lengthscales. This makes the memory robust to any subsequent evolution over shorter times, which would correspond to smaller lengthscales. This physical picture has been exploited by a recent simulation algorithm called "patchwork dynamics," which accesses the non-equilibrium behavior of spin glasses over a broad range of timescales by directly equilibrating the model glass on successively larger lengthscales A shout across a mountain valley often results in an acoustic echo as the sound is returned to its source a few moments later. The sound waves reflecting from the far side of the valley follow in reverse the path along which they propagated in the first half of their journey. This is as close as one can get to time reversal-the velocities of the wave packets are reversed and they follow the identical path both to and from the valley's far side. The sound waves that return to their source contain a memory of what was shouted including the timing between different syllables. Perhaps due to our familiarity with this phenomenon, such acoustic echoes are captivating but they no longer challenge our intuition. However, they have counterparts in various material systems which are not at all intuitive; they are subtle, challenging to understand, and ultimately very surprising. A well-known example is the case of the spin echo first demonstrated by Edwin In the spin echo, a large static magnetic field H 0 ẑ produces a small polarization of the spins in the sample; slightly more of the spins point in the +ẑ than in the -ẑ direction. Each spin precesses about the ẑ axis at its Larmor frequency ω, determined both by the applied static field H 0 ẑ, and the small magnetic inhomogeneities in the sample. When a radio-frequency (RF) pulse tuned to the average ω 0 is applied in a direction perpendicular to H 0 the spins rotate away from +ẑ axis. The trick with the spin echo is that the RF pulse can be applied for only a short time so that when it is turned off, the spins instantaneously point in an arbitrary direction-in the simplest case for this explanation, a "π/2 pulse" rotates spins into the x-y plane perpendicular to ẑ, where they again precess about the static field H 0 ẑ. Because of the local inhomogeneities of the magnetic field in the sample, the Larmor frequency varies from one spin to another so some spins will precess farther. This causes the spins to dephase so that they will eventually fan out and point in all directions in the x-y plane. After the spins have been allowed to dephase for a time τ , another RF pulse of twice the duration (called a π pulse) is applied, flipping the spins in their orientation in the x-y plane. The spins will once again precess about the field with the same Larmor frequency that they had originally. However, the fast and slow spins have been switched. The fast spins (that had rotated farther during the period between the pulses) will now be in a position where they lag behind those that precess more slowly. Now, because the fast spins rotate more rapidly, after waiting an additional time τ they will catch up with the slow ones that were in a lower field. This realignment can be read out in a pulse. Such an echo is a memory of the time delay, τ , between the two RF pulses. Multiple RF pulses, with different durations, can also be applied; these protocols have helped to make nuclear magnetic resonance a useful tool for measuring and unscrambling many different spin interactions in solids. The spin echo is only one of many related effects. Similar behavior is associated with other ensembles of two-state systems. These include photon echoes Other echoes-Other types of echoes do not require a two-state system in order to return an imposed signal. An example is the temperature quench echo shown in Fig. In all these cases, the memory is encoded in the coherence of the spins (or oscillators). The initial pulse sets up a reference time when all the phases are in synchrony with one another. The system then evolves according to its dynamics and apparently de-phases so that the phase (A) Frc. 4. Effect 'of the homogeneity of the field on the widths of tails and echoes. The tails and echoes associated with a sample (A) in a very homogeneous field are wide compared to those associated with a sample (8) in a less homogeneous Geld. i Bloembergen, Purcell, and Pound, Phys. Rev. 73, 679 (1948). of the molecules through the inhomogeneous external field II,. Therefore if diffusion is important, a decay or relaxation time measured by Method A is "artificially" determined by the external magnet. In the present work a new method for obtaining an echo envelope which reveals the "natural" decay even in the presence of diffusion has been introduced. This method of measurement will be referred to as Method B. In Method A a number of 90' pulses must be applied to the sample in order to obtain sufhcient data to plot the envelope. Each 90' pulse is followed by an 180' pulse and the accompanying echo. Between each 90'-180' sequence sufficient time must elapse to allow the sample to return to its thermal equilibrium condition. In Method 8 a single 90' pulse is used to obtain an entire echo envelope without requiring the sample to return to thermal equilibrium. This is accomplished by initiating the measurement with the usual 90' pulse at t=0. A 180' pulse is then applied at time t= r. The s R. K. Wangsness and F. Bloch, Phys. (i A. Abragam and R. V. Pound, Phys. nonlinear way with the excitation pulses, as in temperature quench echoes Capillary waves present another arena where an echo may be produced. Raindrops striking a puddle or pond create surface waves that are easily observed with the naked eye. Starting from an initially-localized wave front, the different wavelength components radiate outwards at different speeds, so the total energy is spread over a growing area and the waves become harder to see. If you were to watch a video of this scene in reverse, it would look awry: the waves would instead travel inwards towards a single point and arrive there in concert, focusing all their energy at that location. Remarkably, recent experiments have shown that this reversal of dynamics may be achieved in real time In the study of all these echo phenomena, the crucial ingredient for creating a memory is the ability to retrace the dynamics in the reverse order from how the initial system evolved. That is, it relies on a form of time reversal in which the spins (or waves) are manipulated to be in a configuration so that they effectively retrace their previous dynamics. (For anharmonic echoes, the effect is attributed to phase conjugation Such behavior is not only relegated to the case of an echo. It is well known that a liquid of sufficiently high viscosity (i.e., low Reynolds number) is reversible if the boundaries are distorted and then returned to their original positions along precisely the reverse sequence of motions as they were originally deformed. This phenomenon is showcased in a video-recorded demonstration by G. I. Taylor for the National Committee for Fluid Mechanics Films In the demonstration, a blob of dye is introduced into a viscous liquid occupying a narrow gap between two cylindrical walls. When the inner cylinder is rotated, the fluid is sheared and the spot of dye smears out into a sheet. After the first shear, it appears as if the fluid is completely mixed and that there is no way of regaining the original conformation. But there is a subtle memory in the fluid that "remembers" where it came from. When the shear is then performed in the opposite direction, the spot reappears. This memory, like the spin echo, is surprising but is based on the idea of time (or more precisely, path) reversal. If the system can be manipulated so that after a first set of deformations, the dynamics can be made to repeat itself but in the opposite direction then there is a reversal of dynamics (if not in the time itself). Another situation in which this type of behavior shows up is in a form of relaxation phenomenon. Consider a system that has a set of modes by which relaxation can take place. Each of these modes has a specified relaxation time (or spectrum of times). The origin of these relaxation times is a detail of the system that is often unclear, though in some cases they are simply the relaxations of a material's subsystems individually If the system is perturbed so that it relaxes toward a new state, all the modes will relax. However, if the system is only held in this new position for a waiting time τ train before it is returned closer to its starting configuration, then only the modes that have relaxation times smaller than τ train will contribute appreciably to that relaxation. The modes with longer relaxation times will not have had a chance to evolve much The model proposed for the Kovacs effect in compressed crumpled sheets relied on having a set of relaxation pathways that could retrace their paths once the driving compressive force is released Relation to aging and rejuvenation-Once thought of in this context, the rejuvenation, aging, and memory experiments in spin glasses might also be included as a form of path reversal. In that much more complicated case, when the spin glass is quenched and held for some time at a temperature T 0 , it evolves most rapidly on short length scales and more and more sluggishly as the system tries to reach its ground state on longer scales. In the model by Middleton A memory that we all have firsthand experience with is associative memory. At one point or another you probably had a hard time remembering the name of a person you knew or a place you once visited. Yet if you can conjure up some specific detail associated with it-a scene or an event or even a smell or taste-suddenly the name comes back to you. What makes this particular kind of memory special is that you can use a partial or approximate version of the memory to recall much more. This experience is by its very nature subjective, and there may be many important biological factors that affect this processing of information in our brains. Nonetheless, the physics community was able to formulate model systems which also exhibit the phenomena of associative memories. Some of this work has contributed to the study of artificial neural networks with associative memory -systems that have growing applications in technology and scientific research Consider a network of identical nodes, each node denoting a neuron i, and each connection ij being assigned a weight J ij . Each neuron may be "on" (s i = 1) or "off" (s i = -1). The connection weights govern the evolution of the system: starting from some initial state (e.g., the top image in Fig. The model with such weights reproduces the desired associative memory behavior: if you are in a state s that is merely close to the memory s mem , then the evolution will lead to the state s = s mem which is a stable fixed point unchanged by further evolution. In that sense, the stored memory is successfully retrieved by the system. Although this behavior might be unsurprising, consider trying to store three different memories in the same network in such a way that any of them can be retrieved. Suppose the memory of your friend would be stored in a set of bond strengths, J (1) ij , the memory of your boss is given by another set, J (2) ij , and the memory of your pet fish is yet another, J (3) ij (Fig. (1) You may expect the system to form three stable fixed points; one for each of the memories. But trouble is right around the corner: Spurious stable fixed points also arise. Some are mixtures of the desired states (e.g., a combination of your boss and your pet fish) and others look completely unrelated. So while you set out to write a few memories in the system, you have unwittingly written many more "false" memories-things that you can now remember but have never experienced! John Hopfield and others showed in the 1980s that although this is true, the idea can still work. Below some threshold number of stored memories, each desired memory is indeed a stable fixed point, while all spurious fixed points have a smaller basin of attraction, i.e., only very nearby states converge to them Although the network model started as an abstraction of neuronal behavior, its mathematical form is reminiscent of magnetic systems in condensed matter physics, starting from the observation that each node could describe a spin state, s i = 1 or -1. We refer the reader to the excellent textbook by The abstract mathematical model of a neural network introduced by Hopfield One key insight from such models is the recognition of an intrinsic balance in a biological neural network: either new memories are easily accepted (plasticity of synapses), or old memories are retained for a long time (stability of synapses) Associative memory may also arise in the seemingly disparate context of self-assembly. The process of selfassembly entails building blocks, driven only by thermal or other random fluctuations, that aggregate into a larger objects. Mutual interactions between different constituents may be the only guide during this otherwise mindless process of spontaneous assembly. The building blocks can come from a wide variety of natural or artificial nano-and meso-scale objects. Likewise the design for their mutual interactions can vary immensely in their range, anisotropy, specificity and physical mechanism. The emergent assembly may be quite distinct and intricate -a specific crystal, macromolecule, biological cell component, or meta-material. While the behavior of particles attracting or repelling each other while moving around may seem far removed from the artificial neural network or a synapse network of a brain, one may intuit the phenomena of associative memory here as well. We suggest that the desired assembled structure may be viewed as a memory that is stored in the building blocks through the design of their mutual interactions. Correspondingly, when the structure is self-assembled due to a willful trigger (say, by providing a small substructure to act as a nucleation seed), one may claim that the memory has been retrieved. A simple associative memory for assembly then contains a mixture of independent batches of building blocks, with each batch designed to assemble into a particular structure when the appropriate trigger is applied. This construction is however quite wasteful. In contrast, biology is much more economical and reuses the same building blocks (e.g., individual proteins) in many different cellular assemblies One might imagine that this simple set of rules would inevitably cause errors in the assembly of a chosen structure from among the encoded memories, analogous to the part-fish-part-boss chimera that we sought to avoid in the Hopfield model. However, it was shown that because each particle has multiple neighbors (four in the case of the square lattice), its bonds have enough specificity that this confusion can be averted. Consider for a moment the trivial construction where each encoded structure uses a completely distinct set of blocks -in this case only m = N/M different structures can be stored, where N is the number of block types and M is the size of the structures. Using instead the Hebbian-like scheme, one can safely encode up to m c ∼ √ N (N/M ) structures on a square lattice. The different memories can be retrieved by using various triggers, such as introducing a seed, or increasing certain concentrations or bond strengths so that a seed forms spontaneously. A diagram showing the various possible outcomes of such an assembly model is shown in Fig. The relatively simple theoretical model of self-assembly described here suggests that one can design materials that change states and transform at will, while using a limited pool of constituents We conclude our survey of different forms of memory formation with a discussion of the memory of initial conditions that occur in experiments on dynamical systems. In Fig. This finite-time singularity is determined by a balance of terms in the Navier-Stokes equations governing the fluid flow. Depending on the properties of the internal and external fluids (i.e., the fluid making up the drop and the fluid into which the drop is falling), there will be different similarity solutions for the singularity. For the case of droplet snapoff, these situations fall into a discrete set of "universality classes"; the singularities within a given class share behavioral signatures with other breakup events in the same class The second kind of singularity is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions as in the example of the air bubble in Fig. The two classes of breakup behavior presented here differ in their memory of initial conditions. The falling liquid drop is insensitive to its evolution history and has lost the memory of its initial conditions. In contrast, the rising air bubble is highly sensitive to the forces present during its lifetime and remembers a great deal about how it was initiated. These examples present a clear dichotomy of how in some cases it is nature while in other cases (that may naively appear similar) it is nurture that determines the fate. Memory and its loss still surprise. The type of memory that we have discussed in this section deals with the dynamics of the system, such as remembering initial conditions. The basic forms of this memory are the conservation laws that we usually take for granted. Remembering initial conditions may appear to have a somewhat different character than some of the memories mentioned in previous sections, in which the input is embedded in a system's steady-state configuration and can be extracted at an arbitrary later time. However, there are also similarities with some of those more conventional material memories. In echoes, the memory also appears in the dynamics as the spins return to their original phases relative to one another; likewise in the Kovacs effect, the memory appears only once in the relaxation dynamics of the material. Note also that in the present case of the dynamics of the disconnecting air bubble, the memory is not as fleeting as it first seems. While the memory of the amplitude is directly observable only in the brief moments before the singularity, aspects of the dynamics can still be reconstructed because of the lasting effect that the initial conditions have on the size distribution and trajectories of the satellite bubbles Focusing on memory storage and recall across the entire range of material properties has not been a widespread approach for studying matter. However, such a study provides a common language for physicists to discuss some of the most fascinating aspects of historydependence, dynamics, and information storage in farfrom-equilibrium systems. As Twyla Tharp suggests, each new memory can provide a novel way to perceive material behavior and thus may lead to an alternate framework for organizing our knowledge about matter in general. This prompts us to seek behaviors, patterns, and similarities that may have been overlooked. It can also lead to new experimental and theoretical endeavors because it compels us to ask questions of a somewhat unusual -and therefore novel -nature. This perspective may lead to new insights and even the creation of new forms of matter with unique functionality dictated by the memories stored in their creation. One lesson from a comparative study of memory is that we should not assume that a memory behavior is unique, because we can often find another systemsometimes with no superficial similarities-that obeys the same rules for storage and recall. Thus, among the many memory behaviors we have encountered we perceive a smaller number of generic types and principles. The preceding sections have provided some examples of how different memories are related. Here we summarize some of the most relevant threads that connect or delineate them, and that motivate a broader perspective on memory formation. Hysteresis-We have tried to draw a few conclusions about ways of uniting different phenomena under some common principles. In Sec. II we noted several systems that remember the direction or sign of the input that was applied most recently. This simple principle underlies most of the world's digital memory and is the building block of the much richer return-point behavior (Sec. III). Maximal input-In Sec. II, we grouped together another set of memories that shared the somewhat obvious property that they all remembered a maximal value of an applied input. This form of memory is rather common and has been found in many materials and with many different probes. Oscillatory training over multiple cycles-Less obvious are the memories encoded in physical systems subjected to oscillatory perturbations. While these seem to have rather different forms, some of these phenomena appear to be related. A good example is the observation of multiple transient memories in charge-density-wave systems, in sheared non-Brownian suspensions, and in paths worn by visitors in grass. These memories have the same overall phenomenology despite one of them arising in a hard-condensed matter system, another in a fluid, and the third being a macroscopic human-scale phenomenon. All three initially learn many inputs and then forget all but one (or two) of them; however if noise is present they can remember all inputs indefinitely. Reversal of dynamics-More ambitious and less obvious was our attempt to group echo phenomena together with examples of rejuvenation and aging in glasses and with the Kovacs effect. The point of commonality was taken to be that they each manipulate their respective system as a way of "reversing paths." This allows them to retrace their dynamical evolution to the instant when the phases were initially set to be coherent. We also suggested that the Kovacs effect may likewise be conceived as allowing a system's relaxation dynamics to be reversed in time. Besides these common phenomenologies, we can discern common physical principles among some memoryforming systems: Memory as a marginal state or an energy minimum-In the example of non-Brownian dilute suspensions, a memory is encoded in a steady state with reversible particle motions, which is reached by shearing with a constant training amplitude. Yet one reads out that memory not by observing the steady state, but by observing the onset of irreversible motion when the training amplitude is exceeded slightly (Fig. Role of quenched or unquenched disorder-Disorder can give a system the ability to distinguish among, and remember, many possible input values. For example, a system with return-point memory that can be modeled with many identical hysterons (i.e., having identical hysteresis loops) would store no more information than a single hysteron. Instead, because the transition thresholds of the hysterons are distributed broadly (typically due to defects), a sufficiently large system can make fine distinctions among values of the applied field. Thus, in some of the systems we have described, disorder plays a beneficial role in providing a large ensemble of subsystems that together allow a nearly continuous range of input values to be stored. This principle also applies to the case of the charge-density wave that exhibits multiple transient memories, where the charge density evolves to find a metastable state in the presence of disordered pinning sites In both these examples the disorder cannot evolve (i.e., it is quenched), and is encoded in the system's Hamiltonian. However in other systems the disorder itself can evolve. To see this, one need only think about aging and rejuvenation in molecular glasses, exemplified by the thermal sorting algorithm with that behavior Training by following a path-In considering these examples there is another aspect that appears to lead to different behaviors. In the case of the multiple transient memories in suspensions, the path of the dynamics in phase space is remembered; it is not only the marginal final configuration that is trained. We observe the same memory of a path in charge-density wave conductors and jammed solids, and the notion of a path is even more explicit in the model of park benches on a lawn. In these examples training must typically be repetitive as the system learns the path. This is distinct from memories in the Hopfield model or self-assembly where the memory is stored (at least in some rules) by varying the interaction strengths between pairs of spins or particles. In those associative memories, a well-chosen learning rule deterministically sets the interactions to store a memory, without the need for any dynamics in the training. That a material carries a memory of its formation suggests that one may use that memory to create some specific functionality based on the stored information. Memory could inform the design and processing of new materials with a range of applications. Amplitude variation-Oscillatory manipulation of a solid is common and is, indeed, the essential ingredient of most AC (linear and non-linear) susceptibility measurements. By focusing on the particular aspect of memory, one is motivated to concentrate not only on how the response depends on the amplitude of the oscillation, but on how it depends on changes to the amplitude during the experiment -or, in more practical terms, during the material's preparation and use. In systems such as dilute suspensions and jammed solids, amplitude variation is the basis for reading out memories-and for recognizing that memories are present in the first place. Learned mechanical properties-In systems where memory storage is in response to an external stress, as in the examples of dilute suspensions or jammed solids, memory can have mechanical consequences. Memories formed by cyclic training in these systems show that one can tailor a material's responses at specific amplitudes or values of strain (Fig. Memory capacity-Another type of question that leads to novel investigations is the memory capacity in a system. For example, the pulse-duration memory in charge-density wave solids or the approach to the absorbing-state transition in non-Brownian suspensions, have shown an even richer phenomenology when, in addition to addressing the creation of a single memory, one asks how many different memories can be encoded in these systems. In the case of self-assembly, the goal of encoding a greater variety of structures with fewer types of particles motivates further development of theoretical design principles and experimental systems. Disorder and diversity are especially relevant to the design of multiplememory systems because they can make various parts or coarse-grained scales of the system susceptible to different inputs. Throughout this paper we have raised a number of questions about memory that enrich our study of the physics of matter. We have indicated a few, but certainly not all, of the ways in which memories are similar or dissimilar to one another and have suggested that addressing such questions can lead not only to interesting questions about the variety and robustness of memory formation but also to useful applications, once the science of material memory is better understood. In her novel Mansfield Park, Jane Austin's protagonist claimed: "If any one faculty of our nature may be called more wonderful than the rest, I do think it is memory. . . . our powers of recollecting and of forgetting do seem peculiarly past finding out." While in our lived experience this may indeed be true, in the world of materials, the mysteries of memory formation have been yielding to acute scientific examination. Thus the ideas of memory formation, and the mechanisms that nature uses to implant information of different kinds into matter, can be articulated into sets of coherent principles that seem to bind them together. However, much work still needs to be done to delineate the distinctions between different types and provide a common framework for understanding the interconnection between them. We hope that such questions strike a chord within the broader research community and call attention to this novel and exciting branch of inquiry. = 0.04, and is then subjected to a single cycle of shear deformation with repeatedly. We have three cases (1).3 is smaller than both 1 and 2 . (2). 3 is less than 1 but greater than 2 and (3). 3 is larger than both 2 and 1 . We consider these cases in turn.a. Retraining amplitude is smaller than both the training amplitudes: We consider configurations trained at 1 = 0.06 and 2 = 0.04. We then apply cyclic shear deformation with 3 = 0.02. The results are shown in Fig.17. Kinks in the MSD curves at 1 = 0.06 (largest ) and 3 = 0.02 indicate that the memory of these amplitudes is encoded, and remain even after a large number of cycles at 3 = 0.02. No clear signature is visible at 2 = 0.04. As in the case of triple memories, it may be possible that this signature will remain if a di↵erent training protocol is used, but we do not investigate it further.b. Deformation amplitude is smaller than one of the training amplitudes but larger than the other: We consider configurations trained at 1 = 0.06 and 2 = 0.04. We then apply cyclic shear deformation with 3 = 0.05. The results are shown in Fig.18. Even after a single deformation at 3 = 0.05, the memory at 2 = 0.04 is erased,