We report measurements of the diffusion rate of isolated ion-implanted 8 Li + within ∼120 nm of the surface of oriented single-crystal rutile TiO 2 using a radiotracer technique. The α-particles from the 8 Li decay provide a sensitive monitor of the distance from the surface and how the depth profile of 8 Li evolves with time. The main findings are that the implanted Li + diffuses and traps at the (001) surface. The T-dependence of the diffusivity is described by a bi-Arrhenius expression with activation energies of 0.3341(21) eV above 200 K, whereas at lower temperatures it has a much smaller barrier of 0.0313(15) eV. We consider possible origins for the surface trapping, as well the nature of the low-T barrier. It is well known There are a number of poorly understood aspects of rutile lithiation, including the cause of the limited Li + uptake, as well as why reported Li diffusion rates differ by orders of magnitude, even under the same experimental conditions In this study, we employ the α-radiotracer method to extract the diffusion coefficient and its activation energy for isolated Li in rutile TiO 2 and show that Li + traps at the (001) rutile surface. In addition, we report that the nanoscale Li diffusion exhibits bi-Arrhenius behavior. The high-T (above ∼200 K) activation energy and diffusion rate are in agreement with previous studies. The low-T behavior is discussed in the context of the recently reported Li-Ti 3+ polaron complex The experiment was performed using the ISAC facility at TRIUMF In the experiment, a short beam pulse of low energy (0.1 -30 keV) 8 Li + ions is implanted close to the surface of the rutile targets (at an average depth of ∼100 nm) housed in an ultra-high vacuum cold finger cryostat To further amplify the sensitivity to 8 Li + near the surface, the α-detector is placed at a grazing angle, θ ≤ 4.4 o , relative to the surface, as shown in Fig. The diffusion rate of Li inside the sample is directly related to the time it takes to reach the surface, which in turn relates to the α-rate as a function of time. This method has intrinsic time-and length-scales of τ 1/2 ∼1 s and d∼100 nm, respectively, which leads to a theoretical sensitivity to the diffusion rate arXiv:1810.12537v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 1 Mar 2019 D from 10 -12 to 10 -8 cm 2 s -1 . This technique thus covers an optimal range of D for battery materials. However, our effective sensitivity limit is closer to 10 -11 cm 2 s -1 , determined by experimental factors such as the finite counting statistics and the existence of small distortions due to pileup in the detector response. In addition, the experimental sensitivity is somewhat higher for a lower implantation energy (see insert of Fig. In situations where Li + is immobile, the probability of detecting an α for any given decay event is time-independent and the measured α-counts follow the decay rate of 8 Li. This can be monitored conveniently using the high energy β-particles from the 8 Li decay, which are weakly attenuated over these distances. Thus, the ratio of counts Y α = N α /N β is constant in time. On the other hand, when Li + is mobile, the ratio is timedependent when the mean diffusion length in the 8 Li lifetime is comparable to the mean depth of implantation, reflecting the fact that the 8 Li + depth distribution is evolving in time. The information on Li diffusion comes from the time evolution of the α-signal. The absolute α-to-β ratio, i.e., the baseline ratio of Y α , in the absence of diffusion, depends on experimental factors such as detector efficiencies, therefore in order to account for these systematics, each α-spectrum is self-normalized to start from unity at time zero, i.e., Y n α (t) = Y α (t)/Y α (0) surface and the initial 8 Li + stopping profile as simulated by the SRIM Monte Carlo package With an accumulating boundary condition at the surface, faster diffusion results in a monotonically increasing Y n α (t; D), while a reflecting boundary condition leads to Y n α (t; D) that decreases with time, since the overall mean distance from the surface will then increase with time as the Li migrates away from the surface back to the bulk of the sample, towards the uniform depth distribution. Between these two ideal cases, there could be a non-zero trapping probability P tr at the sample's surface. For a fixed diffusivity D, Y n α (t; D, P tr ) gradually evolves from looking reflective-like (P tr <20 %), towards resembling the accumulating condition (for P tr ≥50 %). Note that after each reflection, the Li + will continue their random walk, so for any non-zero value of P tr , most Li ions will eventually (after several reflections) get trapped at the surface if the diffusion is fast enough. A technique similar to the one discussed here has been developed by Jeong et al. Using this technique, we performed α-radiotracer measurements on rutile TiO 2 at various temperatures with two beam energies (10 and 25 keV) and two sample orientations. As Li + is known to diffuse primarily along the c-axis of rutile, if the c-axis is oriented parallel to the surface (perpendicular to the beam), then the 8 Li + motion should not change the initial implantation profile. Since the ab-plane diffusivity D ab 10 -12 cm 2 s -1 , Y n α (t) is expected to be time-independent. On the other hand, if the c-axis is perpendicular to the surface, then the depth distribution of lithium should be evolving with time, since D c 10 -12 cm 2 s -1 . In Fig. To fit the data, we used a custom C++ code applying the MINUIT It is not clear whether the Li + surface trapping is caused by an electrostatic potential well (similar to H in Pd Turning to the values of D(T) extracted using the above analysis (see Fig. where E i is the activation energy and D i is the prefactor of each component. These were found to be E H = 0.3341 α-radiotracer|25 keV α-radiotracer|10 keV Imp. Spectroscopy Figure similar to the ones found in rutile nanorods using impedance spectroscopy Both data sets acquired with beam energies of 10 and 25 keV yield virtually the same bi-Arrhenius activation energies and they are in agreement at high-T, but the low-T component of the 10 keV data is shifted lower by about an order of magnitude. For trapping probability P tr <100 %, the apparent gap narrows and for P tr =50 % is about half an order of magnitude wide. The persistency of the gap suggests that it might be related to either a discrepancy between the SRIM and the actual implantation profiles (e.g., due to channeling A bi-Arrhenius relationship for diffusivity is not uncommon; in vacancy ion conductors We first consider a recent β-NMR experiment on rutile which also used an implanted 8 Li + beam on similar crystals. The β-NMR measurements revealed two peaks in the relaxation rate 1/T 1 , one below 100 K and one above 200 K. Below 100 K, a 0.027 eV barrier was attributed to dynamics of electron-polarons in the vicinity of the implanted ion It seems possible that the larger activation energy observed above 200 K may involve diffusion of a more complex object, possibly a Li-polaron complex, or it could be related to a disassociation energy of Li + with the polarons, which are known to form Coulomb bond defect complexes. Indeed, theory predicts a diffusion barrier of 0.29 eV for the Li-polaron complex and a disassociation energy of 0.45 eV The much larger prefactor above 200 K, compared to low-T, is also quite intriguing and is further evidence that these are two very different mechanisms for diffusion of Li in rutile. Indeed, D H , when written in terms of frequency, yields τ -1 H ∼2 × 10 12 s -1 , which is in the 10 12 -10 13 s -1 range one would normally expect from phonons driving a thermally activated motion. Note that this frequency is ∼5000 times smaller than what was found with β-NMR In summary, we used the radioactive α-decay of 8 Li to study Li diffusion in a single crystal rutile TiO 2 in the range of 60 K to 370 K. The nanoscale Li diffusion rate was found to exhibit bi-Arrhenius behavior. We report a high-T activation energy of E H = 0.3341 