Discrete scale invariance (DSI) is a phenomenon featuring intriguing log-periodicity which can be rarely observed in quantum systems. Here we report the log-periodic quantum oscillations in the magnetoresistance (MR) and the Hall traces of HfTe 5 crystals, which reveals the appearance of DSI. The oscillations show the same logB-periodicity in the behavior of MR and Hall, indicating an overall effect of the DSI on the transport properties. Moreover, the DSI feature in the Hall resistance signals its close relation to the carriers. Combined with theoretical simulations, we further clarify the origin of the log-periodic oscillations and the DSI in the topological materials. Our work evidences the universality of the DSI in the Dirac materials and paves way for the full understanding of the novel phenomenon. Discrete scale invariance (DSI) is a partial breaking of continuous scale invariance where observables of the system obey the scale invariance only for a geometrical set of choices written as the form of ’ü¼ n with ’ü¼ being the scaling ratio The scale anomaly DSI is of high general interest while it can be rarely observed in quantum systems experimentally HfTe 5 is a sister compound of ZrTe 5 In this work, we reveal the universality of the peculiar log-periodic quantum oscillations and DSI phenomenon in Dirac materials by the magneto-transport results of HfTe 5 crystals. The oscillations with logB-periodicity are demonstrated in the MR behavior, independent on the minor differences of the sample quality. The logB-periodicity is also discovered in the Hall traces of the HfTe 5 crystals. This indicates an overall effect of the DSI on the transport properties. Based on the experimental results, we elucidate the origin of the DSI, and elaborate on its relation to the log-periodic oscillations in both the longitudinal MR and the Hall resistance. We propose a theoretical model to quantitatively explain these features, analyze the influence of a small band gap on the DSI feature and clarify its relevance to various topological materials. This work provides new insights towards further understanding of the log-periodic quantum oscillations and the DSI in solid-state systems. Single crystals HfTe 5 in our work were grown via a self-Te-flux method as in the previous report The resistivity-temperature (’ü▓T) characteristic of HfTe 5 crystals down to 2 K is shown in Fig. Figure According to the nonlinear Hall data of HfTe 5 crystals, we would attribute the various ’ü▓T behavior and MR effect to the competition of a semi-metallic Dirac band and a semiconducting band in the material By performing the second derivative for the MR results in Fig. The magneto-transport measurements at high magnetic fields up to 58 T further confirm the logB-periodic MR oscillations and DSI in HfTe 5 . For clarity, data curves in Figs. The temperature dependence of the logB-periodic oscillations in HfTe 5 is shown in Fig. As discussed previously obeys the scale invariance property When a magnetic field is applied, the magnetic length is included, and the binding energy spectrum of the quasi-bound states evolve with the magnetic field. Using the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin method, our numerical simulation shows that the energy of the nth quasi-bound states approaches the Fermi energy at the magnetic field B n , which obeys the approximate DSI property The oscillation term in ’ü▓ xx and’ĆĀ’ü▓ yx can be obtained by the T-matrix approximation, and both satisfy the log-periodic property Meanwhile, due to the relatively large impurity scattering from these short-range impurities, the broadening effect smears the log-periodic oscillations at small magnetic fields, ultimately leading to fewer observable oscillating cycles. Secondly, the log-periodicity in ’ü▓ yx of HfTe 5 is relatively more remarkable. This feature may be due to the relatively large value for the density of charge impurity and thus relatively large value for the density of quasi-bound states n C and the ratio n C /N, which gives rise to considerable correction for Hall trace ’ü▓ yx in HfTe 5 . Besides the ideal consideration shown above, in real systems some other issues can influence the DSI property, which needs to be clarified. Firstly, both a small band gap ’üä’ĆĀand finite screening length ’ü¼ S impose constraint on the DSI feature by introducing an effective low energy cut-off. But the quasi-bound states with binding energy much larger than the band gap’ĆĀ’üä’ĆĀand radius much smaller than ’ü¼ S cannot be influenced. Direct estimation gives the largest value of radius R C and corresponding magnetic length l B,C satisfying R C Ōēł l B,C Ōēł min ( ’ü« F /’üä’Ć¼’ĆĀ’ü¼ S ). If one set ’üä = 10 meV and neglect the screening effect, R C Ōēł 33 nm and the corresponding magnetic field B C Ōēł0.6 T. Secondly, in the system with ultralow carrier density, both the charge impurity and the carrier from the electron band can generate the Coulomb attraction In summary, we report the intriguing log-periodic quantum magneto-oscillations in both the Hall and the MR results in the topological material HfTe 5 , which indicate the underlying DSI feature in the system. The observation of the log-periodicity in both physical observables ’ü▓ xx and ’ü▓ yx reveals that the DSI shows an overall effect on the transport properties for a Dirac system with the long-range Coulomb attraction. The origin of the DSI and its relation to the log-periodic magneto-oscillations are theoretically elucidated. This work paves the way for further research on the log-periodic oscillations and the DSI in quantum systems. 