Phase change thermal diodes (PCTD) suffer from fairly low thermal rectification ratio, which hampers their widespread utilization as thermal management and control units for cutting-edge technologies, encompassing photovoltaics, thermoelectric modules, batteries and other miniaturized electronic products, etc. Herein, a PCTD prototype is theoretically designed via heat conduction and convection models, fabricated and experimentally executed, accessing an unprecedentedly giant thermal rectification ratio of 3.0 at ambient temperature. Theoretical model additionally introduces freezing temperature to address supercooling-enabled extended-convection and liquidheight-dependent effective thermal conductivity. With optimized length ratio and feasible assembly of two phase change terminals, the emerging physical states of thermal media continuously manipulate heat flux in the forward direction and reverse direction operations within temperature bias of 10~40 °C. The most significant finding discloses the fact that supercooling elongates the overall workable temperature bias range, while manual supercooling release allows to tune the thermal 2 rectification ratio at any temperature bias within 10~33 °C. Integrating the conventional asymmetric thermal transport mechanism with state-specific heat transfer hysteresis helps establish the novel governing mechanism. The necessity of waste heat scavenging and mitigation of thermal emissions through environment-friendly as well as techno-economic scenarios are declared to be the universal goals. Therefore, sustainable heat recovery, either from uninterruptable waste heat sources, miniaturized electronic products or intermittent solar sources, via directional heat flux manipulation is emerging as one of the fundamental interests. In the paradigm of multi-oriented demands, thermal technology has been recently utilized to create innovative thermal diodes, which is expected to be employed for efficient thermal computing and information processing, (1) The certain types of thermal media, i.e., phase variant or phase invariant, can generate diversified working mechanisms that are necessary for thermal rectification. For instances, phase variant (normally known as phase change materials and abbreviated as PCMs) thermal media (e.g., solid-solid and solid-liquid PCMs) allow heat conduction in solid state (lattice vibrations), and thermal convection in liquid state (buoyant motion), thus they can develop dual-nature thermal diodes based on doublephase-oriented heat transfer mechanism. Dating back to 1936, Starr presented a solid rectifier and provided the insight of directional heat transfer at the junction of copper and cuprous oxide nanostructures, which led to disclose the innovative phenomenon of asymmetrical thermal conductance in relevance with electron theory of conduction. While in most of the applications, maintaining such a huge temperature bias may not be feasible, urging to explore low temperature bias-driven thermal media. Although many kinds of thermal media have been employed to fabricate thermal diode terminals, the design complications, arose on the account of selected thermal media, have impeded thermal rectification ratio. For example, if thermal conductivity of the first terminal increases with the rising temperature and the second terminal also behaves in the same way, then the high thermal rectification ratio in either direction may not be achieved. Such a configuration composed of two phase change terminals has been analyzed, providing a thermal rectification ratio of only 1.23 The reported thermal rectification ratio of PFH-O thermal diode was up to 1.43, which was further enlarged to 2.6 upon coupling the PFH-O with PNIPAM aqueous solution. Nakayama As a comparative implication, supercooling is predicted to be one of the potential interests to sustainably manipulate the heat flux and tune the thermal rectification ratio within easily accessible temperature biases henceforth. Based on the aforementioned interpretation and classification of PCMs, it is inferred that selecting the right thermal media and establishing the underlying mechanism are instantaneously painstaking as well as crucial. To date, the foremost mechanism of a thermal diode has been realized by varying the thermal conductivity with respect to temperature, Considering a bi-terminal PCTD sandwiched between a heater situated at the bottom and a cooler situated at the top, the heater temperature is set at T h, and the cooler temperature is set at T c . With exception of heat losses from the boundaries, the heat flux through the PCTD is assumed to be unidirectional, flowing from the hot terminal towards cold terminal. A reasonable assumption is made that k As , k Al , k Bs and k Bl are treated constant because they vary little in the temperature range of 0~40 °C in the present study. However, k Bl_eff majorly varies with the height of liquid phase. In addition, regarding phase change temperatures with reference to analysis of Cottril et al., [45] the equivalence of the melting temperatures of two PCMs, i.e., T mA =T mB , is supposed to be an ideal condition. Theoretical modeling has been established through the Fourier's law of heat conduction theory and quantified natural convection in the corresponding forward direction and reverse direction operations. In each operation, the cooling process (performed by reducing the cooler temperature) and heating process (performed by increasing the cooler temperature) were adopted to investigate the effects of supercooling and non-supercooling of CaCl 2 •6H 2 O on the thermal rectification ratio, respectively. A new parameter T fB that serves to critically handle the supercooling effect has been introduced in theoretical modeling. Implementing the successive operations of the PCTD via cooling and heating processes helps configure eighteen thermal modules under various operating conditions, whose theoretical modeling is elaborated in Section 3.1 and 3.2 of SI, respectively. In the heating process, the PCTD modules for PCM A and PCM B can be configured by creating relationships between T mA and T mB through the interface temperature T i , as schematically shown in Table Herein, we explain the method of theoretical analysis by taking the most complicated module as an example, namely Forward-C3, as shown in Table This module follows the operating condition of T mA <T i ≤T fB in the forward direction of cooling process, where two PCMs exist in both solid and liquid phases simultaneously, thereby generating the four thermal resistances in total. According to the Fourier's law of heat conduction, the temperature distributions in each junction of the PCTD are considered linear, which are presented as follows: where δ A and δ B are the heights of the PCM A and PCM B in liquid phase, respectively. Since the heat conduction is unidirectional, the heat fluxes through different junctions of the PCTD are equal, being evaluated by the temperature gradient and effective thermal conductivity of the respective PCM, which is expressed as follows: The heat flux q, the interface temperature T i , and the heights δ A and δ B in liquid phase can be derived from Equations ( The mathematical formulae of T i , δ A , δ B and q for other thermal modules have been derived in the same manner, as detailed in Section 3 of SI. In experiments, the forward and reverse heat fluxes through the PCTD encounter a slight decline due to the presence of thermal contact resistance between two terminals and steel blocks. In order to simplify theoretical analysis, thermal contact resistance is neglected in the present study, but the influence of thermal contact resistance is treated as a modifying factor for heat flux and the resulting heat flux q c is calculated as follows: Where q is the heat flux without the influence of thermal contact resistance obtained from Equation (4), R td is the thermal resistance of the PCTD being calculated by R td =(T h -T c )/q, R c_td is the thermal contact resistance of the PCTD, which is evaluated in Section 2.2 of SI. Using the formulated heat flux q c in the forward and reverse directions, the thermal rectification ratio in each thermal module can be determined by Equation (1). Design optimization of the PCTD has been executed using dimensionless length L id and dimensionless temperature T id , which are defined as follows: where is the average phase change temperature of two PCMs. Considering the supercooling of aqueous CaCl 2 solution, the relationships of both forward and reverse heat fluxes at L id and T id become different in the respective heating and cooling processes. Thus, the thermal rectification ratio of the PCTD can be obtained under four possible conditions, which are shown in Figure The further fabrication detail and experimental procedure are mentioned in Section 5 of SI. A series of experimental and theoretical investigations have been systematically conducted both for the forward direction and reverse direction. In the forward direction, variation of heat fluxes versus implemented temperature bias of 10~40 °C is shown in Figure In the cooling process, the physical state of paraffin terminal remains solid due to its melting temperature higher than the maximum applied temperature of the cooler, so the emerged thermal zones are predominantly resulted from the alternate physical states of CaCl 2 terminal. For example, hot zone entails the hot liquidus state at the cooler temperature range of 30~14 °C (the relevant temperature bias is 10~26 °C), as shown in Figure In the reverse direction, the heat fluxes through the PCTD as a function of temperature bias are shown in Figure The appearance of the critical point, that is 26 °C, is alike to that in the forward direction due to the same optimum length ratio of CaCl 2 and paraffin terminals, but the origination of the asymmetric thermal transport is obviously opposite. Having the constant temperature of heater (40 °C) higher than the melting temperature of paraffin As a precaution in the reverse direction in the cooling process, supercooling should be preferentially avoided to limit the heat flux. Moreover, theoretical analysis finds a reliable validation through a good agreement with experimental heat flux in both the cooling and heating processes. By using the heat fluxes of the forward direction and reverse direction operations, as shown in Figure It is eventually exposed that the physical states steadily contribute to asymmetric thermal conductance, and consequently, maximum thermal rectification of 3.0 has been achieved. In addition, the sustainability of thermal rectification ratio spreading over a wide temperature bias is no more questionable, as evidenced from red curve in with low thermal conductivity appears, thereby bringing about a sudden rise in thermal rectification ratio due to the low heat flux in the reverse direction. However, the abnormal trend during SSR help recommend that thermal diode should not be operated in the cooling process of reverse direction. The present study instigates to utilize the unexplored thermo-physical properties of PCMs, as well as contributes to establish the fundamental governing theory necessary to understand the dynamics and inter-dependent parameters of a PCTD. The findings depict that not only the materials demonstrating thermal conductivity variances and length ratio of terminals are vital, but also other thermo-physical parameters such as variable intensity of natural convection, phase change hysteresis and melting temperature difference are worthy of considerations. Moreover, it is postulated that a phase change thermal medium can either undermine the maximum thermal rectification ratio or strengthen it on behalf of a gap between the state-specific thermal conductivities. Precisely, with advantage of a large gap between the (effective) thermal conductivities in solid and liquid phases, a remarkable thermal rectification ratio can be achieved. With in-depth theoretical and experimental analyses, we thus propose the overall governing mechanism, namely phase change-driven asymmetric thermal transport, as schematically shown in Figure As illustrated in Figure On the other hand, as shown in Figure Moreover, geometrical arrangement of physical module also helps elaborate the underlying mechanism of directional heat flows. To realize the concept, we introduce the simplest vertical model consisting of phase change media sandwiched between a bottom heater and a top cooler. For the existence of natural convection, the development of temperature gradient in upward direction is imperative, and further natural convection can be adequately strengthened or extremely weakened by controlling the size of PCM chambers. Since aqueous CaCl 2 solution sustains natural convection in a widened temperature range due to phase change hysteresis, the size of CaCl 2 chamber is intentionally kept large. While, the smaller size of paraffin chamber assists in suppressing the natural convection and results in only conduction-dominant heat transfer. Consequently, the entire arrangement brings about asymmetrical thermal conductance, providing a considerable thermal rectification ratio. In summary, thermal performance of a thermal diode should be optimized by manipulating the state-specific heat fluxes so that the best combination of the forward and reverse heat fluxes can be proposed henceforth, leading to a superior thermal rectification ratio. A novel supercooling-enabled PCTD is presented, setting forth the theoretical design guidelines and routes to optimize its performance. Theoretical hypothesis leads to fabricate a prototype thermal diode with an optimum length ratio of 0.12, consisting of NTC paraffin terminal and convection-intensified PTC CaCl 2 terminal. Findings reveal that considerable heat flux in the forward direction operation is driven by convection-intensified liquid states, while conduction prevails in consecutive solid (or limited liquid) state known for high thermal resistance in reverse direction. More significantly, introduction of T fB in theoretical modeling serves as a novel parameter which provides manifold benefits, including a widened temperature range, extensive convection empowered by phase change hysteresis due to supercooling effect, sustainable thermal rectification and tunable thermal performance at any temperature between 7~30 °C. Consequently, a giant thermal rectification ratio of 3.0 is obtained. Cumulatively, the conclusive experimental and theoretical evidences help understand and establish the novel governing mechanism combining the state-specific asymmetric thermal conductance with phase change hysteresis of CaCl 2 terminal. Materials and characterization: Paraffin (Ruhr Tech, OP35E) and calcium chloride anhydrous (CaCl 2 ) (SCR, AR, >96%) were purchased and employed as-received. Furthermore, the steel blocks were connected with a bottom heater and a top cooler, facilitating constant temperature hot water and cold ethylene glycol, respectively. Throughout the experimental runs, temperature of the bottom heater was kept constant at 40 °C, while the temperature of top cooler was varied from 0 °C to 30 °C in the heating process, and from 30 °C to 0 °C in the cooling process. Therefore, the temperature bias was monitored in the range of 10~40 °C. To measure the temperature data across the PCTD, four equidistant resistive temperature sensors (RTD Pt-100) were centrally inserted into the top and bottom steel block. After the PCTD achieved steady-state, the temperature history was recorded using data acquisition system (Keithley 2700) with subsequent heat flux calculations according to the Fourier's law of heat conduction. Thermal conductivities influence the performance of the PCTD, necessitating the precise determination. Thermal conductivities of paraffin in solid and liquid phases were adopted as k As =0.35 W m -1 K -1 Where, k st is thermal conductivity of the steel blocks, which is temperature-dependent and can be estimated through the following equation: Where, T st is the mean temperature of the steel blocks. The temperatures at the top and bottom of the sample can be determined by extrapolating the temperature distribution, and the total thermal resistance R t can be determined by the following equation: Where, ΔT s is the temperature difference between two ends of the sample, R s denotes thermal resistance of the sample. R c_s represents thermal contact resistance of the two interfaces between the sample and two steel blocks. In the experiment, thermal grease was pasted between all interfaces of the sample and steel blocks, therefore thermal contact resistances for different interfaces deemed to be very small. To obtain thermal conductivity k s of the sample and value of R c_s , two thermal resistances R t1 and R t2 of the samples with different thicknesses of h 1 and h 2 were measured. Therefore, k s and R c_s can be calculated as follows: The influence of the thermal contact resistance should be necessarily taken into consideration. The value of the thermal contact resistance in Section 2.1 of SI is 0.003 K m 2 W -1 that includes two interfaces between the single sample and two steel blocks. However, when the single sample is replaced by thermal diode, an additional thermal contact resistance at the interface of two clamped PCMs should be considered whose value equals to that of interface between the single sample and steel block. As a consequence, the thermal contact resistance R c_td of thermal diode becomes 1.5 times larger than the R c_s of the single sample, thus R c_td =0.0045 K m 2 W -1 has been cautiously used while carrying out theoretical analysis of the PCTD. In the mathematical model, the natural convection during hot liquidus states and supercooled states, particulalry of of aqueous CaCl 2 solution, has been quantified in terms of effective thermal conductivity. It can be formulated as follows: Where, Nu is the Nusselt number with value of 1 for solid state and static liquid, and larger than 1 for liquid state under natural convection. Considering the PCTD, the natural convection is prone to be induced by the top cooler and bottom heater, and the Nu of the natural convection is given as follows: Where, Gr δ is the Grashof number and Pr is the Prandtl number of aqueous CaCl 2 solution in liquid phase, which are further determined by the following equations: Where, ρ, α V , c p and μ are the density, thermal expansivity, specific heat capacity and viscosity of aqueous CaCl 2 solution, respectively; ΔT B2 is the temperature difference between two ends of aqueous CaCl 2 solution. By following the mathematical models as given above, it is complicated to excatly estimate k Bl_eff becuase many properties are required, such as thermal conductivity, density, thermal expansivity, specific heat capacity and viscosity.Therefore, a simple method was used to evaluate the k Bl_eff by reorganizing Equation S6-S9 such that all the thermo-physical properties are combined into one parameter C, yielding a simplified equation as follows: Where, C is expressed as follows: When the mean temperature of aqueous CaCl 2 solution is fixed, the variation of k Bl_eff is only related to the temperature difference ΔT B2 and the height of aqueous CaCl 2 solution δ B . Meanwhile, the parameter C can be presented by a reference effective thermal conductivity k Bl_eff * of aqueous CaCl 2 solution at a reference temperature difference of ΔT Bl * and reference liquid height of δ B * : Where, k Bl_eff at an arbitrary ΔT B2 and δ B is formulated as follows: A theoretical model is established that has a verstality to systematically address heat conduction and convection phenomena. Unlike the previous models as reported in references [20] [21] [37] (cited in the main text), the present model can solve the problem statements related to solid-solid and solid-liquid phase change phenomena, as well as help configure eighteen thermal modules for heating and cooling processes. Also, the limitation of constant thermal conductivities [21] [37] and constant effective thermal conductivities [20] is resolved in the present study, and theoretical solutions can be achieved with variable effective thermal conductivity in terms of liquid height. Since the PCTD undergoes an extended convection due to supercooling effect of aqueous CaCl 2 solution, a novel parameter T fB is included that ensures multiple benefits, including the unprecedentedly high thermal rectification ratio, a widened temperature range, a sustainable performance and a large tunability. Further detail of the procedure can be understood as follows:  In the heating process, the phase change temperatures of PCM A (paraffin) and PCM B (CaCl 2 •6H 2 O ) were T mA and T mB , respectively.  In the cooling process, two approaches have been executed: before supercooling release, the phase change temperatures of PCM A and B were T mA and T fB , respectively; after supercooling release, phase change temperatures of PCM A and B were recovered to T mA and T mB , respectively, due to supercooling eliminated in liquid phase.. In heating process, four thermal modules in forward direction and four in reverse direction have been modeled by relating the values of T i , T mA and T mB , as shown in Table As Since the heat conduction of the PCTD is unidirectional, the heat fluxes through different junctions of the PCTD are equal, which is shown as follows: Owing to different physical states of two junctions, the formulae of the temperature distributions and heat fluxes of the PCTD in different operating conditions are also different, which are listed as follows: Forward-H1: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S16 and S17, and the formulae are given as below: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S19 and S20, and the formulae are given as below: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S22 and S23, and the formulae are given as below: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S25 and S26, and the formulae are given as below: Where, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S28 and S29, and the formulae are given as below: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S31 and S32, and the formulae are given as below: ) Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S34 and S35, and the formulae are given as below: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S37 and S38, and the formulae are given as below: Using the formulated heat fluxes of the PCTD in different operating conditions, thermal rectification ratio in each thermal module of the PCTD can be calculated by dividing forward heat flux to reverse heat flux. In cooling process, four thermal modules in forward direction and six in reverse have been modeled, as shown in Table Subsequently, the calculation procedures of remaining two thermal modules, Reverse-C1 and Reverse-C2, are introduced as follows: Reverse-C1: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be inferred from Equations S40 and S41, and the formulae are given as below: Where, q, T i , δ A and δ B can be inferred from Equations S43 and S44, and the formulae are given as below: The dark blue and light blue colors PCM A in solid and liquid states, whose thermal conductivities are k As and k Al , respectively; while dark red and light red show PCM B in solid and liquid states, whose thermal conductivities are k Bs and k Bl_eff , respectively. In the figure, three segments of thermal contact resistances correspond to those between steel block and PCM B, PCM B and PCM A as well as PCM A and steel block from bottom to top. There are three thermal contact resistances in the theoretical PCTD module, one is between the two PCM terminals, and the other two are between the PCTD and two steel blocks. As can be found form the results in Section 2.1 of SI, the values of different thermal contact resistances are almost the same because thermal grease is pasted between all the interfaces, which is denoted as R c_i . Consequently, the value of R c_i =0.0015 K m 2 W -1 is one third of that of R c_td . Owing to the presence of thermal contact resistance, there is a temperature difference across the interface. For the interface between PCM A and PCM B, the interface temperature is T i1 on the side of PCM A, and T i2 on the side of PCM B; for the interface between top steel block and PCM A, the interface temperature is T c on the side of top steel block, and T c ' on the side of PCM A; for the interface between PCM B and bottom steel block, the interface temperature is T h on the side of bottom steel block, and T h ' on the side of PCM A. There is a relationship between the interface temperatures and the thermal contact resistances: Where, q c is the heat flux of the PCTD, and ΔT c is the temperature difference across the interface. The above thermal module can be depicted by a 1-D heat conduction model with respective thermal resistances in series. According to the Fourier's law of heat conduction, the equations to depict the temperature distribution of the PCTD at steady state are mathematically formulated as follows: Since the heat conduction of the PCTD is unidirectional, the heat fluxes through different junctions of the PCTD are equal, which is shown as follows: Where, q c , T i1 , ΔT c , δ A and δ B can be derived from Equations S46-S48, and the formulae are given as below: And T i2 , T c ' and T h ' can be calculated by The q c of other thermal modules can also be described by the comprehensive model and estimated in the same manner. However, including thermal contact resistance in the thermal module brings very large complexity in theoretical analysis. We therefore propose a lumpedparameter method to take the effect of thermal contact resistances into consideration where the total thermal contact resistance is treated as a modifying factor for heat flux obtained by 1-D heat conduction model in Section 3 of SI, as shown by Equation The uncertainty of the heat flux q and thermal rectification ratio R of the PCTD needs to be determined. In the present experiment, the heat flux of the PCTD was evaluated by the temperature gradient and thermal conductivity of steel blocks, which is shown in Equation Furthermore, although the experimental set-up was encased by thermal insulation materials, the heat loss in experiments could not be completely eliminated, which can be evaluated by the difference between the heat fluxes of two steel blocks. Therefore, the major uncertainty in measurement was caused by the uncertainties of the temperature differences ΔT measured by the RTDs, the distances Δx between the RTDs, the thermal conductivity k st of the steel block and the difference between the heat fluxes of two steel blocks q st1 and q st2 , which are shown in Table where δ presents the uncertainty of each parameter. The uncertainty of thermal rectification ratio can be evaluated by the uncertainties of the forward heat flux q for and the reverse heat flux q rev : 2 2 for rev for rev ( ) ( ) q q R q q      (S52) summary of the experimental (E) and/or theoretical (T) results of the achieved maximum thermal rectification ratios (R max ) with respect to thermal diode materials and temperature of the cooler (T c )/heater (T h ). The table is aligned according to the thermal rectification ratio R max . The structural transition refers to a phase change within a single state (i.e., solid or liquid), while the state transition refers to a tranfomration of one state into another state (e.g., solid into liquid). . Schematic illustration of different theoretical PCTD modules designed via possible operating conditions in heating process. The dark blue and light blue colors denote PCM A in solid state and liquid state, whose thermal conductivities are k As and k Al ; while dark red and light red colors represent PCM B in solid state and liquid state, whose effective thermal conductivities are k Bs and k Bl_eff . Operating Conditions T i >T mA and T i