We consider two-body bound states in a flat band of a multiband system. The existence of pair dispersion predicts the possibility of breaking the degeneracy of the band and creating order, such as superconductivity. Within a separable interaction potential approximation, we find that finiteness of the effective mass of a bound pair is determined by a band structure invariant, which in the uniform case becomes the quantum metric. The results offer a simple foundation to understand and predict flat band superconductivity. We propose an experiment to test the interaction-induced pair motion. The concept of a flat band refers to Bloch bands of periodic systems, which are either perfectly dispersionless or where the band width is negligible compared to other energy scales. The effects of interactions and disorder are enhanced in such systems. This may lead to magnetic order In the Cooper problem We consider two interacting particles in a periodic potential and interacting via an interaction potential λV (1, 2). The two-body Schrödinger equation is [T 1 + T 2 + λV (1, 2)] |ψ(1, 2) = E|ψ(1, 2) , where T 1 + T 2 contains the kinetic energies and the periodic potential. The two particles can be either fermions or bosons. The solution for λ = 0 is the two-particle state given by (T 1 + T 2 )|φ n = E n |φ n , where n contains all quantum numbers (band index, lattice momentum, spin) of the two-particle state. Let |φ 0 (1, 2) denote the state of the particles in absence of interactions and E 0 the corresponding energy. We consider a flat band where E n = E 0 (or E n ≃ E 0 ). We denote by n the states in this flat band and by n ′ those in other dispersive or flat bands. The solution that fulfills the Schrödinger equation is given by We then assume the isolated flat band limit: The lowest/highest energies E ′ min/max of the bands above/below the flat band are separated from it by a band gap that is larger than the interactions, |E 0 -E ′ min/max | ≥ |λ|. If we further assume that E is close to E 0 (weak interactions), then |E -E ′ min/max | ≥ |λ| and the last term of Eq. ( becomes negligible. We proceed with where n refers to quantum numbers in the isolated flat band, and we introduced the notation E b for the pair binding energy. We use units where h and the system volume are set to one. We use the Bloch functions e ik•x m k (x) of the flat band where k is the lattice momentum and the band and spin indices are not marked explicitly. are the center-of-mass (COM) and relative momenta and coordinates, respectively. We consider interaction potentials V , whose dependence on the COM coordinate has the same periodicity as the lattice, then the COM momentum q of the two particles is conserved. Even when we consider the two-body problem in the isolated flat band, the multiband nature of the system is inherent in the spatial dependence of the periodic part of the Bloch function, m k (x). In the language of lattice models, it contains the orbital dependence of the Bloch function. We consider a general interaction potential V = V (x 1 , x 2 ) (instead of V = V (r)) to incorporate possible effects arising from the spatial (orbital) dependence of the interaction and the Bloch functions. We now make our second approximation: consider a separable potential 2 ), and assume u real. The calculations are straightforward but, for convenience, intermediate steps are given in the Supplemental Material and the momentum summation is over the first Brillouin zone. This shows that, for attractive (effective) interactions (λ < 0), a bound state (E b < 0) exists whenever ũ(k 1 , k 2 ) is non-zero for a sufficiently large number of momenta so that the sum in (4) is non-vanishing in the thermodynamical limit. Importantly, the bound state energy is linearly proportional to the coupling constant λ. Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mean-field theory for a flat band system predicts linear dependence of the order parameter (pairing gap) To find out whether the bound pair has a dispersion, we study |ũ(k 1 , k 2 )| 2 further. We bring back the original interaction potential using u( . Furthermore, we assume contact interaction V (x 1 , x 2 ) = V (x 1 )δ(x 1x 2 ), consider interacting particles that have opposite spins, and use the relation (consequence of time reversal symmetry) We obtain The result is intuitive: in a flat band, kinetic energy effects are absent, thus the pairing energy is given solely by the probability of the particles to overlap in space and the local interaction potential. We now expand the result (5) with respect to small pair momentum, ). Summation is assumed over repeated indices and where The effective mass tensor is therefore This means that the existence of a finite, positive effective mass, and thus the possibility of breaking the degeneracy towards an ordered state, depends on the derivatives of the flat band projector in a simple way. The result is gauge invariant and independent of the basis. In the case of a trivial flat band, such as a single band lattice model with vanishing hopping, the periodic part of the Bloch function is independent of momentum and the pair mass remains infinite, preventing superfluidity. In a multiband lattice model, the derivatives can be finite. Bear in mind that the separable potential approximation leads to only one bound state, which is the sum of the exact bound states. However, we show in the following that, for several interesting lattice models, only one (significantly) dispersive bound state exists and therefore the result The superfluid weight D s ij , defined as the change in energy density δE = D s ij q i q j /2 due to supercurrent q, has been shown to be proportional to the quantum metric by multiband mean-field theory )dk i dk j when a parameter k is varied. The quantum metric is the real part of the quantum geometric tensor whose imaginary part is the Berry curvature. This connection allows us to determine the finite Chern number and Berry curvature as the lower bounds for superfluid weight using multiband BCS theory To make a connection to previous many-body results, let us first note that the continuum results ( where g ij (k) is the quantum metric. In Refs. The result where we have have defined the "local quantum metric" g local ij (k, x), which is of the same form as the usual quantum metric but with the projector The local quantum metric is both basis-and gauge-independent, unlike the conventional quantum metric and Berry curvature that are gauge-invariant but depend on the basis We test the analytical results against exact numerical solutions of the two-body Schrödinger equation in selected lattice models that feature flat bands. The contact interaction is used. For the 1D sawtooth ladder, which has one flat band (Fig. Our results can be directly tested in ultracold quantum gas experiments for two particles. The expansion velocity is obtained by fitting the free particle result x2 (t) = x2 (0) + v 2 exp t 2 to the width x2 (t) of the density distribution. The expansion velocity is controlled by the mass and the initial spread of the momentum distribution, since the effective mass approximation gives v exp = p2 (0) /m eff . Using p2 (0) ∝ |λ| -1/4 and m eff ∝ |λ| -1 , one obtains v exp ∝ |λ| γ with γ = 0.75. The value obtained by fitting of the data is γ = 0.74 for V 0 = -2t and γ = 0.72 for V 0 = -0.3t, in good agreement with the expected value. The m eff ∝ |λ| -1 behavior characteristic for a flat band is seen until |λ| becomes comparable to the gap between the flat band and its neighboring bands (here |λ| ≃ 2t). Experiments both for bosons and fermions would be interesting, although only the latter connects directly to superconductivity. By increasing the filling, an experiment could test to which extent the two-body predictions also describe the many-body case. Further, our results are symmetric in the coupling, and for λ > 0, so-called repulsively bound pairs could be observed In summary, we show that the energy of a two-body bound state in a flat band is linearly proportional to the interaction constant and depends on the overlap of the periodic part of the Bloch functions and the orbital structure of the interaction potential in a simple way. The pair momentum dependence of the bound state energy can be used to determine the effective mass. Within the separable potential approximation, we find that it is essentially defined by a gauge-and basis-independent quantity that we call the local quantum metric. With further approximations on the uniformity of the interactions and Bloch functions, we recover the dependence of the effective mass on geometric quantities, such as the (global) quantum metric and Berry curvature predicted earlier by many-body approaches. We demonstrate the adequacy of our approximate analytical results by comparison to exact solutions of the two-particle problem in the sawtooth ladder, Lieb lattice and Harper models; these and other flat band models can be realized for instance with ultracold gases Our results show that the two-particle problem already gives the salient features of the corresponding BCS mean-field (and other many-body) theory predictions. This suggests that in understanding and predicting superconductivity in flat bands of multiband systems, knowledge of the orbital dependence of the interaction and the noninteracting band structure can already be quite powerful. This may be advantageous when the single particle band structure alone is complex, for instance involving a large unit cell as in twisted bilayer 2D materials, and therefore formulating a suitable many-particle lattice model is a challenge. Our approach can easily be extended to different pairing symmetries. The two-body approach may also be, due to its computational lightness, well suited for materials discovery and optimization to find new flat band superconducting materials. The twobody effective mass also gives the first order estimate of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) temperature via the relation Furthermore, it gives a benchmark for full many-body descriptions to distinguish strong correlation effects. Our results highlight the role of the local and global quantum metric in a flat band and provide intuitive insight to the connection between superfluidity and quantum geometry. While all flat bands have a high density of states, the distances between the Bloch functions may differ in ways that are decisive for superconductivity. We start from the Schrödinger equation where T 1 + T 2 contains the kinetic energies of the two particles (fermions or bosons) and the periodic potential, and λV (1, 2) is the interaction potential between the particles. The solution without the interaction potential is the two-particle state given by where n contains all quantum numbers (band index, lattice momenta, spin) of the two-particle state. Let |φ 0 (1, 2) denote the state of the particles in absence of interactions and E 0 the corresponding energy. We consider a flat band where all other states with different quantum numbers (but the same band index) have the same energy, E n = E 0 (or E n ≃ E 0 ). We denote by n the states in this flat band and by n ′ those in other dispersive or flat bands. The solution that fulfills the Schrödinger equation ( The proof assumes that the eigenfunctions are orthogonal and complete, allowing to write (labels 1, 2 are dropped here) Now one can use nmax n=0 |φ n φ n | = 1 to simplify the last term so that which gives (1), with the last term zero by We assume the isolated flat band limit: The lowest/highest energies E ′ min/max of the bands above/below the flat band are separated from it by a band gap that is larger than the interactions, |E 0 -E ′ min/max | >> |λ|. If we further assume that E is close to E 0 , which should be the case for weak interactions, then |E -E ′ min/max | >> |λ| and the last term of (2) becomes negligible. The validity of this approximation can be confirmed by checking that for the final result indeed |E -E 0 | << |E -E ′ min/max |. Within the isolated flat band approximation we proceed with where n refers to quantum numbers in the isolated flat band. We use the Bloch functions e ik•x m k (x) of the flat band where k is the lattice momentum and the band and spin indices are not marked explicitly. Then The plane wave part of the wavefunction can be written in terms of the center-of-mass (COM) The Bloch functions m k (x) are assumed normalized by the system volume, and the volume does not appear explicitly in the calculation in this section. We then consider the case where particle one has spin up and the particle two spin down, and use m ↑ k = m ↓ * -k ≡ m k which is consequence of time reversal symmetry. This brings the above formula into We introduce a definition of the total wavefunction: Since in a lattice we cannot assume a separation of the COM and relative coordinates, this has to be understood as just a redefinition (multiplication of wave function by a phase factor). The interaction potential V is assumed to have the same periodicity in its COM coordinate dependence as the lattice (this allows a large class of possible potentials, also orbital-dependent ones). Then the total lattice momentum q = k 1 + k 2 is conserved. The equations ( It thus follows that the COM momentum q dependence is only left in the periodic part of the Bloch function and in ψ q,k (x 1 , x 2 ): We consider a general interaction potential V = V (x 1 , x 2 ), and make the separable potential approximation, namely , and assume u real. Strictly speaking, such separation is justifiable only for a delta function potential (contact interactions), but it may be a good approximation in other cases as well. In the end of the calculation, the original potential is reintroduced by The matrix element in the equation ( We also define Now we can proceed with We obtain In the last step, equation In |ũ(q, k)| 2 we can replace the separable potential by the original one to obtain We continue to process the result further by assuming that the interaction is of contact potential type, namely V (x 1 , x 2 ) = δ(x 1x 2 )V (x 1 ). This still keeps the possibility that the interaction depends on position, that is, the strength of the contact interaction may be orbital dependent. The energy becomes To inspect the possibility of a finite effective mass, we make an expansion in the pair momentum, that is, a small q Taylor series, to the Bloch function: ). Summation is assumed over repeated indices and ∂ i ≡ ∂/∂k i . This gives where The summation of k over the first Brillouin zone can be changed to integration, and partial integration can be applied to remove the second derivative. Note that the projectors P are continuous over the whole Brillouin zone even when there would be discontinous jumps in the phases of the Bloch functions (associated with finite Chern numbers, for instance). Therefore this partial integration step is valid in the general case. The result is Thus For i = j this is simply This means that a finite, positive effective mass exists whenever the first derivative of the projector is non-zero at least on one orbital where V (x) is non-zero. In this section, we use the variational method to calculate the two-body energy in a multiband lattice system. Since the two-body potential is translationally invariant or has the same periodicity as the lattice, the total momentum q of the two particles is conserved. In the isolated band limit, we can construct the following variational state Here c † k,σ,m creates a Bloch state with momentum k and spin σ in the m-th band which is the band we are interested in. If the interaction is not weak compared to the band gap, we can use variational states that mix Bloch bands, and if all the bands are included in the ansatz, the variational solutions become exact. The isolated flat band approximation is therefore done here by the variational ansatz. We construct the functional The coefficient A k and energy E q are determined by calculating functional derivative of In the second quantized formalism, the two-body potential can be written as and the field operator can be expanded by using Bloch functions with N c being the number of unit cells. Note that the Bloch functions for spin-up and spin-down particles are not necessarily the same. Here n is the band index and n k,σ is the periodic part of the Bloch function of the nth band. We find that (here m k,σ is the periodic part of the Bloch function of the band of interest defined by the ansatz, with the band index m) an exactly flat band, the dispersion ε k,σ,m is independent of the momentum. Here we keep the k dependence such that our result can be applied to quasiflat bands. To get Eq. ( From Eq. ( It is clear that for an exactly flat band (ε k+q/2,↑,m + ε -k+q/2,↓,m = constant), the momentum dependence of the bound states solely comes from the Bloch functions in V k,k ′ (q). The equation (49) can be studied for a general type of interaction via numerical solutions. However, to proceed with analytical calculations we use the contact interaction, which is actually an accurate description of most ultracold atom systems, and can be a good first order approximation in others. Contact interaction means we take and assume that V (x) has the same periodicity as the periodic potential experienced by the particles. For continuum ultracold gas systems, it is natural to assume V (x) = V because the scattering length between the particles is independent of the position. The position dependence is introduced because in the tight binding approximation, the on-site (Hubbard-type) interaction can be orbital dependent. Using the contact potential, the projected potential becomes where u.c. denotes unit cell. For tight binding models, Eq. (51) becomes where α labels the orbitals in the unit cell. Eq. ( We now consider the case where the interaction is orbital independent, V α = 1. Then let us remind of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) approximation (U is the on-site interaction strength, i the position index), We can relate the operator c † iσ to the Bloch function m * k,σ , and the order parameter ∆ = U c † i↑ c † i↓ to the expectation value m * k,↑ m * -k,↓ ; then, inspired by the structure of the BCS approximation, we may approximate Eq. ( Here N orb is the number of orbitals that compose the flat band. The factor 1/N orb is introduced because there are N 2 orb terms in Eq. (55), while in the original potential there are only N orb terms to be summed. Moreover, 1/N orb appears in the BCS self-consistent equation for ∆, see Eq. (73) in Sec. III. These arguments support the approximation done in deriving equation The eigenvalue of the approximated potential, Eq. ( Since the energy Eq. ( We consider now the so-called uniform pairing condition, which in the earlier works 1-3 was defined by having V α same for all orbitals and also demanding In this case we can show that the zero pair-momentum energy has a simple form: This means Eq. ( This further motivates the approximation done in deriving equation ( We continue within the uniform pairing condition defined above. We consider small momenta and expand Eq. ( where g ij (k) is the quantum metric that is given in terms of the Bloch function projector The effective mass is which is the same as the result from the multiband BCS theory, see Eq. (79) in Sec. III, and the same as the result of equation ( The energy Eq. ( Here P k = |m k m k | is again the projection operator. Taking the trace of the projected potential corresponds to the separable potential approximation done in the derivation presented in the main text and Section I above. As a comparison, Eq. ( Expanding Eq. ( = E q=0 -q i q j 2 λ N c k α V α α|∂ i P k |α α|∂ j P k |α . Partial integration as explained in Section I was applied in the last step. The effective mass is This effective mass is the same as equation ( The trace of the potential is the total energy of the bound states and in general, there are more than one bound state for a given q, so Eq. ( Here we study another model, the time-reversal invariant Harper-Hubbard model. Both the exact result and the result of the separable potential approximation are shown in Fig. We plot the separable potential approximation result, Eq. ( According to the previous results on the flat band superfluid weight 1,3 , the change of the energy density δE/N c in the presence of supercurrent q is Here E = (ǫ 0 -μ) 2 + ∆ 2 (ǫ 0 is the flat band energy) is the energy of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle. Note that in Refs. 1,3 , the total momentum of a Cooper pair is 2q, while in the current work, we use a different convention such that the total momentum of a Cooper pair is q, and therefore the superfluid weight, Eq. ( We apply the BCS result of the order parameter. Since there are multiple bands, the BCS self-consistent equations are (we have assumed that the energy of the flat band is zero and the that pairing is uniform 1 , namely ∆ α = ∆ for all orbitals α that participate in the pairing) Here N orb is the number of orbitals, and the density is defined as where n is the number of fully occupied non-flat bands. With is convention, the particle number in the flat band is 2N c N orb n, and therefore n c = nN orb can be identified as the density of Cooper pairs in the flat band. Solving the self-consistent equations we find H. Miyake, G. A. Siviloglou, C. J. Kennedy, W. C. Burton, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 185302 (2013).