In this work we investigate the electronic properties of mercaptocarboxylic acids with several carbon chain lengths adsorbed on ZnO-(10-10) surfaces via density functional theory calculations using semi-local and hybrid exchange-correlation functionals. Amongst the investigated structures, we identify the monodentate adsorption mode to be stable. Moreover, this mode introduces optically active states in the ZnO gap, is further confirmed by the calculation of the dielectric function at PBE0 and TD-PBE0 levels. One interesting finding is that adsorption mode and the dielectric properties of the hybrid system are both rather insensitive to the chain length, since the acceptor 1 Hybrid nanostructures made of organic and inorganic materials are of great interest for applications in electronic and optoelectronics devices. ZnO is a semiconductor and a lowcost material with a wide band gap of 3.3 eV, high electron mobility, and high absorbance in the UV range . Ab initio density-functional theory calculations of several small functional groups on ZnO (1010) surfaces have been pursued . The calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) . We have explored several geometries for the MPA molecules on the ZnO (10 10) surfaces. The ground-state geometries for SH-(CH 2 ) n -COOH on ZnO are shown in Fig. The presence of the intra-gap states raises the question whether these systems can be used to enhance or modify the optoelectronic properties of the ZnO non-polar surfaces. Therefore we have calculated the dielectric function of the bare and functionalized surfaces in the IPA . The discussion above does not include the presence of excitonic effects. However, more accurate predictions of materials for optoelectronic applications requires the inclusion of the electron-hole pair, which can be achieved using theoretical methods at different approxi-mations, such as GW + Bethe-Salpether equation (BSE) or TD-DFT . Also, it would be useful to have the absorption spectrum calculated with GW+BSE, but this is still prohibitive due to the high computational costs. Furthermore, we would like to point out that, even though the spectra are calculated here in the IPA, the inclusion of excitonic (ladder) effects is not expected to change the physical picture significantly, as the exciton binding energies between localized molecular states and delocalized conduction band states should be weak due to a small wave function overlap in the corresponding exchange Coulomb matrix elements. Hence, we believe that the absorption due to the presence of -SH groups states around 2.3 eV can be used either to enhance the efficiency of solar cells based on functionalized semiconductor surfaces. Usually, the nanowire growth direction is the [0001] with the non-polar surfaces exposed. Therefore, the field propagation would be most beneficial if it naturally happens along the nanowires surfaces. We have investigated adsorption of MPA-derived molecules with several carbon chain lengths using semi-local and hybrid functionals. We have identified the monodentate adsorption mode as the most stable one and have further shown that electronic and optical properties of these hybrid system are not very sensitive to the chain length. The acceptor state located in the band gap is very localized on the molecular orbitals, mainly on the sulphur atom. This indicates that even small molecules can be used to stabilize ZnO non-polar surfaces and tune their dielectric properties. Our results corroborate well with experimental findings which have suggested that this system is promising for optoelectronic applications. 