In this work we want to enhance the calculation performed by Franz, Parisi and Virasoro (FPV) A very powerful tool to study spontaneous symmetry breaking is the evaluation of the free energy cost of interfaces between different ordered phases of a system. The stability of the ordered phase is in fact strictly linked to the probabilistic cost of fluctuations transforming one ordered phase into another. If the probability of creating bubbles of a different ordered phase inside a given one is not zero the ordered phase will be unstable under this kind of fluctuations, so in the end no ordered phase can exist This technique can be used to easily determine the so called lower critical dimension of systems composed of Ising and continuous (Heisenberg) spins. As the name suggests the lower critical dimension is the number of spatial dimensions for which the free energy cost of fluctuations cease to be infinite in the thermodynamic limit, such that in this number of dimension spontaneous symmetry breaking is not possible. The formalization of these concepts is the Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem This result can be easily sketched by considering a D-dimensional cube of side L with periodic boundary conditions in the first D -1 directions, and boundary conditions in the D-th direction given by spins displaced by an angle θ. The difference in free energy at low temperature between this setting and the one with only periodic boundary conditions will be given by the interaction energy between neighbouring spins, which in turn are forced to be different by the different boundary conditions. The least energy will be used when every couple of neighbouring spins along the D-th direction is displaced by an angle θ L . This displacement implies an energy density proportional to θ 2 L 2 , and so the free energy difference with respect to the periodic boundary conditions system is proportional to θ 2 L D-2 . We have to deal with a different situation in systems with only discrete symmetries. In such cases we indeed have an energy gap between two different ordered phases, so no cheap fluctuations will be present. In the situation presented above the least energy configurations are not the ones in which the spin difference is distributed over the whole system, but the ones in which the interface is concentrated on a single hypersurface (in this case there is a lower bound in the interaction energy, such that there is no point in distributing it over larger regions of the system). This implies a free energy cost proportional to L D-1 , and a lower critical dimension D lc = 1. The system of interest in this paper is the Ising spin glass, or Edwards-Anderson model, and as we will see it will escape both the situations described above. The Hamiltonian of this system contains a quenched disorder -unknown variables which however do not change from one configuration to another -in addition to Ising spin variables. For a fixed quenched disorder the only symmetry of this Hamiltonian is the one of the Ising spins, but in the end we will have to average out the disorder variables, introducing the so-called replicas of the system While the presence of a stable phase in three spatial dimensions is strongly supported by experiments and numerical simulations and the starting condition: For this system it was possible to study the dependence of the free energy cost on the order parameter. The simple proportionality δf (q) ∝ P (q) was found, where δf (q) is the free energy density cost as a function of the order parameter q and P (q) is its probability distribution. More precisely one can evaluate the probability of a fluctuation bringing a state having the same boundary overlap p 1 to a different state, having different boundary overlaps p 1 and p 2 . The probability one obtains has the form: One might wonder if this kind of dependence from p 1 and p 2 is general or just a peculiarity of hierarchical spin glasses, but to study the problem in the Edwards-Anderson model we have to go past the approximations used in the FPV papers. With these approximations the quantity P (q) is a constant, so that the free energy cost is trivially proportional to it, but when the probability is non-trivial the proportionality could be broken. In addition a recent work The main purpouse of this paper is to address the last two issues, extending the FPV calculation in order to describe the dependence of the free energy cost on the temperature and the order parameter, in addition to the number of space dimensions. The paper is organized in this way: in section 2 we give the basic definition of the model, mostly borrowing from the original paper The starting model of the FPV paper was the D-dimensional Edwards-Anderson spin-glass Hamiltonian in a box of volume V and side L 1: where < i, j > are nearest neighbour sites and the spins s i are of the Ising type, s i = ±1. The variables J ij are independent Gaussian variables such that Taking the continuum limit and considering the system close to the critical temperature we obtain the expression for the mean field free energy: Here Q ab (x) is the overlap matrix, the order parameter of the replica theory. Considering two replicas of the system -having the same disorder but in general different configurations -we can define the overlap matrix as where a and b are the replica indices, and i is the site index. In the continuum limit , fixing a small region of space V x centered in x and having volume In all the paper τ = T c -T , y is the coupling constant of the replica symmetry breaking interaction (it is equal to 2 3 in the original model), Tr is the trace in replica space, and n is the number of replicas. In the FPV computation the only quartic term retained was the one responsible for the replica symmetry breaking. The Edwards-Anderson model to which the above approximations are applied is also called the reduced model. The reduced model with free boundary conditions can be solved by the mean field solution found by Parisi with u 0 = 3yq min and u 1 = 3yq max . Here and in the rest of the paper we use the letter x for space coordinates, and u for the replica coordinates. For the breaking points we have the relations: The solution found predicts many overlapping pure states, with an overlap constant in space. From this starting point we want to force a dishomogeneity in the order parameter by imposing different boundary conditions over a distance L in a particular direction of the lattice. We cannot directly impose particular values for q(0, u) and q(L, u) because the functional form q(x, u) is obtained from the saddle point equations, so any modification of it would bring us out of the saddle point approximation. Instead the method of real replicas is used As it can be seen from the above definition the overlap boundary conditions are constrained only in one spatial direction, the other ones remaining free. The overlap will thus be a constant in all directions but the constrained one. The quantity we are interested in is the free energy difference corresponding to the ratio between this partition function and the one without constraints. We have to remember that the replicas used to obtain the mean field solution of the problem are conceptually different from the replicas we are using to evaluate the free energy cost of the constraint. For this reason the latter are called real replicas, and when applying the usual replica method to the coupled system we have two different replica indices, one for each real replica. In this setting a generalized order parameter is used, in that we have to consider the overlaps between both two copies of the first (or the second) real replica, and the overlap between the first and the second real replicas. Thus we have three different types of overlaps: Q ab 11 (x) between states of the first real replica, Q ab 22 (x) between states of the second real replica, and Q ab 12 (x) = Q ba 21 (x) between states of the first and states of the second real replica. In the original work the ansatz taken is Here p(x) is an unknown function we have to recover from the saddle point equations with boundary conditions p(0) = p 1 and p(L) = p 2 . This generalized order parameter can be written as Q αβ (x), α and β being double indices: α = {a, r}, β = {b, s} for r, s = 1, 2. We will consider different boundary conditions only in one spatial direction, so here the coordinate x will denote the only direction in which a non-trivial behaviour of the system is present. Near the critical temperature a Landau expansion of the free energy as a function of this extended order parameter can be performed, and in the case p 1 = p 2 a saddle point solution can be found with similar methods as in the single real replica problem. The solution has the form: The parameters are the same as in the unconstrained solution, except for u p = 3y p. The solution of the unconstrained problem being Q f (u) = u 3y , we see that in the region u < u p the solution can be written as Q f (2u). This is a general fact, not based on the particular model but on ultrametric symmetry. We can now perturb this solution of the problem with p 1 = p 2 to study the case p 1 = p 2 . The free energy density is modified by the gradient squared |∇Q| 2 , and the parameter of the perturbation will be proportional to some positive power of |p 1 -p 2 |/L (the perturbation in density must go to zero for fixed overlap difference and infinitely far away boundaries). The gradient term is the one responsible for the value of the lower critical dimension D lc = 2 in the presence of a continuous symmetry. It is easy to see that it gives a contribution to the free energy cost proportional to L D-2 , which would guarantee the stability of ordered phase down to D = 2. In a spin glass system however this dominant contribution vanishes due to replica symmetry. In fact for the gradient term evaluated on the unperturbed saddle point we obtain: The vanishing of the gradient term at the leading order is a signal of the fact that breaking the replica symmetry is associated with zero modes which are much more powerful than the ones of a standard continuous symmetry breaking. Given that the gradient on the unperturbed solution vanishes we can conclude that the lower critical dimension will be higher than D = 2. To estimate it an assumption on the functional form of the order parameter can be made, and an approximation of the saddle point can be found in the functional class selected. If we assume the function p(x) to interpolate linearly between the two boundary condition, the saddle point equations evaluated on the unperturbed solution become: Given the form of these equations the assumption is made that the effect of the gradient is to enforce a small smoothing of the overlap function around the points up 2 and u p in replica space. This assumption can be taken as the starting point of a variational problem, in which a polynomial function is chosen to smooth the unperturbed solution around the breaking points up 2 and u p . Before going to the variational problem in the next section, we mention a useful result about the dependence of the free energy density variation on the temperature and the magnetic field. In particular we can prove that as long as the unperturbed solutions q(x, u) and p(x, u) do not depend on the temperature and magnetic field in the region u 0 < u < u 1 , the free energy variation δF = F (p 1 , p 2 ) -F (p 1 , p 1 ) does not depend on these parameters either. In fact we can expand the free energy variation as: with δQ being a small perturbation localized around the points in which q(u) = p. The only part of δF which could depend on the temperature is because all other terms in which Q(x) is coupled with δQ(x) are null when Q(x) depend on τ . It is however easy to show that also the temperature dependence of the two terms in δF τ is such that the total dependence vanish. Similarly the only term in which we can find a dependence on the magnetic field is Tr Q(x)δQ 2 (x) , but in all the points in which Q(x) shows a dependence on the magnetic field δQ 2 (x) vanish, so also this term is field-independent. In this section we show how a variational approach can be used to find an approximate solution to the saddle point equations where the intervals are defined by the points: Figure The variational parameters in the above formula are δ and δ , the intervals over which we interpolate the unperturbed solution with the second order polynomial. The constraint imposed on the solution is to have different values of p(x) at the boundaries of the system. This in turn forces a non-vanishing derivative d p dx at least in some regions of the block. This derivative takes the place of |p 1 -p 2 |/L as the perturbative parameter. The free energy density variation as a function of δ and δ takes the form: where it was introduced the variable χ = 3y d p dx . Maximizing over the variational parameters we find the free energy density cost: The solution of this variational problem is obtained for parameters: Finally maximizing the free energy density variation with respect to the functional form of p(x) we obtain a linear variation of the overlap (and thus a constant free energy density) over the whole block: p With this free energy density cost we finally obtain the free energy variation over a volume and we see that the free energy cost does not grow with the volume for dimensions d ≤ 4 New results We modified the original calculation to check its stability changing the function space over which the free energy is maximized. The maximization process in the original paper was constrained to variations contained in the space of quadratic polynomials. We improved the smoothness of the solution and changed the space of variations to higher degree polynomials by imposing continuity of the first k-derivatives at the insertion points of the polynomial. Our family of perturbed solutions takes the form: Now p k δ (x, u) and p k δ (x, u) are the lowest degree polynomials in u ensuring the continuity of the solutions up to the k-th order derivative. In the original solution interpolating with second order polynomials we had a discontinuity of the second derivative at the insertion points; here we can impose continuity to arbitrary order. To check the stability of the solution we variated the solution imposing continuity of second order derivatives, obtaining for the free energy density cost the result: As we see the functional form of the expression is completely unchanged, the only difference being a small reduction in the numerical coefficient. Finally evaluating the free energy cost on a solution with continuous third order derivatives at the insertion points we obtain: It can be noted that with continuity of the second and third order derivatives of the solution at the insertion points the change in the free energy cost is negative, so we are slightly moving away from the real maximum After a careful review of the effect of different boundary conditions on the free energy ( where P (q) is the overlap probability and p = p1+p2 is the average overlap. The free energy density obtained in the previous section trivially satisfies a similar relation (though with different exponents), but given that the probability P (q) is itself a constant it is difficult to establish the significance of this result. We want to consider an extension of the truncated model which generates a non-linear solution q(u), and as a consequence a non-trivial overlap probability P (q). In this section we extend the model by adding to the free energy density a generic polynomial function local in replica space; relabeling the free energy ( with g(q) = g 6 q 6 + g 8 q 8 + g 10 q 10 + ... and only even terms are included in order to preserve the Z 2 symmetry of the original Hamiltonian. With "local in replica space" we mean that there are no terms proportional to z which couple overlap matrix elements Q ab for different values of the codistance between replica indices ab (in the continuum limit this would translate to a different codistance index u). This peculiarity of the new "interaction terms" allows us to extend to this free energy many of the results derived in the FPV calculation. As a first step it is easy to show that the saddle point equations derived from such a free energy (with only one real replica) are algebraic and local in the matrix elements Q ab , as in the truncated model. This implies that the solution cannot depend on the temperature and magnetic field for any u ∈ (u 0 , u 1 ), where q(u 0 ) = q min and q(u 1 ) = q max . This directly implies that there can be no dependence of the free energy cost on the temperature and magnetic field, for the same argument given in section 2: no term in F 0 is temperature or magnetic field-dependent, and given that all the terms in g (Q ab ) have only one set of replica indices their variations have the form: They are different from zero only when δQ ab is different from zero, where there is no dependence on temperature and magnetic field in Q ab . Given the algebraic nature of the saddle point equations they are easy to solve for any polynomial g(Q ab ). As an example the exact solution for the lowest order non-trivial polynomial, g(Q ab ) = z 6! Q 6 ab , has the form: The last expression as a power series in u becomes: The inverse function u(q) and the associated bulk overlap probability have the simpler form: Finally we can evaluate the free energy cost with this extended free energy using the same variational approach as in the previous section. We can simplify the calculation performing it perturbatively in the coupling constant z; at the first perturbative order we obtain: dp dx We see that at this order of approximation the free energy density cost is indeed proportional to P (q) 3 4 . We verified this proportionality for polynomials of order up to 24, and derived it analytically in section 5. The last step is to maximize the free energy over the functional form of p(x). We find a functional form different from the linear one of FPV; in particular we obtain: This functional form implies a homogeneous distribution of the free energy cost over the block: In this section we want to perform the calculation for a system with a free energy closer to the real Edwards-Anderson one. We can obtain the truncated model of section 2 expanding the Edwards-Anderson effective Hamiltonian up to order four in powers of the field, and retaining only the fourth order term responsible for the replica symmetry breaking. This is the minimal model to describe a system with replica symmetry breaking, and the solution for it is the linear overlap function we met in section 2. If we want to study what happens when the solution of the system becomes non-linear it is sufficient to add the remaining fourth order terms to the free energy. The free energy including all the fourth order terms has the form We call the two additional terms respectively F z and F t (denoting as in the previous sections densities with lower case letters). Their contribution to the saddle point equations is given by: n δF z δQ ab (x) n δF t δQ ab (x) The new saddle point equations for a solution homogeneous in space are thus: The only contribution of the F t term is to effectively increase (or reduce, for negative t) the reduced temperature of the system. This can be seen by the fact that in the saddle point equations the reduced temperature appears only in the combination τ = τt n TrQ 2 (x) . The term F z , on the other hand, deforms the functional form of the solution making it non linear (and giving it an explicit dependence on the effective temperature τ ). Solving the equation with z = 0 we would have the same linear solution as section 2, dependent on the temperature only in q(u) = q max and on the magnetic field only in q(u) = q min . The value of q max would depend on the effective temperature τ instead of τ ; τ has a dependence both on the temperature and magnetic field through the term TrQ 2 , but given that q(u) ≤ q max ≈ τ the corrections will always be smaller than τ if t is of order one. Solving the saddle point equations with the F z term the situation changes more radically; the solution becomes non linear and acquires a dependence on the effective temperature for every value of the overlap q(u). We have the explicit form: We want now to study the dependence of the free energy cost on the temperature and magnetic field. Given the explicit dependence of the solution of the saddle point equations on the effective temperature τ we expect a similar dependence also in the free energy cost. We already saw that the free energy cost of the reduced model F 0 cannot depend explicitly on the temperature or the magnetic field; the only dependence can be trough q(u), and thus trough τ . We can check that the same happens for the two additional terms F z and F t . On the saddle point solution we have: nδf z = z 12 Tr 4QδQ 3 + 6Q Taking the derivative of the right hand side of the the first equation with respect to Q ab we obtain: It is easy to show that both terms vanish when ab is such that and we already showed that for terms of this kind there is no coupling between values of the overlap for different values of the index ab. As a consequence there can be no dependence on q min or q max when δQ ab is different from zero -the only possible dependence is trough q(u). The previously examined terms thus cannot depend explicitly on the temperature and magnetic field; the only dependence on these parameters is trough τ . In addition we expect an explicit dependence on τ , not only trough q(u), only from the term δf z . From the saddle point solution we obtain the overlap probability: We proceed to evaluate the free energy cost perturbing the reduced model at the first order in the coupling constant z. The correction given by the term f t to the temperature can be found solving a self-consistency equation for TrQ 2 , and all other contributions proportional to t vanish. We obtain the free energy cost: dp dx The overlap probability expanded at this order of approximation in z is: We can see that in this case the free energy cost is not proportional to any power of P (q); we have the same functional dependence on p and the effective temperature, but slightly different numerical coefficients. The other difference with the previously analyzed cases is the dependence on the effective temperature that we already saw. These differences can be traced back to the different nature of the saddle point equations: while in the previous cases they reduced to "local", algebraic equations, in this case they are differential equations, the solutions of which depend on boundary conditions. We note also that the only effect of f t has been to modify the temperature, all the other terms being subleading in L -1 . Having recovered the free energy density cost as a function of the overlap and temperature we can maximize over the functional form of the overlap, to find the free energy as a function of the temperature: This result can be compared to the one recently reported in This value is in agreement with the findings of As we can see the result is perfectly equivalent to the previous one at the first order in z, higher orders in z being connected to higher orders in τ . The last expression allows us also to evaluate the variation of the internal energy as a function of the temperature: with κ(τ ) = d dτ 1 + zτ + 3 2 z 2 τ 2 . We obtain the exact value for the Edwards-Anderson model (at this order of approximation in the temperature) substituting the values z = 3, y = 2/3. Finally we note that the scaling L D- In this section we show a number of analytic results generalizing the calculations of the previous sections. The analytic derivation allows us to consider what happens in a general model having the same structure of the two previously analyzed and in which the same variational procedure is applied. In addition the model described in this section describes accurately the Edwards-Anderson free energy up to order six in the overlap field. This general free energy can be written as: the models previously analyzed can be recovered from the general one keeping different from zero only the coupling constants: for the sixth-order polynomial model and: for the Edwards-Anderson model 5 . To solve the general saddle point when there are no constraints on the boundary conditions we use the standard methods, but here we outline the different steps because they will be useful in exploiting all the symmetries of the theory. For the saddle point we have: We can see that the terms proportional to t ij with j > 1 give the only contribution of rescaling the coupling constants of Q i-1 . This is a generalization of what we saw in the case of abc Q 2 ab Q 2 bc , and in the same way we can consider effective coupling constants to absorb these contributions. Using this strategy the last equation becomes: Now taking the continuum limit and deriving with respect to Q u we obtain: space of the whole solution space. The solution for different boundary conditions was assumed to be a small perturbation of the solution with free boundary conditions, the perturbations being second order polynomials in order to smooth discontinuities generated by the different boundary conditions. Here we extended the solution space over which the maximization is performed to include higher order polynomials and continuity of higher order derivatives of the solution. The space of solution thus explored is much larger than the original one, but still the solution originally found is robust: the scaling of the free energy cost as a function of the overlap difference and the number of spatial dimensions is independent of the smoothing we adopt for the discontinuities. We performed the same calculation in two extensions of the original model, to study the dependence of the free energy density cost on the overlap q with different type of interactions. We found different scenarios between an Hamiltonian with polynomial interactions and the one of the Edwards-Anderson model, characterized by interactions of the form Tr (Q n ). In the case of interactions of the form ab Q n ab we found a similar behaviour to the one of the hierarchical models of To try and explain the different behaviours we evaluated analytically the free energy density cost for the generic Hamiltonian with interactions of the form ab Q n ab and Tr (Q n ). The main difference between the two classes of models is the "locality" of the interactions of order higher than three in replica space: while in the case of polynomial interactions all terms of order four and higher depend only on one value of the replica index, terms like Tr Q 4 connect different replica indices. This has the effect of making the function u (Q) explicitly dependent on q max and introducing more convoluted factors in the free energy cost dependence on the overlap. The scaling of the free energy cost as a function of spatial dimensions is however not altered by these complications, which confirm the robustness of the FPV original calculation regarding the value of the lower critical dimension D lc = 2.5. One of the most useful tools used in the paper is the diagonalization of ultrametric matrices, sometimes called -in the continuum limit -Replica Fourier Transform q d q 2 q 1 q 1 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 2 q d q 1 q 1 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 1 q 1 q d q 2 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 1 q 1 q 2 q d q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q d q 2 q 1 q 1 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 2 q d q 1 q 1 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 1 q 1 q d q 2 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 0 q 1 q 1 q 2 q d We indicate with • the average over the disorder and with • termodynamic averages. We checked the result also for linear polynomials, obtaining the free energy density cost δf 0 = 0.549271 y In the Edwards-Anderson effective Hamiltonian the coupling constant are fixed to values of order one, but in most of this section we keep them as free parameters. We use the fact that TrδQ = 0 from the equation for qmax evaluated in ab = 0. It can be easily proved that the termabc Q 2 ab Q 2 bc is proportional to TrQ 2 2 .