We measured the optical reflectivity of the Dirac material Au 2 Pb in a broad frequency range (30 -48 000 cm -1 ) for temperatures between 9 and 300 K. The optical conductivity, computed from the reflectivity, is dominated by free-carrier contributions from topologically trivial bulk bands at all temperatures. The temperature-independent total plasma frequency of these carriers is 3.9 ± 0.2 eV. Overall, optical response of Au 2 Pb is typically metallic with no signs of localization and bad-metal behavior. Current tremendous interest in different topological materials has led to prediction and experimental verification of a number of new solid-state phases, where the lowenergy physics is governed by novel emerging quasiparticles, such as Dirac or Weyl fermions A direct gap is present in the low-temperature electronic structure at all momenta, but a number of electron-and hole-like trivial bands cross the Fermi level. The trivial electron and hole pockets also exist in the high-temperature phases, in addition to the bulk Dirac bands. Carriers from these trivial Fermi-surface pockets dominate the broad optical response of Au 2 Pb. In this paper, we investigate their contributions to the optical conductivity. Single crystals of Au 2 Pb were synthesized according to the procedure reported by Schoop et al. Electrical dc resistivity measurements were performed in four-contact geometry in a custom-made setup by cooling from room temperature down to 5 K. Transversal magnetoresistance (MR) and Hall resistivity measurements were conducted on Hall bars at 5 to 280 K in magnetic fields B of up to 6 T. The crystal plane used for all transport experiments was (110). We should notice that due to the cubic high-temperature structure and the fact the at low temperatures the orthorhombic distortions are pretty small As already noticed, band-structure calculations for the high-and low-temperature phases predict that both, electron-and hole-like, bands cross the Fermi level and, hence, contribute (with different signs) to R H at any temperature. Thus, a straightforward determination of the free-carrier concentration from R H is not possible. Application of the one-carrier-type (OCT) relation, R H = 1/(en), allows a low-bound estimation for the free-carrier concentration, n ∼ 5 × 10 21 cm -3 at 5 K. Such high n strongly indicates conduction of metallic type (obviously, the real carrier concentrations can only be higher, as holes and electrons provide Hall constants of opposite signs, which partly compensate each other). Within the OCT model, one can also obtain rough estimates of the carrier mobility, μ OCT (5K) ∼ 10 2 cm 2 /(Vs), and of the relaxation rate, γ OCT (5K) ∼ 100 cm -1 (here, the free-electron mass is taken as the effective carrier mass). These values are obviously some sort of averages over all the bands crossing the Fermi level and hence should be considered with a grain of salt. Still, γ OCT lies right in-between of the scattering rates obtained from our optical studies for the carriers described by the so-called narrow and broad Drude components, as discussed below. Temperature-dependent optical reflectivity, R(ν), was measured on a large [3×2 mm 2 ] polished (100) surface of a Au 2 Pb single crystal over a broad frequency range from ν = ω/(2πc) = 30 to 10 000 cm -1 . Additionally, we measured room-temperature reflectivity up to 48 000 cm -1 . The spectra in the far-infrared (below 700 cm -1 ) were collected with a Bruker IFS 113v Fourier-transform spectrometer using in situ gold coating of the sample surface for reference measurements. At higher frequencies (up to 22 000 cm -1 ), a Bruker Hyperion infrared microscope attached to a Bruker Vertex 80v FTIR spectrometer was used. For these measurements, freshly evaporated gold mirrors (below 10 000 cm -1 ) and protected silver (above 10 000 cm -1 ) served as reference. Finally, at the highest frequencies (up 48 000 cm -1 ) we used a Woollam variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometer with SiO 2 on Si substrate as reference. For Kramers-Kronig analysis Figure Au 2 Pb demonstrates a typical metallic response: at ν → 0 the reflectivity approaches unity, ε(ν) is large and negative, σ 1 (ν) is very high, and δ(ν) is inversely proportional to frequency. R(ν) starts to drop down at around 10 000 cm -1 , indicating the onset of the plasma edge. This high-frequency position of the plasma frequency is another indication of the high free-carrier concentration in Au 2 Pb. Further, we can conclude that high concentration of free carriers prevents us from observing any sort of characteristic optical features of a Dirac material, where the interband transitions between the linearly dispersing bands are supposed to manifest themselves as a linear-in-frequency σ 1 (ν) for 3D systems which connects the real part of the complex conductivity to the number of 3D Dirac bands per Brillouin zone N D and the Dirac-band Fermi velocity v F . Using N D = 6 and v F ∼ 10 6 m/s, estimated from the band-structure calculations In order to fit the optical response of Au 2 Pb, we used a standard Drude-Lorentz ansatz Here, σ 0 is the dc limit of a Drude term, τ represents a free-electron scattering time, ω 0k is the eigenfrequency of k-th Lorentz oscillator, ∆ε k is its dielectric contribution and Γ k is the corresponding line width. As mentioned above, band-structure calculations and ARPES measurements demonstrate that at any temperature Au 2 Pb possesses a few bands (Dirac or not) crossing the Fermi level Figures The fit parameters of the Drude terms versus temperature are shown in figures 4 (c) and (d). As one can see from the panel (c), the two Drude components completely account for the dc conductivity, σ dc (T ) ≡ 1/ρ(T ), of Au 2 Pb: the sum of the zero-frequency limits of the Drude modes matches the dc conductivity values perfectly at any temperature. It is also evident that it is the narrow component, which is mostly responsible for the temperature dependence of σ dc . Overall, the temperature evolution of the optical spectra is pretty smooth. We have to notice that the broad Drude term does reflect behavior of free carriers, has nothing to do with localization and cannot be replaced by a Lorentzian. As one can see from figure The plasma frequencies of the two Drude components, ν B pl and ν N pl , are shown in figure In figure As one can see from figure Here m * is an averaged effective mass of all carriers and a parabolic band dispersion is assumed (as discussed above, we can ignore Dirac electrons, for which the plasma frequency is supposed to be related to the Fermi velocity, the band filling and, generally, the band gap We have measured broadband optical response of Au 2 Pb -a Dirac material, which possess bulk Dirac bands at high temperatures (above 97 K) and surface Dirac bands at low temperatures (below 40 K). Neither of the Dirac states could be seen in optical conductivity because of the very high absorption due to free carriers (electrons and holes) in the trivial bulk bands. The total plasma frequency of these carriers remains temperature independent at 3.9 ± 0.2 eV. Optical measurements provide an estimate for the total carrier concentration: n m * /me ≃ 10 22 cm -3 .