Spintronics is a multidisciplinary field whose central theme is the active manipulation of spin degrees of freedom in solid-state systems. Ferromagnetic spintronics has been a main focus as it offers non-volatile memory and logic applications through current-induced spintransfer torques 1-4 . Enabling wider applications of such magnetic devices requires a lower switching current for a smaller cell while keeping the thermal stability of magnetic cells for non-volatility. As the cell size reduces, however, it becomes extremely difficult to meet this requirement with ferromagnets because spin-transfer torque for ferromagnets is a surface torque due to rapid spin dephasing 5,6 , leading to the 1/ferromagnet-thickness dependence of the spin-torque efficiency 7 . Requirement of a larger switching current for a thicker and thus more thermally stable ferromagnetic cell is the fundamental obstacle for high-density nonvolatile applications with ferromagnets. Theories predicted that antiferromagnets have a long spin coherence length due to the staggered spin order on an atomic scale Here we report a long spin coherence length and associated bulk-like-torque characteristic in an antiferromagnetically coupled ferrimagnetic multilayer. We find that a transverse spin current can pass through > 10 nm-thick ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayers whereas it is entirely absorbed by 1 nm-thick ferromagnetic Co/Ni multilayer. We also find that the switching efficiency of Co/Tb multilayers partially reflects a bulk-like-torque characteristic as it increases with the ferrimagnet-thickness up to 8 nm and then decreases, in clear contrast to 1/thickness-dependence of Co/Ni multilayers. Our results on antiferromagnetically coupled systems will invigorate researches towards energy-efficient spintronic technologies. The spin-transfer torque (STT) acting on ferromagnets (FMs) is a surface torque, based on the averaging effect of STT becomes larger for larger exchange splitting, λc is only a few angstroms in strong FMs (e.g. cobalt or iron) for which the STT is almost a surface torque. Theories predicted that the spin coherence length is very long in antiferromagnets (AFMs) because of the staggered spin order on an atomic scale We qualitatively illustrate the spin coherence length in FMs and FIMs (or AFMs) based on the spin precession around the local exchange field. Neglecting the spin relaxation, dynamics of nonequilibrium spin density s is described by , where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, Hex is the effective exchange field that is aligned along the local magnetic moment m. , this equation of motion transforms to where the sign of spin precession angle  follows the sign of H and thus the sign of m (Fig. In order to verify the theoretical prediction of long spin coherence length, we perform experiments with a ferrimagnet (FIM), i.e., Co/Tb multilayers where both Co and Tb layers are atomically thin and their moments are coupled antiferromagnetically. We choose a FIM, instead of an AFM, for following two reasons. One is that Co/Tb multilayers can show a longer λc than a FM because of the antiferromagnetic alignment of Co and Tb moments (Extended Data Fig. ). We find that there is no noticeable current-induced SOT without the Pt layer, suggesting that the Co/Tb bulk itself cannot directly contribute to SOTs. We extract the spin-orbit effective fields, HL and HT, by fitting V2f, We estimate the effective spin Hall angle , where e is the electron charge and ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, with considering thickness-dependent variation of the saturation magnetization MS and current density J in the Pt layer. The Co/Tb multilayer shows a significant MS variation with the minimum at tFIM of 6.6 nm (inset of Fig. Besides the distinct thickness-dependence of θeff, another interesting observation is that the Co/Tb multilayer shows a larger θeff than Co/Ni multilayer (θeff of Co/Tb multilayer = 2.1 at tFIM of 9.9 nm and the average θeff of Co/Ni multilayer = 0.2 ± 0.05). We note that a model calculation with considering a thickness-dependent variation of the sd exchange in FIMs shows qualitatively similar trends with the experimental ones (Extended Data Fig. As an independent test, we perform SOT switching experiments with applying an external field (Hext) in the current direction (θ = 0°) for deterministic switching. The insets of Fig. , where Hp is the domain wall depinning field For Co/Ni multilayers, η decreases with tFM, whereas for Co/Tb multilayers it increases and then decreases with tFIM, following similar trends to SOT effective fields (Fig. As different approaches for the estimation of spin torque efficiency show qualitatively similar trends, it indicates that SOT for Co/Tb multilayers is not a surface torque. Moreover, the observed thickness-dependence of spin torque efficiency is qualitatively consistent with the model calculation (Extended Data Fig. In order to resolve this ambiguity, we perform additional spin pumping experiments to estimate the spin coherence length λc. We measure a spin-pumping-induced inverse spin Hall voltage (VISHE) for substrate/Pt( The spin pumping and spin torque are connected through the Onsager reciprocity For the second harmonic measurements, an ac current Iac with a frequency of 13.7 Hz and a magnitude of 5 mA is injected into the channel of the device In the spin pumping measurements, a microwave at 7 to 9 GHz is applied to the asymmetric coplanar stripline waveguide by a signal generator. An in-plane field (Hb) along the waveguide direction is swept around the resonance field (H0) given by the Kittel formula 