High quality semipolar and nonpolar GaN is crucial in achieving high-performance GaNbased optoelectronic devices, yet it has been very challenging to achieve large-area wafers that are free of basal-plane stacking faults (BSFs). In this work, we report an approach to prepare large-area, stacking-fault-free (SF-free) semipolar GaN on (4-inch) sapphire substrates. A root cause of the formation of BSFs is the emergence of N-polar (0001 ̅ ) facets during semipolar and non-polar heteroepitaxy. Invoking the concept of kinetic Wulff plot, we succeeded in suppressing the occurrence of N-polar GaN (0001 ̅ ) facets, and consequently in eliminating the stacking faults generated in (0001 ̅ ) basal-planes. The result was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy, cathodoluminescence, and low-temperature photoluminescence characterizations. Furthermore, InGaN light emitting diodes with promising characteristics have been produced on the SF-free semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN on sapphire substrates. Our work opens up a new insight about the heteroepitaxial growth of nonpolar/semipolar GaN and provides an approach of producing SF-free nonpolar/semipolar GaN material over large-area wafers which will create new opportunities in GaN optoelectronic and microelectronic research. Semipolar and nonpolar crystallographic orientations of gallium nitride (GaN) have the possibility to address long-standing problems, such as efficiency droop and wavelength droop in III-Nitride light emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes (LDs). A much-reduced polarization field in semipolar or nonpolar active regions is expected to greatly reduce the quantum confined Stark effect and improve carrier injection across heterointerfaces, thus leading to improved device performance in LEDs and LDs 1 . In the past decade, high output power blue and green LEDs and LDs have been demonstrated on semipolar planes such as (1011 ̅̅̅̅ ), (202 ̅ 1), and (303 ̅ 1) 2-8 . However, all these high-performance devices could only be realized on bulk GaN substrates, which were produced by cross slicing of (0001)-oriented GaN crystals prepared by either hydride vapor phase epitaxy HVPE or ammonothermal growth 2-9 . The resulting nonpolar and semipolar substrates, while being of high microstructural quality with very low densities of stacking faults (SFs) and dislocations, are of very small and irregular dimensions defined by the shapes of as-grown crystals. The dimension and price of these substrates severely hinder the effort in mass-producing semipolar and nonpolar devices 2-9 . Since 2000, tremendous efforts were exerted on the heteroepitaxy of nonpolar/semipolar GaN on large-area, industry standard substrates including sapphire, silicon, or SiC substrates. These efforts evolved over time in approximate three generations. The first generation is planar heteroepitaxy of GaN directly on sapphire or SiC substrates. Planar heteroepitaxy of nonpolar and semipolar GaN suffered from a high density of SFs, including basal-plane SFs (BSFs) and prismatic SFs (PSFs) associated with BSFs 10-15 . BSFs and PSFs are very deleterious to the performance of GaN-based devices. Epitaxial lateral overgrowth (ELO) which was successful in suppressing dislocations on c-plane GaN was tested to reduce the density of SFs in semipolar and nonpolar GaN sapphire (0001) or Si (111) sidewalls. Once GaN grows out of trenches and coalesces with neighboring stripes to form a continuous film, a nonpolar or semipolar orientation of GaN is produced in the normal direction of the substrate. In spite of its flexibility in rendering almost arbitrary crystallographic orientations of GaN, the process of OCE still produces SFs albeit with a somewhat lower density In this study, we report a method to achieve SF-free semipolar or nonpolar GaN by heteroepitaxial growth on large-sized foreign substrates. We will discuss the origin of the generation of SFs, disclosing the general principle of eliminating these otherwise persistent defects, and demonstrating a particular solution. As an example, we will demonstrate the elimination of SFs in semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN and the growth of high crystalline quality 4-inch semipolar (20 2 ̅ 1 ) GaN without SFs on sapphire substrates. The surface of the (20 2 ̅ 1 ) GaN/sapphire template is micro-facetted with a combination of (101 ̅ 0 ) and (101 ̅ 1 ) facets, because of the thermodynamic properties of different GaN crystallographic planes. To demonstrate its utility, we performed chemo-mechanical polishing (CMP) to achieve atomically smooth semipolar GaN surface; high-performance InGaN LEDs are obtained on the SF-free semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN/sapphire templates. As reported previously, the presence of nitrogen-polar (N-polar) (0001 ̅ ) facets interacting with foreign interface would typically result in the generation of SFs in semipolar or nonpolar GaN To explore the influence of surfactants and doping on modifying the shape of GaN crystal, we have studied the kinetic Wulff plot by conducting selective area growth (SAG) of GaN with different dopants, including Si, germanium (Ge), and Mg, which are used as regular n-type and p-type doping, respectively. The SAG was conducted on SiO2-masked openings of annular ring and circle pattern on a-plane GaN/sapphire templates. Schematic drawing about SAG is shown in Fig. As described earlier, OCE is a process of combining substrate patterning with selective area growth to "rotate" the surface orientation of GaN from conventional (0001) to nonpolar and semipolar directions. Semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN has been grown on patterned sapphire substrates (PSS) using OCE Since Ge-doping is effective in shaping GaN to avoid the emergence of N-polar GaN facets, we tested Ge-doping during growth of semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN on PSS. After the coalescence of adjacent Ge-doped GaN stripes, 8 μm un-doped GaN was subsequently grown to form a continuous GaN film with a total thickness of about 10 μm, as shown in Fig. Usually, SFs as planar defects appear as dark line contrast in CL scan image InGaN-based blue LEDs were grown on CMP-polished SF-free (202 ̅ 1) GaN/sapphire template. A semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN bulk substrate with size of 5 × 10 mm 2 bought from Mitsubishi Chemical was co-loaded together with the SF-free (202 ̅ 1) GaN/sapphire template. Roomtemperature electroluminescence (EL) measurements were performed on LEDs under continuous-wave current injection conditions. Fig. A low leakage current of ~ 10 -6 A has been achieved under a reverse-bias of -5 V. A photo of a GaN/sapphire template is about 70% of that on a (202 ̅ 1) GaN bulk substrate at the injection current of above 100 mA. Previously all the reports of semipolar and nonpolar LEDs grown on sapphire showed a performance of at least a factor of 10 or more reduction in output power, with less than 1 mW at an injection current of up to 200 mA GaN on sapphire, confirmed by the characterizations of TEM, CL and LT-PL. This is the worldfirst demonstration about large-area SF-free semipolar GaN heteroepitaxially grown on a foreign substrate. Furthermore, InGaN LEDs have been grown on the SF-free semipolar (202 ̅ 1) GaN on sapphire substrates, with the performance very similar to that on GaN bulk substrate. Our work opens up a new insight about the heteroepitaxial growth of nonpolar/semipolar GaN and provides an approach of producing SF-free nonpolar/semipolar GaN material over large-area wafers which will create new opportunities in GaN optoelectronic and microelectronic research. MOCVD growth and device fabrication: MOCVD growth was performed in a Aixtron lowpressure MOCVD reactor. Growth of a (202 ̅ 1) oriented GaN layer was conducted on PSS. The sapphire substrates were chosen such that the [0001] sapphire direction with respect to the substrate surface corresponds to exactly the [0001] GaN direction with respect to the (202 ̅ 1) GaN surface, i.e., c-plane offcut 75.09° towards the a-direction (sapphire (224 ̅ 3) offcut 0.45°). Linear trenches of nominally 3 μm wide with a pitch of 6 μm and a depth of 1 μm are prepared by photolithography with reactive-ion etching. Except for the desired c-plane sapphire sidewall, the entire sapphire surfaces are masked by dielectric SiO2, fabricated with a self-aligned technique of angled evaporation. More details about stripe patterned sapphire substrates and schematic drawing about OCE process can be found in our previous publication After achieving (202 ̅ 1) GaN grown on sapphire, the wafer was taken out of the reactor and planarized by a CMP machine to reach a smooth surface in order to conduct InGaN LEDs growth on (202 ̅ 1) GaN/sapphire templates. LED structure consists of a 1.5-μm-thick Si-doped GaN with a Si-doping concentration of about 1 × 10 19 cm -3 , followed by three pairs of InGaN (4 nm)/GaN (6 nm) multiple quantum wells active region. The active region was followed by a 150 nm P-type GaN layer with a Mg-doping concentration of about 7 × 10 19 cm -3 . Subsequently, small-area (600 × 600 μm 2 ) mesas were processed by standard photolithography and Cl-based reactive ion etching. Ni (20 nm)/Au (50 nm) was used as both n-and p-type contacts. Fig. The selective area growth (SAG) was conducted on SiO2-masked openings of annular ring and circle pattern on a-plane GaN/sapphire templates, as shown in Fig. 