The ability to control and direct acoustic energy is essential for many engineering applications such as vibration and noise control, invisibility cloaking, acoustic sensing, energy harvesting, and phononic switching and rectification. The realization of acoustic regulators requires overcoming fundamental challenges inherent to the time-reversal nature of wave equations. Typically, this is achieved by utilizing either a parameter that is oddsymmetric under time-reversal or by introducing passive nonlinearities. The former approach is power consuming while the latter has two major deficiencies: it has high insertion losses and the outgoing signal is harvested in a different frequency than that of the incident wave due to harmonic generation. Here, we adopt a unique approach that exploits spatially distributed linear and nonlinear losses in a fork-shaped resonant metamaterial. Our compact design demonstrates asymmetric acoustic reflectance and transmittance, and acoustic switching. In contrast to previous studies, our non-Hermitian metamaterial exhibits asymmetric transport with high frequency purity of the outgoing signal. Controlling wave propagation using metamaterials-composite materials with a specifically tailored impedance profile-has led to many unprecedented technologies in recent years. Photonic Tailoring loss, together with a judicious design of the impedance profile, can lead to the realization of devices with unconventional properties and novel functionalities. The best-known example of such non-Hermitian methodologies is the creation of Parity-Time (PT) symmetric materials. These materials steer light Active elements are incorporated through piezoelectric and piezoacoustic effects in those systems to provide gain and loss. For instance, speakers Nevertheless, such elements face challenges in terms of energy consumption and physical size. Passive conservative nonlinearities have also been used for achieving asymmetric transmission Here, we demonstrate asymmetric acoustic reflection in a linear non-Hermitian metamaterial (LnH-MetaMater), and asymmetric acoustic reflection and transmission in a nonlinear non-Hermitian metamaterial (nLnH-MetaMater). In contrast to the majority of existing nonlinear acoustic rectifiers (see recent reviews Non-Hermitian metamaterial design. To realize asymmetric acoustic energy transport exploiting non-Hermiticity, we designed a metamaterial such that the two resonant components of the metamaterial have dissimilar imaginary parts of the complex resonance frequency while the real parts remain approximately equal. The metamaterial consists of two air-coupled tuning forks that resonate at a desired matched frequency: a metal fork made of aluminum (Al) (density r=2700 kg m -3 , Young's modulus E=69 GPa, Poisson's ratio n=0.33) and a polymer fork made of polycarbonate (PC) (r=1200 kg m -3 , E=3 GPa, n=0.4). We modify their resonance mode of interest to be at the same frequency by tailoring the geometry of each fork. We utilize both the principal and the sway modes of resonance and fabricate two pairs of forks that are frequency matched at their respective modes. At the matched frequency of resonance, the Al fork acts as the low-loss element while the PC fork acts as the high-loss element. An intriguing feature of this design approach is that it permits constituents with different material properties and geometries provided the resonators resonate at the same frequency. It allows designing metamaterials with dissimilar imaginary parts without affecting the ability to maintain similar real parts. A tuning fork has two primary modes of resonance In contrast to the principal mode, the sway mode oscillation is about a node at the bottom of the stem and it strongly couples to the system boundary through the fork's stem-a mechanism that leads to a strongly nonlinear response (Fig. The PC fork, however, shows a strong increase of the FWHM of the sway mode as a function of the excitation amplitude, P #$ (Fig. Our LnH-MetaMater consists of an Al fork and a PC fork that have the same resonance frequency at their principal mode, and our nLnH-MetaMater metamaterial consists of a different pair of Al and PC forks designed to have their resonance frequency matched at the sway mode. The forks are placed at a designated gap, G, thereby forming a resonance cavity between them. We devised a two-port acoustic testing setup From the measured pressure, we calculated the reflectance (R = -. -. * -0 -0 * ) and transmittance (T = -2 -2 * -0 -0 * ), where P # is the incident pressure wave, P 3 is the reflected pressure wave, and P 4 is the transmitted pressure wave, see methods section in supplementary information. We used two sample configurations of the metamaterial as shown in Fig. as functions of the frequency, and the incident sound pressure level (Pi) (Fig. Here, the subscript MP of R, T, and A denotes that the wave is first incident on the metal (Al) fork (left incidence), and the subscript PM denotes the wave is first incident on the polymer (PC) fork (right incidence). The color density quantitatively describes the Q 9 , Q > , and Q ? in each plot. The two forks in the LnH-MetaMater have same design frequency of ~2175 Hz, but different losses at the principal mode of resonance (Fig. The color on the positive scale of Q 9 implies that the intensity of the reflectance corresponding to the right incidence is higher than that of the left incidence (also see Fig. The asymmetric reflectance is a direct consequence of non-uniform losses present in the metamaterial and their influence at various reflection paths that contribute to the left and right total reflection. Incident sound waves from the right (PC) side will have a total reflection that can be written in the form of a geometric series , where t -C/?G and r -C/?G are the transmission and reflection amplitudes of the PC/Al forks respectively. Similarly, the total reflection for incident waves encountering the metamaterial from the left (Al) side can be written as At the principal-mode resonance frequency, we observe that the QR>0 (Fig. Although the reflectance and absorbance in the LnH-MetaMater are asymmetric, the transmittance is symmetric (Fig. MetaMater, on the other hand, consists of an Al fork and a PC fork having closely matched frequencies (~1925 Hz), but very dissimilar losses at the sway mode of resonance (Fig. The transmission asymmetry can be understood qualitatively by using a geometric series consideration similar to that of the LnH-MetaMater. The terms that describe the sound-wave-paths for left (Al side) and right (PC side) incidences include "time-reversal" pairs such as t ?G t -C and t -C t ?G , t ?G r -C r ?G t -C and t -C r ?G r -C t ?G , etc., which regardless of containing the same sequence of scattering events with PC and Al, but in reverse order, are no more equal. Specifically, the transmission t ?G/-C and reflection r ?G/-C terms are amplitude dependent. As a result, they are affected by the direction of the sound incidence, i.e. t GST4 ?G/-C ≠ t 3#VW4 ?G/-C and r GST4 ?G/-C ≠ r 3#VW4 ?G/-C . The exact summation of such nonlinear (amplitude dependent due to incidence direction) series in the case of the nLnH-MetaMater is a difficult task. Nevertheless, one can get a quantitative understanding of the transmission asymmetry of the nLnH-MetaMater by modeling the system as a set of two coupled oscillators. Numerical Model. When the principal and sway modes are well-separated spectrally, the tuning fork system can be modeled as two coupled masses (Fig. The equation of motion for each of the masses shown in Fig. where m $ is the n th mass, x $ is the displacement of the n th mass, v $ is the spring constant of the spring connecting the n th mass to the (n -1) th mass, μ $ is the linear friction coefficient, and we have assumed that the masses are at a unit distance between one-another at their equilibrium points. The arbitrary functions f a $ (x $ ) and g d $ (x $ ) describe the lossy and real nonlinearity of the system respectively. Of these parameters, μ $ , f a $ , and g d $ are zero for n ≠ 1, 2. For the spring constants and masses, we have, (2). Dividing Eq. ( where κ $ ≡ v $ /m ( , γ $ ≡ μ $ /m ( , f $ ≡ f a $ /m ( , and g $ ≡ g d $ /m ( . By assuming harmonic solutions of the form x $ = a $ e <#u4 , we obtain: -ω ) p q p r x $ = -κ $ (x $ -x $<I ) -κ $=I (x $ -x $=I ) + iω(γ $ + f $ (x $ ))x $ + g $ (x $ )x $ (4). From Eq. ( where k is the associated wavenumber of the propagating wave with frequency ω. The transport properties of the coupled nonlinear oscillators of Eq.(2,4) can be further investigated using the backward transfer map: which super-imposed with appropriate scattering boundary conditions can allow for a unique solution of the nonlinear problem. We assume incident and transmitted plane waves of the form: where i ( , r ( , and t ( are the complex amplitudes of the incident, reflected, and transmitted waves, respectively. Scattering boundary conditions Eq. ( We can obtain i ( and r ( in terms of x I and x ) from Eq. ( (3) These relations, combined with Eq. (5,6), allow us to obtain i ( and r ( in terms of t ( and k by recursively calculating the displacement of each of the masses, and in turn we can compute reflectance and transmittance for the system. This way of calculating the scattering properties of nonlinear systems by fixing the output scattering conditions is necessary because of the multistability often present in these problems We evaluate the transmittance T ≡ ‡ 4 r # r ‡ ) and reflectance R ≡ ‡ 3 r # r ‡ ) using the backward map approach. First, we perform the transformation A $ ≡ • q S ...0~ † 4 r . This allows us to simplify the form of the wave at the output. Assuming for simplicity that m ( = 1, Eq. ( where F $ (A $ ) ≡ f $ (x $ (A $ )), G $ (A $ ) ≡ g $ (x $ (A $ )). From (7), we have A g = e #‚ , A ) = 1. By recursively applying Eq. ( (5), which together with Eqs. (8) allow us to obtain the transmittance and reflectance: As we discussed previously, the above calculations assume left-incident scattering boundary conditions, see Eqs. (7). To evaluate the transmittance and reflectance for a rightincident wave one needs to flip the subscripts of m, γ, F, and G that appear in the expressions for α and δ in Eqs. (10), i.e. 1 → 2, 2 → 1, which is equivalent to flipping the sample. Equations ( where a j , a 9 are real numbers. Assuming that the nonlinearity of the aluminum fork and its linear losses are negligible, g I , f I and, γ I are equal to zero. We also adjust m I so that the resonators 1 and 2 have the same resonant frequency in spite of the losses in resonator 2. We then obtain the transmittance from the left (T -) and right (T 9 ) for a range of incident frequencies ω and transmitted wave amplitudes t ( using Eqs. We have observed multistability (i.e. multiple possible output waves for a single input) in our results for a range of parameters (i.e. |i ( | ) corresponding to more than one values of T), mostly around small frequencies and relatively large values of |i ( | ) when g ) (x ) ) is large. However, multistabilities are suppressed for the parameter range that is presented below. To verify that the model reproduces the features of the system observed in experiments, we interpolate the results of T -/9 (|i ( | ) , ω) so that we can obtain the degree of asymmetry . Obviously, Q > can only be obtained for the parameter range where both T -/9 are single-valued functions of the incident intensity. In Fig. To understand the source of asymmetry in transmittance, we examine the dependence of T -/9 on the nonlinearities. For simplicity, we will assume κ ( = κ and m I ≈ m ) = m. Starting with the expression for transmittance in (11) and using the appropriate expressions from (10), we obtain, where . The discrepancy between these expressions stems from the arguments of the nonlinear functions. This is true for both the real and the imaginary nonlinear terms. If we assume no real nonlinearity (inspired by the fact that Figs. and F ) (A ) ) ≈ a j |tA ) | ) , Eq.( with A ≡ 2 sin k, B ≡ 1 -η ) , Γ ≡ η(γ d ) + F ¥ ) (1)), Γ ¥ ≡ ηF ¥ ) (1)(|η| ) -1). Eqs. ( From the numerical modeling, we have found that the transmittance of an incident sound wave from the right (PC) side of the nonlinear lossy oscillator is Similarly, the transmittance of an incident wave from the left (Al) side of the linear lossless . The variables A and B contain "linear" information such as the frequency of the incident wave, the dispersion properties of the propagating medium, structural/geometric information of the resonant cavity. The variable Γ includes information about the linear and nonlinear losses associated with the lossy oscillator. Typically, Γ is an increasing function of the excitation amplitude and is responsible for the nonlinear resonant shift towards lower frequencies that we observe in the transmission spectrum of the nLnH-MetaMater (Fig. Transmission asymmetry is forbidden by the reciprocity theorem in the case of linear timereversal symmetric systems, consistent with the symmetric transmittance in LnH-MetaMater that we discussed initially. In contrast, asymmetric acoustic transport can be realized in systems with conservative nonlinearities and in the absence of mirror symmetry Instead, one may utilize the existence of large asymmetric frequency conversion for efficiently transmitting power from one side to the other. The obvious drawback of this approach is that the harvested signal is at different frequencies than the input signal. Use of amplifiers can overcome insertion losses Details of the experimental methods, sample fabrication, and additional data can be found in Supplementary Information. Experimental technique. The two-port acoustic testing setup consists of a custom-built aluminum impedance tube that has 6.35 mm wall thickness and 25.4 mm x 10 mm rectangular cross-section that matches the configuration requirements for the test sample. It was designed according to The lock-in amplification system simultaneously generates a cosine and sine waves by NI 9263 DAQ, and simultaneously measures the four microphone signals along with those two cosine and sine waves by NI 9215 DAQs. The voltage amplitude (V " ) and phase (Φ) of the signal from each microphone (V $%& ) were calculated by V " = (V ) * + V , * and Φ = tan 01 2 3 4 3 5 6, where V ) = 〈V $%& cos(ωt + φ)〉 and V , = 〈V $%& sin(ωt + φ)〉, and then converted into pressure using the calibration factors of each microphone. At each frequency of the frequency sweep, 700 cycles were generated and middle 50% of the measured signals were used for analysis, neglecting the initial and final 25% for any unsteady responses. From these signals, the incident and reflected signals in each port are calculated as described below: The measured pressures by microphones 1-4 (Fig. where P % C and P % K are the forward traveling (incidence) and P H C and P H K are the backward traveling (reflection) pressure waves in port a and b respectively, and x 1 , x * , x J , x M are the distances to microphones 1-4 from an arbitrary reference. From equations (1) and (2), P % C and P H C in port-a can be calculated as, Similarly, in port-b, the transmitted pressure can be calculated as, Phase-shifting these quantities to the sample's front (x X ) and back (x K ) boundaries results in, From these quantities, the reflectance, R, the transmittance, T, and the absorbance, A, are calculated as, Here the P * is the complex conjugate of the pressure P, and k = *gX h -iδ with frequency, f (in Hz), sound speed in air, c =346 m/s, and visco-thermal losses, δ. We measured the δ from a similar frequency sweep performed in an empty tube without any sample inside. We obtain the loss factor in units of Nepers/m by calculating the natural logarithm of the transmission per distance given by, δ = ln n P 1X e *g%X() L 0) G )/h P JX p s r Here P 1X and P JX represent the complex pressure of the forward traveling wave at microphones one and three respectively, and s represents the distance between the microphones one and three. This measurement was repeated and averaged for four different values of s. We observed that the reflection at the resonance of the tuning forks was damping the speaker, which can cause up to fifty percent variation in incidence over the whole frequency range. In order to avoid this variation, our instrument control program verifies if the incident sound pressure level (SPL) is within ±0.5 dB of the intended amplitude at each frequency step. If the incident amplitude is outside the above acceptable range, the program re-executes the frequency step by slightly increasing or decreasing the amplitude until the incidence is within the acceptable range. This allowed us to maintain nearly constant incidence throughout all the frequencies tested. 