We demonstrate improvements to the cooling power of broad bandwidth (10 GHz) microwave attenuators designed for operation at temperatures below 100 mK. By interleaving 9-m thick conducting copper heatsinks in between 10-m long, 70-nm thick resistive nichrome elements, the electrical heat generated in the nichrome elements is conducted more readily into the heatsinks, effectively decreasing the thermal resistance between the hot electrons and cold phonons. For a 20 dB attenuator mounted at 20 mK, a minimum noise temperature of T n ~ 50 mK was obtained for small dissipated powers (P d < 1 nW) in the attenuator. For higher dissipated powers we find T n ∝ P d 1/4.4 , with P d = 100 nW corresponding to a noise temperature of 90 mK. This is in good agreement with thermal modeling of the system and represents nearly a factor of 20 improvement in cooling power, or a factor of 1.8 reduction in T n for the same dissipated power, when compared to a previous design without interleaved heatsinks. The field of superconducting quantum computing has advanced to a point where systems with multiple qubits are now available. where P e-p is the rate at which heat flows from the electrons to the phonons, V is the volume of the normal metal, and Σ is the electron-phonon coupling constant, which is a material-dependent parameter. Since P e-p results in T e increasing above T p , a resistive element that dissipates electrical power will produce more Johnson-Nyquist thermal noise, and cause more dephasing, than if it were not dissipating power. Hence, when designing an attenuator for operation at millikelvin temperatures, it is important to achieve a large effective coupling (VΣ) between the electrons and phonons, such that T e is close to T p . Both this power law and finite element simulations of the thermal response of the attenuator suggested that the heat was not efficiently conducted out of the nichrome, resulting in the electrons in the NiCr resistors being driven out of equilibrium with the phonons. If the thermal resistance between the electrons and the phonons could have been decreased, a lower noise temperature would have been achieved when dissipating power. In this article, we demonstrate how the cooling power of the attenuator can be improved by an order of magnitude by modifying the layout to increase the effectiveness of the hot-electron heatsinks. First, to better conduct heat out of the NiCr resistor elements and into the cold conducting heatsinks, where V H is the total volume of the two heatsinks and Σ H is the electron-phonon coupling constant for the material used to construct the heatsinks. If we ignore the emission of phonons by the electrons in the nichrome (see supplementary material for a more complete discussion), then heat generated in the nichrome will only flow into the heatsinks by thermal conduction via the electrons, and the maximum electron temperature T R (max) will be in the center of the resistor, furthest from the two heatsinks. For good cooling, T R (max) should not be much larger than T H , and we choose the specific temperature criterion T R (max) < √2T H for convenience. Using this criterion and Eq. ( where κ e T e is the thermal conductivity of the resistor due to the electrons. For design values T p = 20 mK, P R = 100 nW, κ e = 0.02 Wm -1 K -2 , A R = 56 μm For testing, a 20 dB attenuator chip was packaged in a copper box (see Fig. To measure the effective noise temperature of the attenuator at millikelvin temperatures, we connected the attenuator to the input line of an Al microwave cavity that contained a transmon qubit. To find Γ φ , we measured the qubit relaxation time T 1 and spin-echo coherence time T 2 . The qubit dephasing rate Γ φ was then extracted using Γ φ = T 2 -1 -(2T 1 ) -1 . When no additional heating was applied to the attenuator, we measured mean values of 〈T 1 〉 = 14.2 ± 0.1 μs and 〈T 2 〉 = 26.7 ± 0.8 μs, where the error bars are the standard deviations of the mean of the 5 measurements. These results led to 〈Γ φ 〉 = (2 ± 1) × 10 3 s -1 . By using the relation 11 along with measurements of the dispersive shift χ/2π = -0.34 MHz and the cavity decay rate κ/2π = 0.7 MHz, we found that in this case the average number of photons in the read-out cavity was n ̅ th = (1.0 ± 0.7) × 10 -3 . Given the total 70 dB attenuation in the input line, n ̅ th has a lower bound of ~10 -4 . Our result of n ̅ th is about 5 times larger than that recently reported in a system in which the microwave signal to a one-port cavity was filtered by a bandpass cavity attenuator. [exp ( and find T n ≤ 55 mK, similar to our previous design. Finally, we can use the data in Fig. In summary, we have developed microwave attenuators with increased cooling power that are suitable for use with quantum devices below 100 mK. This improvement was achieved by decreasing the length that dissipated heat has to travel in each resistor element and interleaving large-volume hot-electron heatsinks. These simple components and related techniques for improving thermalization of signals at millikelvin temperatures will be useful for increasing the dephasing times of superconducting qubits, and possibly improving the performance of other types of millikelvin devices. See supplementary material for the analysis of heat flow in a simplified geometry in order to estimate the length L R of the resistor sections.