The Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 (YIG) films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) have recently attracted a great deal of attention for spintronics applications. Here, we report the induced PMA in the ultrathin YIG films grown on (Gd 2.6 Ca 0.4 )(Ga 4.1 Mg 0.25 Zr 0.65 )O 12 (SGGG) substrates by epitaxial strain without preprocessing. Reciprocal space mapping shows that the films are lattice-matched to the substrates without strain relaxation. Through ferromagnetic resonance and polarized neutron reflectometry measurements, we find that these YIG films have ultra-low Gilbert damping constant (α < 1×10 -5 ) with a magnetic dead layer as thin as about 0.3 nm at the YIG/SGGG interfaces. Moreover, the transport behavior of the Pt/YIG/SGGG films reveals an enhancement of spin mixing conductance and a large non-monotonic magnetic field dependence of anomalous Hall effect as compared with the Pt/YIG/Gd 3 Ga 5 O 12 (GGG) films. The non-monotonic anomalous Hall signal is extracted in the temperature range from 150 to 350 K, which has been ascribed to the possible non-collinear magnetic order at the Pt/YIG interface induced by uniaxial strain. The spin transport in ferrimagnetic insulator (FMI) based devices has received considerable interest due to its free of current-induced Joule heating and beneficial for low-power spintronics applications Recently, several ways have been reported to attain the perpendicularly magnetized YIG films, one of which is utilizing the lattice distortion and magnetoelastic effect induced by epitaxial strain In this work, we realized the PMA of ultrathin YIG films deposited on SGGG substrates due to epitaxial strain. Through ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR) measurements, we have found that the YIG films had small Gilbert damping constant with a magnetic dead layer as thin as about 0.3 nm at the YIG/SGGG interfaces. Moreover, we have carried out the transport measurements of the Pt/YIG/SGGG films and observed a large non-monotonic magnetic field dependence of the anomalous Hall resistivity, which did not exist in the compared Pt/YIG/GGG films. The non-monotonic anomalous Hall signal was extracted in the temperature range from 150 to 350 K, and we ascribed it to the possible non-collinear magnetic order at the Pt/YIG interfaces induced by uniaxial strain. Structural and magnetic characterization. The epitaxial YIG films with varying thickness from 3 to 90 nm were grown on the [111]-oriented GGG substrates (lattice parameter a = 1.237 nm) and SGGG substrates (lattice parameter a = 1.248 nm) respectively by pulsed laser deposition technique (see methods). After the deposition, we have investigated the surface morphology of the two kinds of films using atomic force microscopy (AFM) as shown in Fig. The Y 3d spectrums show a small energy shift as shown in Fig. Therefore, the stoichiometry of the YIG surface has not been dramatically modified with the strain control. Furthermore, we have performed the PNR measurement to (5-10 nm) between YIG (or TmIG) and substrates Dynamical characterization and spin transport properties. To quantitatively determine the magnetic anisotropy and dynamic properties of the YIG films, the FMR spectra were measured at room temperature using an electron paramagnetic resonance spectrometer with rotating the films. Fig. The lowest ΔH pp at θ=64° could be ascribed to the high YIG film quality and ultrathin magnetic dead layer at the YIG/SGGG interface. It should be noted that, as compared with YIG/GGG films, the ΔH pp is independent on the frequency from 5 GHz to 14 GHz as shown in Fig. Furthermore, we have also investigated the spin transport properties for the high quality YIG films grown on SGGG substrates, which are basically sensitive to the magnetic details of YIG. The magnetoresistance (MR) has been proved as a powerful tool to effectively explore magnetic information originating from the interfaces The temperature dependent spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) of the Pt (5 nm)/YIG (3 nm) films grown on the two different substrates were measured using a small and non-perturbative current density (~ 10 6 A/cm 2 ), and the sketches of the measurement is shown in Fig. ]/ρ XX(0) in the YZ plane for the two films under a 3 T field (enough to saturate the magnetization of YIG), shows cos 2 β behaviors with varying temperature for the Pt/YIG/GGG and Pt/YIG/SGGG films as shown in Fig. Here, it should be noted that the spin transport properties for the Pt layers are expected to be the same because of the similar resistivity and films quality. Therefore, the SGGG substrate not only induces the PMA but also enhances G ↑↓ at the Pt/YIG interface. Then, we have also investigated the field dependent Hall resistivities in the Pt/YIG/SGGG films at the temperature range from 260 to 350 K as shown in Fig. Though the conduction electrons cannot penetrate into the FMI layer, the possible anomalous Hall effect (AHE) at the HM/FMI interface is proposed to emerge, and the total Hall resistivity can usually be expressed as the sum of various contributions where R 0 is the normal Hall coefficient, ρ S the transverse manifestation of SMR, and ρ S-A the spin Hall anomalous Hall effect (SAHE) resistivity. Notably, the external field is applied out-of-plane, and ρ s (~Δρ 1 m x m y ) can be neglected If the DMI could be compared with the Heisenberg exchange interaction and the magnetic anisotropy that were controlled by strain, it could stabilize non-collinear magnetic textures such as skyrmions, producing a fictitious magnetic field and the There are large variations for the Hall signals when the external magnetic field is lower than the saturation field (B s ) of YIG film (~50 mT at 300 K and ~150 mT at 50 K). More interestingly, we have firstly applied a large out-of-plane external magnetic field of +0.8 T (-0.8 T) above B s to saturate the out-of-plane magnetization component M Z > 0 (M Z < 0), then decreased the field to zero, finally the Hall resistances were measured in the small field range (± 400 Oe), from which we could find that the shape was reversed as shown in Fig. site and the tetrahedrally coordinated 24(d) site, aligning antiparallel with each other In conclusion, the YIG film with PMA could be realized using both epitaxial strain and growth-induced anisotropies. These YIG films grown on SGGG substrates had low Gilbert damping constants (<1×10 -5 ) with a magnetic dead layer as thin as about 0.3 nm at the YIG/SGGG interface. Moreover, we observed a large non-monotonic Ferromagnetic resonance measurements. The measurement setup is depicted in Fig. . For FMR measurements, the DC magnetic field was modulated with an AC field. The transmitted signal was detected by a lock-in amplifier. We observed the FMR spectrum of the sample by sweeping the external magnetic field. The data obtained were then fitted to a sum of symmetric and antisymmetric Lorentzian functions to extract the linewidth. Spin transport measurements. The measurements were carried out using PPMS DynaCool. details for 3-nm-thick YIG film are shown in the Supplementary Note 2. According to the angle dependence of H res as shown in Fig.