Materials with large magnetostriction are widely used in sensors, actuators, micro electromechanical systems, and energy-harvesters. Binary Fe-Ga alloys (Galfenol) are the most promising rare-earth-free candidates combining numerous advantages such as low saturation magnetic field (~200 Oe), excellent ductility and low cost, while further improving their performance is imperative for practical applications. Using density functional theory calculation, we report results of the effect of substituting small amount of additional elements X (eg. X = Ag, Pd and Cu) on magnetostriction of Fe-Ga alloys, and find that it may double the magnetostriction with a substitutional percentage of only 1.6%. Moreover, adsorbents with high chemical activity (eg. O or Os atoms) may affect the surface energy of different face-orientations of Fe-Ga alloys, indicating proper surface treatments are necessary to tune the alignment of Fe-Ga grains to achieve better performance. These results may be helpful to further optimize the magnetostrictive properties of Fe-Ga alloys for device applications. Exploring novel magnetostrictive materials that can change their dimension with a small magnetic field is crucial for both fundamental research and technological exploitations Recent experimental and theoretical studies suggest that the availability of nonbonding electronic states around the Fermi level is important for the initial quadratic increase of λ 001 of Fe 1-x Ga x alloys against x. Ga atoms avoid forming first neighbors in the Fe lattice and, as a result, the presence of each Ga atom effectively breaks 8 Fe-Fe bonds in Galfenol and hence many non-bonding Fe-d states are induced In this paper, we report results of systematic density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the effect of substitution of several transition metal elements (eg. Ag, Pd and Cu) on the magnetostrictive properties of Fe 1-x Ga x alloys with x~19%. Interestingly, we found that a small substitutional amount of these elements may significantly enhance the magnetostriction of Galfenol, by a factor of >200%. Meanwhile, we also investigated the effect of different adsorbents (such as O atoms, Os atoms and H 2 S molecules) on the surface energies of Galfenol to provide useful guidance for the choice of chemical environment for the post-synthesis treatment of Galfenol samples, particularly for the preferential alignment of Fe-Ga grains along the (001) direction. These results provide new insights for the development of Galfenol with optimal performance in devices. Our DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The energy cutoff for the plane-wave expansion was set to 500 eV, which is sufficient for Fe-Ga alloys according to our previous studies. To determine the magnetic anisotropic energy (MAE), we used the torque method supercell, which has 128 atoms in a cubic box. Their surfaces were mimicked by building up a slab model that consists of 9 atomic layers and a vacuum gap of about 12 Å thick to avoid the spurious interaction between periodic images. Different growth and annealing conditions were considered and simulated by varying the surface orientations and chemical adsorbents. For the binary Fe 1-x Ga x alloys, the monotonic decrease of the tetragonal shear modulus continues up to x~25%, whereas the increase trend of the magneto-elastic coupling coefficient only sustains to x~15%. This causes the rapid drop of the magnetostriction after it reaches its maximum at x~19% To this end, adding a small amount of the other elements is a promising way, and many elements including transition metals (e.g., Mn, Co, Ni, Cr, Zn) and metalloids (e.g, Ge, Si) have been used in previous studies We found that the total energy of Fe 79.7 Ga 18.7 X 1.6 ternary alloys (X = Ag, Pd, Cu) remain almost constant when the distance of two X atoms (d) is larger than 4.09 Å, indicating the weak interaction between them at this region as shown in Fig. However, the total energy decreases significantly up to 0.3~0. Practically, this can be done through Ag, Pd, Cu or Ge, Si substitution for Ga atoms, respectively, assuming that they do not significantly affect the band structure of the Fe-Ga alloys near around Fermi level. FIG. As we mentioned above, large magnetostriction relies on two main factors: strong magneto-elastic coupling coefficient b 1 and small tetragonal shear modulus . As known, b 1 and are simply proportional to the slope of the MAE~ε line and the curvature of the total energy curve near ε=0%, respectively. From the strain induced changes of MAEs and total energies in Fig. It is known that the magnetostriction of Fe-Ga alloys is strongly anisotropic, namely, the tetragonal magnetostrictive coefficient, λ 001 , can reach to about 280 ppm while its rhombohedral magnetostrictive coefficient, λ 111 , is one order of magnitude smaller (± 20~30 ppm). Therefore, it is crucial to develop an approach that can align most Fe-Ga grains along the (001) direction in order to achieve an optimal performance. It is believed that the alignment of grains in Fe-Ga films depends mainly on the surface energies (denoted as "γ") of different facets, which can be controlled by tuning the chemical potential and using different surface adsorbents. Here, we consider the surface energy of a facet with adsorbents according to the following equation: ( where N Fe , N Ga , and N M denote the numbers of atoms of Fe, Ga and adsorbent, respectively; μ Fe , μ Ga and μ M represent their corresponding chemical potentials. A is the surface area of the unit cell and the factor 1⁄2 accounts for the two surfaces in typical slab models. To allow direct comparison between different non-stoichiometric Fe-Ga facets, we assume an equilibrium growth condition with a constraint of Since the concentration of substituents that we discussed above is rather low, in principle they should not significantly alter the surface energies. Since hybridization between adsorbents and substrates may change the Fe-Ga surface energies, we then focus on calculating the surface energies of the (001), ( (111) facets at different Ga concentrations in the topmost layer with the presence of O atoms, Os atoms and H 2 S molecules. As we can see in Fig. surface is more stable in the Ga-rich condition (μ Ga → 0) while (001) surface becomes more favorable in the Ga-poor condition (μ Ga → -3.0 eV). As shown in Fig. It is worth noting that adsorbed Os atoms push the intersection of Fe-Ga surface energies between the (001) and (110) orientations to the side of Ga-rich condition (μ Ga = -1.8 eV), which will be helpful for the formation of grains with the (001) orientation and maximize the magnetostrictive properties of Fe-Ga films. In the oxidation condition, one has to use a reservoir that binds to Ga atoms more tightly than the bulk Ga so as to create an environment for aligning Fe-Ga grains along the (001) direction. Nevertheless the energy difference between (001) and (110) surfaces is rather small in the Ga-poor end (-3.0 eV < μ Ga < -2.0 eV). Therefore, the surface energies in H 2 S/Fe-Ga and clean Fe-Ga are not much different. These results suggest that one may need to anneal Fe-Ga samples in the Ga poor condition and make proper surface treatments to promote most grain alignment along the (001) direction for better performance. In summary, we performed systematic DFT calculations to find possible ways for further improving the magnetostrictive properties of Fe 1-x Ga x alloys at x ~19%. Rigid band theory analysis suggests that this is realizable by substituting a small amount of Ag, Pd and Cu for Ga atoms in the Fe-Ga matrix, which is confirmed by DFT calculations with a large unit cell. Furthermore, the effect of different adsorbents on the surface energies of Fe-Ga alloys was also investigated, that may guide the design of growth and annealing conditions for the preferential (001) alignment of Fe-Ga grains in films. These results show the feasibility of engineering the magnetostrictive properties of transition metal alloys by tuning their electronic properties and surface environment for the optimal performance of these materials for device applications. Now we want to discuss the possibility of increasing tetragonal magnetostriction λ 001 with these substituents. Following to the rigid band model, we first analyze the dependence of MAE of a strained Fe 79.7 increase of magneto-elastic coupling constant b 1 is the main reason for the large enhancement of λ 001 in Fe 79.7 Ga 18.7 X 1.6 (X = Ag, Pd, Cu) ternary alloys.