Starch based scaffolds are considered as promising biomaterials for bone tissue engineering. In this study, a highly porous starch/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) based nanocomposite scaffold with a gradient pore structure was made by incorporating different bio-additives, including citric acid, cellulose nanofibers, and hydroxyapatite (HA) nanoparticles. The scaffold was prepared by employing unidirectional and cryogenic freeze-casting and subsequently freeze-drying methods. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy confirmed the cross-linking of starch and PVA molecules through multiple esterification phenomenon in presence of citric acid as a cross-linking agent. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) observations showed formation of aligned lamellar pores with a gradient pore width in the range of 80 to 292 μm, which well meets the pore size requirement for bone regeneration, and also well dispersion of cellulose and HA nanofillers within the scaffold matrix. Based on the mechanical testing results, the cellulose-HA reinforced scaffold possesses sufficient compressive modulus and yield strength for non-load bearing applications in the dry state; and also it presents fast responsive shape recovery in the wet state. According to in-vitro assessments, apatite phase mineralization was extensively induced in the presence of HA nanoparticles as heterogeneous nucleating sites. Also, it was revealed that cellulose and HA nanofillers decelerate and accelerate the scaffold biodegradation rate, respectively. MTT assay proved good cytocompatibility of the nanocomposite scaffold with osteoblast cells. Finally, it was shown that the introduced scaffold provides a suitable platform for the cells adhesion. starch/PVA blend in fluids Polymeric scaffolds lack bioactivity and sufficient mechanical properties; hence, polymeric based nanocomposite scaffolds containing bioactive, biocompatible, and rigid fillers have been recently presented as new 3D scaffolds In this work, cellulose nanofibers and HA nanoparticles are incorporated to the cross-linked starch/PVA blend to form a novel biodegradable, biocompatible, bioactive, and water stable scaffold with a highly porous and gradient structure mimicking the bone extracellular matrix (ECM) architecture via unidirectional freeze casting followed by freeze-drying method. Then, the pore structure and mechanical and biological properties of the fabricated scaffold were investigated in detail. We believe that our proposed nanocomposite scaffold can be considered as a promising material for non-load bearing bone substitutes. Granular unmodified edible corn starch, 30 wt.% amylose and 70 wt.% amylopectin, was supplied by Glucosan Company (Iran). Polyvinyl alcohol (Mw= 72,000 gr/mole) and citric acid (Mw=192 gr/mole) were purchased from Merck. Mechanically synthesized cellulose nanofibers with the average diameter of 45 nm in gel state (containing 4 wt.% nanofibers) and synthesized hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (average diameter size ~ 35 nm) were provided by Nano Novin Polymer Company and Pasture Institute (Iran), respectively. To study the structure and properties of the nanocomposite scaffold, three scaffolds containing different compositions were prepared as given in Table In this study, 3% (wt/v) solution of starch/PVA (3:2 wt/wt) in deionized water was considered. To provide 100 ml of the solution, 1.2 gr PVA was dissolved in 50 ml deionized water at 90°C, and then was added to the mixture of 1.8 gr starch in 50 ml deionized water. Next, immersing in a 90 °C bath, the starch/PVA solution was mechanically stirred at 1500 rpm for 2 hrs, while its volume was kept constant at 100 ml by adding deionized water. 2.5 pph cellulose nanofibers in gel state along with some deionized water were mixed for 30 min using a magnetic stirrer. Subsequently, for better dispersing of the nanofibers, the suspension was ultra-sonicated three times for 10 min. The ultra-sonicated suspension was added to the starch/PVA solution, which is obtained in section 2-2-1, and then mechanically stirred at 1500 rpm and 90 °C for 30 min. It should be noted, according to the literature, the nanofibers content should be lower than 3 wt.% to prevent fibers agglomeration. Therefore, the cellulose nanofibers content was set at 2.5 pph to get a well dispersion of the nanofibers within the matrix. To break apart the as-received HA nanoparticle agglomerates, 30 pph HA nanoparticle was mixed with 5 pph citric acid and some deionized water, then the obtained suspension was ultra-sonicated three times for 10 min. Here, citric acid was employed to neutralize the surface charge of the HA nanoparticles, and thus to help with the dispersity of the nanoparticles in water To prepare SP, SPC, and SPCH samples, the ultimate solution and suspensions in sections 2-2-1 to 2-2-3 were cooled to room temperature, and then 30, 30, and 25 pph citric acid was respectively added to them as crosslinking agent. It should be noted that since 5 pph citric acid had been previously consumed for the dispersion of HA nanoparticles (see section 2-2-3), here 25 pph citric acid was added to SPCH suspension. Finally, SP solution and SPC and SPCH suspensions were homogenized by mechanical stirring at 1500 rpm for 10 min at room temperature. It is noteworthy that it has been reported that the employment of high amount of citric acid (30 pph) not only extensively increases the cross-linking reaction but also makes no toxicity To unidirectionally solidify the prepared solution and suspensions, an apparatus described in the following was employed. The mold was a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube (∅ out = 20 mm, ∅ in = 15 mm, and L = 6 cm) which its bottom was sealed by an aluminum foil. The mold was insulated by a polystyrene foam, and placed on an aluminum substrate in contact with liquid Nitrogen. 5 ml of the solution/suspension was poured into the mold; and after freezing from bottom to top, the solidified sample was freeze-dried using an apparatus from Christ Company, Germany, under the following conditions: main drying at -60 °C and 0.005 mbar for 17 hrs, and final drying at -76 °C and 0.006 mbar for 31 hrs. Then, the achieved scaffold was ejected carefully from the PTFE tube, and located in an oven at 140 °C for 4 hrs to be thermally cross-linked. Finally, the fabricated scaffold was preserved in a silica gel desiccator. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectra were obtained using ABB Bommem MB-100 spectrometer after preparing KBr-based pallets and recording five scan in the range of 4000 -400 cm -1 . The surface morphology of the fabricated scaffolds was observed using TESCAN-Mira 3XMU Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) equipped with an EDS detector. Prior to microscopy, the cross and longitudinal sections of the scaffolds were cryogenically cut and then coated with a thin gold layer. Compressive properties of the scaffolds in dry state were measured according to ASTM D638 using a Hounsfield H10KS universal frame equipped with 500 N load-cell at the cross-head speed of 1 mm/min and at ambient temperature. The porosity of the nanocomposite scaffold was evaluated using gravimetric measurement where ρ app is the apparent density of the porous nanocomposite scaffold, and ρ 0 is the density of nonporous nanocomposite. The reported porosity is the average of five repetitions. The bioactivity, i.e. the potential to form bonelike calcium phosphate layer, and degradation rate of the scaffolds were investigated within simulated body fluid (SBF) which contains ion concentrations similar to those found in human blood plasma. SBF solution was prepared based on Kokubo's instruction Subsequently, the fabricated scaffolds were soaked in SBF at 37 °C for different periods of time including 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days. After removal from SBF, the scaffolds were rinsed with deionized water and dried at 40 °C for 48 hrs under vacuum pressure. Possible formation of the apatite phase on the surface of the dried nanocomposite scaffold was monitored by FE-SEM; and also the degradation rate was calculated by means of Equation Dry Weight Loss (%) = (W 0 -W t ) W 0 × 100 (Equation where W0 and Wt are the dry weight of scaffold before and after degradation, respectively. The (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-iphenyltetrazolium bromide) MTT assay was conducted to assess the biocompatibility of the fabricated scaffolds. The extraction of scaffolds was carried out in accordance with the ISO 1993-5 protocol. The fabricated scaffolds were autoclaved, and then 0.1 g of them was incubated in 1 mL of culture medium at 37 °C for 3, 7, and 14 days. The culture medium was also preserved in similar condition and served as the negative control. The human osteoblast cell line (MG-63, National Cell Bank of Iran) was employed and cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS-Serum, Germany), 100 U.ml -1 penicillin, and 100 μg.ml -1 streptomycin; and then it incubated at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. To evaluate the viability of the osteoblast cells, they were cultured into a 96-well microtiter plate (Nunc, Denmark) at a population density of 1×10 4 cells/well, and then incubated in the culture medium for 24 hrs. Then, the culture medium was discarded from the wells; and instead, 90 μl of the scaffold extract in the main concentration along with 10 μl FBS was added to each well. Again, after 24 hrs, the medium was removed and replaced with 100 μl of 0.5 mg/ml MTT (Sigma, USA) solution; and then the cells were incubated at 37 °C for 5 hrs. To solubilize the precipitated formazan crystals, 100 μl isopropanol (Sigma, USA) was added to each well, and subsequently, the plate was shaken for 20 minutes at 37°C. Finally, the optical density (OD) of the dissolved formazan was measured using a multiwall microplate reader (Stat Fax 2100, USA) at 545 nm, and the result was normalized with the negative control sample. In addition, to statistically analyze the obtained data, one-way ANOVA with LSD post hoc test using SPSS (version 16.0 SPSS Inc. Chicago IL) was utilized, and the statistical significance was considered at p<0.05. 100 μl medium culture containing 30000-35000 MG-63 cells was poured on the surface of the sterilized nanocomposite scaffold. After incubating for 5 hrs, a specific amount of culture medium containing 10% FBS was added to the cell seeded scaffold, and the incubation was continued for 24 hrs. Afterwards, the solution on the scaffold was taken out; and then the scaffold was rinsed with phosphate-buffer saline (PBS) to remove non-adherent cells. The adhered cells were fixed with 3% (v/v) glutaraldehyde solution in PBS for 30 minutes at ambient temperature. Finally, the scaffold was gently washed with deionized water, dehydrated by graded alcohols (50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95%, and 100%, each for 5 min), and dried at room temperature. The dried scaffold was surface coated with gold nanoparticles, and viewed by FE-SEM. To establish whether the starch and PVA molecules are thermally cross-linked in the presence of citric acid, FTIR analysis was utilized for SP sample before and after heating at 140 °C for 4 hrs. The obtained FTIR spectra are presented in Figure First, a new absorption band is made around 1028 cm -1 which is assigned to the formation of alkoxyester (C-O) bond attributed to the esterification of starch and PVA molecules with citric acid. As seen in Figure Second, the band around 3400 cm -1 , which is correlated to the stretching vibration of the OH groups, is broadened to the lower wavenumbers. This can be attributed to the OH groups form hydrogen bonds which link the molecules within the sample On the contrary, moving from section 5 to 6, the average width of the aligned pores decreases to 196 μm. This is due to high concentration of the remained solution at the final step of solidification. Also, by detailed scanning of Figure Based on all these observations, the formation mechanism of the ice crystals during unidirectional freezing of the solution can be schematically depicted as Figure The surface topography of the aligned pore channels is illustrated in Figure FE-SEM image of the surface of SPC scaffold is shown in Figure Figure We can evidently observe that HA nanoparticles and cellulose nanofibers appropriately dispersed within the matrix. The EDS analysis of the nanoparticles is given in Figure The compressive elastic modulus and yield strength (1% offset) of the fabricated scaffolds in dry state are presented in Figure Figure Figure Now, looking at Figure The decrement in the dry weight loss of SPCH scaffold after 21 and 28 days incubation in SBF can be attributed to the extensive formation of the apatite phase on the scaffold. In a word, cellulose nanofibers and HA nanoparticles alter the degradation behavior of scaffold by decelerating and accelerating the degradation rate, respectively. Likely, by varying the amounts of cellulose nanofibers and HA nanoparticles, we might be able to control the degradation rate of the nanocomposite scaffold based on our desired function. A firm conclusion, however, needs further studies. Figure In the present study, a highly porous starch-based nanocomposite scaffold containing cellulose nanofibers and hydroxyapatite nanoparticles was fabricated via unidirectional freezing by freeze drying. To increase stability of the scaffold in aqueous media, starch was blended with PVA followed by cross-linking using citric acid. FTIR analysis confirmed that starch and PVA are thermally cross-linked through multiple esterification phenomenon. Porosity of the fabricated scaffold was 95% which verifies the formation of a highly porous scaffold. The pore structure of the scaffold from bottom to top contains cellular pores with maximum diameter of 50 μm and aligned pore channels with gradient width in the range of 80 b c a to 292 μm, which could be appropriate for bone tissue regeneration. It was revealed that both cellulose nanofibers and HA nanoparticles, which are well dispersed and adhered to the matrix, improve the compressive properties of the scaffold. In addition, the water-wetted scaffold presents shape memory behavior after compression unloading. Extensive mineralization of apatite phase on the scaffold after incubating in SBF proved the high bioactivity of the scaffold. In vitro biodegradation assessment demonstrated that while cellulose nanofibers decelerate degradation rate of the scaffold, HA nanoparticles accelerate it. MTT assay ascertained excellent cytocompatibility of the scaffold with MG-63 human osteoblast cells. In addition, adhesion of the osteoblast cells to the scaffold surface confirmed their favorable interaction. In brief, the fabricated nanocomposite scaffold with gradient pore structure can be considered as a new biocompatible, biodegradable, bioactive, and mechanically fast responsive scaffold for minimally invasive filling of non-load bearing bone defects. * The pph values were considered as parts (by wt.) per hundred parts of the starch/PVA mixture in dry state.