A special surface discharge is proposed based on the multi-anode electrode geometry. Instead of the traditional surface flashover of creepage on the insulator surface between the electrodes, a surface discharge with one of the electrodes being placed far away from the insulator is achieved in this paper. The unique electric field distribution due to the multi-anode electrode geometry has a significant influence on the discharge process of the surface discharge. It changes the generation and propagation process of the plasma, forming a plasma plume contributes to the propulsion performance of the thruster. Through theoretical analysis of the obtained plume data, it is indicated that the ablative pulsed plasma thruster based on multi-anode electrode geometry (short for multi-anode APPT) promotes the internal pressure of the plasma jet during its propagation and significantly increases the density and energy of charged particles. The discharge phenomena manifest that the multi-anode APPT and the helix-coil multi-anode APPT effectively increase the intensity of the plasma plume. Through electron density spatial distribution measurement, it has been found that the helix-coil multi-anode APPT increases the density of plasma in the axial direction to more than 4 times of the conventional coaxial APPT and reduces the electron density in other directions. In the propulsion test, it has been demonstrated that the multi-anode APPT and the helix-coil multi-anode APPT have better performance in terms of the impulse bit and the thrust-to-power ratio. In addition, it is also identified that the pinch effect will be enhanced with the increase of discharge power and the propulsion performance is promoted more distinctly. The multi-anode APPT and the helixcoil multi-anode APPT have been proved to have potential application advantage in the field of micro-satellite propulsion. The existing Ablative Pulsed Plasma Thruster (short for APPT) is one of the promising electric propulsion devices because of its simple structure, small volume and high reliability Z-pinch is an important method of plasma constriction in the study of plasma characteristics However, all of the confinement are limited within the thruster, and the issue of plasma diffusion after the plasma leaves the nozzle has not been considered. The application of an external magnetic field by additional circuit or permanent magnet is another effective method to optimize the plasma plume In this paper, we achieve a surface discharge on the condition that one of the electrodes is far away from the insulator and the creepage path is truncated. We apply this type of surface discharge to the coaxial APPT to improve its performance. This discharge method is able to realize a complete plasma plume confinement in the whole propagation process of plasma. It solves the problem that the conventional Z-pinch cannot effectively act on the plasma leaving the nozzle and the increase of the quality or complexity caused by the application of external magnetic field. This paper is organized as follows: the experimental system is introduced in the second part. The APPT based on the multi-anode electrode geometry (short for multi-anode APPT) is proposed along with its comparison with the conventional coaxial APPT (short for conventional APPT) in the third part. This part elaborates the special discharge process of the multi-anode electrode geometry and verifies the pinch effect of the multianode APPT. In the fourth part, a helix-coil multi-anode APPT and its characteristics are introduced. The fifth part validates the performance improvements of the multi-anode APPT and the helix-coil multi-anode APPT and it is followed by the conclusion and prospect. The experimental system mainly includes a pulsed power supply circuit, a vacuum discharge device and diagnostic systems, which is shown in Fig. The APPTs in this paper are based on coaxial electrode geometry. In the conventional coaxial APPT studied in this research, a solid polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube is used as the propellant. Its inner diameter and outer diameter are 5 mm and 10 mm respectively. The cathode and the anode are made from stainless steel material: the cathode is cylindrical and is placed in the PTFE tube; the anode is in the shape of a trumpet nozzle and is fixed to one end of the PTFE tube. The axial distance between the cathode and the outlet of PTFE tube is 10 mm. The triggering mechanism of cathode triple junction (short for CTJ) It is commonly accepted that the surface discharge usually requires both the cathode and the anode to contact with the insulator. The secondary electrons and charged particles will form an arc path along the insulator surface between the electrodes. The type of surface discharge of one electrode contacting with the insulator and the other electrode being far away from the insulator has not been proposed yet. This situation is concluded to be due to the following reasons: the separation of the electrode and the insulator results in the truncation of the creepage path of surface flashover; the weakening of the electric field intensity in CTJ due to the long distance between the electrodes makes it hard to emit initial electrons; it is difficult to generate enough plasma to connect the cathode and the anode before the formation of arc current. In our previous research, we proved that the generation of plasma will continue provided that the strong electric field in the CTJ is sustained. Based on this theory, a method of using specially designed multi-anode electrode geometry to realize a long distance-noncontact surface discharge is proposed in this paper. The multi-anode electrode geometry is designed on the basis of conventional coaxial electrode geometry. A anode next to the cathode is completely insulated and is the first anode (short for insulated-anode). It is able to maintain the electric field intensity on the CTJ before the formation of arc current. A second anode (short for remote-anode) is in the shape of a ring and is arranged 100 mm axial direction away from the insulated-anode nozzle. The remote-anode has an inner diameter of 5 mm and an outer diameter of 15 mm. It is exposed to complete the discharge. The photographs of the plasma plume for the two APPTs with the same power supply parameters are captured and shown in Fig. The cathode and the first anode in multi-anode electrode geometry have the same parameters with the conventional electrode geometry (except for the insulation layer). Therefore, the electric field intensity in the CTJ for the two electrode geometries is about the same. The initiation mechanism of the surface discharge for the multi-anode electrode geometry is similar to that of the traditional surface flashover. The electrons emitted from the CTJ bombard the PTFE and the desorbed gas molecules to generate the initial plasma on the surface of insulator, which is formed by secondary electrons In order to investigate the discharge process of multi-anode electrode geometry, the ANSYS Maxwell 3D software was used to analyze the electric field distribution of the electrode geometry. When a voltage of 10 kV is applied between the cathode and the anodes (the insulated-anode an the remote-anode), the distribution of electric field vector of the multi-anode electrode geometry is shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. It is generally accepted that the directional drift of electrons is mainly determined by the electric field and the propagation of the plasma is affected by the ions (here, referring to C + , F + , etc.). Therefore, the diffusion of electrons towards the remote-anode is inhibited by the electric field between the insulated-anode and the region A, leading to a sustained high interelectrode voltage. The maintenance of the high interelectrode voltage guarantees the continued generation of plasma on the surface of PTFE, which contributes to the propagation of plasma towards the remote-anode. When the plasma arrives at the region A during the propagation, some electrons in the front edge of the plasma will be extracted and reach the remoteanode instantly under the influence of the electric field between the region A and the remote-anode. When the plasma propagates to the remote-anode, the arc path is able to be formed between the cathode and the remote-anode. A series of experiments have been carried out and the typical waveforms of the interelectrode voltage and the discharge current of the two electrode geometries with the same discharge parameters are obtained and shown in Fig. In contrast, the interelectrode voltage and current waveform of the multi-anode electrode geometry exhibits a completely different discharge characteristic. Fig. The time needed for the plasma to propagate to the remote-anode is calculated to be 6.7-8.8 μs according to the distance between the cathode and the remote-anode. It is consistent with the time when the interelectrode voltage drops to the arc voltage. The distance between the remote-anode and the cathode is altered in subsequent experiments to further verify this hypothesis. The time when the interelectrode voltage drops to the arc voltage is recorded for each configuration. It drops to the calculated time zone based on the distance and the plasma propagation velocity each time. As a result, the analysis has been confirmed. In order to investigate the Z-pinch on the plasma plume of the multi-anode APPT, we established a theoretical model of the plasma internal pressure relative to the axial distance. The plasma, as a fluid containing charged particles, can be described using the theory of magnetohydrodynamics. The equations of magnetohydrodynamics and electrodynamics are written as Where 0  is the vacuum permeability; ρ and p  are the mass density and pressure of the fluid, respectively; u is the macroscopic velocity of the fluid and F is the force acting on the unit volume of the fluid. According to equation (1) and equation ( After that, we assume the current sheet is cylindrical and the current density is distributed evenly. The current density distribution function of the plasma jet cross-section is expressed as where 0 R and 0 r are the outer radius and the inner radius of the current sheet, respectively. By substituting equation ( Assuming that the current sheet thickness ( 0 R -0 r ) remains unchanged during the constriction of the plasma jet, the cross- sections in different positions of plasma jet are analyzed (S1 and S2 in Fig. To obtain the relationship between the density of the plasma plume and its axial displacement, the Matlab software is used to analyze the light intensity of the plasma plume and obtain the data of plasma plume cross-section radius relative to the axial displacement. The Origin software is used to curve-fit the data to obtain the plume boundary function. The internal pressure of the plasma at different axial position is calculated with equation ( i i e e p k n T n T   , the density and temperature of charged particles inside of the plasma will be promoted when the pressure p increases. Therefore, the pinch effect produced by multi-anode electrode geometry on one hand reduces the diffusion of charged particles, on the other hand increases the density and energy of the charged particles. The increase of particle density and energy in plasma is crucial to the performance of thruster. The spatial distributions of plasma electron density for the two APPTs are measured to verify the experimental effect of Z-pinch. Because the plasma is approximately neutral, the distribution of electron density is able to reflect the distribution state of the plasma. The specific measurement method is shown in Fig. The spatial distribution of the electron density proves that the plasma plume of the conventional APPT disperses in radial directions because of the internal pressure, leading to a poor directionality. In contrast, the plasma plume of the multianode APPT is subjected to the pinch force and has a distinct directionality. The increase of plasma density in axial direction will bring some benefits to the performance of the thruster. The helix-coil multi-anode APPT FIG. Therefore, it is concluded that the design of helix-coil is able to further reduce the diffusion of plasma and increase the density of plasma in axial direction. The improvements of plasma plume and the decrease of discharge current are supposed to be beneficial to the promotion of performance of the thruster. To determine the experimental performance of the multi-anode APPT and the helix-coil multi-anode APPT, a number of thrust tests are performed. The microthrust measurement system used in this experiment is proposed by Liu Where T is the microthrust, h is thickness of the PVDF thin-film (28 μm), L is the length of the PVDF thin-film (15 mm), Where bit I is the impulse bit, TP is the thrust-to-power ratio, P is the discharge power of the electrode, E is the energy consumed by the electrodes each impulse. Moreover, to investigate the variation tendency of the APPT's performance with different discharge power, the energy stored in the capacitance C is changed to alter the arc current in the discharge. The impulse bit and the thrust-to-power ratio of the APPTs as a function of energy stored in capacitance C are shown in Fig. Therefore, the multi-anode APPT and the helix-coil multi-anode APPT has an advanced propulsion performance through Z-pinch and θ-pinch. This paper proposes a method of multi-anode electrode geometry to realize a special surface discharge. This type of discharge has been proved to suitable for the application in the APPT. It can effectively constrict the plasma plume outside of the anode nozzle. The multi-anode APPT and helix-coil multi-anode APPT exhibit distinct advantages on the propulsion performance compared with the conventional APPT. The innovation of the paper is mainly embodied in the following aspects: Firstly, a special surface discharge is realized with the anode being placed far away from the insulator. Secondly, the Z-pinch on the plasma plume leaving the nozzle is realized, which effectively reduces the diffusion of the plasma. Thirdly, the helix-coil multi-anode APPT achieves the θ-pinch with a simple structure. It increases the density of the plasma plume with its own discharge current. Fourthly, the multi-anode APPT and the helix-coil multi-anode APPT are able to reduce the loss of discharge energy and thus improving the performance of the thruster. This paper focuses on the optimization of the plasma plume characteristics of the multi-anode APPT, and preliminarily proves its advantages on the propulsion. The design of the anodes is the key to realize the pinch effect, and therefore the optimized anode parameters are necessary for its application. Limited to the length of the article and the current study, these issues will be discussed in the future study.