Neutron planar waveguides are focusing devices generating a narrow neutron beam of submicron width. Such a neutron microbeam can be used for the investigation of local microstructures with high spatial resolution. The essential parameter of the microbeam is its angular width. The main contribution to the microbeam angular divergence is Fraunhofer diffraction on a narrow slit. We review and discuss various ways to characterize the angular divergence of the neutron microbeam using time-of-flight and fixed wavelength reflectometers. Neutron scattering is a powerful tool for the investigation of polymers, biological objects and magnetic systems because of the specific properties of neutrons: high penetration ability, isotopic sensitivity and intrinsic magnetic moment. Neutron scattering is a complementary method to X-rays, for example, for the investigations of magnetic materials in bulk. Neutron beams at conventional instruments have a width 0.1 -10 mm. For the investigation of local aperiodic microstructures with high spatial resolution we need very narrow beams. Therefore in the last decades focusing devices in one or two dimensions have been developed, including capillary lenses, Fresnel lenses, elliptical neutron guides and bent crystal monochromators More effective focusing devices are planar waveguides. These are tri-layer film where the middle layer with low neutron optical potential is sandwiched by two layers with high neutron optical potential. In The spatial resolution is defined by the width a of the microbeam at the sample position at the distance ld and the angular divergence of the microbeam The angular divergence of the microbeam due to Fraunhofer diffraction In the present work we measured the contribution of Fraunhofer diffraction to the angular divergence of the microbeam at a fixed wavelength reflectometer ~1/ F d  and compared the results with time-offlight data. In this section, we will briefly review the theory of neutron resonances in planar waveguides In Fig. The resonantly enhanced neutron wave is propagating along the guiding layer like in a channel (Fig. where e x is the channeling length. According to the theory of neutron channeling in planar waveguides There are several types of tri-layer systems with very similar potential well structure as in Fig. If the upper and bottom layers are thin but the middle layer is relatively thick as in Fig. Resonators in Fig. For the first time in 1994 the layered resonator was used for observation of resonantly enhanced neutron interaction with matter: in Recently, the interest to use layered resonators is increasing again. For example, in A planar waveguide to produce a neutron microbeam was considered theoretically for the first time in 1973 in The angular distribution of the normalized microbeam intensity is defined by Fraunhofer diffraction as: Eqs. where B is the normalization factor which is defined from the fit. In eq. ( In this section we present the experimental results obtained on the fixed wavelength reflectometer NREX (reactor FRM II, MLZ, Garching, Germany) with horizontal sample plane. The spatial resolution of the 3 He two-dimensional position-sensitive detector (PSD) was 3 mm. The distance from the first slit after a monochromator to the sample was equal to 2200 mm and from the sample to the detector was 2400 mm. The second slit of the width about 0.7 mm was placed at the distance 200 mm before the sample and served for background suppression. Two Cd beam-stops were used for the reduction of the specularly reflected and the direct beams (Fig. Two series of experiments were carried out. In the first experiment, the waveguide with nominal structure Ni 67 Cu 33 (20 nm)/Cu(150)/Ni 67 Cu 33 (50)//Si(substrate) was investigated (Fig. Therefore the refracted beam is close to the microbeam for the resonance n = 0. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. Points are experimental data corrected on the angular resolution of the incident beam and PSD using In time-of-flight mode the grazing angle of the incident angle i  is fixed and the neutron wavelength of the microbeam n  is defined by the resonances n=0, 1, 2, 3 ... The neutron wavelength of the microbeam is changed by changing the angle i  . The experiment was carried out on the reflectometer REMUR [8] with a vertical sample plane at the pulsed reactor IBR-2. The combined moderator containing the thermal and cryogenic parts was used. The neutron Maxwell spectrum of the polarized incident beam on the exit of the single supermirror polarizer is presented in Fig. In Fig. 12b-d the curve 3 was obtained by summing of the intensity in two neutron wavelength channels for better statistics. In Figs. 12 c,d the curve 3 is multiplied by 10 for clarity. The neutron microbeam intensity is integrated between the reflected and refracted beams. One can see maxima of the neutron intensity corresponding the resonances n=0, The splitting between the maxima positions is increased when the glancing angle of the incident beam is increased and the waveguide channel width is decreased. One can see that the neutron wavelength at the resonance peak position can be increased by increasing the glancing angle of the incident beam. In Fig. In Fig. From the experimental data at REMUR we can estimate the angular divergence of the neutron microbeam outgoing from the waveguide edge as Points correspond to experimental data and line is the linear fit. (d) Experimental Fraunhofer diffraction contribution to the angular width of the microbeam n=0 as a function of the waveguiding channel width d for the neutron wavelength 4.26 Å (curve 1), 3 Å (curve 2) and 2 Å (curve 3). Points are experimental data and line is a calculation using ( Based on the discussion in the preceding sections, a few general rules for the design of planar waveguides generating microbeams can be defined. 1) The width d of the guiding channel should be adapted to the required resolution, but it should not be smaller. 2) A rather short neutron wavelength of about 2 Å is favorable. 3) The investigated sample should be placed as close as possible to the waveguide edge, preferably at a distance of about 1 mm. In this geometry, nonmagnetic waveguides and polarization analysis should be used for the investigation of magnetic microstructures, as in this case the use of a magnetic field on the sample does not affect the non-magnetic waveguide. In The requirement to place the waveguide close to the sample is not a severe limitation, as these waveguides are quite short. As the neutron channeling length is around 2.5 mm, the waveguide length can be limited to about 5 mm, as the gain of longer waveguides is negligible. The short 5 mm waveguides can easily be placed in complicated sample environments, such as cryostats. In The gain factor of waveguides can be defined as the ratio of the neutron microbeam intensity (mm). The intensity of this beam is 290 (n/s), corresponding to the intensity of the totally reflected beam in Fig. To date, we have shown the feasibility of neutron microbeams in several experiments. A polarized neutron microbeam intensity of about 1 n/s at the PRISM reflectometer using a neutron wavelength of 4.0 Å proved sufficient to scan a magnetic microwire in a reasonable measuring time of about 10 hours At the NREX reflectometer, a neutron microbeam intensity 10 n/s for a neutron wavelength 4.26 Å was sufficient to use the polarized neutron channeling method for the investigation of the weakly magnetic films of TbCo 5 At the time-of-flight reflectometer REMUR, the neutron microbeam intensities of about 10 -2 n/s were achieved, strongly dependent on the neutron wavelength. We used the combined (cryogenic and thermal) moderator to increase the neutron intensity for the large wavelengths. Such a microbeam intensity is sufficient for the investigation of microbeams or waveguides themselves In conclusion, we have investigated the angular width of the neutron microbeam from the edge of the planar waveguides. It was shown experimentally that the main contribution to the angular divergence of the microbeam is Fraunhofer diffraction on a narrow slit of the width d where the guiding layer (or channel) of the waveguide plays the role of the narrow slit. We have measured the angular width of the microbeam and corrected it on the angular divergence of the incident beam and the angular resolution of the positionsensitive detector. 