We describe a new sensitive method for the investigation of weakly magnetic films placed inside a tri-layer planar waveguide. Polarized neutrons tunnel into the waveguide through the surface, channel along the layers and are emitted from the end face as a narrow and slightly divergent microbeam. Polarization analysis permits to detect very small magnetization in the order of a few 10 Gauss. The magnetic film containing the rare-earth element Tb was investigated using both fixed wavelength and time-of-flight polarized neutron reflectometers. The experimental results are presented and discussed. Thin magnetic films are widely used for practical applications and fundamental investigations. Therefore the development of new methods for its characterization is a timely task. A powerful tool for the investigation of thin magnetic films is Polarized Neutron Reflectometry (PNR) where () N z ΎΒ▓ is the nuclear SLD, c is a constant and B is a magnetic induction. The direction and the magnitude of the magnetization vector can be extracted for each layer of a multilayer film from a fit of model calculations to experimental reflectivities. The drawback of PNR is that low magnetization values can be hardly resolved. The smallest magnetization detected by conventional reflectometry is about 1000 G. To extract a low magnetization value about 100 G we need a typical measuring time about 100 hours, too much for conventional experiments. Nevertheless, in the particular case of Bragg diffraction in thin films it was possible to extract a low magnetization about 10 G Thin magnetic films containing rare-earth elements are promising materials for the development of new methods of magnetic data storage and ultra-fast switching Various layered resonator systems might be used for the investigations of weakly magnetic films: i) interference filters; ii) Fabry-Perot resonators and iii) resonators or planar waveguides. All of them have a very similar potential well structure but slightly different features and applications. We give a short review of literature to identify adequate resonator systems for the determination of small magnetization. In Fig. If the middle layer is relatively thick as in Fig. For better understanding the difference between resonators and waveguides we review applications of resonators. The theory of neutron resonances in layered structures was developed in A planar waveguide is used for the production of a neutron microbeam emitting from the end face or for neutron channeling in the middle guiding layer. The planar waveguide for producing the neutron microbeam was considered theoretically for the first time in structure as in Fig. The channeling length was experimentally measured in In conventional experiment the width of the neutron beam is from 0.1 to 10 mm. For the investigations of local microstructures in bulk with high spatial resolution a very narrow neutron beam is needed. Therefore various focusing devices including Fresnel lenses, capillary lenses, elliptical neutron guides and bent crystal monochromators are developed The Fraunhofer diffraction contribution ~/ d ΎΒυ into the microbeam angular divergence was investigated experimentally. The dependence ~ΎΒυ was measured experimentally in We have reviewed various tri-layered resonant systems. First, the method of neutron interferometry based on Fabry-Perot interferometer (Fig. In Section 2 we consider the principles of magnetic planar waveguides and present some calculations. In Section 3 the experimental results in the fixed wavelength measuring mode are presented. In Section 4 the experimental results the time-of-flight techniques are shown. In Section 5 the results are discussed. The geometry of experiment is shown in Fig. where 2 z k is the z-component of the neutron wave vector inside the guiding layer, 00 sin the grazing angle of the incident beam for spin up (dashed line) and spin down (solid line) and the magnetization value 500 G. The dips on the reflectivity at total reflection correspond to the maxima of the neutron wavefunction density. The positions of the resonances are shifted for spin up and down and this difference is proportional to the magnetization value. The calculations for various rare-earth containing materials were done in There is also the difference of the resonances positions for spin up and down but the greater order of resonance corresponds to the less neutron wavelength in contrast to the fixed wavelength presentation in Fig. The potential energy of neutrons in the magnetic film where ΎΒφ is the neutron magnetic moment, the signs "+" and "-" correspond to neutron spin up and down respectively. In air the magnetic induction 0 B is equal to the applied magnetic field H and the potential energy of neutrons in the applied magnetic field is . The part of the kinetic energy of neutron movement in z-direction is When two vectors H and B are collinear, the angle is 0 ΎΒμ ΎΑ╜ΎΓ░ and spin-flip probability is zero. For example, at reflection of neutrons from magnetically non-collinear film there are four reflectivities R ΎΑτΎΑτ , R ΎΑφΎΑφ , R ΎΑτΎΑφ and R ΎΑφΎΑτ . The left index "+" or "-" corresponds to neutron spin of the incident beam. The right index "+" or "-" corresponds to neutron spin of the reflected beam. The reflectivity with spin flip is spin-flip probability . For the magnetically collinear film spin-flip probability is zero: 0 RR ΎΑτΎΑφ ΎΑφΎΑτ ΎΑ╜ΎΑ╜ . In where is the Planck's constant, 2 ΎΒ▓ is nuclear SLD of the magnetic film, For other spin transition we obtain the following expressions: The magnetization of the magnetically collinear film is equal to M B H ΎΑ╜ΎΑφ . From the condition of the resonance 0 n ΎΑ╜ in (3) we can found: Experiment was done at the polarized neutron reflectometer NREX with horizontal sample plane. The fixed neutron wavelength is ΎΒυ = 4.26 ├Ζ (ΎΒνΎΒυ/ΎΒυ = 1.5 %). The sample was Ta(3 nm)/Ni 0.67 Cu 0.33 To characterize the TbCo 11 magnetic film, we measured the reflectivities for spin up and down at different applied magnetic field. The procedure of the sample magnetization was following: the film was magnetized in the high negative magnetic field about -10 kOe, then magnetic field was reduced down to zero and then the switched positive magnetic field about +20 Oe was applied. In the field about +550 Oe the film was totally demagnetized. In the experiment we used the analyzer only once to check spin-flip reflectivities in the demagnetized state. The other measurements were done without the analyzer. In Fig. respectively. There are minima of the resonances n=0, 1, 2, 3 on the total reflection plateau. The reflectivities for spin up and down are merged and spin asymmetry is close to zero. This indicates to low magnetization. In the high magnetic field 4618 Oe (Fig. Reflectometry we can obtain qualitative information. But quantitative information is indirect and strongly depends on experimental factors. To extract directly the magnetization value we measured the neutron microbeam intensity emitted from the film end face. In Fig. The magnetization value extracted from splitting of the peaks n=0 positions vs. the applied magnetic field is shown in Fig. Experiment was done at the polarized neutron timeof-flight reflectometer REMUR The sample was the same as at the NREX reflectometer. The procedure of the sample magnetization was following. The external magnetic field +10.3 kOe was applied parallel to the sample plane and then the field was decreased down to 0. Then the applied field changed the sign and was increased to -10.3 kOe and then decreased to 0. Then the applied field in the interval from 300 Oe to 10.3 kOe was applied to the sample for the measurements. Neutron intensity is presented vs. the neutron wavelength and the grazing angle of the incident beam for spin down in Fig. In Fig. In summary, we measured the magnetization curve of the TbCo 11 film using fixed wavelength and time-offlight techniques. Both methods give similar results. Let us estimate the sensitivity of polarized neutron channeling method in the fixed wavelength mode. From Fig. . From In Fig. In The interference filter also can be used for the determination of the low magnetization. In Fig. We have demonstrated a new method for the investigation of weakly magnetic films. Intensity of polarized neutrons channeled in the magnetic film inside planar waveguides and emitted from the end face was registered as a function of the grazing angle of the incident beam. From the difference of the microbeam peaks positions for spin up and down we can directly extract the magnetization value of the film. This direct resonant method with high sensitivity about 30 G is complementary for model-dependent polarized neutron reflectometry. We hope that polarized neutron channeling will be demanded for characterization of weakly magnetic films containing rare-earth elements used for the development of magnetic recording and switching. 