An understanding of the normal state in the high-temperature superconducting cuprates is crucial to the ultimate understanding of the long-standing problem of the origin of the superconductivity itself. This so-called "strange metal" state is thought to be associated with a quantum critical point (QCP) hidden beneath the superconductivity 1,2 . In electrondoped cuprates-in contrast to hole-doped cuprates-it is possible to access the normal state at very low temperatures and low magnetic fields to study this putative QCP and to probe the T  0 K state of these materials 3,4 . We report measurements of the low temperature normal state magnetoresistance (MR) of the n-type cuprate system La 2 x Ce x CuO 4 (LCCO) and find that it is characterized by a linear-in-field behavior, which follows a scaling relation with applied field and temperature, for doping (x) above the putative QCP (x= 0.14) 5 . This unconventional behavior suggests that magnetic fields probe the same physics that gives rise to the anomalous low-temperature linear-in-T resistivity 4 . The magnitude of the linear MR decreases as T c decreases and goes to zero at the end of the superconducting dome (x ~0.175) above which a conventional quadratic MR is found. These results show that there is a strong correlation between the quantum critical excitations of the strange metal state and the high-T c superconductivity. Quantum criticality has been a recurrent theme for attempting to understand the physics of the cuprates and other strongly correlated materials 1,2 . But, despite extensive theoretical and experimental effort over the past 30 years, the relation between quantum criticality and the anomalous properties of the normal state and the origin of the superconductivity is unresolved. There has been much experimental evidence for a QCP as a function of doping in both electrondoped 3,6 and hole-doped 1,7-9 cuprates. However, the nature of the phase for the doping below the QCP is undetermined. For the n-type, the QCP is most likely associated with long range or short range antiferromagnetic order (AFM) (with the carrier l < magnetic correlation length), while for the p-type the QCP marks the end of a pseudogap phase of unknown origin. The QCP in both cuprate types is associated with a Fermi surface reconstruction (FSR), where a large holelike FS is found above the FSR doping quite different for n-and p-type cuprates. Above Tc (for H =0) hole-doped cuprates exhibit the mysterious linear-in-T resistivity, which extends to high temperatures beyond the Mott-Ioffe-Regel (MIR) The role of a magnetic field on the QCP and the normal state properties is also undetermined in spite of much theoretical and experimental effort. The electron-doped cuprates have a much lower critical field (H < 10T) What has not been studied (or understood) is how the magnetic field may impact these fluctuations and hence the low temperature metallic state. In this work we remedy this deficiency by measurements of the MR in the normal state of LCCO in the same temperature and doping range (0.14 < x < 0.17) where the linear-in-T resistivity is found. We find a linear-in-H behavior, a distinctly different response than for quasiparticles in conventional metals, where one expects a MR ~H for fields where ω τ <<1. The magnitude of the linear-in-H resistivity mirrors the magnitude and doping evolution of the linear-in-T resistivity, with both going to zero at the end of the superconducting dome. Moreover, the temperature dependent magnetoresistance follows a scaling relation with applied field and temperature for doping (x) above the QCP up to the end of the superconducting dome. This shows that there are excitations, common to both field and temperature, which are correlated with the superconductivity (and probably the cause). In Fig. However, the measured MR just above the transition temperature strongly suggests linear-in-H resistivity continues to a much lower field (see Fig. In Fig. x increases and both go to zero at the doping where the superconductivity ends. In the nonsuperconducting overdoped regime the resistivity varies as T (Fig. These results are incompatible with that expected in conventional metals This crossover in transport behavior as a function of T is shown schematically in Fig. However, the high field (>20 T), high temperature, magnetoresistance remains linear with field as shown in Fig. At higher temperatures, the magnitude of the H MR decreases with temperature (see Fig. Fermi Liquid system We note that a linear-in-field MR has just been reported in the hole-doped cuprate La Sr CuO (LSCO) The linear-in-T resistivity in both p-and n-type cuprates has recently been attributed to Planckian dissipation To the authors knowledge there is no agreed upon prediction for the field dependence of the resistivity in the Planckian dissipation limit. In summary, we have found an unconventional linear-in-field magnetoresistance at low temperature and low field in the electron doped cuprate LCCO. This behavior is found over an extended doping regime above the purported quantum critical point (i.e., the Fermi surface reconstruction doping). The magnitude of the linear-in-H resistivity mirrors the magnitude and doping evolution of the linear-in-T resistivity, with both going to zero at the end of the superconducting dome. An H/T scaling suggests that there is an energy scale, common to both field and temperature, which is linked to the superconductivity. Our results represent an important and novel aspect of the ground state of the electron-doped cuprates. Moreover, these new results suggest an anomalous quantum criticality in LCCO where the so-called "strangemetal" state of the cuprates can extend to very low temperatures and fields and over a wide range of doping. 