In this paper we study a role of F-centers, hole centers and excitons in energy transfer in Eu-doped BaBrI crystals. Optical absorption spectra, thermally stimulated (TSL) and photostimulated (PSL) luminescence in wide temperature range 7-300 K are studied in undoped and doped with different concentrations of Eu ions BaBrI crystals. Based on experimental and calculated results two possible energy tranfer processes from host to Eu 2+ ions are established. Mixed alkaline earth halides BaBrY (where Y=I, Cl) are recently developed scintillation materials having good potential. The light output for BaBrI:Eu 2+ crystals was estimated as 90,000 photons/MeV In this paper we discuss the role of excitons, electron and hole centers in energy transfer process in BaBrI crystals. The results obtained by optical absorption, photostimulated and thermally stimulated luminescence are presented and discussed. The obtained results demonstrate possible energy transfer processes from host to Eu 2+ ions. Explanations for the role of electron and hole traps are presented as well. Eu-doped crystals and undoped crystals were grown by Bridgman technique reported in Despite the fact that the quasi-binary phase diagram of BaI 2 -BaBr 2 shows region where solid solution for either BaI 2 or BaBr 2 in BaBrI is not formed, an imbalance induced on purpose in the bromine/iodine ratio can alter the shape of the absoprtion spectrum from F(Br) to F(I)-centers. As shown below using imbalance between BaBr 2 and BaI 2 in raw the undoped crystal containing mostly F(I) centers can be grown. Further in this paper this sample is called non-stoichiometric crystal. Optical absorption spectra were measured with a Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 spectrophotometer. The crystals were irradiated either by x-rays from a Pd tube operating at 40 kV and 40 mA regime for not more than one hour or 185 nm light from a low-pressure Hg-lamp. Absorption spectra of xray and photo colored crystals contain the same bands. Thermally stimulated (TSL) and photostimulated (PSL) luminescence spectra were measured in vacuum cold-finger cryostat. Before measurements samples were irradiated under 185 nm light from low-pressure mercury lamp at 77 K (for PSL) and at 7 K (for TSL) temperatures. PSL was registered with SDL-1 grating monochromator equipped with Hamamatsu photomodule H10721-04. PSL was excited using 150 W halogen lamp and MDR2 grating monochromator. TSL glow curves were measured in linear heating regime with rate 1 K/min using cryocooler Janis Research CCS-100/204N. The calculations have been performed in embedded cluster approach implemented in Gaussian 03 computer code After irradiation of undoped stoichiometric samples at room temperature bands at about 2.05 and 1.55 eV appear in optical absorption spectrum (Fig. As shown in the inset of Fig. In related crystals of BaFBr, BaBr 2 the absorption bands in irradiated crystals at about 2-2.5 eV are attributed to F(Br)center Ab initio calculation of F(I) and F(Br) centers were performed. The results are given in Fig. The calculated and experimental spectra agree well. In stoichiometric crystals two types of centers: F(Br) and F(I) are found. In non-stoichiometric samples grown by Czochralski method we observed an excess F(I) centers and optical absorption peak shifts to low energy region. When BaBrI doped with Eu sample is exposed to x-ray or 185 nm irradiation at 77 K photostimulated luminescence is observed. Spectrum of photostimulated luminescence under 2 eV light irradiation is shown in Fig. Photostimulated luminescence is also observed in irradiated undoped crystals. The photostimulated luminescence spectrum is depicted in curve 3 of Fig. In addition to photostimulated luminescence, thermally stimulated luminescence properties of BaBrI and BaBrI doped with 0.05 and 1 mol.% were investigated to clarify the recombination mechanism. In figure3, curve 1 the glow curve for the exciton emission around 320 nm for x-ray irradiated at 7 K undoped BaBrI is depicted. Strong peaks around 50 and 60 K and two weaker peaks at 95 K and 140 K are observed. The symmetrical shape of the peaks indicates the presence of second or general order kinetics. For 50 and 60 K peaks thermal trap depth was estimated using second-order kinetic peak shape. The values are 0.10 and 0.13 eV respectively. Higher energy peaks are more complex and simple deconvolution is not possible. The glow curves for Eu-doped samples are different to undoped sample. In figure3, curve 2 the glow curves for the Eu 2+ emission around 410 nm for x-ray irradiated at 7 K BaBrI-Eu crystals are shown. Intense wide peaks at 95 and 140 K are found. In 1 mol.% Eu 2+ doped sample intensity of TSL is weaker and two wide peaks at about 140 K and 200 K are observed (Fig. For all crystals the peaks in the glow curves correspond to beginning of thermally stimulated motion of hole centers, because F-centers are stable up to 600 K. Low temperature peaks at 50 and 60 K could be attributed to simple hole centers of I - 2 or Br - 2 . Higher temperature peaks could be related to complex centers called in alkali halides V 2 , V 3 centers Excitation of Eu 2+ emission in the region of exciton peak E , e V I n t e n s i t y , a r b . u n i t s This radius can be also estimated from overlapping emission and absorption spectra integral. The radius R of dipole-dipole energy transfer defined as the distance at which the probability of donor (exciton in our case) radiative transitions is equal to the probability of transfer to acceptor (Eu 2+ ion), is given by: Here n is the refractive index of crystal, the subscript A denotes the acceptor center and D denotes the donor center, N A is concentration of acceptor centers (in cm -3 ) and μ A (E) is their absorption coefficient (in cm -1 ), f D (E) is the emission spectrum of the donor centers after 4 •cm 4 ). From the experimental data we estimate the radius R as 27.6 Å. Both values obtained for the distance of energy transfer from the host to the Eu 2+ ion are in good agreement. Therefore, efficient energy transfer from host to Eu 2+ ion takes place. It explains the growing light output with concentration of Eu 2+ ions found in In irradiated at 77 K samples PSL is observed. In stimulation spectrum of undoped crystal the band attributed to F(Br) centers appears. Taking into account the fact that only hole centers are unstable below room temperature we can propose following model. After irradiation free anion exciton decays to F-H pairs similarly to alkali halide crystals where anticor-relation between F-center production and intensity of exciton emission takes place In Eu-doped samples the delayed energy transfer process is more involved. From the one hand, Eu ions should be a hole trap relying on PSL data, where an electron is liberated from F-centers and radiatively recombine with hole. The simple assumption is that Eu 2+ ion captures a hole and becomes Eu 3+ ion. However similarly to BaFBr As the case BaFBr crystals F-centers and H-centers formation can be spatially correlated and appear near Eu 2+ ion STE/Eu 2+ emission/absorption overlap allows to determine dipole-dipole transfer distance. The distance is sufficient to resonant energy transfer. This concludes that the fast energy transport from host to activator responsible for the scintillation of BaBrI-Eu proceeds by STE creation and resonance dipoledipole transfer. At the same time, delayed energy transfer with participation of electron and hole centers formed by exciton decay takes place. In this process spatially correlated pair of F-and hole-center is produced, and a hole recombines with Fcenter in thermally assisted process leading to resonance transfer to Eu ion. Contribution of delayed energy transfer process decreases with increase of concentration of Eu 2+ ions due to diminution of distance between the dopant ions.