Transport of the edge-state electrons along zigzag phosphorene nanoribbons in presence of two impurities/vacancies is analytically investigated. Considering the places of the defects, a number of different situations are examined. When both defects are placed on the edge zigzag chain, as is expected, with changing the energy of the traveling electrons the electrical conductance exhibits a resonance behavior. In this case, for two vacancies the observed resonant peaks become extremely sharp. An amazing behavior is seen when the second vacancy is located along an armchair chain while the first is placed at the intersection of the edge zigzag and this armchair chains. In this case, in a considerable range of energy, the conductance is strongly strengthened. In fact the presence of the second vacancy create a shielded region around the first vacancy, consequently, the traveling wave bypasses this region and enhances the conductivity. The analytical results are compared with numerical simulations showing a very good agreement. Introduction. -Graphene, as the most fundamental two-dimensional (2D) material in the world, has no electronic band gap in its electronic structure and this feature is an obstacle in practical application of this material in the design of semiconductor devices Bulk phosphorus is a layered crystal of the van der Waals type In addition to above mentioned properties, the negative differential resistance (NDR) behavior which is robust with respect to the edge reconstruction has been reported for a two-terminal zPNR device In this paper, similar to what has been studied on the coherent electron transport along zigzag graphene nanoribbons Theory. -As is schematically shown in figure where i, j represents the index of summation that is taken over only the considered nearest neighbors, t ij is referred to as the hopping integral between atoms at sites i and j, c i and c † i are the electron annihilation and creation operators in site i, h.c. stands for Hermitian conjugate and V is the disorder potential energy. It is obvious that in absence of the defects, V is zero. The calculations based on the ab initio tight-binding method, show that taking only five nearest-neighbor interatomic interactions is a very good approximation to provide a reasonable description of the phosphorene band structure Phosphorene can be cut into nanoribbons that the shape of their edges depends on the direction of the cut. Two typical crystal directions, namely the armchair and zigzag directions, were generally explored. The nanoribbons with zigzag edges exhibit some interesting behaviors representing important physical aspects. One of the interesting aspects of these nanoribbons is the existence of quantum edge states in the edge zigzag chains. In the following section, we are interested in studying the behavior of the edge-state electrons, traveling along a side zigzag chain, when they scatters off the impurities doped into the chain sites. In order to investigate this issue, the electronic properties of this type of the nanoribbons is studied analytically. Also, a numerical simulation is made to study the tunable resonances due to the impurities and the validity of the analytical calculations is examined by comparing their obtained results with this numerical simulation. As is known, a zigzag edge chain in a honeycomb lattice supports some quantum edge states which are localized at the edge sites of the side zigzag chains. The exitance of these edge states in zPNRs has created a great potential for this material to use it in science and technology. These states are also the essential ingredients in many of the fascinating properties of phosphorene. The properties of the edge states in phosphorene are intimately related to the properties of the bulk band. The bulk energy gap can be opened by breaking the inversion symmetry of the lattice. Both electron-hole and the lattice inversion symmetries are broken in phosphorene by the interatomic interaction corresponding to the hopping integral t 4 . The first step in the evaluation of the transport properties is to calculate the conductance which depends on the Hamiltonian of the specified system. Here, we use the Landauer formula, to evaluate the conductance of a zPNR. In this equation, g(E) is conductance, e is the fundamental charge, h is the Planck constant and T (E) is the transmission coefficient. Both conductance g(E) and the transmission coefficient T (E) depend on the electron energy E. For two different cases, both conductance and band structure of a typical zPNR are schematically shown in Fig. Employing the tight-binding hamiltonian given in Eq. ( in which k is the wave number, the constant value of δ n is 0 (0.5) for even (odd) n, α k is given by and γ k , a normalization coefficient satisfying Since -2t 1 < t 2 , the partial wave amplitudes appearing in the edge wave states, α 2n k , are always less than unit and they tend to vanish with increasing n. This means that the edge states are localized at the sites of the edge chain, and they decay to zero by penetrating from the edge into the inside sites. Furthermore, for the boundary values of k, k = ±π, the wave stats are zero unless n = 0. In other words, for k = ±π the edge states are strongly localized on the side zigzag chain. Considering the t 4 term as a perturbation and applying a first-order approximation the wave state remains unperturbed, but the energy eigenvalue now depends on k and reads This expression is very similar to the dispersion relation of a one-dimensional tight-binding atomic chain, , where E 0 corresponds to -4t 1 t 4 /t 2 and ∆ to 2t 1 t 4 /t 2 . In other words, in present approximation an A-type edge chain is equivalent to a one-dimensional tightbinding chain with an integral hopping of ∆ = 2t 1 t 4 /t 2 and an energy shift of Green's function of the edge states in zPNRs. With the above introduction, now we can apply a Green's function technique to calculate the transmission coefficient of the doped lattice for the case in which the edge-state matter waves traveling along a zigzag chain are scattered by the on-site impurities. The Green's function of a defect-free system with a discrete spectrum is defined as and the same for a system of a continuous spectrum reads For phosphorene, using the quantum edge states and their eigenenergies given respectively in Eqs. ( The appeared integral can be performed analytically to obtain a closed-form expression for each of the matrix elements. In the following discussions, we need a number of these matrix elements which are listed as follows; and where k 0 is the pole of the integrand in Eq Furthermore, for two sites on an armchair chain with even n and n , since m = m and δ n = δ n = 0, the corresponding matrix element of Ĝ reduces to Inserting α k and γ k from Eqs. ( where is an integer. Using the obtained analytical expressions for the matrix elements of the edge-state Green's operator and applying the general theory of the potential scattering, we can calculate the transmission coefficient of the system in presence of the on-site impurities and/or vacancies. This issue will be followed in the next section. Electrical conductance of the zigzag-edged phosphorene nanoribbons. -In this section, we present the results of the transport calculations in the pure and the defective zPNRs. Our aim of this study is the exploring of the influence of the defect type and its position on the transport properties of the considered system. To perform the calculations, we begin with the Lippmann-Schwinger equation in the potential scattering theory where |ψ in and |ψ out are the quantum states of the incoming and outgoing charge carriers, ĜE is the Green operator for the unperturbed system, V is the scattering potential and T is the transition matrix corresponding to the scattering potential V with V |ψ out = T |ψ in . An attempt to solve the Lippmann-Schwinger equation by successive iterations leads to Now, we assume that two on-site defects are localized at positions (m 1 , n 1 ) and (m 2 , n 2 ), and consider the edgestate charge carriers traveling along the side zigzag chain. These traveling matter waves will be scattered by the defects. Consequently, the incoming wave in the Lippmann-Schwinger equation is the edge-state wave given in Eq. ( where V 1 and V 2 are the potential strengthes due to the presence of the defects. With this form of the scattering potential the transition operator T can be written in its matrix form as where It is obvious that the matrix elements of [ ĜE ] are known as Since, the matrix forms of the scattering potential and the free-defect Green's operator are exactly known, a closedform expression can be evaluated for the transition matrix using the fact that Substituting the edge-state wave function as the incoming wave, and the matrix forms of ĜE and T into Eq. ( where Using the obtained result for the outgoing wave, both the transmitted and the reflected parts of the final sate are derivable. Having these parts of the outgoing wave, the reflection and transmission coefficients can be evaluated. To evaluate these coefficients, for an arbitrary site of (m , n ) it is seen that Since the transmission coefficient is more of interest, we examine the transmitted part of the final wave state at an arbitrary position of (m , n ) with m m 2 . In this case, using the form of the Green's operator it is easy to show that the above expression is proportional to m , n |ψ k . Consequently, we obtain the transmission amplitude as in which it is obviously known that m m 2 . Finally the transmission coefficient is obtained using In the following discussion, we consider two on-site impurities and/or vacancies in the nanoribbon. As is seen in Fig. Also, for simplicity, we assume that the potential strengths V 1 and V 2 are equal, so we put Clean, m=3, m=4 Fig. and we notice that for two vacancy defects, U tends to infinity (U → ∞). Results and discussion. -In all the following discussions, we assumed that the first impurity/vacancy is fixed at (m 1 , n 1 ) = (0, 0) on the edge zigzag chain. Figure A similar situation for two vacancies on the edge zigzag chain is demonstrated in Fig. Figure Summary and conclusion. -Considering a tightbinding model and applying the general scattering theory, the electron transport in a zPNR in presence of two impurities/vacancies was analytically investigated. For two impurities on the edge zigzag chain, the variations of the conductivity with the electron energy exhibits a resonant behavior. For a similar situation with two vacancies, a similar resonant behavior with extremely sharp peaks has been observed. It was shown that the agreement between the analytical calculations and the numerical simulations in these cases is excellent. It found out that the presence of the impurities along the y-axis reduces the conductivity considerably. If the distance between the impurities increases the behavior of the system approaches the behavior of a system with a single impurity on the zigzag chain. Two adjacent vacancies induce considerable conduction in a certain range of the electron energy. This is due to creating a shielding by the second vacancy around the first one. For this final case, the agreement between the analytical and numerical calculations is excellent only for n = 2. For larger value of n, although the overall behavior of analytical calculations and simulations is the same, they have considerable discrepancies in detail. * * * MA acknowledges hospitality of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy. The fourth author also would like to acknowledge the office of graduate studies at the University of Isfahan for their support and research facilities.