We report the electronic structure of CuTe with a high charge density wave (CDW) transition temperature Tc = 335 K by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). An anisotropic charge density wave gap with a maximum value of 190 meV is observed in the quasi-one-dimensional band formed by Te px orbitals. The CDW gap can be filled by increasing temperature or electron doping through in situ potassium deposition. Combining the experimental results with calculated electron scattering susceptibility and phonon dispersion, we suggest that both Fermi surface nesting and electron-phonon coupling play important roles in the emergence of the CDW. Low dimensional materials have the tendency to form new orderings with novel physics. Charge density wave (CDW) Copper-based chalcogenides form a large family with diverse properties and potential applications in solidstate devices such as thermoelectrics, batteries, and photovoltaics Here we provide direct experimental evidence for the CDW in CuTe by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements. An anisotropic CDW gap with a maximum value of 190 meV is observed in the quasi-1D band formed by Te p x orbitals through a nesting wave vector q x = 0.4 a * which matches well with previous diffraction results High quality CuTe single crystals were grown by selfflux method. Surface-sensitive ARPES measurements have been performed at BL 4.0.3 of the Advanced Light Source and BL 1 CuTe has an orthorhombic structure with space group Pmmn and lattice constants of a = 3.149 Å, b = 4.086 Å, c = 6.946 Å Since the gap is anisotropic along the quasi-1D line segment, we further investigate the evolution of the gap with momentum. Figure Figure In addition to increasing tempeature, the CDW gap can in principle also be filled by injection of charge carries. For examples, transient melting of the CDW phase has been reported in TbTe 3 First principles calculations of the phonon dispersion and the electron susceptibility have been performed to provide theoretical insights to the CDW mechanism. A phonon softening is observed at both q = (0.4, 0, 0) and (0.4, 0, 0.5) (pointed by red arrows) in the calculated phonon spectra shown in Fig. , where f ( k ) is the occupation at energy k . For both of two quasi-1D bands from the Te p x orbitals (labeled as α and β in Fig. In summary, we report the electronic structure and provide experimental evidence for the CDW phase in CuTe containing quasi-1D Te chains. ARPES experiments clearly show that the two quasi-1D like parallel bands from the Te p x orbitals are gapped in CDW transition, and the gap is collapsed by increasing temperature or electron doping. Our experimental results together with first principles calculations suggest that electron-phonon coupling and electron-electron scattering by Fermi surface nesting of the quasi-1D Te p x orbitals both contribute to the formation of the CDW phase of CuTe. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 