We report on ferromagnetic resonant mode hybridization in re-entrant cavities made with a commercial three-dimensional (3D) printer, followed by conventional 3D metalization with copper and tin. The cavity volume was only 7% that of a standard cavity resonating at the same frequency, while maintaining a high quality factor. Simulations were in very good agreement. We obtained an effective coupling of about 40 MHz in two cavities at room temperature. These experimental results demonstrate the utility of tunable filters based on complex 3D printed cavities. I n recent years, a new light-matter interaction platform has been developed The main purpose of this work is to demonstrate the strong coupling signature between a YIG thin film resonator and photons generated by a 3D re-entrant cavity elaborated by additive manufacturing. The use of posts inside a 3D cavity permits to reduce its final volume and to offer the possibility to control precisely the working frequency by keeping a high Q factor. In such configuration, most of the microwave (MW) electric field is concentrated in the gap (creates between the lid and the top of inner posts), while all of the MW magnetic field is distributed around the post, with a rapid decrease in amplitude, as shown in Fig. Our 3D cavities have been elaborated by a standard stereolithography 3D printer (Formlabs Form 2). Each of them received two final steps which consist to clean residual resin in a IPA alcohol bath and to treat them in a UV chamber including a heat treatment. Conventional 3D metallization procedure of plastic elements has been adapted to our goal in order to produce a full metallization of plastic re-entrant cavities described as follows: (i) Dry etching by sandblasting (enhancement of the roughness), (ii) Surface activation with Pd 2+ solution, (iii) Autocatalytic bath of copper: Pd particles act as catalyst sites and permit the growth of an homogeneous layer of Cu which spontaneously end up when reaching a 3 μm thickness, (iv) Standard electrodeposition process of Cu (5-10 μm) including a Tin finish of 8 μm to ensure a high electrical conductivity. The final metallic layer deposit on each cavity consists of a thickness of 16 to 21 μm which correspond to at least seven skin-depths at 1 GHz The measurement at room temperature of the frequency dependence of the S 21 of cavity 01 (blue) and 02 (red) is represented in Fig. The use of ferrimagnetic insulating material consists of a single-crystal (111) Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 (YIG) film of 9 μm grown on a (111) Gd 3 Ga 5 O 12 (GGG) substrate by liquid phase epitaxy (LPE). The sample has been cut into a rectangular shape (4 mm×6 mm) by using a Nd-YAG laser working at 8 W. YIG exhibits spin waves with the highest quality factors among all magnetic materials. It is also free from dissipation due to conduction electrons, resulting in a narrow linewidth. The long lifetime of collective spin excitation in YIG has attracted a lot of interest not only for the field of spintronics but also for magnon engineering in the quantum regime. The plane of the YIG film is placed between the cavity wall and the post, as shown in Fig. ). Based on the harmonic coupling model Hybridization resonance modes feature observed in Fig. , is greater than losses of both resonators. It should be noted that the response of the YIG resonator does not reflect the intrinsic magnetic loss but includes the inhomogeneous broadening due to the excitation of several modes. Even so, the average linewidth for the magnetic resonator is smaller than g ef f 2π . Similar behaviour has been observed with the YIG/Cavity 02. A fine magnetic field step was used to demonstrate a clear signature of the strong coupling regime. Figure A good agreement of F 1,2 (solid white lines) with experimental data is obtained with k=0.125 (cavity 01) and 0.156 (cavity 02), the saturation magnetization 4πM s =1775 G, and the gyromagnetic ratio γ=1.8 10 7 rad Oe -1 s -1 . The color plot is associated with |S 21 | (linear) for which the red area corresponds to a transmission amplitude of 12%. Features of YIG/cavity systems are summarized in Table The purpose of this work is not to follow the different excited spin waves mode (and to extract in the meantime the associated wave vectors) but to compare the experimental determination of the coupling strength, k, as function of the resonant frequency to the following equation where μ 0 is the permeability of the vacuum, V c corresponds to the volume of the cavity, N is the total number of spins (linked to the excited YIG volume), and s=(5/2) is the spin number of the ground state Fe 3+ ion in YIG. The coefficient η ≤ 1 describes the spatial overlap and polarization matching conditions between the microwave field and the magnon mode. In a previous work, we demonstrated an exceptional point in a notch filter coupled to a YIG/Platinum system by thermally control the magnetic damping (magnetic losses by analogy with β) with a current-induced heating method The next generation of 3D printed re-entrant cavity based on our processing protocol will include adjustable post height elements to monitor the frequency dependence of k over a wide range with more accuracy (single cavity). We reported mode hybridization between magnons and photons generated by a full metallized 3D printed re-entrant cavities, elaborated with a commercial stereolithography 3D printer. A frequency dependence of the coupling strength was observed with the two YIG/Cavity systems which differ only with the inner post height (similar volume). 3D additive manufacturing opens an innovative path for the development of a new class of 3D tunable filters by combining the advantages of re-entrant cavities. Such elaboration procedure will also improve the integration of YIG/Pt system without drastically increasing the intrinsic loss rate of the cavity.