On-chip manipulating and controlling the temporal and spatial evolution of light is of crucial importance for information processing in future planar integrated nanophotonics. The spin and orbital angular momentum of light, which can be treated independently in classical macroscopic geometrical optics, appear to be coupled on subwavelength scales. We use spin-orbit interactions in a plasmonic achiral nano-coupler to unidirectionally excite surface plasmon polariton modes propagating in seamlessly integrated plasmonic slot waveguides. The spin-dependent flow of light in the proposed nanophotonic circuit allows on-chip electrical detection of the spin state of incident photons by integrating two germanium-based plasmonic-waveguide photodetectors. Consequently, our device serves as a compact (~ 618 m 2 ) electrical sensor for photonic spin Hall dynamics. The demonstrated configuration opens new avenues for developing highly-integrated polarizationcontrolled optical devices that would exploit the spin-degree of freedom for manipulating and controlling subwavelength optical modes in nanophotonic systems. Introduction. Light carries both the spin, an intrinsic form of angular momentum, and orbital angular momentum, which determines its polarization and spatial degree of freedom. Interaction between the spin and orbital degrees of freedom of photons has evoked intensive investigations owing to its potential to push the development of technologies, such as chiroptical spectroscopy Remarkably, even achiral structures exhibit the SOI potential in the near-field due to twisted trajectories of surface plasmons at a nanosphere We utilize the strong SOI in an achiral plasmonic nanostructure to demonstrate for the first time onchip detection of spin-controlled directional routing in a compact plasmonic nanocircuit. We find that a subwavelength semiring can launch gap surface plasmons supported by seamlessly integrated plasmonic slot waveguides preferentially in one direction, depending on the spin state of locally incident radiation. This spin-dependent phenomenon can thus be regarded as a manifestation of the quantum spin Hall effect (QSHE) of light . Figure In order to study the SOI in our device, we first focus on the interaction of incident radiation with the semiring coupler. Therefore, we validate numerically the spin-sorting functionality by utilizing finite difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations, considering that the modeled geometry is illuminated with a diffraction-limited beam (λ0 =1550 nm). We clearly see in Fig. With the above numerical simulations establishing the framework for spin-selective unidirectional excitation, we now move on to the experimental realization of the on-chip device for spin-selective routing. For this purpose, we first conduct an all-optical far-field characterization of the device before plasmonic photodetectors are integrated (See Figure After experimentally verifying the predicted spin-sorting functionality of the device, plasmonic photodetectors are integrated for the realization of full on-chip detection. Therefore, an additional lithography step was carried out to define the plasmonic detector region. Consequently, the plasmonic slot waveguide is locally filled with amorphous Ge semiconductor material by thermal evaporation. To substantiate the electrical detection of propagating plasmons, we have comprehensively characterized a plasmonic photodetector in a simplified system from the same fabrication batch, consisting of a straight plasmonic slot waveguide (See Fig. Internal quantum efficiencies (IQE) exceeding 1% are demonstrated for the individual detector at the targeted wavelength of 1550 nm. For the on-chip electrical detection experiment, the beam is positioned onto the coupler section and the photocurrents of the individual photodetectors are measured for various polarization states of the incident beam. Figure We find that the directionality appears with non-resonant characteristics which enables broadband operation (See Supporting Information, Section S2). Comparing the absolute photocurrent evolutions of the individual detectors with the numerical investigation in Fig. We believe that this discrepancy is associated with fabrication imperfections and surface roughness in the semiring and waveguides which serves potentially as inherent waveguide coupler due to diffraction on roughness features. In summary, using SOI in an achiral semiring, electrical on-chip detection of spinselective directional routing in a plasmonic nanocircuit has been demonstrated successfully. This study may open new routes in highly integrated plasmonic nanocircuits that include the spin degree of freedom for manipulating the optical power flow, in analogy to electron spintronics. Our proposed device not only enables spin-controlled tunable addressing of two plasmonic waveguide channels for spin-encoded communication applications, but also serves as a compact polarimeter capable of determining the one-axis linear polarization state, helicity and handedness of locally incident radiation. The device can be extended by waveguide channels that are sensitive to linear polarization along one of the ±45o axes with respect to the symmetry axis of the device, which enables a complete on-chip characterization of the polarization state. Taken together, we believe this study further bridges the remarkable nanophotonic manipulation capability of plasmonics with nanoscale electronic systems. Fabrication. The fabrication of the device relies on a multi-step lithographic process using the mix-and-match technique for lithographic overlay. First, bonding pads and connecting electrodes are patterned onto a glass chip by optical lithography, metal deposition (5 nm Ti / 50nm Au), and lift-off. The plasmonic circuit is written by electron-beam lithography (EBL) at an acceleration voltage of 30keV in 300 nm PMMA resist and 20 nm thick Al layer to prevent charge accumulation. The alignment between the different lithography steps is performed manually using markers. After development, the circuits are formulated by depositing a 5 nm titanium adhesion layer and 100 nm gold by thermal evaporation and subsequent 12 hours lift-off in acetone. For the optical characterization a 300 nm PMMA cladding was spin-coated on the chip to reduce mode leakage into the glass substrate. The same PMMA layer serves as an electron beam resist for the last EBL step, which integrates the germanium photodetectors onto the plasmonic circuit by evaporating 2 nm Ti and 110 nm Ge onto the pre-defined region. Finally, a 300-nm thin layer of PMMA is deposited. For electrical connection, the chip is wire bonded on a printed circuit board equipped with two on-board amplifiers. Numerical Simulations. Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations were performed using a commercial software (FDTD Solutions v8.11.318, Lumerical). Perfectly matched layers (PMLs) were applied to enclose the computational domain of 3 μm × 4.5 μm × 2 μm in all calculations. A finest mesh grid size of 10 nm is used in the simulations. The optical constants of the gold were taken from the experimental data reported by Johnson and Christy To determine the coupled light into each waveguide, we integrated the time-averaged Poynting vector over the slot gap area at 3 μm away from the antenna coupler. 