We here report magnetostriction measurements under pulsed megagauss fields using a high-speed 100 MHz strain monitoring system devised using fiber Bragg grating (FBG) technique with optical filter method. The optical filter method is a detection scheme of the strain of FBG, where the changing Bragg wavelength of the FBG reflection is converted to the intensity of reflected light to enable the 100 MHz measurement. In order to show the usefulness and reliability of the method, we report the measurements for solid oxygen, spin-controlled crystal, and volborthite, a deformed Kagomé quantum spin lattice, using static magnetic fields up to 7 T and non-destructive millisecond pulse magnets up to 50 T. Then, we show the application of the method for the magnetostriction measurements of CaV4O9, a two-dimensional antiferromagnet with spin-halves, and LaCoO3, an anomalous spin-crossover oxide, in the megagauss fields. Magnetic field is a useful tool to investigate the nature of matter by directly acting on spin, orbital and phases of electrons. Ultrahigh magnetic fields reaching 100-1000 T (=1-10 Megagauss) have very large Zeeman energy that well exceeds that of the room temperature 1 . Such high magnetic field is used not only for better characterization of matter in resonance methods but also used for bringing about emergent quantum phase of matter that is stable even at room temperature. Besides, a number of non-magnetic materials can be made into magnetic ones accompanying drastic change of physical properties (conductivity, magnetization and optical responses) and even their chemical properties. Recently, magnetic fields reaching or approaching 100 T with millisecond pulse duration have been generated in nondestructive manner in several facilities in the world, being used for solid state researches. On the other hand, megagauss fields with much shorter pulse duration (a few micron seconds) have been generated in destructive manner using flux compression methods and fast discharge of capacitor bank for decades Due to the nature of the megagauss pulse magnets such as electromagnetic flux compression (EMFC) technique and single turn coil (STC) method Geometrically frustrated spin system on pyrochlore lattice of CdCr 2 O 4 Low dimensional quantum spin system exhibits quantum phases that is absent in classical spin systems. SrCu 2 (BO 3 ) 2 is a two-dimensional quantum spin system on a Shastry-Sutherland lattice. The ground state is a gapped nonmagnetic phase, which arise from the formation of singlet spin dimers. The spin gap is collapsed by application of high magnetic fields, leading to formation of number of ordered phases. By magnetostriction measurements, it was found that the longitudinal magnetostriction curve in c axis is proportional to the magnetization curve Electronic states can be altered by applications of high magnetic fields in strongly correlated electron systems such as spin crossover cobaltites, heavy fermion systems and valence fluctuating intermetallics, leading to a large lattice volume changes. In a spin crossover cobaltite, LaCoO 3 , the spin-state of the trivalent cobalt ion is classified into low, intermediate and high spin states according to the total spin S = 0, 1, 2, respectively. Many electron configurations of these spin states are quite different in the electron occupation number of the e g orbitals, resulting in the large difference in their ionic radius. We have found magnetic field induced spin- The shift of the Bragg wavelength ∆λ B is converted to the intensity of reflected light ∆I using an optical filter. (c) An actual measurement setup of the FBG based high-speed 100 MHz strain monitoring system using the optical filter method. The intensity of light reflected from the FBG is monitored using an avalanche photo-diode and recorded using an 2.5 GHz oscilloscope along with the pulsed magnetic field. crossover in cobaltites in megagauss regions As for heavy fermion system, the c-f hybridization between the localized f electrons and the conduction electrons promotes the formation of Kondo lattice at low temperatures. The c-f hybridization is effective electron transfer from the f orbital to the conduction band. The valence of f orbital indicates the strength of the Kondo coupling, which is coupled to the ionic radius of f orbitals. Valence fluctuation is the state where the c-f hybridization is so strong that a major portion of f electron is transformed to the conduction electrons. When a valence fluctuating state is altered by high magnetic fields, a large lattice volume change is expected to take place accompanying the change of the f valence. Some system have a gap called Kondo gap with spin and charge gap. For a Kondo insulator YbB 12 , high magnetic field of 50 T suppress the insulator phase leading to the simultaneous meta-magnetic and metal-insulator transition, where strong Kondo coupling is still present As discussed above, the observation of lattice degree of freedom at megagauss fields are quite essential to investigate variety of physical phenomena. From the technical point of view, one promising technique for the strain measurements at megagauss fields is fiber Bragg grating (FBG) strain sensor, as is schematically drawn in Fig. For measurements under megagauss fields, repetition rate exceeding 10 MHz is required due to the short pulse width as mentioned earlier. A technique is reported for 100 MHz detection of FBG strain monitor that employs a sophisticated technique where optical spectrum is converted to the time domain. The time spectrum is detected using a high-speed digitizer with 25 GHz bandwidth Here we introduce a high-speed 100 MHz FBG based strain monitor using optical filter method for the detection scheme for the measurement of magnetostriction at megagauss regions. The method enables us to measure magnetostriction at 100 MHz with a high resolution of 2 × 10 -5 at cryogenic temperature down to 2 K. We show practical applications of the method for solid oxygen, volborthite, CaV 4 O 9 and LaCoO 3 . Typical waveform of the magnetic field generated using destructive pulse magnets of STC and EMFC in ISSP, UTokyo are shown in Fig. For magnetostriction measurements under megagauss fields, we utilized the optical filter method as a detection scheme of strain through the reflection from FBG for the high speed measurement. Detailed description of the measurement system is given in Refs. The ultrahigh magnetic fields were generated using a horizontal and a vertical STCs in ISSP, UTokyo Solid oxygen is a typical spin-lattice coupled system where the crystal structure is determined by the competition between intermolecular forces arising from Van der Waals interaction, electric quadrupole-quadrupole interactions and magnetic exchange interaction between spin angular momentum of O 2 with spin-one Recently, it was found that the application of megagauss fields on α-O 2 and β-O 2 can destroy the antiferromagnetism inducing phase transitions to a novel θ-O 2 , which is experimentally evidenced using magnetization and optical spectroscopy As a preceding step for observing structural change in α-θ phase transition, we have carried out a series of magnetostriction measurements using FBG technique for α-O 2 and β-O 2 . The results up to 7 T using direct measurement of FBG spectra is shown in Figs. We further measured the magnetostriction of α-O 2 up to 30 T using a non-destructive pulse magnet with millisecond pulse duration. We employed here the optical filter method as a detection scheme. In Fig. with conditions of c 1 < 0 and c 2 > 0. We argue that the origin of the quadratic term c 2 B 2 is the exchange striction, where increasing magnetization requires the antiferromagnetic exchange interactions to be suppressed inducing the increment of the inter-molecular separation. On the other hand, the origin of the linear term c 1 B with the negative coefficient is not clear at this moment. A possibility is that the linear magnetostriction, which is prohibited due to the time reversal symmetry for paramagnets, may appear as a converse of the piezomagnetism The presence of the magnetic order with the 66 magnetic point groups that do not contain the symmetry operations of time reversal ( 1) or time reversal times inversion ( 1 ) can exhibit cross correlated phenomena of strain and magnetization at proximity of zero magnetic field Physics of low dimensional quantum spin system is further enriched by the geometrical frustration that is inherent in triangular, Kagomé and Maple leaf lattices. Volborthite was first considered as a candidate for a Kagomé quantum spin lattice. Now it is believed that, in volborthite, the deformation of the Kagomé lattice is significant that the spin network is completely different from the Kagomé antiferromagnet but is effectively closer to the spin system with nearest neighbor exchange of J 1 > 0 and the next nearest neighbor antiferromagnetic exchange constant of J 2 < 0 We have carried out magnetostriction measurements of volborthite up to 45 T at 4.2 K and 2.2 K as shown in Fig. As discussed in the previous subsection, low dimensional quantum spin system attracts attention due to the variety of magnetic phases arising from the enhanced magnetic fluctuations due to the low dimensionality, quantum mechanical nature of spin. Magnetic order is further suppressed leading to the enhanced magnetic fluctuation due to the frustrations arising from geometrical feature or competing exchange interactions. The magnetic model of an antiferromagnet CaV 4 O 9 is shown in Fig. We have carried out magnetization and magnetostriction measurements up to 150 T and 190 T, respectively, as shown in Figs. As summarized in Fig. Due to the competing strength of Hund's coupling and crystal field splitting in cobalt oxides, many cobaltites undergo the spin-crossover where the spin-state of Co ion changes with the variation of external fields such as temperature, pressure, magnetic fields and transient photo-irradiations. Among them, LaCoO 3 is by-far the most intensively studied material for its puzzling spin crossover process from the low-spin (LS) insulator ground state, then to the paramagnetic insulator state and then to the paramagnetic metallic state with increasing temperature. Cobaltites can be viewed as a strongly correlated electron system with many electrons and multiple orbitals. From the point of view, an interesting proposal has been claimed theoretically based on multi-orbital Hubbard models We previously reported an experimental observation of unusual spin-state ordering at megagauss fields as shown on the B-T phase diagram in Fig. For further investigation of the high field phases, we have carried out a series of magnetostriction measurement of LaCoO 3 up to megagauss fields with variation of the initial temperatures. Representative results are shown in Fig. In the present experiment, a single crystalline sample was used. For future study, we are planning to perform experiments with a sintered power sample. Sintered power samples are advantageous in the senses that the first order transition gets softer making the FBG measurement easier We have reviewed our recent development of the highspeed 100 MHz strain measurement system based on the FBG technique and the optical filter method devised for the magentostriction measurements at μs-pulsed magnetic fields for megagauss region. Measurement system for the optical filter method is introduced. As working examples, the measured results on solid oxygen, volborthite, CaV 4 O 9 and LaCoO 3 are briefly reviewed.