Microstrctural, vibrational, ferroelectric and dielectric properties investigation reveals non-stoichiometric chemical ordered regions (CORs) and relaxor like dielectric characteristics in lead magnesium niobate (PMN) ceramics uniaxially hot pressed (HP) at 800 o C to 1200 o C. Occurance of (1⁄21⁄21⁄2) superlattice reflections along <111> in <110> zone axis SAED pattern as well as the presence of bright nano-meter regions in corresponding darkfield images in 800 o C hot pressed PMN demonstrates formation of the CORs as soon as perovskite phase is formed during calcination and remains unaffected with HP sintering tempreature. Separation between two broad peaks of Nb-O-Nb stretching mode and the redshift of O-B-O bending modes suggest an increase in the polar nano-size regions. Grain size dependence of the ε m and shifting of the T m from 278 K to 263 K is explained by the coreshell model. Polarization switching and impedance spectroscopy is observed to be consistent with the grain size analysis. Lead magnesium niobate (PMN) is first discovered in late 1950's by Smolenskii Below the T b , the PNRs are developed due to local structural distortion, which are permanently correlated dipole moments (giant dipoles) composed of many unit cells. Condensation of the soft transverse optical (TO) phonon mode is recently reported near the T b by elastic diffuse scattering of neutron Several models are proposed to comprehend growth of the PNRs in the PMN Initially, the diffuse ε m peak is considered due to distribution of phase transitions (T c ) in crystal, but now it is recognized as response of the PNRs, which appears at the T b ~600 K. These dynamic PNRs grow in number as well as in size on cooling, which cause increase in the 'ε' till it becomes static around T ≃400 K. Finally, it is proposed that the PNRs ensemble into a nano domain ferroelectric state around 220 K (elliptical shape with maximum ~10 nm size) There are two widespread models reported to explain origin of the PNRs According to the first model, i.e., Dipolar glass model, the PNRs are nano-size polar area, which is formed due to local phase transition and these PNRs are randomly distributed in a cubic background matrix. The second model assumes that the phase transition may be occurring similar to that of the normal ferroelectrics, but due to random electric field, the long range order breaks into smaller nano-domains. The quenched random electric field is originated due to the disorder present at the B-site cations, which is occupying equivalent crystallographic position in the perovskite lattice. Recently, frustrating dipolar interaction with the quenched disorder is suggested to obstruct the ferroelectric like transition in the PMN and ultimately leading to the PNRs The CORs are believed to be source of the quenched random field, which destroy the long range polar ordering. Size of the CORs and separation between these regions is reported to 2-3 nm and ~ 2.5 nm, respectively Investigation of temperature dependent microstructural evolution In ferroelectric and relaxor ferroelectric ceramics, grain size has been reported to influence dielectric permitivity, spontaneous polarization and piezoelectric properties Carreaud et al. Relaxor like dielectric characteristics of Ba (Zr x ,Ti 1-x )O 3 system are recently reported, where polarizability difference between Zr and Ti ions has been stated crucial for the formation of the PNRs The Columbite method is used for synthesising calcined powder of the PMN and details are described in ref The density of sintered pellets is determined by liquid displacement method (the Archimedes Method). The density of the hot-pressed ceramic is found to increase from 76% to 99% of the theoretical value with increasing HP sintering temperature. Room temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the polished ceramic is measured on a Rigaku diffractometer (Cu K α source with λ = 1.54 Å) using a scan rate of 2 o /min with 0.01 o step size in the 2θ range 20-60 o . Crystal structure and the lattice parameters are calculated by Lebail fitting of the XRD pattern of the hot pressed ceramics using commercially available Fullprof software Average grain size is measured by the linear intercept method using 'imageJ' software. Microstructure images are recorded from the fractured surface of HP800 to HP1200 samples using scanning electron microscope and are shown in Fig. With increasing HP sintering temperature, the extent of open porosity reduces drastically above 1000 o C. Figure ( The pyrochlore phase < 2 wt.% for the HP800 and HP900 ceramics may be due to poor control of environment for lead oxide loss during HP sintering. Single perovskite phase is obtained in all the other PMN ceramics hot pressed above 900 o C, which is also evident in Fig. The Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) of all the major peaks are found increasing with increase in the HP sintering temperature. Inset of the Fig. Presence of the CORs and the PNRs in HP sintered PMN ceramic is directly visualized using 〈110〉 zone selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern along with bright and dark field transmission electron microscope (TEM) images These PNRs are much smaller in size than a typical FE domain, which agrees well with the earlier TEM study on the PMN and other Pb-based mixed perovskite relaxors The intensity of the F-spot is identical to that of the atmospheric pressure sintered PMN sample (at 1200 o C) reported earlier The TEM studies thus show the presence of the F-spots in HP800 sample, which is hot pressed at the temperature of the calcination, revealing that the nonstoichiometric CORs is an inherent part of the PMN and remains unaffected even after sintering. There is no change in the intensity of the (1⁄21⁄21⁄2) superlattice reflection and the size of nano-regions in dark-field images with increase in the HP sintering temperature. The consequences of enhancement of the PNRs on dielectric properties are discussed in section 3.5. Raman spectroscopy is used to investigate the local structures of the PMN, where the global symmetry is different from the local symmetry. The Raman spectrum of all the hot pressed PMN ceramics is compared in Fig. No evidence of disappearance of the old modes or appearance of new modes is observed with increasing HP sintering temperature, confirming the same macroscopic phase structure. These spectra are adjusted by the Bose factor and normalized by the intensity of 788 cm -1 'A 1g ' mode of the PMN. In consistency with the earlier report, the Raman spectra is de-convoluted using the Pseudo-Voigt peak shape function Similarly, the Raman spectra are de-convoluted for all HP800 to HP1200 samples. Figure For conveyance, the Raman spectra are divided into three regions. In region I, two modes near 100 and 150 cm -1 , as indicated by dotted line B 1 and B 2 in Fig. In region II, the wide band from 200 cm -1 to 400 cm -1 consists of four Raman modes, The value of "ρ" has been found to increase from 0.55 to 0.77 exhibiting enlargement of the coherence length of off-centred Pb-shifts with increasing HP sintering temperature, implying reduction in the disorder at the B-site. In region III, two broad peaks in frequency range of ~500-800 cm -1 are assigned to the Nb-O-Nb stretching mode, as designated by D 1 and D 2 (Fig. In region III, the highest intensity mode near 780 cm -1 , designated as A 1g mode, assigned to the stretching mode of the B 1 -O-B 2 bond (here Nb-O-Mg). After fitting Raman spectra of all HP ceramics, it is observed that the peak position, intensity, and FWHM of the A 1g mode (~788 cm -1 ) do not show any variation with HP sintering temperature, which implies no change in the size of the B-site cation ordered region, which is consistent with TEM analysis. Temperature and frequency dependent dielectric properties measurements are carried out to study the influence of HP sintering temperature on the relaxor dielectric behaviour. The real (ε') and imaginary (ε") parts of complex dielectric constant (ε*) as a function of temperature for HP800 to HP1200 ceramics at selected frequencies are shown in Fig. The ε'(T) and ε"(T) for all HP ceramics show broad ε m with strong frequency dispersion near T m , i.e. the T m shifts progressively towards lower temperature with decreasing frequency. This frequency dispersion clearly indicates that the relaxation process of the dynamic PNRs occurs at multiple time scale In the later part of this section, this is explained by considering the core-shell model. The fitted parameters are presented in Table where ε A (>ε m ), T A (<T m ) and δ A (called degree of diffuseness) are adjustable parameters, essentially independent of frequency and effective in long temperature range above the ε m . Figure Reduction in the dielectric permittivity with decreasing grain size has been explained by a core-shell model ( where K obs is the experimental value at the T m and V 2 is the volume fraction of porosity present in the sample. Here the porosity is assumed to be not interconnected where K shell and V shell and K core and V core are the dielectric constant and volume of the shell and core regions, respectively. Assuming the K core of 28000 (single crystal of PMN) and a K shell of 300, the grain boundary thickness is calculated and presented in Table The T m is also observed to shift to lower temperature with increasing grain size. This shift can be explained if grain boundary influence on the thermal properties of the PNRS is considered. In small grains, regions near to grain boundary may have more probability of restricting thermal activity of the larger polar regions, which are associated with the lower frequencies. This means, the dielectric permittivity will have more contribution from the thermally active smaller volume polar regions that are associated with the higher frequency. This result in shifting of the T m to higher frequency regime, which is consistent with the increase in the T m observed with decrease in the HP sintering temperature. A decrease in the dissipation factor for smaller grain sized PMN-HP800 sample is also consistent with this mechanism. Further, strong frequency dependent dielectric behaviour of all the HP ceramics is a consequence of statistical distribution of the PNRs over wide temperatures range. Fitting of frequency dispersion of the T m to different models can reveal insight of the interaction among the PNRs. Reasonableness of the fitting parameters with the Vogel-Fulcher relation (Eq. 5) means frustrated interaction among the PNRs leading to freezing of the polar cluster dynamics at finite temperature (T f ) ( where f o is attempt frequency (τ o   -1 is the microscopic time associated with flipping of fluctuating dipole entities), E a is activation energy, k B is the Boltzmann constant, T f is the Vogel-Fulcher temperature, where freezing of polar cluster dynamics take place, zv is critical dynamic exponent and T g is glass transition temperature. Figure The fitting of T m vs f plot with Eq. 6 for all the HP ceramics is also carried out. The cluster glass ground state (also known as "super-dipolar" glass) is reported to develop at a static glass temperature (T g = 238K) from high temperature PNRs ensemble under random electrostatic interaction The parameter T g is decreased from 264 to 241 K with increasing HP sintering temperature, which suggests critical slowing down of dynamics of the PNRs ensemble (cluster) below this temperature. It may by noticed that the T g of the HP1200 agrees well with the earlier report Relaxation behaviour is investigated using Cole-Cole dielectric relaxation model because the T g or T f is considered as the temperature below which the distribution of relaxation time diverges. (T) are compared in Fig. To get insight of the dead layer around the grain, impedance spectroscopy has been carried out. Figure where C o is the capacitance at ω = 1 rad/s, ω is the angular frequency and 'n' is exponent having value in between 0 and 1. The exponent "n" reflects deviation from an ideal capacitance. The "Q" is identical to a capacitance component when the exponent n is equal to one. Equivalent circuit consisting of two RQ elements in series (as shown in the inset of the Fig. Figure x 10 4 Ω to 3.7 x 10 6 Ω, respectively. Similar trend is noticed at other two temperatures. No appreciable change in the capacitance is noticed with increase in the HP sintering temperature. Electric field induced polarization switching is recorded at 300 K, 220 K, and 180 K under a drive of 15 kV/cm at 50 Hz and is compared in Fig. Typical ferroelectric like P-E hysteresis loop is observed at 180 K for all HP ceramics except HP800 and is shown in Fig. Grain size dependence on the ε m and T m has been analysed using the core-shell model, which reveals increase in the ratio of core to shell region thickness with increasing grain size. Raman spectroscopy investigation has revealed an increase in the local distortion, which is not detected in X-ray diffraction pattern. Typical relaxor like dielectric characteristics, Superlattice reflection (1⁄21⁄21⁄2) in <110> zone SAED pattern and A 1g mode corresponding to chemical ordered regions has been observed in HP-800 sample, which confirms formation of the CORs during the calcined stage. Frequency and temperature dependence of the dielectric constant reveal decrease in the distribution width of the relaxation time and the degree of diffuseness, which imply increase in size of the PNRs and their co-operative interaction with increasing HP sintering temperature. Table Table HP1200 