Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) is a technique to obtain microcrystallographic information from materials by collecting large-angle Kikuchi patterns in the scanning electron microscope (SEM). An important fundamental question concerns the scattering-angle dependent electron energy distribution which is relevant for the formation of the Kikuchi diffraction patterns. Here we review the existing experimental data and explore the effective energy spectrum that is operative in the generation of backscatter Kikuchi patterns from silicon. We use a full pattern comparison of experimental data with dynamical electron diffraction simulations. Our energy-dependent cross-correlation based pattern matching approach establishes improved constraints on the effective Kikuchi pattern energy spectrum which is relevant for high-resolution EBSD pattern simulations and their applications. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) is a technique which is used to reveal the microstructure of crystalline materials, including metals, ceramics, functional materials, and minerals in the scanning electron microscope (SEM) An important fundamental question concerns the scattering-angle dependent electron energy distribution which is relevant for EBSD patterns, where the effective scattering angles can change by values in the order of 90 • within a single diffraction pattern (see Fig. Energy differences of this size would have considerable impact especially on high resolution EBSD methods for strain determination, and therefore it is important to resolve the apparent inconsistency. We assign the central source of the discrepancy concerning the effective Kikuchi pattern spectrum to the use of the continuous slowing down approximation In order to explain the experimental scattering geometry, a typical set up for EBSD analysis is shown schematically in Fig. With respect to the experimental data acquisition, we show in the top part of Fig. The geometry of the Kikuchi patterns is governed by the gnomonic projection of the conditions for Bragg reflection of waves originating from a point source inside a crystal The width of the Kikuchi bands seen in Fig. Theoretical models of EBSD have to consider a spectrum of backscattered electron energies in the treatment of the dynamical diffraction effects, as discussed in The properties of the BSE spectrum in the SEM have been studied in the past Berger and Niedrig Deal et al. Winkelmann et al. The analysis of the diffraction modulation as a function of energy showed that high Kikuchi band contrast is associated with energy losses approximately in the range below 1 keV for scattering angles of 135 • and an angle of incidence of 75 • . The maximum in band contrast was shown to depend on the relative path lengths in the sample. When the inelastic scattering happens predominantly on the incident part of the path before the backscattering event, the band contrast can still be high even for higher numbers of plasmon losses. It was also shown that the Kikuchi profile becomes blurred by reduced dynamical scattering at low energy losses when the geometrical conditions are such that the effective sample thickness for the backscattered electrons is very low (< 5nm). Based on these spectroscopic investigations, the Kikuchi pattern simulation model discussed in Using energy-resolved pattern simulations within this approximation, it was shown in If the energy spread of the backscattered electrons as a function of position across the detector would be the dominating mechanism that causes changes of diffraction features, we could also analyse the width of experimental Kikuchi bands directly to obtain information on the corresponding electron energy spectrum The predictions of the CSDA-MC simulations in The geometrical conditions for the scattering angles at the top of the EBSD pattern, with the largest losses and largest broadening of the spectrum, approximately correspond to the geometry with 75 • angle of incidence studied spectroscopically in In the current paper, we use full pattern dynamical electron diffraction simulations to explore the possible impact of the BSE energy spectrum on the appearance of EBSD patterns from silicon. Compared to an averaged band width, the crossing points of features in dynamical pattern simulations are very sensitive to energy, which can be used, for example, to calibrate the beam voltage in quantitative convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) in the transmission electron microscope The silicon EBSD data was measured from a sample of a commercial Si(001) wafer at 15kV acceleration voltage. Maps of 50 × 37 patterns with a resolution 800 × 600 pixels using an e -Flash HR EBSD detector (Bruker Nano) were acquired at 6000x magnification using a FE-SEM LEO 1530VP at 10 nA probe current and 400ms exposure time in the high vacuum mode. After the measurement, 10 patterns near a selected position were averaged to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio. Background processing of the raw EBSD patterns was done via static and dynamic background division as discussed above to result in an approximately constant average intensity. For quantitative image visualization, we normalize the Kikuchi patterns to the mean of μ = 0.0 and standard deviation of σ = 1.0. The same normalization is applied to the simulated patterns. No further changes in brightness or contrast were applied. The measurements of the BaFe 2 As 2 patterns Simulation of the dynamical master data is performed for a specified electron energy spread and the assumed crystal structure according to the Bloch wave approach described in The Debye-Waller-Factor for Si was taken as B = 0.8 Å -2 . For the simulations of the BaFe 2 As 2 patterns, we have used 2936 reflectors with a minimum lattice spacing d hkl > 0.35Å, and a Debye-Waller-Factor of B = 0.3 Å -2 to account for the experimental temperature of 12 K. We calculated 8 sets of master data, at energies from 18.0 keV to 21.5 keV in steps of 0.5 keV, without additional energy broadening or angular smoothing. Concerning the depth distribution that is necessary for the dynamical simulations, we use analytical distributions which take into account the qualitative features of the Kikuchi source distribution Quantitative image comparison is performed by calculating the normalized cross-correlation coefficient (NCC) r (0 < |r| < 1) The projection center was determined from the best full pattern fit of orientation and projection center for all 6 assumed mean energies. Based on the high pattern resolution of 800 × 600 pixels, the accuracy of the PC value determined in this way is estimated to be in the order of less than 0.1% and is not expected to influence the final result. In the subsequent fit for the respective regions of interest, the same, fixed PC was used for all energies and optimization of the NCC was performed through small variations in the orientation for each energy, to find the best match between experiment and simulation. We present a comparison of the energy-dependent pattern matching analysis for ROIs extracted from the experimental pattern (Fig. As can be seen in these Figures, a change by 1 keV induces visible changes in the patterns, i.e. the more reasonable fit can be distinguished by eye within these limits. This direct visual verification of the fit of specific features of crossing lines, as shown in Figures In Fig. As an additional analysis option to further verify the results of the fitting procedure discussed above, we also extracted Kikuchi bands from the experimental patterns. Because we know the gnomonic projection center calibration for the experimental pattern, we can reproject the experimental data to a spherical coordinate system (θ, φ). In this coordinate system, a Kikuchi band runs azimuthally (angle φ) along the equator and extends to latitudes ±θ as measured from the lattice plane trace at the equator with θ = 0. The extraction of a (110) band can be seen in Fig. To this end, in Fig. In summary, a direct band extraction and profile analysis implies that energies near 11 keV and lower are incompatible with the measured profiles. The possible influence of the energy deficiency effect has to be considered for an experimental Kikuchi band profile analysis, especially if small changes in band widths are assumed to be relevant. In order to further investigate the role of the density of the material and the resolution of Kikuchi pattern features on the effective Kikuchi spectrum, we have carried a similar analysis for Kikuchi patterns measured from BaFe 2 As 2 at a temperature of 12 K and at a beam voltage of 20 keV which contain a high density of high frequency diffraction information. The results shown in Fig. We have shown that the features observed in experimental Kikuchi diffraction patterns of silicon at 15 keV are consistent with the assumptions of the simulation model discussed in In the following, we will discuss several issues which are related to (a) the use of an observed width of interference features to infer properties of the respective spectrum (b) use of an inadequate simulation model for description of the energy spectrum. In general, estimation of an electron energy spectrum from diffraction patterns can be highly unreliable, because the observation of broadened interference features does not necessarily imply a broadened spectrum. Instead, we note that several factors can lead to a broadening of interference features in Kikuchi patterns when using a conventional setup like described in Fig. • Minimal orientation changes of the material in the measured sample area will lead to a superposition of patterns which are slightly rotated with respect to each other, thus leading to an effective broadening of diffraction features. This is reduced when a single crystal of unstrained material is explored (such as the Si(001) semiconductor wafer samples shown here). • The sample surface quality can affect the pattern quality due to crystal deformations, defects, amorphous oxide layers and carbon contamination. • The quality of Kikuchi pattern features is influenced by temperature effects • Diffraction of electrons from sources in thin (< 5nm) regions of the surface will lead to a broadening of features due to reduced dynamical scattering effects The relative influence of these dynamical diffraction effects can change with scattering angle. • The primary energy reference is not known exactly. This can be due to an uncertainty in how precisely the SEM voltage and the energy spread of the incoming electron beam is known, or by charging effects which change the actual landing energy on the sample. From the results presented in Fig. Ultimately, the combination of items that impact the precise band width and resolution at different positions on the detector can be complicated. In the absence of a quantification of the various possible broadening mechanisms, extraction of Kikuchi band widths leads to inconclusive results (compare also Fig. Compared to previous dynamical simulation approaches for EBSD It has been shown that the CSDA is a very good approximation for many applications in electron microscopy within a regime of large collision numbers Experimentally, the failure of CSDA-MC simulations for spectroscopic SEM investigations has been verified using an electrostatic energy filter with with 0.55% energy resolution Going beyond the CSDA by using discrete inelastic loss processes, it was shown in In the EBSD literature, Monte Carlo simulations have been applied by several authors for the analysis of EBSD experiments, see for example Concerning the depth-dependent Kikuchi diffraction source intensity, it has been discussed in We used full pattern dynamical electron diffraction simulations to explore the possible impact of the backscattered electron energy spectrum on the appearance of EBSD patterns from silicon. We found that Kikuchi patterns from silicon are consistent with mean energies which are approximately 1 to 1.5 keV below the primary beam energy, compared to a corresponding range between 2 and 5 keV predicted in In both examples, we have evaluated not only the band width of one particular feature, but we have analyzed the appearance of extended and correlated Kikuchi pattern features, which provides greater precision in estimating the constraints on the effective Kikuchi pattern spectrum. The experimentally observed broadening of diffraction features is consistent with narrow effective Kikuchi spectra (FWHM 500 eV). For higher-Z materials, the mean energy will approach the primary beam energy. We find that the use of the continuous slowing down approximation (CSDA) in the Monte Carlo part of the Kikuchi pattern simulation approach presented in 