In this paper, we study the impact of using III-nitride semiconductors (GaN, AlN) as substrates for ultrathin (11 nm) superconducting films of NbTiN deposited by reactive magnetron sputtering. The resulting NbTiN layers are (111)-oriented, fully relaxed, and they keep an epitaxial relation with the substrate. The higher critical superconducting temperature (Tc = 11.8 K) was obtained on AlN-on-sapphire, which was the substrate with smaller lattice mismatch with NbTiN. We attribute this improvement to a reduction of the NbTiN roughness, which appears associated to the relaxation of the lattice misfit with the substrate. On AlN-on-sapphire, superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs) were fabricated and tested, obtaining external quantum efficiencies that are in excellent agreement with theoretical calculations. Superconducting ultrathin (few-nm-size) films are the keystone of devices such as superconducting hot electron bolometer mixers and could grant access to interesting physical phenomena involving Majorana fermions The most stable crystalline configuration of NbTiN is the rocksalt cubic structure, with a lattice parameter between aNbN = 4.39 Å It has been reported that the use of crystalline GaN, AlGaN or AlN as substrates results in an improvement of the crystalline quality and critical superconducting temperature of Nb(Ti)N thin films, which grow epitaxially on (0001)-oriented III-N In a conference contribution, Zhu et al. showed NbN SNSPDs on crystalline AlN-onsapphire with reduced jitter but poor detection efficiency (< 4%) In this paper, we study the impact of the substrate on the crystalline quality and superconducting critical temperature of ultrathin (11 nm) films of NbTiN deposited on almost-lattice-matched III-nitride semiconductors by reactive magnetron sputtering. Various materials are considered as substrates, namely a 1-μm-thick AlN-on-sapphire template, a GaN/AlN (650 nm/1 μm) heterostructure on sapphire, and 350-μm-thick GaN substrates, either non-intentionally doped (n-type conductive) or Fe-doped (semiinsulating). Thin (≈ 11 nm) NbTiN films were deposited by reactive magnetron co-sputtering at room temperature in an ultra-high vacuum chamber (background pressure between 5×10 -9 Torr and 1×10 -8 Torr). After solvent cleaning (acetone, methanol), the substrates were placed on a 4" wafer chuck and held in place using aluminum pins. During the deposition, the substrate holder was rotating in order to improve the radial uniformity of the samples. The substrates were held at a distance of about 30 cm from the targets. The Nb target was placed directly below the substrate holder, while the Ti target was placed in a confocal geometry, the target pointing towards the substrate holder. Both targets were 3" in diameter and 0.250" thick. The applied power on the Nb target was 200 W (direct current), while the applied power on the Ti target was 200 W (radiofrequency), which corresponds to a power density of 4.39 W/cm 2 . The sputtering pressure was set to 3 mTorr with a gas mixture of 100 sccm of Ar and 10 sccm of N2. A quartz crystal monitor was calibrated by deposition of a thick film and subsequent measurement of the deposited thickness with a profilometer. From measurements on previous samples deposited in the same conditions, we estimate the thickness variation in 1 cm × 1 cm, to be less than 1%. The estimated deposition rate was 0.1 nm/s. The samples were deposited two at a time during subsequent runs, and under similar conditions, namely same pressure, gas partial pressures, applied powers, plasma voltage and current. The nominal Ti mole fraction in the Nb1-xTixN layer was x = 0.2, but chemical measurements by electron energy loss spectroscopy and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy of reference specimens, performed in a transmission electron microscope, point to x = 0.15±0. The samples under study are listed in table X-ray reflectivity and x-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) were performed in a Panalytical Empyrean diffractometer equipped with a cobalt anode beam tube (Co λΚα = 1.789 Å), a Göbel mirror and a two-dimensional pixel detector used in both zerodimensional and one-dimensional modes. The microstructure of the samples was analyzed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). The samples were prepared in cross-section by either mechanical polishing followed by ion milling or by focused ion beam milling and measured in a FEI-Tecnai microscope operated at 200kV. Finally, the surface morphology was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in a Dimension 3100 system operated in the tapping mode. The thickness of the NbTiN layer has been determined precisely using x-ray reflectivity. Examples of these measurements corresponding to samples SA and SGF are illustrated in figure To identify the crystalline orientation of the NbTiN film and its epitaxial relationship with the substrates, structural studies were performed by HRTEM along both To get a precise assessment of the strain state of the superconducting layer, a detailed Comparing samples SA and SGF, the average height increases from 1.9 to 4.7 nm, while the RMS roughness evolves from 0.85 to 1.6 nm, respectively. Note that these values are higher than the surface roughness of the substrates (shown in table 1), and there is no correlation between the NbTiN roughness and the substrate roughness. On the contrary, the variation of the NbTiN roughness from sample to sample correlates well with the lattice mismatch between the superconducting film and the substrate, which confirms that the strain relaxation plays a role in the surface roughness development. Let us remind that for low misfits and ultra-thin layers, relaxation can be achieved by elastic undulation of the surface prior to the formation of dislocations From the structural analysis of the NbTiN layers we conclude that there is an enhancement of Tc in epitaxial layers grown on III-nitrides with respect to layers deposited on amorphous materials, like SiO2. A further improvement is observed as the substrate gets more closely lattice matched to the NbTiN epilayer, i.e. the Tc is higher for material deposited on AlN with respect to deposition on GaN. This trend cannot be related to the strain state, since the samples are fully relaxed. We therefore attribute it to the reduced roughness of the NbTiN film. This result might also explain the results observed by Krause et al. when depositing NbN on various AlxGa1-xN, buffer layers In order to assess the suitability of such NbTiN films to the foreseen application, we have fabricated SNSPDs from sample SA, which displayed the best superconducting properties. The devices were designed for operation under normal incidence illumination. The NbTiN film was patterned into a meander structure as described in ref. We used a dip-stick system to immerse the detector in liquid helium. In our system, the detectors and the internal electronics are immersed within liquid helium, ensuring a stable operation temperature of 4.2 K. Continuous-wave laser diodes emitting at wavelengths λ = 1.31 μm and 0.65 μm were used for optical excitation. The laser power was attenuated in order to obtain a photon flux around 10 6 photon/s. Figures Note that the devices present a very low level of dark counts, about 10 times lower than typical measurements in SNSPDs on SiO2/Si substrates. The low dark count rate is explained by the high critical current (35±3 μA, which corresponds to a critical current density in the meander of ≈ 5.9 MA/cm 2 ). Therefore, the voltage trigger level is well above the noise level of the readout system, which reduces the probability of dark counts. The enhancement of the critical current (and reduction of the noise level) is consistent with the improvement observed by Schmidth et al. when inserting a sputtered AlN buffer layer before the deposition of NbN on GaAs The device performance is modeled using finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) calculations with the commercial RSoft FullWave software In conclusion, we studied superconducting and structural properties of ultrathin . Getting a good agreement with the experimental results requires assuming a multilayer structure consisting of a bottom Nb0.8Ti0.2N layer (≈ 8.45±0.45 nm) capped by an Nb0.8Ti0.2N0.9O0.1 layer (≈ 2.1±0.2 nm) and by a mixture of Nb2O5 and TiO2 [less than one atomic layer, with (Nb2O5)0.7(TiO2)0.3 composition]. Post-growth oxidation and Nb2O5