The physics underlying spectral redshift of thermally generated surface phonon-polaritons (SPhPs) observed in near-field thermal spectroscopy is investigated. Numerically exact fluctuational electrodynamics simulations of the thermal near field emitted by a silicon carbide surface scattered in the far zone by an intrinsic silicon probe show that SPhP resonance redshift is a physical phenomenon. A maximum SPhP redshift of 19 cm -1 is predicted for a 200-nmdiameter hemispherical probing tip and a vacuum gap of 10 nm. Resonance redshift is mediated by electromagnetic gap modes excited in the vacuum gap separating the probe and the surface when the probing tip is much larger than the gap size. The impact of gap modes on the scattered field can be mitigated with a probing tip size approximately equal to or smaller than the vacuum gap. However, sharp probing tips induce important spectral broadening of the scattered field. It is also demonstrated that a dipole approximation with multiple reflections cannot be used for explaining the physics and predicting the amount of redshift in near-field thermal spectroscopy. This work shows that the scattered field in the far zone is a combination of the thermal near field emitted by the surface, and electromagnetic interactions between the probe and the surface. Spectroscopic analysis of near-field thermal emission thus requires a numerically exact fluctuational electrodynamics framework for modeling probe-surface interactions. Several recent experiments [e.g., Several simplified models, namely the point dipole model with These methods rely on adjustable parameters (e.g., dipole size) to fit theoretical predictions with experimental data, and therefore do not provide physical insight into resonance redshift. In this paper, a critical knowledge gap is addressed by analyzing the physics of the near-field thermal interactions between a probe and a surface via the thermal discrete dipole approximation (T-DDA) By considering a planar heat source made of SiC and a non-resonant probe made of intrinsic Si, it is shown that SPhP resonance redshift observed on the scattered field in the far zone is not an experimental artifact but is a physical phenomenon mediated by electromagnetic gap modes generated in the vacuum gap separating the probe and the surface. This work shows unambiguously that the far-zone scattered field is not a sole signature of near-field thermal emission by the surface, but is also greatly affected by the probe-surface electromagnetic interactions. The problem under consideration is shown in Fig. , where ε ∞ = 6.7, ω LO = 969 cm -1 , ω TO = 793 cm -1 , and Г = 4.76 cm -1 where P is the 3N stochastic column vector containing the unknown induced dipole moments, sur E is the 3N stochastic column vector containing the fluctuating field due to thermal emission by the surface, A is the 3N by 3N deterministic interaction matrix calculated from the free-space dyadic Green's function (direct interaction between sub-volumes), and R is the 3N by 3N deterministic reflection-interaction matrix calculated from reflection dyadic Green's function (indirect interaction between sub-volumes). The scattered electric field (magnitude squared) in the far zone is obtained from the induced dipole moments as follows: where k 0 is the magnitude of the wavevector in vacuum, r is the magnitude of the position vector r, ⊗ is the outer product, and † denotes the Hermitian operator. The ensemble average of the induced dipole moment autocorrelation function is determined from Eq. ( An explicit expression for the ensemble average of the spatial correlation function of the fluctuating field, E sur ⊗ E sur , has been provided in Ref. In Eq. ( where r i is the position vector of sub-volume i, r I,i is the position vector of the image of subvolume i with respect to the vacuum-SiC interface, k sca is the wavevector in the far zone, and R γ is the Fresnel reflection coefficient for γ-polarized radiation incident from vacuum. The electric field scattered in the far zone by probes A and B is shown in Fig. The near-field thermal energy density in vacuum at a distance Δ of 10 nm above the SiC surface, calculated via fluctuational electrodynamics , expression derived by determining the poles in the TM-polarized Fresnel reflection coefficient of the interface in the electrostatic limit and by neglecting losses in the dielectric function of SiC where p ε ′ and s ε ′ are the real parts of the dielectric function of the spherical probe and the surface, respectively, while m is the order of the gap mode. In addition to the aforementioned conditions, Eq. ( As probe A is characterized by a 200-nm-diameter hemispherical tip, Eq. ( A very small portion of the volume of probe B is in the extreme near field where SPhPs are dominant. Since the scattered field in the far zone is proportional to the volume squared of the illuminated portion of the probe, the scattered field is dominated by the contribution from the large portion of the probe volume that is located at micrometer distances away from the surface. Spectral broadening with respect to the near-field energy density observed with probe A is also mediated by the same physics. Note that the fields scattered by both probes display a local maximum at 980 cm -1 due to a local maximum in the reflection by the surface at angle of 45°. Results of Fig. 4.76×10 -45 (V/m) 2 ). To demonstrate that only numerically exact fluctuational electrodynamics simulations can capture gap modes at the origin of SPhP resonance redshift, a dipole approximation is employed hereafter to calculate the field scattered by probe A. A novel version of the dipole approximation accounting for multiple reflections between the probe and the surface is derived in Section 2 of the Supplemental Material where eff p γγ α , is the γγ-component of the effective polarizability tensor that accounts for multiple reflections within the vacuum gap separating the dipole and the surface. The effective polarizability is given by: ( ) where p α is the dipole radiative polarizability that include self-interaction (radiative reaction correction) Note that the impacts of electromagnetic gap modes on the spectral heat rate exchanged between the surface and the probe is discussed in the Supplemental Material (see Section 3 and Fig. It is worth mentioning that the far-zone scattered field in an experiment is likely to exhibit additional spectral broadening when compared to numerical predictions at a fixed gap distance d. In actual near-field thermal spectroscopy experiments, the probing tip oscillates in a direction normal to the surface, thus resulting in a gap distance that is modulated from contact to a few tens of nanometers In summary, this work has demonstrated that resonance redshift reported in near-field thermal spectroscopy is mediated by electromagnetic gap modes induced when the probing tip size is much larger than the vacuum gap size. These gap modes affect the scattered field in the far zone even if the probe is non-resonant. Resonance redshift can be minimized with a probe with tip size approximately equal to or smaller than the vacuum gap thickness. However, this is done at the expense of measuring a scattered field in the far zone that is not dominated by resonant electromagnetic surface modes due to spectral broadening. The measured signals in near-field thermal spectroscopy experiments should be analyzed using a numerically exact framework in the probe-surface configuration, such as the T-DDA. Alternatively, numerical simulations used in tandem with the gap mode eigenfrequency expression may allow design of probe geometry and material minimizing resonance spectral redshift. Center for High Performance Computing at the University of Utah for providing computational resources for this study. 10496 and 5448 sub-volumes of varying sizes are used for discretizing probes A and B, respectively. Smaller sub-volumes are used for discretizing the portion of the probe that is closer to the surface. The number and size of the sub-volumes used for discretizing the probes are listed in Table The dipole approximation is valid when the probe size is much smaller than the thermal wavelength and the separation gap. In this regime, higher order poles are not excited and uniform electric field can be assumed within the probe. The moment induced in the dipole due to thermal emission by the surface is modeled using the thermal discrete dipole approximation (T-DDA) with surface interaction as follows where p α is the dipole radiative polarizability, p is the induced dipole moment, E sur is the fluctuating field emitted by the surface, and G R is the reflection Green's function accounting for the multiple reflections between the dipole and the surface. In the electrostatic limit, where the thermal wavelength is much larger than the dipole size and separation distance, retardation effects can be neglected ( ) where eff p γγ α , , given by Eq. ( Near-field radiative heat transfer between a surface and a probe has been studied in the past using the T-DDA where α i is the radiative polarizability of sub-volume i. Heat rate spectra for probes A and B are shown in Fig. 