The persistent interest of the epitaxy of group IV alloy GeSn is mainly driven by the demand of efficient light source that could be monolithically integrated on Si for mid-infrared Si photonics. For chemical vapor deposition of GeSn, the exploration of parameter window is difficult from the beginning due to its non-equilibrium growth condition. In this work, we demonstrated the effective pathway to achieve the high quality GeSn with high Sn incorporation. The GeSn films were grown on Ge-buffered Si via ultra-high vacuum chemical vapor deposition using GeH4 and SnCl4 as precursor gasses. The influence of both SnCl4 flow fraction and growth temperature on the Sn incorporation and material quality were investigated. The key to achieve effective Sn incorporation and high material quality is to explore the proper parameter match between SnCl4 supply and growth temperature, which is also called optimized growth regime. The Sn precipitation is significantly suppressed in optimized growth regime, leading to more Sn incorporation into Ge and enhanced material quality. The prototype GeSn photoconductors were fabricated with typical samples, showing the promising devices applications towards mid-infrared optoelectronics. Progress in group IV photonics over recent years has elevated the GeSn material system to the forefront of photonic integration on Si substrates Growth of GeSn on Ge is difficult due to low solubility (<1%) of Sn in Ge and the instability of α-Sn above 13 °C. In order to grow GeSn material, growth techniques were developed under non-equilibrium growth conditions such as low temperature growth via either MBE Previous reports of GeSn material growth focus on the successful deposition conditions and the final product. While providing useful guidance, they have not provided an effective route to produce high quality GeSn as optimized growth conditions vary with reactor designs and configurations. The growth of GeSn material detailed in the previous growths showed the material properties of the grown films, however no result has yet to demonstrate the entire development pathway to high quality GeSn material. The goal of this work was to detail an optimization methodology for the development of high-quality GeSn material on the Ge buffered Si that is potentially transferable across reactor design and configuration. The results from optimization of GeSn using a home-built UHV-CVD are presented as demonstration of the optimization process. The two dominating factors of growth temperature and SnCl4 flow fraction were extensively explored with wide ranges. Specifically, the GeSn growth starts with the variation of temperature while the SnCl4 flow fraction was kept at the overpressure regime. The cloudy surface of GeSn was observed, which was due to the Sn segregation on the surface. Two distinguished Sn incorporation regions were also determined. Then GeSn growth continues with the decrease of SnCl4 flow fraction while keeping the temperature at the constant, driving the GeSn growth window from SnCl4 overpressure regime to the optimized regime. With the decrease of SnCl4 flow fraction, the mirror-like GeSn surface and effective Sn incorporation were achieved. After that, the growth temperature was further decreased while keeping the SnCl4 flow fraction at the optimized region. As a result, the Sn incorporation was further enhanced. Once the high-quality and high-Sn-content GeSn was obtained photoconductor devices were fabricated with infrared imaging also being accomplished. It has been acknowledged that the combination of Ge hydrides and SnCl4 during the CVD epitaxy results in the severe etching effect, thus limiting the success of GeSn growth. The etching effect originates from the generation of gaseous HCl byproduct during the reaction between Ge hydrides and SnCl4. The overall epitaxy of GeSn is the competition between deposition and etching, both of which heavily depends on the supply of SnCl4 and growth temperature. In order to explore the optimal epitaxy window of GeSn, we designed the experiments by following three logic sequences. First of all, we grew the well-known Low/high temperature two-step Ge films. All material growth work was done using p-type Si (001) 4-inch wafers as substrates. The wafers were processed using standard piranha etch and HF dip prior to growth as described in our previous work Visual inspection of the wafer after growth can provide useful information about the film surface. Diffusion of light reflecting off the surface is quite noticeable by the human eye and can serve as an indicator of surface roughness. For this work the film surfaces were divided into three categories: i) the sample surface was milky in that visual reflections were not easily visible, ii) the sample surface was hazy such that visual reflections were easily visible but not clear, and iii) the sample surface was clear or mirror-like finish. These categories correspond to the size of Sn droplets seen on the surface with milky have droplets up to 3 μm, hazy films had less than 1 μm droplets, and mirror films had no detectable droplets. The droplet density on the milky and hazy surfaces were <0.5 and >1 droplet per square micrometer, respectively. Visible and SEM images from these classifications are given in section C. Successive growths were accomplished to verify the temperature dependence on Sn incorporation To fully understand the effect of SnCl4 in the growth of GeSn, the ratio of SnCl4 gas flow ratios was calculated showed that the first batch was grown under a SnCl4 flow fraction of 2.9× 10 -3 . This value is two orders of magnitude above that which has been reported in the growth of high quality GeSn More evidence of the effect of reducing the SnCl4 overpressure can be seen in the surface of the grown samples. It has been shown that SnCl4 overpressure creates droplets on the surface. Visually, as the SnCl4 molar flow fraction reduces, the cloudiness of the sample surface clears up and sample optical quality improves. A more in-depth look at the sample surface was accomplished using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Figure In Figure In Fig. The GeSn films with effective Sn incorporation and mirror-like surface have been achieved by decreasing the Sn dilution ratio down to the gas flow limit of mass flow controller. In order to further increase the Sn incorporation, the growth temperature was designed to decrease while maintaining the Sn dilution ratio at 2.3×10 -4 . By the visual inspection after GeSn epitaxy, the surface morphology of GeSn film changes with the decrease of temperature from the growth temperature from 270 to 250 oC. As shown in Fig. The room-temperature PL spectra was conducted in order to study the optical properties of GeSn films. As shown in Fig. To demonstrate the fully capability of GeSn, photoconductors were fabricated from selected films. Characterization including, I-V, responsivity (not shown), calculated detectivity and infrared imaging were accomplished with a selected result shown in Fig. The GeSn films were fabricated into photoconductor devices such as the one shown in Fig. The experimental results discussed in this work indicates that during GeSn epitaxy the SnCl4 flow fraction has the supply limit for each growth temperature. The high growth temperature corresponds to the high supply limit of SnCl4 and vice versa. Exceeding the SnCl4 supply limit leads to the Sn precipitation on the surface and the deterioration of GeSn material. The key to achieve optimized growth regime in which high quality film and high Sn incorporation is achievd through proper parameter match between Sn flow fraction and growth temperature. In optimized regime, the Sn precipitation on the surface is significantly suppressed and Sn atoms are effectively incorporated into Ge lattice matrix. For Group 1 samples, the GeSn growth is in the overpressure regime with variable growth temperatures. The excess Sn will segregate on the surface and develop as the droplets due to their low surface free energy. The subsequent Sn atoms supplied by the thermal decomposition of SnCl4 tend to be attracted and absorbed by the high-volume Sn droplets instead of being buried by Ge atoms. The Sn droplets continues growing on the surface via the Ostwald ripening mechanism, For group 2 samples, the SnCl4 flow fraction was gradually reduced while keeping the growth temperature at constant. With the decrease of Sn supply, the sizes of Sn droplets on the surface become smaller. Eventually the GeSn growth enters into the optimized growth regime, where the flow fraction of SnCl4 and growth temperature reach a good match. Therefore, no appreciable Sn droplet develop on the surface, leading to more Sn atoms buried into the Ge. Meanwhile the material quality of GeSn was significantly enhanced. For group 3 samples, the SnCl4 flow fraction was fixed while decreasing the growth temperature. It has been reported that at the optimized growth regime the decrease of growth temperature leads to the increase of Sn incorporation, which was further verified in this work. However, the continuous decrease of temperature break the good match between SnCl4 supply and growth temperature and shifts the growth condition into SnCl4 overpressure regime. As a result, the Sn atoms start segregating on the surface, which again jeopardizes the effective Sn incorporation and material quality. In conclusion, this paper has discussed the method pursued to grow high quality GeSn on Ge buffered Si. The study started in a growth regime in which SnCl4 overpressure dominated the overall growth of the GeSn material. The detrimental effects of SnCl4 overpressure lead to reduction of the SnCl4 molar flow fraction. This reduction in SnCl4 molar flow fraction provided better growth conditions to allow Sn to incorporate into the growing film and less agglomerating on the sample surface. Optimal growth conditions were achieved for the 270 °C growth temperature, producing high quality GeSn with mirror-like surface. Furthermore, temperature reduction below 270 °C resulted in increasing surface Sn with decreasing GeH4 breakdown. GeSn photoconductors were fabricated out of the first and second batch of GeSn growths. The XRD shown in Fig.3shows diffraction peaks for the entire structure. The peak ~ 69° is the Si substrate peak, the peak at 66° corresponds to the Ge buffer peak with GeSn peaks being shifted to angles below 66°. The shifts of GeSn peaks to lower angles with reduction of growth temperature agrees with the extension of PL peak wavelength, indicating increased Sn incorporation. The 325°C growth temperature showed only two layers present in the material however, below 325°C another peak appears and remains throughout the rest of the temperature reduction. This peak does not change with growth temperature reduction. The shift in the low Sn peak, shown in Fig.3in the shaded area, from Ge suggests the layer is only 1-2% Sn. At 325 °C the GeSn peak borders along the shaded region and maintains intensity and linewidth like the Ge buffer. Upon reducing the growth temperature below 325 °C, the high Sn peak reduces in intensity and broadens to only a shoulder by 270 °C and is no longer visible at 240 °C. Further investigation of this phenomenon was done to determine the effect of this level of SnCl4 had on the growth of GeSn. Selected samples from the first batch were investigated further to better understand the low