The localized magnon modes of isolated kπ skyrmions on a field-polarized background are analyzed based on the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation within the terms of an atomistic classical spin model, with system parameters based on the Pd/Fe biatomic layer on Ir(111). For increasing skyrmion order k a higher number of excitation modes are found, including modes with nodes in the radial eigenfunctions. It is shown that at low fields 2π and 3π skyrmions are destroyed via a burst instability connected to a breathing mode, while 1π skyrmions undergo an elliptic instability. At high fields all kπ skyrmions collapse due to the instability of a breathing mode. The effective damping parameters of the spin waves are calculated in the low Gilbert damping limit, and they are found to diverge in the case of the lowest-lying modes at the burst and collapse instabilities, but not at the elliptic instability. It is shown that the breathing modes of kπ skyrmions may become overdamped at higher Gilbert damping values. Magnetic skyrmions are localized particle-like spin configurations These spin wave modes were first investigated theoretically In most investigations skyrmions correspond to simple domains with the magnetization in their core pointing opposite to the collinear background. However, it was shown already in Ref. The collapse of isolated kπ skyrmions and their creation in nanodots by switching the external field direction was recently investigated in Ref. Besides the excitation frequencies themselves, the lifetime of spin waves is also of crucial importance in magnonics applications. This is primarily influenced by the Gilbert damping parameter α Here the localized spin wave frequencies of isolated kπ skyrmions are investigated in a classical atomistic spin model. The parameters in the Hamiltonian represent the Pd/Fe/Ir(111) model-type system, where the properties of skyrmions have been studied in detail both from the experimental The system is described by the classical atomistic model Hamiltonian with the S i unit vectors representing the spins in a single-layer triangular lattice; J, D ij , and K denoting nearest-neighbor Heisenberg and Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya exchange interactions and on-site magnetocrystalline anisotropy, respectively; while μ s and B stand for the spin magnetic moment and the external magnetic field. The numerical values of the parameters are taken from Ref. During the calculations the external field B is oriented along the out-of-plane z direction. The equilibrium kπ skyrmion structures are determined from a reasonable initial configuration by iteratively rotating the spins S i towards the direction of the effective magnetic field The iteration is performed until the torque acting on the spins, T i = -S i × B eff i , becomes smaller at every lattice site than a predefined value, generally chosen to be 10 -8 meV/μ B . The calculations are performed on a lattice with periodic boundary conditions, with system sizes up to 256 × 256 for the largest kπ skyrmions in order to avoid edge effects and enable the accurate modeling of isolated skyrmions. Once the equilibrium configuration S (0) i is determined, the spins are rotated to a local coordinate system Si = R i S i using the rotational matrices R i . In the local coordinate system the equilibrium spin directions are pointing along the local z axis, S(0) i = (0, 0, 1). The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The matrix products are understood to run over lattice site indices i, with the matrix components reading The energy terms in the Hamiltonian are rotated to the local coordinate system via and Bi = R i B, where I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix, D ij × is the matrix describing the vector product with D ij , and K is the anisotropy matrix with the only nonzero element being K zz = K. The spin wave frequencies are obtained from the linearized Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation with σ y = 0 -iI s iI s 0 the Pauli matrix in Cartesian components and acting as the identity matrix I s in the lattice site summations. The symbol γ denotes the gyromagnetic ratio γ = ge 2m divided by a factor of 1 + α 2 , with g the electron g factor, e the elementary charge, m the electron's mass, and α the Gilbert damping parameter. Equation ( Since the kπ skyrmions represent local energy minima, H SW in Eq. ( As is known from previous calculations for 1π skyrmions The atomistic model described in the previous Section enables the treatment of noncollinear spin structures where the direction of the spins significantly differs between neighboring lattice sites. This is especially important when discussing the collapse of kπ skyrmions on the lattice as was performed in Ref. The free energy functional of the micromagnetic model is defined as where for the Pd/Fe/Ir(111) system the following parameter values were used: A = 2.0 pJ/m is the exchange stiffness, D = -3.9 mJ/m 2 is the Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interaction describing right-handed rotation The equilibrium spin structure S (0) = (sin Θ 0 cos Φ 0 , sin Θ 0 sin Φ 0 , cos Θ 0 ) of kπ skyrmions will be cylindrically symmetric, given by Φ 0 (r, φ) = φ + π due to the right-handed rotational sense and Θ 0 (r, φ) = Θ 0 (r), which is the solution of the Euler-Lagrange equation The skyrmion order k is encapsulated in the boundary conditions Θ 0 (0) = kπ, Θ 0 (∞) = 0. Equation ( The spin wave Hamiltonian may be determined analogously to Eq. ( Sy . The matrices in Eqs. ( Due to the cylindrical symmetry of the structure, the solutions of Eq. ( For finding the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the micromagnetic model, Eq. ( The spin wave modes of the atomistic model discussed in Sec. II A were assigned the (n, m) quantum numbers, which are strictly speaking only applicable in the micromagnetic limit with perfect cylindrical symmetry, by visualizing the real-space structure of the numerically obtained eigenvectors. Since the translation of the kπ skyrmions on the collinear background in the plane costs no energy, the spin wave Hamiltonian H SW possesses two eigenvectors belonging to zero eigenvalue, representing the Goldstone modes of the system. Within the micromagnetic description of Sec. II B, these may be expressed analytically as Equations ( Since the eigenvectors and eigenvalues are determined numerically in a finite system by using a discretization procedure, the Goldstone modes will possess a small finite frequency. However, these will not be presented in Sec. III A together with the other frequencies since they represent a numerical artifact. For the 1π and 3π skyrmions the ω 0,1 eigenmode has a positive frequency and an eigenvector clearly distinguishable from that of the ω 0,-1 translational mode. However, for the 2π skyrmion both the ω 0,-1 and the ω 0,1 eigenfrequencies of D SW are very close to zero, and the corresponding eigenvectors converge to Eqs. ( In contrast to the Goldstone modes with always zero energy, the sign change of another eigenvalue of H SW indicates that the isolated kπ skyrmion is transformed from a stable local energy minimum into an unstable saddle point, leading to its disappearance from the system. Such instabilities were determined by calculating the lowest-lying eigenvalues of H SW in Eq. For finite values of the Gilbert damping α, the spin waves in the system will decay over time as the system relaxes to the equilibrium state during the time evolution described by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. The speed of the relaxation can be characterized by the effective damping parameter, which for a given mode q is defined as As discussed in detail in Ref. where the eigenvectors in Eq. ( These relations are known for uniaxial ferromagnets; see, e.g., Ref. The frequencies of the localized spin wave modes of the 1π, 2π, and 3π skyrmion, calculated from the atomistic model for α = 0 as described in Sec. II A, are shown in Fig. , where the transition from the spin spiral to the ferromagnetic ground state occurs at zero external field In the case of the 2π skyrmion an increased number of eigenmodes may be seen in Fig. The increase of possible angular momentum quantum numbers for higher skyrmion order k as well as for decreasing magnetic field B may be qualitatively explained by an increase in the skyrmion size. Modes with a given value of m indicate a total of |m| modulation periods along the perimeter of the skyrmion; for larger skyrmion sizes this corresponds to a modulation on a longer length scale, which has a smaller cost in exchange energy. The breathing modes of the 3π skyrmion with different numbers of nodes are visualized in Fig. Such a description was used to calculate the skyrmion radius in, e.g., Ref. The nodes of the eigenmodes are located roughly between these domain walls, meaning that typically excitation modes with n = 0, . . . , k -1 nodes may be observed in kπ skyrmions, in agreement with the results in Fig. It is also worth noting that the lowest-lying nonzero gyration mode is n = 0, m = 1 for the 1π and 3π skyrmions, it is n = 1, m = 1 for the skyrmion, Fig. Skyrmions with different order k deviate in their lowfield behavior. Since the considered Pd/Fe/Ir(111) system has a spin spiral ground state At the burst instability, modes with n = 0 and all angular momentum quantum numbers m appear to approach zero because of the drastic increase in skyrmion radius decreasing the frequency of these modes as discussed in Sec. III A. A similar effect was observed for the 1π skyrmion in Ref. In the atomistic model, skyrmions collapse when their characteristic size becomes comparable to the lattice constant. For the 1π, 2π, and 3π skyrmions the collapse of the innermost ring occurs at B c,1π ≈ 4.495 T, B c,2π ≈ 1.175 T, and B c,3π ≈ 1.155 T, respectively 4957 T, and β f = 0.23. The effective damping parameters α n,m,eff were first calculated from the eigenvectors obtained at α = 0 following Eq. The effective damping parameters drastically increase and for the lowest-lying modes apparently diverge close to the burst instability, while no such sign of nonanalytical behavior can be observed in the case of the 1π skyrmion with the elliptic instability. For the same n, m mode, the effective damping parameter tends to increase with skyrmion order k away from the critical field regimes; for example, for the n = 0, m = 0 mode at B = 1.00 T one finds α 0,0,eff,1π = 2.04, α 0,0,eff,2π = 5.87, and α 0,0,eff,3π = 10.09. Close to the collapse field, the effective damping parameter of the n = 0, m = 0 breathing mode tends to diverge as shown in Figs. 4(b), 4(c), and 5 for the 2π, 3π, and 1π skyrmions, respectively. Similarly to the eigenfrequency converging to zero in Fig. -βα as shown in Fig. where the left-hand side is proportional to (B c,1π -B) which is approximately constant due to the exponents canceling. This indicates that while Re ω 0,0 diverges close to the collapse field, |Im ω 0,0 | /α remains almost constant at low α values. Due to the divergences of the effective damping parameters found at the burst instability and collapse fields, it is worthwhile to investigate the consequences of using a finite α value in Eq. ( Since the real part of the frequency disappears, the ω q = -ω * q relation connecting Re ω q > 0 and Re ω q < 0 solutions of Eq. ( The high effective damping of the breathing mode in the α 1 limit (cf. Fig. Since the disappearance of Re ω 0,0 and the bifurcation of Im ω 0,0 occurs as the excitation frequency becomes smaller, it is expected that such an effect may also be observed at a fixed α value as the external field is decreased. This is illustrated for the n = 0, m = 0 breathing mode of the 2π skyrmion in Fig. In summary, the localized spin wave modes of kπ skyrmions were investigated in an atomistic spin model, with parameters based on the Pd/Fe/Ir(111) system. It was found that the number of observable modes increases with skyrmion order k, firstly because of excitations with higher angular momentum quantum numbers m forming along the larger perimeter of the skyrmion, secondly because of nodes appearing between the multiple domain walls. It was found that the 2π and 3π skyrmions undergo a burst instability at low fields, in contrast to the elliptic instability of the 1π skyrmion. At high field values the innermost ring of the structure collapses in all cases, connected to an instability of a breathing mode. The effective damping parameters of the excitation modes were determined, and it was found that for the same n, m mode they tend to increase with skyrmion order k. The effective damping parameter of the n = 0, m = 0 breathing mode diverges at the burst and collapse instabilities, but no such effect was observed in case of the elliptic instability. For higher values of the Gilbert damping parameter α a deviation from the behavior of circularly polarized modes has been found, with the breathing modes becoming overdamped. It was demonstrated that such an overdamping may be observable in 2π and 3π skyrmions for intermediate values of the damping significantly above the burst instability field where the structures themselves disappear from the system. The results presented here may motivate further experimental and theoretical studies on kπ skyrmions, offering a wider selection of localized excitations compared to the 1π skyrmion, thereby opening further possibilities in magnonics applications.