We report the design, elaboration and measurements of an innovative planar thermoelectric (TE) devices made of a large array of small mechanically suspended nanogenerators (nanoTEG). The miniaturized TE generators based on SiN membranes are arranged in series and/or in parallel depending on the expected final resistance adapted to the one of the load. The microstructuration allows, at the same time, a high thermal insulation of the membrane from the silicon frame and high thermal coupling to its environment (surrounding air, radiations). We show a ratio of 60% between the measured effective temperature of the membrane, (and hence of the TE junctions), and the available temperature of the heat source (air). The thermal gradient generated across the TE junction reaches a value as high as 60 kelvin per mm. Energy harvesting with this planar TE module is demonstrated through the collected voltage on the TE junctions when a temperature gradient is applied, showing a harvested power on the order of 0.3 μWatt for a 1 cm 2 chip for an effective temperature gradient of 10 K. The optimization of nanoTEGs performances will increase the power harvested significantly and permit to send a signal by a regular communication protocol and feed basic functions like temperature measurement or airflow sensing. Wireless sensor network (WSN) are an association of various system being able to measure and transfer information over a network without requiring human intervention. Focusing on the sensor part, the major problem preventing the massive spread of WSN is their power supply. Indeed depending on their location, sensors cannot be wired to the grid and/or the maintenance costs induced by the battery change are not acceptable. The smartest solution to get over this problem is to harvest energy from the environment of sensors in order to make them autonomous. Since the environment of sensors are changing drastically depending on their final use, energy harvesting solutions that have been developed until now are devoted to one or very few use cases. Each of these technologies has their own advantages and drawbacks which have been reviewed recently With the emergence of low power communication protocols dedicated to the WSN, there is now a real demand for micro-sources of energy that can deliver power on the order of 100 μWatt. That range of power can be obtained from standard TE module with a temperature gradient of few degrees under stationary operating conditions. However, these conditions of use are not necessarily adapted to small wireless sensors especially when the energy source is intermittent and/or the available volume too limited. This has given a new direction for research that is clearly oriented towards miniaturization of TE modules One of the first miniaturized TEG was based on the structuration of micro-pillars of TE materials, it allowed to strongly limit the volume of the modules Consequently, a growing interest has emerged regarding new designs of nanoTEG using planar and suspended configurations, essentially thanks to pioneering works using microfabrication technologies Here we report the design, the elaboration and the measurement of innovative planar thermoelectric devices made of a large array of suspended nano-thermoelectric generators (single cell nanoTEG). These nanoTEGs are small enough to be duplicated per hundreds upon centimeter square surface and arranged in series and/or in parallel depending on the expected final resistance adapted to the load. The resistance of the measured devices is on the order of 10 3 kΩ in the studied configuration, opening the door to massive parallel wiring of nanoTEG which could lead to resistance of the order of few tens of ohms. We demonstrates a harvested power on the order of 0.3 μWatt for a 1 cm 2 chip for an effective temperature gradient of 10 K. Under optimized performances, they can produce enough power (below 100 μWatt) to send a signal using common communication protocols and feed basic functions, for instance temperature sensing or air flow measurements. The concept at the basis of this work is twofold: first, to take advantage of the reduced thermal coupling between the suspended thermoelectric junction on the membrane and the heat bath (silicon frame) to favor heat exchange with the surroundings (air or radiation) and second to decrease the electrical resistance of the final device in order to use it as generator. It is made possible thanks to the elaboration of small suspended nanoTEG acting like individual nanosource of energy obtained by micro and nanostructuration (see Fig. To optimize the efficiency of the device, we have used bismuth telluride alloys as thermoelectric materials for their high conversion efficiency close to room temperature As compared to a regular macroscopic TE modules that are quite massive, this technical solution allows collecting energy from various small sources. In a regular TEG, the thermal conductance is given by the n and p TE pillars themselves. In a macroscopic module, the thermal conductance between the hot side and the cold side is given by the TE legs; it is of 10 -4 W.K -1 for typical leg dimensions of 1 mm×1 mm×5 mm. Here, since the nanTEGs are planar by construction, the thermal coupling of the sensitive part is only ensured by the TE thin films and the SiN suspending arms. Indeed, first, the aspect ratio of the suspending arms (small thickness, width and long length) is highly favorable for thermal insulation. Second, by using low thermal conductivity materials like amorphous silicon nitride and bismuth telluride, the thermal link to the heat bath is severely reduced as compared to the use of polysilicon The final nanoTEG module is then made out of thousands of identical single cells They are assembled in such a way (series and parallel) that the total electrical impedance can be significantly reduced if needed. Actually, this arrangement is very flexible and ver- satile, it can be adjusted to fit the targeted electrical resistance of the load. As pointed out by numerous works, the internal electrical resistance of the TE module is a point at least as important as thermoelectric performances. Reducing the internal resistance helps maximizing the power generated by the nanoTEG and permits its use with standard low power electronic components More than ten different nanoTEG networks were fabricated and tested going from single cell TEG as shown in Fig. the thermal conductance between the suspended structure and the heat bath, the resistance of the electrical contact at the junction between the p and n types TE materials, the Seebeck coefficient of the bismuth telluride and finally, the overall performance of the TEG to generate an electrical power harvested from its thermal environment. First, the thermal properties of each constituting materials of the TEG have been measured independently. The thermal conductivity of SiN and Bi 2 XTe 3 based TE materials has been measured using on membrane 3ω measurements where L is the length of the n and p-type arms, w their width and e their thickness; N p and N s being respectively the number of nanoTEGs in parallel and series. The expected resistance R sim for the studied array composed of 35 membranes in parallel and 12 membranes in series is 880 Ω (see Table Eq. 1 and the measurements of the actual resistance of the four samples lies within 10%. Intrinsic variation of resistance between samples can originate from inhomogeneity in the layer geometry, broken membrane or could be due to contact resistance. Regarding the contribution of the contact to the overall resistance, we can estimate that the contact resistance between metallic contact and Bi 2 XTe 3 thin film to be below 10 -6 Ω.cm 2 , a value in fair agreement with the state-of-the-art The performance of the nanoTEG has been measured on single membranes, as shown in Fig. increased the voltage measured at the end of the device increases. This shows that the nanoTEG device is very sensitive to forced convection. Fig. These conditions of air flowing are frequently found in moving parts that necessitate onboard sensor application. The power generated by the nanoTEGs has been measured for different temperature gradients. Results are displayed in Fig. This result is significant since it is obtained with not-fully optimized thermoelectric materials as shown in Table By working with larger surface (10 cm 2 ) along with larger temperature gradient, the power generated will be sufficient to feed a low energy communication protocol and exchange information on temperature or airflow speed. As a concluding remarks, it can be mentioned that such miniaturized planar suspended thermoelectric device could also be used for cooling applications, and not only for energy harvesting. For example, small systems located at the center of the suspended membranes can be cooled down by current injection in the nanoTEGs device, using such device in Peltier mode. Miniaturiazed planar suspended thermoelectric devices have been developed for low power energy harvesting. This device is designed to convert small intermittent gradient of temperature into electrical power by using thermally isolated membranes as heating or cooling platform. The geometry of the device permits to adapt the resistance of the thermogen-erator for each particular use case. The efficiency of the nanoTEG is sufficient to expect its application in real wireless sensor network. By construction, the architecture of the device allows the appearance of high thermal gradients over very small distance (60 K.mm -1 ). Using optimized TE materials, more than few tens of microWatt can be generated hence permitting a wireless communication between the sensor and the network. Regular microelectronic fabrication processes are used to elaborate such nanoTEG modules, meaning that the production can be easily upscaled at relatively low cost along with a high integrability. Finally, it has to be stressed that better performances and evolution of the technology are foreseen. Denser array of membranes, optimized new geometry and higher Seebeck coefficients can be easily obtained boosting the performances of the nan-oTEGs towards higher generated power. This shows that membrane based thermoelectric energy harvesters are very promising building blocks for applications where hot or cold air is present offering excellent perspectives for autonomous and connected physical sensing.