We report on the systematic investigation of the optical properties of a selectively grown quantum dot gain material assisted by block-copolymer lithography for potential applications in active optical devices operating in the wavelength range around 1.55 μm and above. We investigated a new type of diblock copolymer PS-b-PDMS (polystyrene-blockpolydimethylsiloxane) for the fabrication of silicon oxycarbide hard mask for selective area epitaxy of InAs/InP quantum dots. An array of InAs/InP quantum dots was selectively grown via droplet epitaxy. Our detailed investigation of the quantum dot carrier dynamics in the 10-300 K temperature range indicates the presence of a density of states located within the InP bandgap in the vicinity of quantum dots. Those defects have a substantial impact on the optical properties of quantum dots. For more than 30 years quantum dots (QDs) have attracted significant attention due to their distinctive delta-like carrier density of states and the carrier dynamics A promising alternative approach for the synthesis of QDs would be selective area growth In this article, we report on the first realization of SAG QDs prepared with the assistance of a new diblock-copolymer, PS-b-PDMS (polystyrene-block-polydimethylsiloxane). Due to the significantly greater Flory-Huggins interaction parameter χ, it is possible to form patterns with even smaller characteristic sizes compared to the previously used PS-b-PMMA. Additionally, this copolymer has numerous other advantages, which would significantly simplify the BCP lithography process. Procedures have been developed allowing for direct deposition of the block copolymer film on the substrate, without any need for a brush layer to control the surface energy of the substrate; specific solvent vapor annealing promotes the self-assembly process and the pattern formation in the film The fabrication process consisted of two distinct stages: fabrication of a dielectric mask by diblock-copolymer lithography and epitaxial growth of QDs by metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE). All the samples were prepared on 2" n-type InP substrates with (001)orientation. First, we epitaxially deposited 450 nm of InP. All the epitaxial processes were carried out using a low-pressure (60 Torr) Turbodisc® MOVPE system with trimethylindium (TMIn), arsine (AsH3) and phosphine (PH3) as precursors, and hydrogen (H2) as carrier gas. The mask fabrication process is schematically illustrated in Figure To transform PS-b-PDMS patterned films into a hard mask, an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Reactive Ion Etching (ICP-RIE) process was carried out. A short step of sulfur hexafluoride plasma etch of 10 s was applied in the beginning to remove a thin PDMS skin layer on top of the polymer film and to open the PS cylinders Selective area epitaxy: Prior to the selective epitaxial growth step, the wafer with the mask on top was cleaned by dipping it into concentrated sulfuric acid for 2 min with following rinsing in de-ionized water with nitrogen bubbles for 3 min. After drying with nitrogen gas, the wafer was loaded into the MOVPE chamber. Then, an annealing step was carried out under phosphine ambient at 550 -650 °C for 15 min. The next step was in-situ InP etching by carbon tetrabromide (CBr4) in the mask openings to form an array of holes (Fig. Block-copolymer lithography. The process of polymer self-assembly depends on the surface energy of the wafer. Contact angle measurements showed the difference in surface energy between epitaxy grown InP and SiO2 surfaces. We discovered that the oxygen plasma treatment allowed to change the surface energy of InP to be similar to Si. In this way, the desired pattern of standing PS cylinders of 30 nm in diameter was achieved after annealing the PS-b-PDMS film with a thickness of 30 nm in methylcyclohexane saturated vapor for 55 min at 21 °C. The presence of short-range hexagonal order indicates a standing cylinder pattern, while the absence of such order is typical for the spherical polymer phase Growth of quantum dots. The first step prior to an epitaxial growth is high-temperature annealing in phosphine overpressure to remove the native oxide from the semiconductor surface. However, annealing InP wafers covered by SiOxCy mask at the standard temperature of 650 °C in phosphine ambient resulted in the formation of InP surface defects while the mask in those areas got membranized. A typical SEM image of such defects is shown in Fig. Time-integrated photoluminescence studies. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra obtained in the temperature range of 10-300 K for the investigated structure are presented in Fig. Since the band offset of the strained InAs/InP material system is expected to be ~300 meV for the conduction band, and ~500 meV for the valence band where Ci is a pre-exponential factor for the i th thermal activation process The respective activation energies are the same as those obtained for above-barrier excitation (see Tab. I). Therefore, the PL quench observed for SAG QDs cannot be discussed in terms of typical thermal activation mechanisms like carrier re-excitation from the QD GS to higher-lying states within the confinement potential of a dot or to the wetting layer. To describe the observed behavior, we suggest the following scenario: a population of photo-generated carriers is effectively trapped by an extensive DOS located within the InP bandgap, and subsequently, it is only partially transferred to QDs. With increasing temperature, a certain population of trapped carriers from their localized potentials releases in the barrier with the localization depth of roughly 7 and 60 meV (Tab. I). Thermally activated carriers, in their vast majority, are nonradiatively lost in the barrier and the efficiency of the processes increases with T. It causes that less and less carriers feed the QD states with increasing T. The nature of carrier localized states in the InP bandgap is related to various lithography steps like impurity levels and defect states at the native oxide/InP interface as well as structural defects formed in the InP matrix during ICP dry etch. Under the incomplete de-oxidation of InP, one can point to InP -1 The temperature-induced quench investigation of SAG QD PL emission indicates that the barrier DOS has a significant impact on the optical characteristics of these dots and influences the carrier redistribution process among the QD ensemble. Figure Each TRPL trace is characterized by a substantial delay after the photo-excitation during which the PL reaches its maximum amplitude, Fig. Figure Finally, for the SAG QDs, the τrise is a strong function of T, as presented in Fig. In conclusion, we present selective area growth of InAs/InP quantum dots assisted by blockcopolymer lithography. The fabrication method of silicon oxycarbide hard masks with cylindrical openings of 20-30 nm in diameter on top of an InP substrate was developed. The pattern parameters could be regulated by manipulating the self-assembly process in PS-b-PDMS block-copolymer. We carried out a systematic investigation of the carrier dynamics in an array of SAG QDs by time-integrated PL and temperature dependent TRPL. The SAG QDs demonstrate strong carrier localization, however, their emission properties are affected by the defect-related density of states located in the InP barrier in the close vicinity of the dots. It is found that these states act as a carrier reservoir for the dots and dominate temperature-induced carrier migration in the structure. The effect is seen although of a strong PL quench from QDs accompanied by negligible changes in the PL decay time in the whole temperature range. This scenario is additionally supported by a slow and elongated temperature carrier capture time by the dots ranging from 200-500 ps. The nature of those defects is likely related to the technological process, the contamination with foreign atoms during lithography steps as well as damage of the crystal lattice during the ICP dry etching process. Villum Fonden. Young Investigator Programme. (VKR023442) Polish budgetary funds for science in 2018-2020. "Diamond Grant" program (DI 2017 011747).