We report the observation of local superconductivity induced at the point contact formed between a normal metal tip and WC -a triple point topological semimetal with super hardness. Remarkably, the maximum critical temperature is up to near 12 K but insensitive to the tip's magnetism. The lateral dimensions of the superconducting puddles were evaluated and the temperature dependencies of superconducting gap and upper critical field were also obtained. These results put constraints on the explanation of the induced superconductivity and pave a pathway for exploring topological superconductivity. Unconventional superconductors and topological materials have attracted tremendous attentions due to their novel physical properties and potential applications. Integration of superconductivity and topological nature may lead to new emergent phenomena such as exotic topological superconductivity, for the interesting interplay between electron pairing and the spin-orbit coupling Most recently, a new type of topological quasiparticles was proposed for the metals hosting symmetry-protected three-band crossings (three-fold degeneracy) near the Fermi level In this work, we performed point contact experiments on WC using both non-magnetic and ferromagnetic normal metal tips. Local superconductivity with various lateral sizes could be induced for all these tips, providing a strong evidence of its unconventional nature. In addition, temperature dependent superconducting gap ∆(T ) and upper critical field H c (T ) were obtained. These observations are helpful to reveal the mechanism of TISC in topological semimetals and deserve to be studied intensively. Point contact measurements were carried out in our home-built probes based on a physical property measurement system (PPMS) from Quantum Design. We adopted here the most common point contact (PC) configuration, often called "needle-anvil" as illustrated in Fig. The high-quality single crystals of WC studied here were grown by the flux method In general, I ∼ V curves of a PC between two normal metals (N/N) look more like straight lines at low bias voltages due to its nearly constant resistance, and no obvious features can be seen in the PC spectra dI/dV ∼ V . The situation is very different for a normal metal/superconductor (N/S) PC. When superconducting state is turned on, the spectral shape will depend on the superconducting pairing symmetry and the effective barrier height at the N/S interface, which could be described by a generalized Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) formalism Though the as-grown WC single crystal is not superconductive, it was found that superconductivity could be induced at the point contact formed between a normal metal tip and WC with a good repeatability involving all the used tips and the studied samples. As demonstrated in Figs. Figures Another interesting finding here is that local superconductivity can be triggered on non-superconducting WC by ferromagnetic Fe, Co and Ni tips as well as the nonmagnetic tips made of PtIr alloy, Au, W, and Ta, providing a strong evidence for its unconventional nature. The measured signals are significant with a good repeatability, ruling out experimental occasionality. Remarkably, the maximal T c achieved by a particular metal tip is not sensitive (almost irrelevant) to the tips' magnetism. This is surprising because it is well known that ferromagnetism will break spin singlet pairing and suppress conventional superconductivity, especially for a thin film similar to the interfacial superconductivity observed here. According to the previous works on conventional superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures, a ferromagnetic layer could seriously suppress or even kill the superconductivity of superconducting layers depending on their thickness In order to get further insight into the observed TISC, the measured Andreev-reflection spectra were studied in detail as exemplified in Fig. The TISC on WC in addition to Cd 3 As 2 In summary, we have observed TISC up to near 12 K on the newfound topological semimetal WC with super hardness. The estimated lateral dimensions of the superconducting regions vary from dozens of nanometers to the order of micrometer, and the determined temperature dependencies of superconducting gap and critical field behave differently from the conventional supercon-ductivity. Most surprisingly, the achieved critical temperature is insensitive to the ferromagnetism of the tip materials. These findings not only reveal the unconventional nature of the TISC but also support interface coupling instead of tip-pressure or confinement effect as the dominant origin. Furthermore, the high chemical stability and super hardness of WC offer an opportunity to fabricate metal/WC interface and explore exotic quantum phenomena in this topological material.