Fluorescent nanodiamonds (fNDs) containing Nitrogen Vacancy (NV) centres are promising candidates for quantum sensing in biological environments. However, to date, there has been little progress made to combine the sensing capabilities of fNDs with biomimetic substrates used in the laboratory to support physiologically representative cell behaviour. This work describes the fabrication and implementation of electrospun Poly Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid (PLGA) nanofibers embedded with fNDs for optical quantum sensing in an environment, which recapitulates the nanoscale architecture and topography of the cell niche. A range of solutions for electrospinning was prepared by mixing fNDs in different combinations of PLGA and it was shown that fND distribution was highly dependent on PLGA and solvent concentrations. The formulation that produced uniformly dispersed fNDs was identified and subsequently electrospun into nanofibers. The resulting fND nanofibers were characterised using fluorescent microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Quantum measurements were also performed via optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) and longitudinal spin relaxometry. Time varying magnetic fields external to the fND nanofibers were detected using continuous wave ODMR to demonstrate the sensing capability of the embedded fNDs. was demonstrated by their ability to support highly viable populations of differentiated neural stem cellsa major therapeutic population able to produce electrically active neuronal circuits. The successful acquisition of ODMR spectra from the fNDs in the presence of live cells was also 2 demonstrated on cultures of differentiating neural stem cells. This work advances the current state of the art in quantum sensing by providing a versatile sensing platform that can be tailored to produce physiological-like cell niches to replicate biologically relevant growth environments. The Nitrogen-Vacancy (NV) color center in diamond has emerged as a high performance quantum sensor with application areas including photonics, quantum information science and the life sciences There has been a growing interest in exploiting the spin dependent optical properties of the NV center to probe biological systems, most notably in recent years for opto-magnetic imaging in bacterial cultures Whilst diamond has a low cytotoxicity profile predominantly for the study of cells in monolayer culture. Both of these approaches do not enable replication of important bioactive cues that occur in the three dimensional in vivo environment. Indeed, it is well established in the life sciences that a key component of the in vivo environment affecting cell function is the extracellular matrix (ECM), as demonstrated by studies reporting the frequency of postsynaptic potentials in neurons to be significantly reduced in a matrix deficient environment Significant work has been carried out over the past two decades to establish surrogate ECM environments to support in vitro cell culture, this is particularly so in the area of stem cell culture to promote cell function and differentiation and in Tissue Engineering to provide structural cues to guide regenerating tissue organization. Electrospun polymer nanofibers (ENF) are synthetic scaffolds that can replicate essential properties of the ECM to support functional cell behaviour in vitro. The fabrication process enables controlled production of nanoscale dimensions and topography similar to the fibrillar structure of the ECM with tuneable fiber thickness, organisation and density. The fibers themselves are typically composed of biodegradable polymers that are amenable to functional modifications to enhance cell survival, differentiation and organisation Aqueous suspensions of 100 nm diameter fNDs containing a high dose of NV -centres (>1000/particle) at a concentration of 1 mg/mL were purchased from FND Biotech, Inc. Solutions for electrospinning were prepared by first centrifuging 1 ml of the fND suspension at 21,000 x g for 10 minutes. Next, the supernatant was removed to produce a pellet of fNDs, which was subsequently dried under a nitrogen atmosphere to remove residual water. A range of candidate solutions for electrospinning were prepared by adding a single fND pellet to 0.33 ml solutions of absolute methanol, acetonitrile or ethyl acetate. Each solution was vortexed and added to 0.67 ml solutions of high grade chloroform (1:2 ratio). 80 mg of PLGA (Resomer® RG 505, Poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide, Sigma)) was then added to each of the resulting solutions. The solutions were mixed using a magnetic stirrer for 1 hour at 20 o C or overnight at 4 o C, producing a 1 ml viscous solution of milky appearance for electrospinning. Critical requirements for preparation of the final solution are use of PLGA that has not undergone degradation due to long storage times and the use of high grade solvents stored on molecular sieves to avoid the presence of water inhibiting the dissolution of PLGA. Prior to electrospinning, the solution was sonicated for one hour to disperse the fNDs enabling uniform distribution of the fNDs in the spun fibers. A conventional electrospinning set up was used Two electrodes were constructed, consisting of a metal needle attached to the syringe and a grounded aluminium collection plate. The syringe pump was set to extrude the solution at a rate of 0.08 ml/min. Under a sufficiently large voltage, electrostatic repulsion induced stretching of the droplets leaving the syringe, followed by the formation of a jet of polymer toward the collection plate. As the solvent component of the solution evaporates, continuous fibres of polymer are extruded and collected onto glass coverslips adhered to the aluminium electrode, generating a mat of fND embedded nanofibers. Fluorescent dye, Rhodamine-B dye (Sigma), at a concentration of 1 μg/ml was added to each candidate solution for electrospinning (in the absence of fNDs) to enable assessment, by fluorescent microscopy, of the effect of each solvent mixture on the electrospun fibers. The fND embedded ENFs were also imaged using SEM (Hitachi S45). Here fiber coated coverslips were mounted on aluminium stubs and gold sputtered under vacuum for two minutes prior to imaging. Image analysis was performed using the open source plugin FibrilJ Experiments were performed using a wide field epi-fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX83) illuminated with a mercury arc lamp. The emission from the lamp was filtered through a narrow band pass excitation filter (Chroma Technology Corporation) centred at 532 nm ± 5 nm. The light was then focused onto the backfocal plane of a 1.49 NA Olympus 60x TIRF objective lens, with the fluorescence emission collected through a 633 nm long pass emission filter (Chroma Technology Corporation) and projected onto a sCMOS camera (Photometrics 95 Prime B) producing an image with a 220 μm x 220 μm field of view (FOV). MWs were generated using a Keysight N2581B vector signal generator and amplified using an AR research 20S1G4 MW amplifier. MW transmission to the fNDs was achieved through a 0.125 mm diameter copper wire positioned above the ENF coated coverslip mounted on the microscope stage. Instrumentation and acquisition settings were computer controlled using an Olympus U-RTC control box in combination with Olympus Cellsense imaging software. Continuous wave ODMR was performed by imaging the fluorescent emission from fNDs in the ENFs whilst sweeping the MW frequency between 2.77 GHz and 2.97 GHz with 2 MHz step sizes. Images were recorded for 10 consecutive frequency sweeps and the resulting data analysed to produce an averaged ODMR spectrum, giving a temporal resolution for a full ODMR spectrum in this instance of 2 seconds. Two point single frequency measurements of the PL intensity were also performed by acquiring two consecutive images, one during the application of a 2.87 GHz MW field and the other without MWs. This measurement scheme was used to dynamically monitor the presence of an externally applied magnetic field. The averaged PL intensity of each image was determined and the difference in the PL intensity related to the magnetic field strength through the use of a calibration curve obtained using a Hall probe. The two point single frequency measurements yield a temporal resolution of 20ms, an effective increase in temporal resolution of 100x compared with a obtaining a full ODMR spectrum. In effect the temporal resolution of the system is limited to 2 times the maximum frame rate of the camera. The max frame rate for a full FOV in this setup is set at 100Hz, however this can be increased to frame rates in excess of kHz if the FOV of acquisition is reduced sufficiently. Longitudinal spin relaxation times (T1) of NV centers in the fNDs were determined by measuring the PL intensity as a function of time following initialisation of the spin states by a pulse of green light. Images were acquired using a custom confocal microscope built around a commercial microscope base (Nikon Ti-U). Pulsed optical excitation was achieved using a 532 nm laser (Verdi, Coherent Scientific) in combination with an acousto-optic modulator (Crystal Technologies), controlled by a PulseBlaster acquisition card (Spincore). The PL emission was filtered by a 560 nm long pass filter (Semrock) in combination with a 650 nm to 750 nm bandpass filter (Semrock) and recorded using a single photon counting avalanche photodiode (PerkinElmer), with the time-correlated photons captured with a multiple-event time digitizer card (Fast ComTech P7889). The microscope and data acquisition were controlled via custom LabVIEW code. All cell culture reagents and cell culture grade plastics were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Dorset, UK) or Fisher Scientific (Loughborough, UK) unless otherwise stated. Basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) was from Peprotech (Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) was from R&D systems Ltd (Abingdon, UK). DNase I was from Roche (Welwyn, UK). The LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Assay Kit was from Fisher Scientific. Primary antibodies were rabbit anti-βtubulin (Tuj-1) from Biolegend (Cat: 802001, London, UK), rat anti-myelin basic protein (MBP) from Serotec (Cat: MCA409S, Kidlington, UK) and rabbit anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) from DakoCytomation (Cat: Z033429-2, Ely, UK). Secondary antibodies were from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories Ltd (Westgrove, PA, USA). Vectashield mounting medium with 4,6diamidino-2-phenyl-indole (DAPI) was from Vector Laboratories (Peterborough, UK). The care and use of all animals used for cell culture were in accordance with the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986 (UK) with approval by the local ethics committee. Neural stem cells (NSCs) were derived from the subventricular zone of P1-3 CD10 mice as previously described (Adams, Pickard and Chari, 2013; Pickard, Adams and Chari, 2017). Briefly, after dissection, the subventricular zone was dissociated into single cells through addition of 10% DNase and mechanical dissociation. Single cells were suspended in neurosphere medium (3:1 mix DMEM:F12, 2 % B27, 25 ng ml -1 EGF and FGF-2, 5 ng ml -1 heparin, 50 U ml -1 penicillin and 50 μg ml -1 streptomycin) at 1 x 10 5 viable cells/mL and 5 mL added to T25 flasks for propagation as neurospheres at 37 o C, 5 % CO2. Flasks were fed every 2 to 3 days. For passaging, neurospheres were dissociated into single cells using a mixture of Accutase and DNase (9:1) and re-seeded in T25 flasks as before. For experiments, glass rectangular coverslips with or without the ENFs were placed in 60 mm petri dishes and coated prior to cell seeding by application of poly-ornithine (20 %, 1 h, 37 o C), rinsing in PBS, application of laminin (5 μg mL-1, 1 h, 37 o C) and then rinsing three times with PBS. Single cells (up to a maximum of passage three) were then suspended at 3 x 10 5 viable cells/mL in monolayer medium (1:1 mix DMEM:F12, 1% N2, 25 ng ml-1 EGF and FGF-2, 5 ng ml-1 heparin, 50 U ml-1 penicillin and 50 μg ml-1 streptomycin). 3 mL of the suspension was added to each petri dish, which contained one experimental substrate. Once the cells had reached approximately 70 % confluence on the glass substrates (2 to 3 days), the monolayer medium was removed entirely and replaced with differentiation medium (neurosphere medium minus growth factors with addition of 1% foetal bovine serum). Cells were allowed to grow in differentiation medium for seven days with feeding (50% medium change) every 2 to 3 days. Here, cells were either used for the live/dead assay or fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (20 min at room temperature) for immunocytochemistry. Cells were washed once with PBS. DMEM (without additional factors), containing 4 μM calcein AM and 6 μM ethidium homodimer, was then added to the cells. The cells were placed back in the incubator for 15 minutes before immediately being imaged in situ. For immunocytochemistry, fixed cells were incubated in blocking solution (5% normal donkey serum [NDS], 0.3% triton-X in PBS) for 30 minutes at room temperature. This was then replaced with appropriate primary antibody solutions which were made up in blocking solution: GFAP for astrocytes, Tuj-1 for neurons and MBP for oligodendrocytes for 16 h at 4 o C. Primary antibody solution was washed off using three washes of PBS before addition of blocking solution for 30 minutes at room temperature. The appropriate secondary antibody in blocking solution was then added and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature in the dark. After incubation the samples were washed three times in PBS. Coverslips were then mounted to microscope slides using Vectashield mounting medium. Immunocytochemistry imaging was performed using a Leica (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) DM2500 LED fluorescence microscope. Live/dead imaging was performed on a Zeiss AxioObserver.Z (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging mbH, Goettingen, Germany). For quantification of the number of viable cells, three areas from each sample were imaged and green (live) and red (dead) cells were counted with percentage viability calculated as the percentage of green cells of the total number of cells. The proportions of cells displaying cell specific staining and percentage of pyknotic nuclei were also assessed in this way using fixed, immunostained samples. Nuclei associated with cell specific staining were counted as positive marker expression and the percentage of positive nuclei was calculated compared to the total number of nuclei in the image. Pyknotic nuclei were identified as condensed and/or fragmented nuclei, indicative of apoptosis. Column charts are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean. Statistical differences between the two groups were interrogated by an unpaired, two-sided t-test with a threshold of P<0.05 set for any significance. NSCs were isolated and cultured as previously described, and maintained in culture for 21 days. Prior to imaging, imaging buffer was prepared containing 135mM NaCl, 3mM KCl, 10 mM Hepes, 15 mM glucose, 1mM MgSO4, 2mM CaCl2 after which the PH was set to 7.4 by adding drop wise 1M NaOH. Neuronal cell cultures were left in a biological flow hood for 5 minutes to allow cells to equilibrate to room temperature. Cells were then washed twice in imaging buffer and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature covered from light in 10μl of 100μM Fluo-5F AM (ThermoFisher) in 20%pluronic acid per 1ml of imaging buffer. Cells were then washed twice in imaging buffer and left in fresh buffer for a further 30 minutes to allow the stain to de-esterify. Cells were then transferred to the microscope (Olympus Ix83) for live imaging and ODMR. Calcium flux in cells was visualised in cells using an Olympus 40x LUCPLFLN 0.6NA objective, with excitation from a mercury arc lamp filtered through a 470-490nm band pass filter, and emission collected through a 515-550nm band pass filtered. Images were captured on an sCMOS camera as previously described. ODMR spectra of the underlying embedded fNDs in live cells were acquired as previously described. The composition of solutions for electronspinning notably affected fND aggregation. Visual inspection of solutions prior to electrospinning (Figure Further, fluorescence microscopy of the Rhodamine-B labelled ENFs, without fNDs, demonstrates the formulation containing a 2:1 ratio chloroform to methanol to produce fibers with a low rate of blebbing as compared to the other solutions studied (Figure Figure The effect on PL and quantum sensing of embedding the fNDs in the ENFs was investigated through a comparison of drop cast fNDs with fND embedded ENFs. Figures Results from measurement of the longitudinal spin relaxation times (T1) of between 40 and 50 individual clusters of fNDs of comparable intensity and size are shown in Figure The successful implementation of T1 relaxometry using the fND embedded ENFs provides a pathway to multifunctional NV based quantum sensing in an environment which recapitulates the nanoscale architecture and topography of the cell niche. Protocols previously implemented on NV implanted diamond demonstrating quantification of paramagnetic species in solution, analogous to the detection of endogenous free radicals in living cells could be performed using the fND embedded ENFs It is noted that for this application, there is rapid drop off in target signal strength as a function of distance from the ND surface, thus optimisation of ENF fabrication process would need to be considered for such applications. In addition to this, while the sensing capabilities of the fNDs embedded in the ENFs was compromised, through reduction in the T1 relaxation time as compared to bare fNDs, this could be mitigated by investigating different polymer compositions and electronspinning parameters affecting fiber density, thickness, and distribution. The protocol used for determining the strength of an externally applied DC magnetic field is shown schematically in Figure Using this approach there is no requirement for long NV coherence times, alignment of the NV axis with the applied external field or complicated MW pulse sequences. Moreover, the approach is robust and can readily be implemented in cell culture systems. Experimentally, the protocol involved acquisition of two consecutive images of PL intensity, one with MWs applied at the resonant frequency and one in the absence of a MW field. The applied magnetic field was varied by moving a neodymium permanent magnet mounted on a translation stage above the microscope stage. At each position of the magnet the contrast between the images with and without MWs was calculated using the ratio of the averaged PL intensity in the corresponding images. A calibration curve was then generated by correlating this contrast to magnetic field strength as measured by a transverse Hall probe located on the microscope stage (Figure The above results demonstrate a simplified approach to NV based magnetometry using the fND embedded ENFs. Alternative approaches to magnetometry are also applicable, in particular measurement of splitting in the ODMR spectrum. In this case the sensitivity of the fNDs embedded in ENFs for magnetometry can be estimated using the equation. Where η represents sensitivity, δ is the full width at half maximum of the ODMR peak, R represents the experimental ODMR contrast, gnv is the g-factor of the NV centre, μB is the Bohr magneton and N is the number of collected photons per second. Using Equation 1 and measurements of PL from a single ND within the FOV represented in figure ENFs is estimated to be 3.4μT/√Hz for a 2s integration time. Higher sensitivity could be achieved through an increase in the number of photons collected via improvement in light collection efficiency, in the number of embedded fNDs and use of a less optically scattering polymer. Enhanced sensitivity is also possible through reduction of the ODMR linewidth, δ, by improvement in the coherence properties of the NVs, potentially achievable using higher purity Improvements in the detection sensitivity of the presented measurement platform could pave the way for the implementation of spatiotemporal electrophysiological measurements on live cells in a physiological-like environment. Indeed, the concept of electrophysiological measurements in cells using NV centers has been explored theoretically and experimentally To examine the potential for fND embedded nanofibers to be used in biological systems an investigation of whether NSCs could be grown and differentiated into their daughter cells on the fibers was carried out. NSCs grown on the ENFs for 7 days displayed a morphology typical of the expected differentiated cell phenotypes. The viability of the differentiated NSCs on the fND embedded ENFs was determined from the live dead assay to be 85% which is in the range previously reported for differentiated NSCs cultured on glass cover slips (Figures 6a, 6b, 6 and 6j). The percentage of apoptotic cells, as assessed by the numbers of pyknotic nuclei, was low with percentages of 4 % for cells cultured on the ENFs and 2.5 % for cells cultured on the glass coverslip observed (Figure It is noted that whilst detection of endogenous electrical signals from cells is not presented in this report, emphasis must be placed on the technical challenges facing such measurements. Furthermore, the validation of active neural circuits in cells grown on fND embedded ENFs using quantum sensing protocols would represent a significant advancement developing methods in electrophysiology. As previously discussed, further optimisation of the fabrication procedure and improvements to the experimental setup and antenna design could significantly improve the sensitivity of this sensing platform, and thus realise the true utility of this bio-sensing approach. In addition, modifications to the acquisition protocol that allow simultaneous imaging of calcium flux and ODMR acquisition, will not only provide concrete validation of this novel electrophysiology approach, but could elucidate important information about the onset of calcium flux in neurons following the initiation of cellular action potentials. Whilst this latter concept has previously been demonstrated using calcium dyes on multi electrode arrays A quantum sensing platform that mimics the nanoscale architecture and topography of the cell niche has been presented. This work identified and demonstrated formulations and fabrication protocols for the production of polymer ENFs with fNDs uniformly embedded along the fibers. Finally, the demonstration of quantum sensing in electrospun scaffolds that mimic the nanoscale properties of the cell niche will be of particular interest to those working in stem cell biology and tissue engineering. 