We present a comprehensive study on the magnetic structure, dynamics, and phase evolution in the single-phase double perovskite La2CoMnO6. The mixed valence state due to oxygen deficiency is verified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and confirms a double ferromagnetic transition observed in DC magnetization. Neutron diffraction reveals that the magnetic structure is dominated by long-range ferromagnetic ordering, which is further corroborated by a critical exponents analysis of the paramagnetic to ferromagnetic phase transition. An analysis of the magnetization dynamics by means of linear and nonlinear ac magnetic susceptibilities marks the presence of two distinct cluster glass-like states that emerge at low temperatures. The isothermal entropy change as a function of temperature and magnetic field (H) is exploited to investigate the mechanism of stabilization of the magnetic phases across the H-T phase diagram. In the regime of the phase diagram where thermal energy is sufficiently low, regions of competing interactions due to local disorder become stabilized and display glasslike dynamics. The freezing mechanism of clusters is illustrated using a unique probe of transverse susceptibility that isolates the effects of the local anisotropy of the spin clusters. The results are summarized in a new H-T phase diagram of La2CoMnO6 revealed for the first time from these data. KEYWORDS: Double perovskites; Collective magnetism; Magnetic glassy; Magnetic anisotropy *Corresponding authors: phanm@usf.edu (MHP) and sharihar@usf.edu (HS) Double perovskite oxides with a general formula A2BBʹO6 (where A is a rare earth or alkaline earth metal, and B and Bʹ are d-block transition metals) display a wide range of interesting physical properties with composition variations, as two B-site cations allow for novel combinations of different elements One member of the double perovskite oxides, La2CoMnO6 (LCMO), has gained particular attention because of the presence of the magnetodielectric effect and multiferroic properties They found that the cooling rate had a direct effect on the magnitude of the MS. The sample annealed at 1325 oC The presence of multiple and complicated crystal structures, together with alternating cation valencies and defects, leads to inconsistencies in the magnetic transition temperatures Multiple magnetic transitions have been reported in LCMO due to coexisting cationic orders. Guo et al. In this study, the magnetic properties of a single phase polycrystalline sample of LCMO are characterized by means of DC magnetization, AC susceptibility, magnetic entropy change (ΔSM), neutron diffraction (ND), and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). Our study sheds light on the nature of the magnetic transitions governed by different magnetic interactions and how each phase evolves in this system. Neutron diffraction indicates the existence of long-range FM order for T < TC down to T = 20 K. A systematic analysis of the critical exponents using magnetization data supports the presence of a PM-FM phase transition, in agreement with ND results. AC susceptibility reveals the presence of cluster glass dynamics at low temperature that is further supported by the ΔSM measurements, which displays signatures of a magnetic state that competes with the dominant FM phase. The magnetic anisotropy is probed by transverse susceptibility as a function of temperature to investigate the effects of coexisting magnetic states and associated freezing phenomena. The article is organized as follows. Experimental methods are described in Sec. II. Section III. presents results and discussion. In Sec. III A, the structural and cationic ordering of the synthesized sample are confirmed. In Sec. III B, features of the DC magnetization are reviewed. In Sec. III C, the magnetic structure is examined via neutron diffraction, and a critical exponents analysis is performed on the magnetization data. In Sec. III D, short-range ordering due to disorder/defects and its influence on the time dependence and anisotropy is investigated as a major competition to the predominant long-range ordering. Sec. III E presents further analysis and discussion of the phase evolution via the magnetocaloric effect, and the results of the static and dynamic studies are summarized in an H-T phase diagram. The conclusion is given in Sec. IV. Polycrystalline LCMO was prepared using a conventional sol-gel method. Reagent chemicals lanthanum nitrate hexahydrate (LaN3O96H2O), cobalt sulphate heptahydrate (CoSO47H2O) and manganese nitrate tetrahydrate (MnN2O64H2O) were taken as the precursor materials according to their stoichiometric ratios. Citric acid was added as the chelating agent to the stoichiometric mixture of precursors. The entire reaction was carried out in basic medium. The resulting mixture was continuously stirred and heated from 100 -400 o C until a viscous gel was formed and decomposed. Final calcination was done at 950 o C for 8 h. The structural phase analysis was carried out using Bruker AXS powder x-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was performed with a PHI VersaProbe II, in ultra-high vacuum (~10 -8 torr). Magnetic measurements were performed using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) with the Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) and AC Measurement System (ACMS) options. Magnetization versus applied magnetic field (M vs. H) was measured from H = 0 -50 kOe for temperatures ranging from T = 10 -250 K, and magnetization versus temperature was measured from T = 10 -260 K for H = 100 Oe. The first (χ1), second (χ2) and third (χ3) harmonics of AC susceptibility were measured simultaneously for T = 10 -250 K for frequencies f = 500 -10000 Hz with an AC driving field amplitude h = 5 Oe. Magnetic entropy change was calculated from magnetization versus field data which was measured up to H = 30 kOe and with temperature steps of 5 K from T = 20 -200 K, 1 K from T = 200 -232 K and 2 K from T = 232 -244 K. Transverse susceptibility measurements were performed using a tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) with a resonant frequency of 12 MHz and sensitivity on the order of 10 Hz The XRD pattern of LCMO is shown in Fig. The XPS was recorded at the Mn and Co L2,3 edges [Figs. The temperature dependence of the zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) magnetization was measured for T = 10 -270 K at H = 100 Oe, as shown in Fig. Divergence is clearly seen between FC and ZFC magnetization curves below 226 K. Apart from the peak at 226 K, a peak at 218 K is also clearly visible in the ZFC magnetization curve. Fig. for Mn 4+ and g = 3 for Co 2+ due to its orbital contribution Based on HC ~ 5.4 kOe at 5 K and the nature of M vs. H curve, it can be concluded that the system is highly anisotropic. Although the high values of μeff and M5T at 5 K relative to previous studies indicate that the sample is highly cationically ordered, The ) and Mn (Mn 3+ /Mn 4+ ) ions, which, consequently, strongly influence the magnetic properties (Sec. III D). At low temperature, a magnetic contribution to nuclear peaks located at dhkl positions of 2.73 and 3.86 Å is evidenced, which increases continuously as temperature is lowered further. The data analysis reveals that these behaviors correspond to the formation of long-range FM order. The average ordered magnetic moment of Co/Mn ions at 20 K is 2.8(5) μB, which is close to the value extracted from isothermal magnetization curves. Notably, the ordered magnetic moment value is lower compared to that determined from spin-only values for Co/Mn ions, which further suggests that the magnetic ground state of La2CoMnO6 is not purely FM. As the neutron diffraction results indicate predominant long-range ferromagnetic ordering, the critical behavior across the PM-FM phase transition is investigated to further probe the nature of the magnetic ordering. The critical behavior of a second-order phase transition can be characterized by the set of critical exponents, which are defined by universal scaling laws. For a PM-FM transition, the magnetization (M) acts as the order parameter, and the universal scaling laws take the form , where M0, h/M, and D are the critical amplitudes of the spontaneous magnetization, inverse susceptibility and the field dependence of the magnetization, respectively, and ε = (T -TC)/TC is the reduced temperature. Alternatively, these exponents can be calculated using the Arrott-Noakes equation of state ( ) where rescaling of magnetization data as a function of magnetic field and temperature into a series of parallel lines can only be achieved by the correct exponents, and the isotherm corresponding to TC passes through the origin. Four different values of the exponents were used to construct the Arrott plot and modified-Arrott plot (MAP) to test the universality class into which this system belongs. For the mean-field model (MF), which is also simply known as the Arrott plot, β = 0.5 and γ =1.0; for 3D Ising, β = 0.325 and γ =1.24; for 3D Heisenberg, β = 0.365 and γ = 1.336; and for tricritical mean-field, β = 0.25 and γ = 1.0 Using a value of TC = TF1 determined from dM/dT vs. T, NS is defined as NS = S(T)/ S(TC). NS vs. T is plotted for all the above models and is compared to the ideal value of NS = 1. Fig. As shown in Fig. where M0 is the spontaneous magnetization, χ1 is the linear susceptibility and χ n (n > 1) are the higher harmonics representing the nonlinear response to HAC. Fig. = 220 K, similar to that shown in the ZFC magnetization. For consistency with DC results above, TF1 and TF2 are considered as the inflection points of the curve. Though the magnitude of the peaks changes with frequency, no longitudinal shift is observed along the temperature axis. In general, for spin glass systems, the longitudinal peak position is dependent on the frequency, as the response of AC-χ is related to the broad distribution of relaxation times which tend to shift towards longer time scales as the temperature is reduced. The presence of these relaxation times within the time of measurement results in peaks that shift to lower temperature as frequency is decreased On closer inspection of Fig. A broad frequency-dependent hump, denoted as TCG1, shifts from T = 110 -140 K for frequencies from f = 500 -10000 Hz. The low temperature anomaly observed in χ1ʹ appears in the magnetic loss near T = 42 K. We denote this transition as TCG2. The presence of the frequency-dependent behavior suggests a freezing over a large range of temperatures indicating the existence of a glassy state where Ea is the activation energy expressed as the product of anisotropy constant (K) and volume (V), i.e. Ea = KV, T0 CG1 is the characteristic temperature, also referred to as the interparticle/intercluster interaction strength, and τo VF is the relaxation time of individual particles. The inset of Fig. The ordering of Mn 4+ and Co 2+ ions in La2Co 2+ Mn 4+ O6 can be described by FM e 2 -O-e 0 interactions (TF1), but appearance of these ions at the antisite positions establishes weaker Mn 4+ -O-Mn 4+ or Co 2+ -O-Co 2+ AFM interactions. Dass et al. With similar arguments as above, the low temperature kink at TCG2 = 42 K seen in Fig. , can be associated with oxygen deficiency. The oxygen-deficient regions consist of Co 3+ and Mn 3+ ions which interact via Co 3+ -O-Mn 3+ FM vibronic superexchange interactions. The presence of antisite disorder in these regions would lead to short-range AFM Co 3+ -O-Co 3+ or Mn 3+ -O-Mn 3+ interactions at the antiphase interface. Thus, the observed anomaly at TCG2 could be due to the local frustrations arising from the competitive Co 3+ -O-Mn 3+ FM and Co 3+ -O-Co 3+ or Mn 3+ -O-Mn 3+ AFM interactions. The absence of a frequency-dependent feature at TCG2 could be due to the longer time scales required to observe the dynamics of these clusters at low temperature. To review, the presence of antisite defects in regions with and without oxygen vacancies lead to the formation of two types of clusters in the system, respectively. Type I: co-existence of FM Co 2+ -O-Mn 4+ and short range AFM Co 2+ -O-Co 2+ or Mn 4+ -O-Mn 4+ interactions and type II: co-existence of FM Co 3+ -O-Mn 3+ and AFM Co 3+ -O-Co 3+ or Mn 3+ -O-Mn 3+ interactions. It is expected that the volume fraction of the anion-deficient region is low, which would result in a smaller volume of type II clusters compared to type I. For a certain field and frequency, the dynamics of larger clusters freeze at a higher temperature. Hence, the freezing of type I clusters is observed before type II clusters. To further support the FM nature of the transition at TF1, the nonlinear components of the AC susceptibility were studied. The real part of second harmonic component (χ2ʹ) (Fig. According to Pramanik et. al. can be measured as a function of HDC, where χT sat is the TS at the saturating or maximum field, Hsat. Peaks are expected in the TS scan at the positive and negative anisotropy fields, ±HK, and at the switching fields, ±HS. As the TS measured via TDO is a dynamic response in nature, it provides an ideal route to probe the effects of the time-dependent properties of the coexisting cluster glass and FM phase on HK. Fig. Moreover, the maximum in HK at T = 80 K agrees well with the freezing temperature of T0 CG1 = 77 K determined for the type I clusters in the AC-χ measurements. HK begins to decrease as temperature drops below T0 CG1 . This behavior may signify the pinning of clusters to the FM matrix, which effectively reduces the contribution of the random anisotropy of the clusters reflected in the dynamic response. The continuous decrease in HK as temperature is reduced further reflects the progressive freezing of spin clusters in the type II regime. It should be noted that TDO measurements are performed at relatively high frequencies such that the behavior associated with the dynamics of the FM matrix + clusters can be markedly different from the behavior observed in the zero frequency M vs. H measurements. With the understanding gained about the mechanisms of the phase evolution using timedependent measurements, a detailed investigation of the static magnetic behavior across the H-T phase diagram is performed by exploiting the magnetocaloric effect. On subjecting the magnetic sample to a change of external magnetic field at a constant temperature, the isothermal entropy change, or by convention, the magnetic entropy change (ΔSM), can be calculated with the help of the following Maxwell relation, The magnetic entropy change may be calculated numerically via 0 ' Conventionally, in ferromagnetic materials, the magnetic entropy of the spin system decreases (ΔSM < 0) as the magnetic field tends to orient moments along the field direction, hence suppressing thermal fluctuations. On the other hand, the application of a magnetic field may increase the entropy causing ΔSM > 0, for example in antiferromagnets, as the external field rotates the spins in antiparallel sublattices against their preferred direction Based on isothermal magnetization versus magnetic field curves, the calculated magnetic entropy change as a function of temperature and magnetic field change, 0H, is summarized in According to the procedure described in where with a dispersion of ~16%. Failure of collapse for  < -1 has been ascribed to improper scaling of magnetic entropy and may be attributed to the increasing fluctuations of an additional magnetic phase near the ordering temperature, Tpeak In our results, however, a significant dispersion is observed above Tr2 ( > -1). This region lies in the temperature range at which the Co 3+ -O-Mn 3+ FM interactions enter the system just below TC. Thus, the occurrence of dispersion is likely due to the proximity of the critical temperature for the onset of second FM interactions to Tpeak. The inset of Fig. 