Topologically gapless edge states, characterized by topological invariants and Berry's phases of bulk energy bands, provide amazing techniques to robustly control the reflectionless propagation of electrons, photons and phonons. Recently, a new family of topological phases, dictated by the bulk polarization, has been observed, leading to the discovery of the higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs). So far, the HOTIs are only demonstrated in discrete mechanical and electromagnetic systems and electrical circuits with the quantized quadrupole polarization. Here, we realize the higher-order topological states in a two-dimensional (2D) continuous elastic system whose energy bands can be well described. We experimentally observe the gapped onedimensional (1D) edge states, the trivially gapped zero-dimensional (0D) corner states and the topologically protected 0D corner states. Compared with the trivial corner modes, the topological ones, immunizing against defects, are robustly localized at the obtuse-angled but not the acuteangled corners. The topological shape-dependent corner states open a new route for the design of the topologically-protected but reconfigurable 0D local eigenmodes and provide an excellent platform for the topological transformation of elastic energy among 2D bulk, 1D edge and 0D corner modes. Topological states, theoretically predicted in condensed matter physics The elastic wave propagation in well-structured phononic systems has exhibited exotic properties, from negative refraction 40 , super focusing 41 to cloaking 42 . Inspired by the fascinating topological characteristics of acoustic and optical systems, the topologically protected edge states in elastic phononic plates Compared with optical and acoustic waves, the elastic waves consisting of in-plane and out-of-plane waves are the vector waves whose bulk polarizations are much more difficult to be well-controlled. In this paper, we design an elastic HOTI. The gapped 1D edge states, the trivially gapped 0D corner states and the topologically protected 0D corner states, instead of the gapless 1D edge states, are experimentally observed in the topologically nontrivial bandgap. The corner states, robustly localized at the corners of the elastic HOTI, not only seriously decay into the bulk, but also rapidly attenuate along edges. Differing from the previous HOTIs in square and cube lattices A composite unit cell consisting of six nodes is presented in Fig. Here, we will explore the higher-order topological phases which exhibit the gapped 1D edge states and the in-gap 0D corner states, instead of the gapless 1D edge states. Aiming as this issue, a new mechanism based on the modulation of the inter-and intra-cell couplings will be developed. When linter increases to 1.2L, and at the same time, lintra reduces to 0.6L, the double Dirac cone is lifted, yielding a complete bandgap ranging from 1503Hz to 1715Hz. On the contrary, when linter reduces to 0.836L and lintra increase to 1.328L, the double Dirac cone is also lifted for a bandgap ranging from 1461Hz to 1650Hz, inspected in Fig. The symmetry-protected edge state on the boundary of a configuration is the fascinating property of the TI. In this study, we construct two different elastic phononic configurations with periodic boundaries along x direction, but truncated along y. The first one is a ribbon configuration consisting of 9 expanded unit cells. Its band dispersion, presented in Fig. Numerically evaluated eigenfrequencies presented in Fig. The bulk, the edge and the corner transmission spectra of the trivial hexagon-shaped sample are presented in Fig. To explain this phenomenon, a topological index N=|N+-N-|, capturing the interplay between the topology of the bulk Hamiltonian and the topological structure of the defect, is introduced. N=|N+-N-| is the number of stable modes bounded to corners In conclusion, this work develops an elastic HOTI by modulating the inter-and intra-cell couplings in a honeycomb lattice. The topologically protected 0D corner modes, lying in the nontrivial bandgap, can robustly concentrate the wave energy at the obtuse-angled corners valued by 2π/3, but not the acute-angled corners valued by π/3. Based on this shape-dependent characteristic, our elastic HOTI provides an additional degree-of-freedom, which is apart from the bulk polarization, to turn on/off the topologically protected local eigenmodes at corners. It is believed that our work exhibits a great ability to control the elastic wave propagation in an unprecedented way and provides an excellent platform to design the new type of elastic topological devices which can topologically transform the elastic wave energy among the bulk, the edge and the corner modes. Furthermore, our physical mechanism to realize the elastic higher-order topological phase is simple, so it can be directly extended to the three-dimensional (3D) HOTIs and even Weyl semimetals, exhibiting in-gap hinge states over a wide range of disciplines, including optics, acoustics and mechanical vibrations.