We have clarified the origin of magnetically dead interface layer formed in yttrium iron garnet (YIG) films grown at above 700°C onto gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) substrate by means of laser molecular beam epitaxy. The diffusion-assisted formation of a Ga-rich region at the YIG / GGG interface is demonstrated by means of composition depth profiling performed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, secondary ion mass spectroscopy and X-ray and neutron reflectometry. Our finding is in sharp contrast to the earlier expressed assumption that Gd acts as a migrant element in the YIG/GGG system. We further correlate the presence of Ga-rich transition layer with considerable quenching of ferromagnetic resonance and spin wave propagation in thin YIG films. Finally, we clarify the origin of the enigmatic low-density overlayer that is often observed in neutron and X-ray reflectometry studies of the YIG / GGG epitaxial system. The intense interest to nanometer-scale epitaxial films of yttrium iron garnet (Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 , YIG) is supported by potential applications in magnonic devices In the present work we investigated in detail the YIG / GGG epitaxial layers grown at 700-1000°C by laser MBE paying particular attention to the properties of the interface region. We studied the correlations between crystal structure, chemical composition and magnetic characteristics of thin YIG / GGG layers. We demonstrate drastic quenching of ferromagnetic resonance and spin wave propagation in ultrathin YIG films, correlating it to the structural data obtained by composition depth profiling. Secondary ion mass spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, X-ray and neutron reflectometry are applied to demonstrate that a Ga-rich layer is formed at the bottom of the YIG film during high temperature epitaxial growth. The direct observation of Ga diffusion into the YIG film is in contrast to the earlier works claiming that the migrant element is Gd. The origin of the thin low density layer residing on top of the YIG layer is also explained. The presented results are specific for YIG layers grown by laser MBE and do not necessarily apply to the other growth techniques such as liquid phase epitaxy. The epitaxial YIG layers were grown at 700-1000°C by laser molecular beam epitaxy onto annealed GGG (111) substrates, following the approach addressed in our earlier works The X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out to study chemical composition and oxidation state in the near surface region. A Physical Electronics 15-255G AR double pass CMA electron energy analyzer and a double anode XR3 X-ray source (VG Microtech) operated at 15 kV, 18 mA for Mg K photons were used. No surface sputtering was performed prior to XPS studies as the latter is known to change oxidation state of Fe. Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) was applied for chemical composition depth profiling. The mass-spectra of positive secondary ions were collected from a 150 mkm area using 25 kV Bi ions. Sputtering was performed applying 1 kV Ar ions in a 200 mkm crater. PNR was applied to probe depth dependent nuclear and magnetic scattering length densities. The measurements were performed at the Super ADAM setup The neutron reflectivity for polarizations parallel (R + ) and antiparallel (R -) to the in-plane magnetic field of 500 Oe was measured as a function of temperature. X-ray reflectivity (XRR) was used complementary to PNR to get information on the electronic density depth profiles. The reflectivity curves were measured at a wavelength of λ = 1.04 Å at BL3A beamline of Photon Factory synchrotron (Tsukuba, Japan). The fitting of PNR and XRR was performed using the GenX package The high frequency magnetic response of the YIG films was measured by ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and spin wave propagation spectroscopies to get complementary information on the standing and travelling spin waves. FMR spectra were measured with a conventional electronic paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer at the fixed microwave frequency of 9.4 GHz. The spin wave propagation was studied in the Damon-Eshbach setup The choice of YIG film thickness was guided by the need to distinguish the modified interface from the main YIG layer. For the depth resolving methods such as SIMS, PNR and XRR, the total film thickness (16-20 nm) was chosen to significantly exceed the dead layer thickness (few nm). With those techniques for which depth sensitivity was not available, we studied thickness series of 4 -6 -15 -25 nm by FMR and SW spectroscopies and 4 -13 nm by XPS. The main results in this paper were obtained for the films grown at 700-850°C. At a higher growth temperature of 1000°C it was difficult to keep stoichiometry (as shown in the XPS section below). Neither did we go lower than 700°C, as in this case the crystalline quality deterioration needs compensation by post growth annealing. As it was demonstrated in Ref. We have investigated the thickness dependence of the ferromagnetic resonance and spin wave propagation. different thickness. The FMR spectra are measured in the magnetic field perpendicular to the film plane. The spectra are scaled, shifted vertically and aligned horizontally for ease of comparison. One can clearly observe that while the film thickness is decreasing from 25 nm to 6 nm, the FMR line is getting wider and lower in intensity. The resonance is still detectable but extremely weak in the 6 nm YIG film, and no FMR signal can be found in 4 nm film. A similar behavior of the FMR linewidth as a function of film thickness was reported earlier by Sun et al. The quenching of static and dynamic magnetic properties in the ultrathin YIG layers suggests that a magnetically dead layer exists at the YIG / GGG interface. In order to shed light on the origin of this layer, two complementary methods -SIMS and XPS -have been applied in the present work to study the depth dependent chemical compositions of the YIG / GGG layers. SIMS was used to obtain element-selective depth profiles, without quantitative evaluation of the element concentrations. XPS was used to non-destructively obtain the chemical composition of the YIG film near surface region and to monitor the iron oxidation states. The SIMS profiles of Fe, Y, Ga and Gd measured in YIG layers grown at 700°C and 850°C are shown in Fig. Interestingly, in all the studied samples the Ga concentration profiles extend up to 5-7 nm deep into the YIG film while the Gd profile sharply drops to zero beyond the gray-labeled broadening region. This observation suggests that diffusion of Ga atoms into the film occurs during the growth. The Fe:Y ratio noticeably decreases towards the interface in the samples grown at 850°C and stays almost constant in the YIG film grown at 700°C. Thus, we believe that during the high temperature growth stage the iron atoms in YIG are partially substituted with gallium atoms that penetrate into the YIG film from the GGG substrate to the depth of several nanometers. The back diffusion of Fe and Y into the substrate, if any, is difficult to estimate accurately, as the border between the "gray" transition layer and the substrate is not well defined. While Y tends to extend farther into GGG than Fe, it can be also due to an instrumental effect. The observed Ga/Fe concentration profile behavior resembles that reported by Ukleev et al. The wide range X-ray photoemission spectra measured in 13 nm films grown at 850°C and and O 1s photoemission spectra are shown in higher resolution in Fig. As it is shown in Fig. The O 1s spectra in Fig. Of these two, the peak at lower binding energy (which is the only one observed in the GGG substrate) corresponds well to the position reported for Fe 2 O 3 , Y 2 O 3 and Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 Interestingly, the XPS spectrum of the 4 nm YIG film grown at 850°C shows a noticeable Ga 2p peak (Fig. The fact that the Gd 3d is not observed in the 4 nm film (Fig. Gallium signature was also reported in Ref. However, the Gd 4d peak at 142 eV is not present in these spectra (see Fig. To further analyze the composition and magnetization depth profiles in the YIG / GGG system, we have applied polarized neutron and X-ray reflectometry techniques. The joint use of both methods gives advantage of complementary information: nuclear  n and magnetic  m scattering length densities (SLD) by PNR and electron  e density by XRR. Despite the rather moderate contrast of the real parts of  n and  e in YIG/GGG, gadolinium can be reliably distinguished from the other elements by the noticeable contribution to the imaginary part of the nuclear SLD. In our study, the reflectivity measurements were carried out for two samples: 23 nm YIG film grown at 700С was studied by PNR and 16 nm film grown at 850С was studied by XRR. For quantitative discussions of nuclear, magnetic and electronic density distribution across the heterostructure we performed fitting using the Parratt algorithm 36 in GenX software package The fitting was performed using the simplest possible model. To avoid stagnation of the algorithm to a local minimum, the PNR fit was performed simultaneous for all the experimental data -all the structural parameters were kept constant between the PNR curves measured at different temperatures and magnetic fields, while the magnetizations of layers were varied. In what follows we plot the output of the fitting algorithm as the depth profiles of the complex density: nuclear and magnetic for PNR or electronic for XRR. The experimental and fitted PNR curves measured at T = 300 K, 50 K and 5 K for 23 nm YIG sample are shown in Fig. The magnetization changes almost synchronously with the real part of the nuclear SLD  n . At room temperature the magnetization of the main YIG layer equals 105 emu/cc, which is slightly lower than the saturation magnetization M s =140 emu/cc of the bulk YIG We, however, believe that this is not the case as the SLD of Y 2 O 3 (3.7510 -5 Å -2 ) is significantly larger than the density value observed in our work and in The sketch of the step-and-terrace surface morphologies gives uniformly sloped (c) and stepped (d) density profiles. The uneven level occupancy might be caused by the adatom migration that occurs when deposition has stopped but the substrate temperature is still high. The low frequency modulations often observed around the 444 and 888 Bragg reflections provide an important evidence that the low density layer has the layered crystal structure of YIG. Noteworthy, the presented XRR and PNR data are in general agreement with each other. As the spanned Q z range accessed by PNR (0.18 Å -1 ) is significantly narrow in comparison with XRR (0.8 Å -1 ), the neutron reflectivity curve does not show the characteristic low frequency modulation and, therefore, provides no evidence of 15 Å thin low density layer residing on top of the YIG surface. We expect that such evidence would become available if the PNR was measured to a higher value of Q z . Taking into account the data of the other groups In our paper, we shed light onto the origin of the few nanometer-thick magnetically dead layer present at the interface of the epitaxial YIG / GGG layers grown at above 700°C by means of laser MBE. Previously, the existence of such layer was mainly suggested based on results of indirect methods, such as static magnetometry measurements. In the present work, we directly show this effect in thin YIG films by means of the ferromagnetic resonance, spin wave propagation and polarized neutron reflectometry. We have demonstrated that the resonance magnetic properties are noticeably quenched as the YIG film thickness decreases to a value of few nanometers. As opposed to the previous works The magnetization was shown to increase by the factor of 2.5 at low temperature. The small non-proportional increase of magnetization within the interface layer was observed upon the sample cooling below 50 K, possibly due to the magnetic phase transition. To our knowledge, this is the first time that Ga diffusion during YIG / GGG growth is directly confirmed by a combination of direct space and reciprocal space methods. Interestingly, a peculiar 15 Å low density layer residing on top of the YIG layer has been observed by the X-ray reflectivity. In our opinion, this layer cannot be explained by a uniform film of a crystalline phase, as it was claimed by 