This manuscript reports a set of acceleration measurements in the frequency range from 0 to 50 kHz performed at the mixing chamber plate (2 axes) and the top flange (3 axes) of a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator. Various configurations of the support frame and coupling to the pulse tube compressor and motor have been tested, and the dominant contribution in the spectrum of vibrations is located, surprisingly, near 20 kHz. Finally, the efficiency of various precautions in suppressing the observed vibration levels is illustrated. Today, cryogen-free dilution refrigerators (DR) are rapidly becoming the dominant technology for achieving mK temperatures, as they eliminate the need for on-site helium liquefaction and are easier to operate than traditional dilution units. The pre-cooling traditionally provided by a bath of liquid helium and a 1 K pot is replaced by a 2-stage pulse tube cooler, capable of reaching temperatures around 3 K at its cold end. Some of the drawbacks of cryogen-free DRs compared to traditional ones relevant to ultra-sensitive measurements at very low temperatures include increased vibration levels Our setup consists of a BlueFors LD-400 dilution refrigerator using the Cryomech PT-415RM cryocooler with a motor model no. RM604152504 and a CPA1110 compressor unit. The refrigerator was purchased with the pulse tube bellows damping stage, but without the optional separate stand for the pulse tube motor offered by BlueFors. The cryostat is mounted on a aluminum support frame fitted with air legs, and connected to the gas handling system placed in the same room via a 100 mm rigid pipe (still pumping line), along with some flexible hoses. The compressor is installed in the basement below the laboratory. During the measurements, different ways of loading the top flange of the cryostat were tested, including 25 kg sandbags and an assortment of lead bricks with a total weight close to 50 kg. The pulse tube motor, mounted on a 6 mm duraluminum plate, which was originally attached to the cryostat frame via rubber silencer blocks (provided by manufacturer), was later moved to a wall-mounted shelf to test whether this improves the observed vibration levels. Moreover, the original flexible hoses connecting the motor to the compressor were replaced with solid pipes attached to the walls (except for short sections near the pulse tube motor or the compressor unit), and these were later isolated with foam to reduce possible acoustic loading. Both versions of the piping were equipped with AeroQuip fittings, allowing easy manipulation at the full pressure of 250 psi. The setup is shown in Fig. A three-axis dynamic piezo-accelerometer built at the Institut Néel from three commercially available accelerometers was used. Two of these were PCB 351B41 by PCB Piezotronics It should be emphasized that spectra in the frequency range up to 50 kHz are shown and interpreted, exceeding the nominal specifications of the sensors. The purpose is to try and estimate qualitative changes between individual configurations of the refrigerator, with no need for precise calibration or exact numerical values. The sensors are physically capable of detecting vibrations up to 50 kHz, and distinguish between various situations, as shown in the next Section. The intrinsic noise of our detection setup can be characterised as white noise, with a measurable 1/f contribution at frequencies below ≈ 1 Hz (c.f. Fig. Two series of measurements were performed: the first one monitoring the vibrations of the top flange at room temperature and the second one with the sensors placed at the mixing chamber plate, which was kept at temperatures close to 4 K. The spectra obtained with the accelerometers at the top flange with different loading of the support frame are shown in Fig. Next, the sensors were placed at the mixing chamber (MXC) plate and connected to the top flange with specialized cryogenic coaxial cables designed to suppress charge induction when subject to motion. The cryostat cabling permitted the use of two sensors only, hence only the two PCB 351B41 sensors on x-and z-axes were kept. Since the main contribution to the vibrations was found to originate from the pulse tube motor, our focus was on testing the mounting of the motor plate and on the hoses/pipes connecting the motor to the compressor. The results of our measurements are presented in Fig. were made at mixing chamber temperatures ranging from 4.0 to 5.3 K. Measurements at 4.6 and 5.3 K under otherwise identical conditions demonstrated a negligible temperature dependence of the accelerometer response. Selected spectra in the form of PSDs are presented in Fig. motor from the cryostat frame to the shelf had little net effect at low frequencies, except in changing to some extent the direction of the vibrations, aligning them more with the x-axis. At high frequencies around 20 kHz, moving the motor away from the frame reduced the overall vibration levels, as seen again from the integrated PSDs in Fig. An additional test was thus carried out, where the pipes were first partly and then completely covered in isolating foam Vibration measurements on a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator were performed and analysed, showing a dominant contribution between 7 kHz and 28 kHz, and pointing to several practical measures that lead to the improvement of vibration levels. Using wall-mounted solid pipes to connect the pulse tube motor to the compressor resulted in a significant suppression of vibrations, as did moving the pulse tube motor away from the cryostat frame. Covering the pipes with soft isolating foam led to an additional improvement, albeit less significant than either of the above. On the other hand, loading the support frame with sandbags or lead bricks had very little effect, and led primarily to redistribution of the vibrations in the frequency domain rather than to their suppression. Further developments related to suppression of vibration level on our cryostat would likely include attaching the large pumping line connecting the still of the DR to the turbomolecular pump(s) in the gas handling systems to the building walls, or by softening its mechanical connection to the cryostat by means of an additional short section of flexible bellows tubing placed horizontally. We hope that our work will stimulate further investigations into the issues of acoustic and ultrasonic vibrations on dry dilution refrigerators. [ms -2 ] [ms -2 ] [ms -2 ] [ms -2 ] [ms -2 ] [ms -2 http://www.pcb.com/Products.aspx?m=351B41 , accessed 14/09/2018 https://www.kistler.com/?type=669&fid=73055&model=document , accessed 14/09/2018 Noma Gum rubber foam, internal diameter 27 mm, thickness 13 mm