Based on first-principles calculations, we show that stoichiometric TaSe3, synthesized in space group P 21/m, belongs to a three-dimensional (3D) strong topological insulator (TI) phase with Z2 invariants (1;100). The calculated surface spectrum shows clearly a single Dirac cone on surfaces, with helical spin texture at a constant energy contour. To check the stability of the topological phase, strain effects have been systematically investigated, showing that many topological phases survive in a wide range of the strains along both the a-and c-axes, such as strong TI (STI), weak TI (WTI) and Dirac semimetal phases. TaSe3 provides us an ideal platform for experimental study of topological phase transitions. More interestingly, since superconductivity in TaSe3 has been reported for a long time, the co-existence of topological phases and superconducting phase suggests that TaSe3 is a realistic system to study the interplay between topological and superconducting phases in the future. The layered transition-metal trichalcogenides MX 3 (M=Nb, Ta; X=S, Se) have attracted lots of interest because of the appearance of the charge-density-wave (CDW) states at low temperature (LT) Meanwhile, topological superconductors have attracted much interest due to the emergence of Majorana fermions In this work, based on first-principles calculations, we show that the single crystal TaSe 3 , known as a superconductor for many years The first-principles calculations were performed within the framework of full-potential linearizedaugmented plane-wave (FP-LAPW) method implemented in WIEN2K simulation package TaSe 3 crystallizes in the monoclinic layered structure with space group P 2 1 /m. The basic building blocks of TaSe 3 are parallel trigonal-prismatic chains along the baxis, as shown in Fig. When SOC is ignored, the calculated band structure along high symmetric lines in the BZ is shown in Fig. To fully understand the metallic electronic band structure, we first investigate the crystal structure evolution beginning with the layered structure of ZrSe 3 . In ZrSe 3 type I chains are arranged, as shown in Fig. The band inversion can be understood from the bonds (green dashed lines) of Se5-Ta1-Se3 and Se5-Ta2-Se6, which support the layered structure of TaSe 3 (see Fig. The inclusion of SOC leads to gap opening at the band crossing points, as seen in the band structure of Fig. To classify TIs, one needs to compute four Z 2 topological indices (ν 0 ; ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ), where ν 0 is a strong topological index and (ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ) are three weak topological indices. Since there is a continuous direct SOC gap, the Fu-Kane Z 2 invariants are well defined for the occupied bands below the gap in TaSe 3 . Due to the existence of inversion center in TaSe 3 , they can be easily calculated by Fu-Kane parity criterion 31 at eight TRIM points (Γ i , i = 1, 2, . . . 8). The strong topological index is given by (-1) ν0 = In view of the fact that the hallmark of topological non-trivial property is the existence of topological nontrivial surface states, the tight-binding Hamiltonians of semi-infinite samples are constructed by the maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) for all the Ta d and Se p orbitals, which are generated from the firstprinciples calculations. The surface Green's functions of the semi-infinite sample are obtained using an iterative method Next, we would like to discuss the possible CDW in TaSe 3 . It is well-known that no CDW is observed in NbS 2 . However, the phonon dispersion shows imaginary frequencies based on first-principles calculations To achieve topological superconductivity, it is challenging to find a material with both nontrivial topology of the electronic structure and superconductivity. A prior theoretical proposal of intrinsic non-trivial material is high-T c superconductor FeTe x Se 1-x In conclusion, we have calculated the electronic structure, and topological properties of TaSe 3 with P 2 1 /m crystal structure by using density functional theory. The calculated topological invariants are (1;100), which indicate that it belongs to the STI phase. A single Dirac cone is obtained in the calculated surface spectra. Further systematical calculations of strain effects suggest TaSe 3 can realize multiple topological non-trivial phases under strains, including STI, WTI and Dirac semimetal phases. These topological non-trivial phases survive in a wide range of the strain along the a-and c-axes, making TaSe 3 an attractive platform to study the topological phase transitions. In addition, the co-existence of the topological phases and superconductivity of TaSe 3 suggests that it could be a realistic system to study the in-terplay between topological and superconducting phases in the future. 0.2 -0.2 0.1 -0.1 0