This article reviews the main theoretical and experimental advances regarding the interaction between surface acoustic waves (SAWs) and electronic excitations in graphene. The coupling of the graphene electron gas to the SAW piezoelectric field can modify the propagation properties of the SAW, and even amplify the intensity of SAWs traveling along the graphene layer. Conversely, the periodic electric and strain fields of the SAW can be used to modify the graphene Dirac cone and to couple light into graphene plasmons. Finally, SAWs can generate acoustoelectric currents in graphene. These increase linearly with the SAW frequency and power but, in contrast to conventional currents, they depend non-monotonously on the graphene electric conductivity. Most of these functionalities have been reported in graphene transferred to the surface of strong piezoelectric insulators. The recent observation of acousto-electric currents in epitaxial graphene on SiC opens the way to the large-scale fabrication of graphene-based acousto-electric devices patterned directly on a semi-insulating wafer. In the last decades, the application of dynamic strain and electric fields of surface acoustic waves (SAWs) has proven to be a successful tool for industrial applications, as demonstrated by the wide spectrum of SAW-based signal processing devices incorporated in electronic systems currently available in the market As an example, it has been demonstrated that SAWs can manipulate optically generated electronic excitations in low-dimensional semiconductor heterostructures In this context, it is not at all surpising the increasing attention that the interaction between SAWs and graphene has attracted in the last years. Since its discovery in 2004 The objective of this manuscript is to overview the main advances reported until now about the interaction between SAWs and charge carriers in graphene. The review is organized as follows. Sections 2.1 and 2.2 discuss the most relevant characteristics of the graphene electronic properties and surface acoustic waves, respectively. Section 3.1 addresses the effects of the SAW-graphene coupling on the propagation of the SAWs, while Section 3.2 focuses on the use of the SAW periodic potentials for the modification of the graphene electronic properties and the coupling of light to graphene electronic excitations. Finally, Section 4 is devoted to the SAW-induced generation of acoustoelectric currents in graphene. We have grouped the results reported here in two subsections, depending on whether the acousto-electric current is generated in graphene transferred to a piezoelectric substrate (Section 4.1), or in epitaxial graphene formed on SiC (Section 4.2). Finally, Section 5 summarizes the main conclusions of this work. Graphene consists of a single layer of carbon atoms forming an hexagonal lattice, as shown in Fig. The electronic band structure of graphene is well-described theoretically by a tight-binding model Here, k = (k x , k y ) is the crystal momentum of the graphene charge carriers, γ 0 = 2.8 eV is the nearest-neighbor hopping energy, and the distance between two nearest-neighbor atoms is a = 1.42 Å. Figure It consists of a valence band and a conduction band touching each other at the six K and K ′ points of the first Brillouin zone. This means that graphene has no band gap between valence and conduction band, and therefore it behaves electrically as a semimetal. In electrically neutral graphene, the valence band is fully occupied, so that the Fermi energy, E F , intersects the electronic bands at the K and K ′ points, also known as charge-neutrality points or Dirac points. At low energies around the charge-neutrality points, the electronic dispersion of Eq. 1 can be approximated as: Here, h is the reduced Planck constant, v F = 3γ 0 a/2h ≈ 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity, and k is expressed relatively to the wave vector at the charge-neutrality point. According to Eq. 2, the energy dispersion around the charge-neutrality point is not parabolic, but linear, like the energy dispersion of massless relativistic Dirac fermions in quantum electrodynamics. Therefore, many of the specific properties of Dirac fermions are also valid for charge carries in graphene, with the peculiarity that, in the last case, the electrons move with an effective speed v F which is 300 times slower than the speed of light. The linear energy dispersion of graphene has important consequences on its electronic properties. For example, the density of states of graphene is not independent of the energy level, like in conventional 2D electron gases, but linear according to: where A c = 3 √ 3a 2 /2 is the area of the unit cell. Another consequence is that the presence of a magnetic field B perpendicular to the graphene surface does not lead to equally spaced Landau energy levels, but to relativistic Landau levels at energies E(n) = ±v F 2ehB|n| with n ∈ Z, and an additional level at the charge-neutrality point. Due to the presence of the two non-equivalent sub-lattices in the atomic structure of graphene, the electron wave function near the charge-neutrality point is expressed as a two-component spinor, where each component indicates the relative contribution of each sub-lattice to the electronic state. This introduces an additional degree of freedom named "pseudospin" due to its analogy with the electronic spin. A relevant quantity to characterize the graphene electronic wave functions is their helicity or chirality, defined as the projection of the pseudospin operator along de direction of motion. Electrons and holes in graphene have a positive and negative helicity, respectively, which implies that electrons with wave vector k and holes moving along the -k direction are intricately connected. The well-defined chirality of the charge carriers is an important property because many interesting electronic phenomena in graphene are based on the conservation of this quantity, e.g. Klein tunneling The most "simple" way to obtain graphene is mechanical exfoliation of bulk graphite SAWs are low-frequency acoustic phonons confined to the surface of an unbounded solid where T is the stress tensor and ρ is the density of the medium. If the solid is a piezoelectric material, then the solutions of the elastic equation must also satisfy the constitutive relations: Here, S is the strain tensor, c the elastic stiffness coefficient, ε the dielectric constant, e the piezoelectric coefficient, D the electric displacement field and E = -∇φ SAW is the SAW x z Figure piezoelectric field, which can be expressed in terms of the piezoelectric potential, φ SAW . As the acoustic propagation velocity is about 10 5 times slower than the velocity of light, the values of D and E at each given time can be we well approximated in many cases by their static solutions (quasi-static approximation) Note that, contrary to u, φ SAW also extends into the vacuum side (z < 0), where it decays with the same characteristic length as into the bulk. Among the different kinds of SAWs, Rayleigh modes In piezoelectric materials, SAWs can be electrically generated using an inter-digital transducer (IDT) In addition to SAW generation, the IDT can also convert SAWs back into rfvoltages. Many electronic systems take advantage of this property and use SAW delay lines as filters of rf-signals. A delay line consists of two IDTs with the same grating periodicity, placed in front of each other on a piezoelectric substrate, cf. Figure Some of the issues limiting the efficiency of SAW delay lines, especially at large frequencies, are related to the impact of the IDT metal fingers on SAW generation and propagation It is well known that acoustic vibrations can interact strongly with moving charges present in a piezoelectric semiconductor by means of the strain-induced piezoelectric field From the acoustic point of view, the interaction between SAWs and moving charges results usually in the re-normalization of the SAW velocity and in the attenuation of the SAW intensity as it propagates along the 2DEG. This is because the kinetic energy acquired by the charges via SAW absorption is typically lost due to carrier scattering. According to the classical relaxation theory, the velocity shift, ∆v, and the attenuation coefficient, α, depend on the longitudinal conductivity of the 2DEG, σ xx , as Here, k 2 ef f is the electro-mechanical coupling introduced in Table The effect of μ and B on SAW propagation has been thoroughly studied in e.g. GaAs-based 2DEGs A case of special interest is the interaction of SAWs with an ultra-clean graphene sheet in the absence of an external magnetic field. Under these conditions, the carrier scattering rate is now smaller than v F q, and therefore the SAW observables will also provide information about the relation σ xx (q). Figure Under special conditions, the interaction between SAW and graphene charge carriers can induce not only SAW attenuation, but also SAW amplification. The amplification of ultrasonic waves was first observed in the 60s in systems combining piezoelectric and semiconductor materials condition for graphene-induced SAW amplification was the same as for Schrödinger particles, v d > v SAW . The Dirac characteristics of the graphene carriers became relevant in the colissionless limit 2πl ≫ λ SAW , where the threshold condition went down to just v d > v SAW /2. Surface acoustic waves can also be used to modulate the energy dispersion of graphene electronic excitations. As an example, Dietel et al Another application example of SAW-based superlattices is the coupling of laser light into graphene plasmons. The large mismatch between the wave vector of free-space radiation and that of the plasmons in graphene prevents their generation by optical means. However, such mismatch can be overcome by placing the graphene layer in a diffraction grating. The grating will scatter the incoming light into several diffraction orders with in-plane wave vectors, k m , determined by: Here, ω and c are the light frequency and velocity, respectively, θ is the angle of incidence with respect to the off-normal, λ g is the periodicity of the grating, and m is an integer denoting the diffraction order. Plasmons will be excited in graphene when one of the possible values of k m matches the plasmon wave vector at the corresponding frequency. Schiefele et al In their proposed method, the frequency of the plasmons is tuned to the frequency of the light by controlling the graphene carrier density, while the SAW wavelength determines the range of plasmon wave vectors accessible via diffraction of the light beam by the SAW. The advantage of this method lies in the fact that tunable, SAWinduced gratings can extend over the full area covered by the graphene layer without the need of any complex near-field techniques Here, μ is the carrier mobility, P SAW and v SAW are the SAW power and velocity, respectively, and α is the SAW attenuation ratio discussed in Eq. 9, which can be rewritten as: From these relations, one can deduce that the amplitude of the AE current depends linearly not only on the SAW power, but also on the frequency of the SAW via the wave vector, q = f SAW /v SAW . This dependence has also been confirmed experimentally, cf. inset of Fig. To demonstrate the special dependence of the AE current on the electric conductivity, the graphene carrier density has been modulated by several means, e.g. photoexcitation of electron-hole pairs shows an example of the last case, where a p-doped graphene layer was exposed to different concentrations of nitric acid (NO 2 ) vapor. As mentioned in Sec. 2.2, the NO 2 molecules adsorbed by the graphene lead to the enhancement of its p-doping character and therefore to the increase of its conductivity. As a result, the amplitude of the conventional current induced in graphene increased with NO 2 concentration (red points). The AE current, on the contrary, decreased because σ, which was already larger than σ M before the exposition to the vapor, moved further away from σ M as the gas concentration increased (blue points). When NO 2 was replaced by a donor of electrons like NH 3 , the partial compensation of the graphene p-doping lead to the decrease of σ. As a consequence, the amplitude of the conventional current reduced, while the AE current increased with the concentration of NH 3 , in agreement with σ approaching σ M (not shown here). Remarkably, for low gas concentrations, the relative response changes of the AE current outperformed that of the common drift current In contrast to photoexcitation and chemical doping, which only induced small variations in the graphene conductivity, the modulation of I ae in a broad range of carrier densities has been demonstrated by means of a field-effect technique. To this end, a top gate consisting of a high-capacitance ion-gel dielectric Figure The AE current is also sensitive to additional mechanisms affecting the electronic properties of graphene. For example, it has been reported that the AE current decreased in CVD graphene when cooling the sample from room temperature to that of liquid nitrogen The functionalities discussed in the previous sections have been demonstrated in graphene layers mechanically transferred to the surface of piezoelectric materials. For the future application of such functionalities in graphene-based acousto-electric devices, however, it is desirable to use material combinations that allow for large scale fabrication at relatively low costs. From this point of view, epitaxial graphene (EG) on SiC is a promising candidate because it makes possible the preparation and patterning of largearea graphene layers directly on an insulating substrate. Moreover, the large acoustic velocity of SiC (cf. Table The generation of AE currents in EG on SiC was first reported by Santos et al of ZnO, only M 1 is a surface solution of the elastic equations. In contrast, for ZnO layers approaching d ZnO ≈ λ SAW , at least four SAW overtones can be generated The AE current measured for the M 2 mode is, in general, weaker than for the M 1 mode. This contrasts with the results for the s 11 coefficient, where the largest dip, and therefore the strongest SAW generation efficiency, corresponds to the M 2 mode, c.f. Fig. Figure Recently, Liou et al As mentioned previously, the ZnO can also act as the dielectric material in a top metal gate for the control of the graphene carrier density. This scheme would allow the modulation of the AE current in EG on SiC in a similar way as has already been demonstrated in CVD graphene transferred to a piezoelectric substrate. It must be taken into account, however, that the presence of the metal layer changes the boundary conditions of the coupled acoustic and electric equations, and that this modification can have important consequences in the spatial distribution of the SAW piezoelectric fields. To study this in detail, we have calculated, using the same numerical method as in Fig. Figures In this topical review, we have discussed the state of the art of the interaction between graphene electronic excitations and surface acoustic waves. After an introduction to the special electronic properties of graphene and the main characteristics of SAWs, we have first discussed the effect of the graphene electron gas on the SAW propagation velocity and attenuation. Due to the Dirac nature of the graphene electronic dispersion, lossless propagation of the SAW along graphene close to the charge-neutrality point has been predicted if the momentum of the SAW exceeds that of the graphene charge carriers at the Fermi level. Moreover, by the application of a DC current to the graphene layer, SAW amplification has been observed experimentally when the drift velocity of the graphene charge carriers exceeded the velocity of the SAW. The use of SAWs for the modulation of the graphene electronic properties has also been theoretically investigated. Due to the slow propagation velocity of the SAW with respect to the Fermi velocity of the charge carriers in graphene, the periodic potentials of the SAW have been proposed as superlattices for the modification of the electronic energy dispersion. In addition, it has been predicted that the periodic elastic deformations of SAWs can act as a diffraction grating for the efficient coupling of light to plasmons in graphene. The effect of the interaction between SAWs and graphene that has been most widely studied experimentally until now is the generation of acousto-electric currents. The amplitude of the AE depends linearly on the power and frequency of the SAW but, in contrast to conventional DC currents, the AE current does not increase monotonously with the conductivity of the electron gas: it becomes inversely proportional to the conductivity above a characteristic value that depends on the SAW velocity and on the dielectric properties of the materials surrounding the graphene layer. In addition, the AE current reverses its sign when the graphene carrier polarity changes from electrons to holes. These properties are, in general, well described by the classical relaxation model between SAWs and a 2D electron gas. At low temperatures and SAW frequencies, however, the behavior of the AE current measured in CVD graphene transferred to a piezoelectric substrate differs from the predictions of the relaxation model due to the contribution of defects and charged impurities to the graphene electronic conductivity over the wavelength and frequency probed by the SAW. The interesting functionalities derived from the interaction between SAWs and graphene have mostly been demonstrated in graphene layers transferred to the surface of piezoelectric insulators like LiNbO 3 or LiTaO 3 . SAW-induced acousto-electric currents have also been reported in epitaxial graphene on SiC. This approach is interesting for technological applications due to the availability of large area graphene layers directly on the surface of a semi-insulating wafer. The weak piezoelectricity of SiC, however, makes it necessary to use strong piezoelectric materials for the efficient generation of SAWs and their coupling to the graphene charge carriers. To this end, the coating of graphene on SiC with a piezoelectric ZnO film has allowed the observation of AE currents that are thousand times larger than those induced in non-coated graphene, where the acousto-electric interaction was mediated only by the piezoelectricity of SiC. The demonstration of some of the unique properties of graphene discussed in this topical review require electronic excitations moving ballistically along the graphene layer. In the case of the interaction between graphene and SAWs, this means that the mean-free-path of the graphene charge carriers must exceed the SAW wavelength, which is typically of the order of a few micrometers. Due to the single-layer nature of graphene, its electronic properties are strongly influenced by the materials below and above it, thus drastically diminishing its electron mobility. Until now, the most successful strategy to screen the deleterious influence of the surroundings has been the encapsulation of graphene in hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) films, where mean-freepaths as large as 28 μm have been reported While the realization of encapsulated graphene relies currently on stacked flakes fabricated by transfer techniques Although this topical review has focused on the interaction of SAWs with graphene, it is important to remark that acousto-electric modulation has also been reported in other two-dimensional materials like transition metal dichalcogenides Finally, graphene and other two-dimensional materials have also been incorporated in optical structures like photonic crystal nanocavities and optical modulators 