Numerical modeling of viscoelastic properties is critical to developing the structure-property relationship of polymer nanocomposites. While it is recognized that the altered polymer region near filler particles, the interphase, significantly contributes to enhancements of composite properties, the spatial distribution of interphase properties is rarely considered due to lack of local property measurements. In recent years, the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) technique has begun to make local property measurements of the interphase available. In the light of the increasing availability of AFM data, in this work a new interphase representation for modeling the viscoelastic properties of polymer nanocomposites is proposed. The proposed interphase representation disentangles the interphase behavior by two separate componentssingle-body interphase gradient and multi-body compound effect, whose functional forms are learned via data mining. The proposed interphase representation is integrated into a Finite Element model, and the effects of each component of the interphase representations are numerically studied. In addition, the advantages of the proposed interphase representation are demonstrated by comparison to a prior simulation work in which only a uniform effective property of the interphase is considered. Moreover, the proposed interphase representation is utilized to solve the inverse problem of inferring spatial distribution of local properties using Bayesian Inference on experimental data. Polymer nanocomposites have attracted much attention in materials science due to their superior properties and great potential in engineering applications. Prior studies In addition to attributes offered to the composite by the nano-inclusions themselves, the region of polymer near the particles, termed the interphase, contributes dramatically to the overall material response. Both geometric and chemical constraints at the nanofiller-polymer interface alter the mobility of the local and interconnected polymer chains, resulting in significant changes to the physical properties of this interphase domain In recent years, experimental efforts have been devoted to studying effects of interphases on the bulk properties of polymer nanocomposites. For instance, Seiler et al. Promoted by the developments of modern computational methods, Finite Element (FE) modeling provides an inexpensive alternative to the traditional experimental approaches and micromechanics models. A number of works have utilized FE methods to study the effects of interphase in composites. For instance, Zhu et al. which presents a FE model for predicting the viscoelastic property of polymer blends whose polymer constituents are immiscible and the property distribution is discrete. Our earlier works In recent years, the development of Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) nano-indentation instrumentation has provided a feasible solution to measure the mechanical property of interphase domains in the nanoscale. In Downing et al. By a comparative study with prior simulation work The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, the proposed interphase representations are first defined. We then illustrate how the proposed interphase representation can be implemented in FE modeling of the viscoelastic properties of polymer nanocomposites. In addition, a Bayesian Inference (BI) approach, which is an essential tool for inferring the interphase representation mathematically, is introduced. In Section 3, the explicit functional forms of the interphase representation are identified via data mining, followed by a series of numerical studies to demonstrate the effects of the interphase representations. The advantages of the proposed interphase representation are then studied via a comparative study using BI with the prior interphase modeling work While it is well recognized that the existence of interphase significantly contributes to the bulk viscoelastic properties of polymer nanocomposites, there is not a descriptive interphase representation that takes the spatial distribution of interphase properties into account. This deficiency is primarily because: 1). In early years, local measurements of the polymer properties at 10's of nanometer resolution were not available and thus there was insufficient experimental evidence to support a detailed interphase representation, and 2). The interphase effects on the polymer nanocomposites are a coupled interaction of both spatial property distribution and microstructural dispersions. Therefore, it is difficult to exclude the influence of complex microstructural dispersions and isolate the interphase spatial distribution alone. To address this entanglement, Cheng et al. It is found in Cheng et al. As shown in Figure where E d is the elastic modulus at a distance d from filler surface, F(•) is the functional form of the interphase gradient defined by a set of hyper-parameters Φ, and L 0 is the interphase thickness which is usually determined by some threshold value on the mechanical property enhancement. To identify the functional form of the single-body interphase gradient function for viscoelastic properties, while recent works Therefore, the analogy between the elastic modulus and the magnitude of the complex modulus is utilized in this work to extend the interphase gradient from elasticity as in The functional form of the single-body interphase gradient function F(•) can be expressed as, where E d,f * is the complex modulus of the interphase at a distance d from the filler aggregate, |E d,f * | represents the magnitude of the complex modulus, and |E d,f * | ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ indicates that modulus normalized by the magnitude of the complex modulus of the matrix |E +∞,f * |. In addition, f is the frequency at which the viscoelasticity is measured, and L 0 is the interphase thickness and Φ is a set of hyper-parameters in the functional form of the interphase decay. For the examples in this work, elastic AFM data is used, such that the F determined is independent of frequency and the frequency dependence for |E d,f * | ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ arises solely due to the matrix viscoelastic modulus. However, as reliable viscoelastic AFM data becomes available, the interphase gradient function F can be revised to contain frequency dependencies explicitly as indicated in Eqn. (2). In defining the single-body interphase gradient, it is prescribed that only the interphase created by one single aggregate is considered. While it seems that this definition could quantify the experimental findings in To examine the influences of the proposed interphase representation functions (i.e. singlebody interphase gradient and multi-body compound effect), a pixelated viscoelastic 2D plain strain model is developed. Different from our prior work where L is the length of the square edge, u(i, j) is the displacement at location (i, j), and U 1 and U 2 depend on the particular loading applied on the cell. In prior numerical simulations for polymer nanocomposites For polymer nanocomposites, techniques such as DMA for acquiring the bulk viscoelastic properties are comparatively mature and inexpensive while probing the local viscoelastic properties within the interphase using AFM is still under development, time consuming and relatively rare. Therefore, in this work, we apply a Bayesian Inference based approach Gaussian Process metamodeling establishes a surrogate model that quantifies the statistical mean and uncertainties in the unexplored region. By considering the mean estimation and the uncertainties, the next candidate point X t+1 that could potentially improve the performance would be identified based on the current dataset (X 0:t , y 0:t ). In proposing the next candidate point, several criteria have been used. For instance, Utilizing the ideas and the related techniques presented in the prior section, the detailed analysis for identifying the functional forms of interphase gradients is demonstrated in this section. Specifically, the functional forms with unknown parameter set (Φ, Ω) of the interphase gradients are firstly explored via data mining on AFM data (Section 3.1). Then the correspondence between the interphase gradient and shifting factors in the frequency domain for viscoelasticity is illustrated in Section 3.2 to demonstrate how the proposed interphase gradient is implemented into Finite Element modeling. Lastly, Section 3.3 presents the numerical analysis of the impacts of (Φ, Ω) parameters (Section 3.3.1 and Section 3.3.2), as well as the numerical validations using Bayesian Inference by taking the prior uniform interphase model (Section 3.3.3) and an experimental data (Section 3.3.4) as optimization objectives. Experimental data on model samples provides clear, quantitative data on interphase gradients near surfaces Zhang et al. where E d ̅̅̅ is the normalized modulus, α′ and β′ are hyper-parameters and d is the distance from filler surface. The fits of the data are illustrated in Fig. where |E d,f * | ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ is the normalized magnitude of the complex modulus at distance d from the filler under frequency f, and |E +∞,f * | is the magnitude of complex modulus of polymer matrix. It is also noted that in this extension from elasticity to viscoelasticity, it is assumed that the frequency dependence of the interphase property E d,f * is identical to that of the matrix property E +∞,f * . This functional form explicitly specifies the hyper-parameters defined in Eqn. 2 by Φ = (α, β). It should be noted that, while both Eqns. 7 and 8 are exponential, the hyper-parameters (α, β) and (α ′ , β ′ ) are not necessarily identical. In a later section (3.2) we will utilize the concept of relaxation time shift factors (Section 2.2.2) to relate the complex modulus parameters obtained from the elastic experiments to corresponding changes in the full viscoelastic properties of the material. The compound effect describes the phenomenon that when two filler aggregates are close to each other, their interphases could interact providing additional enhancement of the property of the interphase area between the aggregates. The work by Zhang et al. As per To implement the FE simulations of the composite properties using a gradient interphase concept, we must determine the shifting factor at each location of the polymer material. This shifting factor at any location in the interphase is determined by: 1) identifying the number of aggregates n that may affect this location by specifying a sufficiently large cut-off distance. 2). For In the prior sections, the proposed interphase representation is first presented, followed by a data-driven exploration of the mathematical forms of the representations. In this section, we first explore the parametric influences of the hyper-parameters in the proposed interphase representations. After that, we study the equivalent spatial distributions of the interphase representations for a prior numerical model with uniform interphase assumption, by applying a Bayesian Inference method. Last, the proposed interphase representation is applied to describe the spatial distribution of interphase property of an experimental sample of polymer composite. The effects of single-body interphase gradient are first investigated. Using the circle packing algorithm in 8 in the single-body interphase gradient are altered individually and the comparisons between the simulated viscoelastic properties by altering α and β are shown in Fig. The contour plots of shift factor magnitude demonstrate that increasing the value of α only affects the property of the interphase regions closely surrounding the filler aggregate, and thus causing only small differences from the bulk composite property. In contrast, varying the β value can substantially extend the interphase region (Fig. With the effects of single-body interphase gradient as a baseline, the influence of multibody interphase compound effect is also investigated. In this numerical study, a moderately loaded microstructure (Fig. In our prior work In these simulations, 100Hz is used as the reference frequency f in Eqn. 8 and Eqn. 11 for estimating the shifting factor for each location in the interphase. In addition, the cut-off distance for considering the impact from a filler is again set as 100 pixels (~480nm) and the ranges for the hyper-parameters are specified as α ∈ [4, 6.5], β ∈ [0.06, 0.1], η ∈ [0.8, 1,2] and ξ ∈ [-0.5, 0.5] and the objective function is set as, ε = ∑ [tan (δ) uniform -tan(δ) gradient ] 2 f=f i m i=1 Then the values of (Φ, Ω) that minimize ε are identified using the Bayesian Inference approach for 50 iterations, as illustrated in Section 2.4. The Bayesian Inference approach is capable of exploring the optimal solution efficiently and reducing the number of FE simulations (Fig. Eqn. 8 and the criteria of interphase thickness determination (105% of the matrix property) describe in Section 2.2, the interphase thickness in the proposed model is obtained as 54.84 pixels. The total interphase thickness in the gradient interphase case is larger than that of the uniform interphase model because single-body interphase gradient drops exponentially as the distance increases, naturally extending its domain. In Section 3.3.3, the prior uniform interphase modeling approach is utilized to produce a virtual objective of the material viscoelastic property, and the equivalent gradient interphase representation is learned via Bayesian Inference. In this section we demonstrate the descriptive capability of the proposed interphase representation by directly utilizing experimental data for a composite in In this demonstration, the microstructure of the composite (Fig. Different properties could perform slightly differently in reflecting the interphase thickness. 2) Numerical error introduced by coarsened meshing: in our FE model, the original microstructure which has a resolution of 700x700 pixels is coarsened to a voxelated meshing (200x200) for computational efficiency, and this coarsening process may introduce numerical errors. It should be also noted that while the functional form of the compound effect is learned based on the experimental data with two overlapped interphases (Section 3.1.2), our method can handle the interaction between interphases produced by multiple particle aggregates. Figure While this work presents the complete process of utilizing AFM experimental measurements of local interphase properties in inferring spatial distribution of interphase via Finite Element modeling, several potential directions could be pursued to further extend this work. First, in this work, the mathematical form of compound effect is learned from the AFM experimental data in which only two filler substrates are included, and the generalization of the compound effect for multiple (n>2) interphase interaction is not rigorously validated. AFM model composites with a great variance of complex geometries, if available, would reveal the impacts of microstructural descriptors for multiple interphase cases, and they would potentially lead to a more precise functional form of the compound effect. Then this sophisticated interphase representations could be utilized to predict the properties of given composites in addition to the inference of interphase properties presented in this work. Second, while the discussion in this work is limited to modeling the viscoelastic property of polymer nanocomposites, similar interphase representation could also be developed in the similar manner for other material properties of interest (e.g. dielectric property if local dielectric property within interphase is available). Lastly, the proposed interphase representation could be implemented in 3D FE modeling. This work is supported by Center of Hierarchical Materials Design (NIST CHiMad 70NANB14H012), NSF-DMREF (NSF Award 1818574, 1729743, 1729452) and NSF-DIBBS (NSF Award 1640840, A12761, 1640840). the AFM sample. In contrast, G(•) is the mathematical function of compound effect that is not observable from experiments and is not distance dependent. would result in different compound properties. 2). The functional form should be monotonically decreasing with respect to distances d i from aggregates. 3). The inclusion of the single-body interphase gradient E d i ̅̅̅̅ created by aggregate #i should lead to the enhancement of compound property. Mathematically, this latter constraint is expressed as, G(|E d 1 ̅̅̅̅̅ |, |E d 2 ̅̅̅̅̅ |) < G(|E d 1 ̅̅̅̅̅ |, |E d 2 ̅̅̅̅̅ |, |E d 3 ̅̅̅̅̅ |) < G(|E d 1 ̅̅̅̅̅ |, |E d 2 ̅̅̅̅̅ |, ... , |E d n ̅̅̅̅̅ |) (8) * ̅̅̅̅̅ | = G(|E d 1 ,f * ̅̅̅̅̅̅ |, |E d 2 ,f * ̅̅̅̅̅̅ |, ... , |E d n ,f * ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ |; Ω)(2)where |E x,f * ̅̅̅̅̅ | is the normalized magnitude of the complex modulus at location x, f is the frequency at which the viscoelasticity is measured, d i (i = 1,2, ... , n) represents the nearest distances from location x to the nearby filler aggregate #i, n is determined by a user-specified, sufficiently large cut-off distance, and Ω is a set of hyper-parameters in the functional form of the compound effect.