Ultrathin aluminum nitride (AlN) films are of great interest for integration into nanoelectromechanical systems for actuation and sensing. Given the direct relationship between crystallographic texture and piezoelectric response, x-ray diffraction has become an important metrology step. However, signals from layers deposited below the piezoelectric (PZE) AlN thin film may skew the crystallographic analysis and give misleading results. In this work, we compare the use of a Ti or AlN seed layer on the crystallographic quality of PZE AlN. We also analyze the influence of several AlN seed layer thicknesses on the rocking curve FWHM of PZE AlN and demonstrate an larger effect of the AlN seed layer on the θ-2θ AlN <0002> crystallographic peak for increasing AlN seed layer thickness. Micro/nanoelectromechanical systems (M/NEMS) have been an area of intense research in the past decades due to their high sensitivity, low fabrication cost, and fast response as well as availability of measurement modes and wide spectrum of measurable phenomena However, miniaturization comes at the cost of greater difficulty in fabrication and integration. To effectively actuate and detect the motion of M/NEMS, piezoelectricity has become highly utilized due to its low power consumption, scalability Several piezoelectric materials have been explored for integration in M/NEMS, including lead zirconium titanate (PZT) To optimize the piezoelectric transduction efficiency in flexural resonators, it is widely known that one should use as thin as possible piezoelectric layer still keeping a large-enough breakdown voltage In order to use AlN to actuate and detect the motion of M/NEMS, AlN must be sandwiched by metal electrodes. The most typically used are aluminum (Al), due to its low density, molybdenum (Mo), due to its high acoustic velocity, and platinum (Pt), since it has been shown that Pt gives the best growth conditions for highly textured AlN thin films AlN has been utilized in a number of works with piezoelectriclayer thicknesses of or below 100nm In this work, we investigate the effect of a seed layer on the crystalline and piezoelectric properties of the piezoelectric layer of AlN (from now on the "PZE layer") that is sandwiched between Pt electrodes. We first compare Ti versus AlN as a seed layer in the growth of highly textured AlN thin films through x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. After, PZE layers grown on top of various AlN seed layer thicknesses are prepared. Through characterization of the crystallinity and piezoelectric response, an apparent loss of crystallographic quality is revealed despite a slightly improved piezoelectric response compared to state of the art. This apparent contradiction (with reported values) is explained by demonstrating that the XRD measurements are a convolution of two peaks, one from the AlN seed layer and one from the PZE layer, which leads to a broadening of the rocking curve full width half maximum (FWHM). All thin film depositions are attained with a DC magnetron sputtering tool (Pfeiffer Spider 600) on 380 μm thick <100> silicon wafers with 1 um wet SiO2. In order to clean any possible residues residing on the substrates, a radio frequency (RF) etch step of 15 seconds is performed within the tool directly before deposition of the thin films. For the comparison of Ti versus AlN as a seed layer, a full stack of four thin films is deposited, consisting of the seed layer (15 nm of Ti or AlN), 25 nm of Pt as a bottom electrode, 50 nm of AlN for the PZE layer and 25 nm of Pt as the top electrode. To measure the influence of the AlN seed layer thickness, substrates are prepared with only AlN seed layers of various thicknesses (15-100 nm) and compared to substrates with full stacks and the same seed layer thicknesses. All AlN depositions are done with a 99.9995% Al target at a chamber temperature of 350°C. Base pressure of the sputtering chamber during deposition is 2x10 -3 mbar. Gas flows introduced during sputtering are 10 sccm of Ar and 40 sccm of N2. A XRD system (D8 Discover, Bruker, Germany) with a resolution of 0.001° is used to take θ-2θ scans over a large range, including the Si <400> peak and the <0002> AlN peak, the later also being characterized by rocking curves. The piezoelectric quality of the films are characterized with a double laser interferometric setup, described elsewhere The fabrication process for the test devices used in the piezoelectric response measurements is shown in Figure We first measure θ-2θ and rocking curves on full stacks with either a Ti or AlN seed layer. The FWHM of the rocking curves are calculated through a Gaussian fitting: a Ti seed layer provides a full stack rocking curve FWHM of approximately 2.6°, while a FWHM of 2.0° is found when using an AlN seed layer of the same thickness, i.e. 15 nm. Based on work by F. Martin et al. To study the influence of the AlN seed layer thickness on the piezoelectric quality of the PZE layer, four different AlN seed layer thicknesses (15, 25, 50 and 100 nm) are deposited on different wafers and compared to deposited full stacks with the same respective seed layer thicknesses. The FWHM of the rocking curves measured for both the seed layers and full stacks are shown in Figure The discrepancy between XRD measurements and piezoelectric response can be explained by taking into account that the XRD measurement of the overall stack returns signals not only from the PZE layer, but also the AlN seed layer, due to the fact that the X-rays penetrate and interact with both layers. Therefore, a Gaussian analysis in MATLAB ® is completed on the θ-2θ data of both the seed layer only and full stack samples to determine the contribution of both layers to the full stack <0002> crystallographic peak. First, a 1-term Gaussian with a linear background subtraction is fitted to the AlN seed layer θ-2θ <0002> crystallographic peak to find the peak center ( ) and its standard deviation ( ). These values are then applied to a 2-term Gaussian with a linear background that is fitted to the full stack <0002> peak, which is shown in Eq (1): Where the first exponential term corresponds to the AlN seed layer, the second to the PZE layer and C1 and C2 correspond to a linear background. As discussed above, variables and were calculated through Gaussian fittings of the AlN seed layer-only samples and applied in Eq. ( In this paper, we report on studies of AlN as an alternative seed layer to Ti for enhanced growth of AlN thin films. First, the influence of Ti and AlN on the crystallinity of AlN PZE layers is measured, demonstrating that AlN is a suitable or better alternative to Ti. Then, AlN PZE layers were grown in a full stack with four AlN seed layer thicknesses. While piezoelectric response measurements are comparable to state of the art, rocking curve measurements demonstrate an influence of the AlN seed layer on the full stack results. This discrepancy between rocking curve FWHM and piezoelectric response lead to a Gaussian analysis of θ-2θ curves of AlN seed and full stack samples with the same seed layer thickness. It is demonstrated that if the AlN seed layer thickness is close or larger than the PZE layer thickness, its contribution to the measured <0002> crystallographic peak of AlN can increase, enlarging the measured full stack peak. However, piezoelectric response is not influenced by AlN seed layer thickness. Therefore, if rocking curve analysis is used to validate AlN thin films grown on a AlN seed layer, either the ratio of AlN seed/PZE layer thickness must be low or the analysis must be assumed to be skewed towards worse results than in reality. J. Hernando, J.L. Sánchez-Rojas, S. González-Castilla, E. Iborra, A. Ababneh, and U. Schmid, J. Appl. Phys. 104,1 (2008).