We investigate the specific influence of structural disorder on the suppression of antiferromagnetic order and on the emergence of cuprate superconductivity. We single out pure disorder, by focusing on a series of YzEu1-zBa2Cu3O6+y samples at fixed oxygen content y = 0.35, in the range 0 ≤ z ≤ 1. The gradual Y/Eu isovalent substitution smoothly drives the system through the Mott-insulator to superconductor transition from a full antiferromagnet with Néel transition TN = 320 K at z = 0 to a bulk superconductor with superconducting critical temperature Tc = 18 K at z = 1, YBa2Cu3-O6.35. The electronic properties are finely tuned by gradual lattice deformations induced by the different cationic radii of the two lanthanides, inducing a continuous change of the basal Cu(1)-O chain length, as well as a controlled amount of disorder in the active Cu(2)O2 bilayers. We check that internal charge transfer from the basal to the active plane is entirely responsible for the doping of the latter and we show that superconductivity emerges with orthorhombicity. By comparing transition temperatures with those of the isoelectronic clean system we determine the influence of pure structural disorder connected with the Y/Eu alloy. Disorder has an important role in the physics of cuprates, since it induces nucleation of the Anderson localization transition from the non-Fermi-liquid superconductor phase to the antiferromagnetic (AF) ordered charge transfer insulator phase. Very strong coupling has been directly investigated by means of Cu substitutional impurities, often employed also directly as a probe. Theoretically, disorder was addressed explicitly by Alvarez et al. The connection between doping and disorder is drastically altered in Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+y at constant oxygen content y, where Y 3+ is randomly replaced by the isovalent Eu 3+ cation with a larger radius. The stronger quenched disorder due to nearest neighbor heterovalent cations is absent, leaving only a residual, weakest quenched disorder. However, the distinct cationic radii of Y (101.9 pm) and Eu (106.6 pm) The strong influence of the Y/Eu steric hindrance on electronic properties was convincingly attributed by nu-arXiv:1811.04668v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 10 Mar 2019 clear quadrupole resonance (NQR) studies Here, choosing y = 0.35, we show by susceptibility and muon spin spectroscopy (μSR) measurements that Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.35 spans the whole phase diagram, from a nearly optimal AF Néel state (with T N = 320(15) K, k = (1, 1, 0) and staggered spin basis along c in the bilayer) to a bulk underdoped superconductor with T c = 20(2) K. This means that the electronic properties of the planes are very effectively modulated from those of a charge transfer insulator, across the metal insulator transition, by a mere structural distortion, without altering the total charge count. We show that the plane hole doping is determined by internal charge transfer, modulated by the Cu(1)O y chain fragment length. Although the isoelectronic cation substitution has no influence on the total charge count, it introduces a form of quenched disorder, absent in the end members, z = 0 and z = 1, and maximal for z = 0.5. We take advantage of the remarkably wide modulation of electronic properties brought about by the Y/Eu substitution to highlight the net effect of the well characterized quenched disorder on the native clean limit cuprate. By carefully calibrating the active layer hole content by several independent experiments, based on the Seebeck effect, The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. I we describe the Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.35 sample preparation, their XRD resistivity and Seebeck characterization which provides the hole count in the z = 1 compound; Sec. II reports DFT calculations and their main conclusions; susceptibility and μSR measurements are presented in Sec. III, with the description of strongly-underdoped Y-Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+y hole count from μSR data; Sec. IV reports our NQR measurements, providing a determination of the average chain length, (z), and draws our conclusions on an absolute calibration of the hole count vs. z; Sec. V contains the main results, the phase diagram for Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+y , quantifying the reduction in the ordering temperatures by structural disorder. A series of Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.35 polycrystalline samples with increasing Yttrium content z = 0.0, 0.15, 0.23, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0 was prepared by the standard solid state reaction technique. The final oxygen content of the samples, y = 0.35 (2), was achieved following a topotactic-like low temperature annealing Synchrotron X-ray diffraction data were collected for the samples with z = 0.20, 0.40, 0.85, 1 on the ID15 beamline at the ESRF in Grenoble (France) by a Perkin-Elmer 2D CCD detector. The incident beam wavelength was set to 0.1423 Å and the 2D images with 0.0083 degree per pixel were integrated by using the FIT2D software We collected powder X-ray diffraction data for all the samples presented in this work. The evolution of a selected range of the diffraction patterns is reported in Fig. Figure In order to discuss the influence of quenched disorder on the electronic properties of our Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.35 samples two key parameters are required: the carrier number h per formula unit, per active Cu(2)O 2 layer, and an appropriate quantification of the degree of disorder. Let us start from the hole carrier number. Stoichiometry imposes that extra holes exist, transferred from core charges of nominal valence cations to other bands, mostly in the plane or in the chain layer. In YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y band calculations Resistivity ρ(T ) measurements, performed by the standard four point technique on 2x2x14 mm 3 sintered specimens are shown in Fig. In order to determine the z dependent additional contribution to mobile holes from the buffer layer we set up a formula unit calculation, that ignores band details, distinguishing only between h, and the remaining holes nominally assigned to the buffer layer. We assume a linear relation between Y content z and the average Cu(1) ion charge 1 + λ 0 + λ 1 z, to yield At fixed y this linear relation may by understood in terms of a transfer function proportional to the distortion introduced by the larger cation, linear in z according to the XRD data of Fig. For y = 0.35 we rely on the Seebeck calibration of the z = 1 end member, h 1 = 0.0700 (25), to constrain Eq. 1, obtaining λ 0 = 0.56. Another calibration is required in the AF region and it is provided by the μSR data of Sec. III, and discussed in Sec. IV B. Let us finally quantify quenched disorder. The agreement of the XRD data with the Vegard law indicates ideal randomness of the Y/Eu sublattice. The probability that a site is occupied by Eu is z, hence in a Poisson distribution its variance, σ 2 = z(1 -z), provides an ideal case measure of quenched cation disorder. To clarify the relation between crystal structure, local structure and electronic properties, we conducted a density-functional theory (DFT) investigation of four selected Y-Eu ratios at the oxygen composition y = 0.325 1/3 that best approximates the experimental conditions. (We use the VASP code The calculations reproduce several experimental features, notably the evolution of crystal structure and or- dering with composition, the approximate location of the structural phase transition, an the hole content in the Cu planes. Figure We now make contact with the expectation that magnetism should disappear (albeit progressively, and not entirely) across the superconducting transition at z c ∼ 0.5, with the antiferromagnetic (AF) ordered and insulating state giving way to a metallic, zero-moment state. The intra-plane and inter-plane first-neighbor Cu-Cu magnetic couplings vs. Y concentration, extracted from the energies of various magnetic states (ferromagnetic, AF-G, AF-A) of the Cu sublattice, are shown in Fig. Susceptibility was determined by measuring the sample magnetization in a field of H = 0.2 mT in a MPMS system by Quantum Design Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID). Figure Here we describe the μSR results and their consequences on hole calibration. In a Zero Field (ZF) μSR experiment on powders the onset of antiferromagnetic order is directly detected from the appearance of a spontaneous local magnetic field B i at each inequivalent the muon site i, yielding a detectable muon spin precession oscillation pattern in the measured muon asymmetry. Muons bind to oxygen in two distinct sites, i = 1, 2 , chain-oxygen and apical-oxygen sites. )/2 measures the magnetic volume fraction (Fig. The intermediate temperature in each panel of Fig. Figure Therefore SQUID susceptometry and μSR provide clear evidence that indeed Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.35 spans a wide portion of the typical cuprate phase diagram, displaying a clear deviation from the carefully characterized behavior where B F = 30 mT is the value of the local field at muon site 1 for T → 0 and h = 0 (i.e. in the parent compound), exponents values are α ≈ 0.3, β ∼ 0.15-0.2, and fixed the critical hole number is h c = 0.056(2), in agreement with the direct determination from T N (h). In this model T A is a crossover temperature between a high temperature (T T A ) thermally activated regime, with plane mobile holes h, and a low temperature frozen regime (T T A ), clearly visible as an upturn Our model mimics the effect of the thermal excitations of the charge doped 2D Heisenberg quantum square antiferromagnet (2DHQSAF) Plane hole number may be thus determined from the known with T N 0 = 422(5) K and h c = 0.056 (2). The best fit of the z = 0 sample data, Fig. Let us finally recall that the superconducting transition temperatures of the clean limit YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y are related IV. In YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y the hole carrier number h depends on both y and sample preparation conditions. Reproducible values are obtained after very long annealing slightly above room temperature. The NQR resonance frequency of Cu, proportional to the electric field gradient at the nucleus, is characteristic of each inequivalent copper site in the lattice and very sensitive to nearest-neighbor (nn) oxygen configuration. Important nn configurations are Cu(1)-2 and Cu(1)-3, shown in the bottom inset of Fig. B. Plane hole number calibration. In Sec. I B we assumed a linear relation, Eq. 1, between plane hole number h per Cu(2)O 2 square cell and the Eu content z. We wish now to discuss the basis of this assumption. Figure The hole transfer mechanism from the basal layer onto the Cu(2)O 2 planes requires the oxidation of Cu(1) from Cu 1+ to Cu 2+ , but it becomes active only above a minimal chain length m ≈ 2, Recalling that the Y z Eu 1-z Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.35 series displays a linear dependence on z for both the cell volume and the average lattice parameters, Fig. It is remarkable that, although the substitution parameter z does not directly introduce a chemical doping, the phase diagram reproduces qualitatively the universal HTC cuprate behavior. A similar equivalence of chemical doping and structural distortion is well known in iron pnictides and selenides The influence of disorder is shown by the deviations from the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y nearly clean-limit case, that is represented by the continuous orange and dashed white lines in Fig. We start by noticing that in cuprates values of h of just few percent are sufficient to suppress T N . This dramatic hole doping effect, much more effective than moment suppression by dilution Point ii) confirms the progressive opening of a spin glass gap in the weak disorder regime, already observed for strong disorder in Y 1-x Ca x Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+y . The onset spin glass temperatures T f of the 0.6 ≤ z ≤ 1.0 samples fall on a straight T A (h) line from the clean z = 0 value of T A , exactly like in Ref. 7 and 17. The normalized suppression of T N and T A , defined as ∆t N,A = 1-T N,A (h, z)/T N,A (h, 0) are shown in Fig. Let us finally consider point iii), the shift of the onset concentration for superconductivity under increased quenched disorder. It is small, but outside errorbars and surprisingly negative: disorder seems to favour superconductivity. It is tempting to argue that the suppression of the 2DHQSAF provides an increased spin density of state involved in the superconducting pairing, but in Y 1-x Ca x -Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+y the same shift was comparable and positive, seemingly in contradiction with this argument. A tentative explanation is to consider that the onset of superconductivity actually coincides, within the accuracy of the present study, with the T-O transition as it does in pure YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y . The locking of the T c onset and the structural transition emphasizes the role of nematic susceptibility 48 in unconventional superconductivity.