Photovoltaic (PV) cells have become one of the most promising renewable energy technologies. To make PV more competitive with incumbent technologies, higher power output densities are needed. One promising approach is to add bifaciality to existing monofacial PV devices, allowing more output power from the additional reflection of sunlight from the ground (albedo α). For example, bifaciality can be added to Silicon Heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell with Interdigitated Back Contacts (IBC) by opening up the gaps between the back metal contacts, but the optimum gap (w) that maximizes power output is unknown. In this paper we show that that the optimum gap where c is the ratio of output power density to power loss due to shadowing and Joule heating, The results are validated by self-consistent finite-element device modeling. For a typical α = 0.3, an optimized bifacial IBC SHJ cell will produce 17% more power output than state-of-the-art monofacial IBC SHJ cells. The results encourage development of bifacial IBC solar cells as a next generation PV technology. The energy output of a solar cell depends on both the solar irradiance absorbed via the photovoltaic effect, as well as its efficiency in converting photo-generated carriers into electricity. Traditional monofacial cells accept light only from the front surface; therefore, reflection from index mismatch and/or a front-contact metallic grid reduces light coupling into cells. Texturing the front surface and/or including an anti-reflection coating addresses the challenge of index mismatch, while interdigitated back-contact cells (IBC) move both n-and p-type contacts to the back to minimize front-grid light reflection. This improved light coupling allows IBC cells to achieve particularly high power output under typical illumination. By inserting high bandgap (Eg) material between absorber and highly recombination active metal contacts, Silicon heterojunction solar cells (SHJ) A new solar cell architecture, called bifacial PV, has recently emerged as a promising technological pathway to higher output yields and lower costs In this letter, we address the fundamental question of bifacial gain of an IBC SHJ cell with sophisticated numerical modeling plus a simple analytical formula capturing the essential physics, which agree closely. We show that IBC SHJ cells benefit from bifacial operation provided that: (a) the albedo exceeds a critical intensity, and (b) the gaps between the metal fingers are optimized. To tackle the back contact design of bifacial IBC SHJ cell, we begin by specifying the details of the device structure. As a reference, we consider a high-efficiency monofacial IBC SHJ cell reported by Yoshikawa et al. The spacing (gap) between Al metal grids (W g ) is the key variable controlling efficiencies, see Fig. ( Here, the idealized intrinsic power-output (P ideal ) of the IBC SHJ cell is reduced by the counterbalancing resistive and shadowing losses defined by the normalized gap width: w = W g W P ⁄ . Our goal in this paper will be to calculate the normalized gap width w opt that maximizes P out (w, α). Light absorption in a bifacial IBC SHJ cell involves a complex interplay of absorption in the bulk and multiple reflection by the randomly textured surface. Light absorption in a bifacial IBC SHJ cell is calculated first to determine the spatial profile of photo-generated carriers. With texturing on both sides of the cell, ray-tracing calculation may involve complicated 3D simulations Based on the spatially-resolved light absorption profile, the transport of the photo-generated electrons and holes are solved in a 2D coupled Poisson-drift-diffusion solver Sentaurus TCAD where ρ is the Al resistivity. This extrinsic series resistance associated with Al back-contact is added to the 2D Sentaurus device model as an external series resistance. Our simulation framework is validated by benchmarking against experimental results of a state-of-the-art monofacial IBC SHJ cell Our simulation framework can now be used to optimize the design of the bifacial IBC SHJ cell shown in Fig. By definition where J SC is the short circuit current; V OC is the open circuit voltage; and FF is the fill factor. These four key metrics (V OC , J SC , FF and P OUT ) for assessing solar cell performance are plotted as a function of w in Fig. in which P OUT,mono is the standard output power of a monofacial IBC SHJ solar cell; J MP,mono is the operating current of monofacial IBC SHJ cell at maximum power point; and ρ c is the contact resistivity between Al grids and heavily doped regions. To find the normalized gap width w that maximizes P OUT , we set = 0; the result for w opt is given by: where c captures the ratio of the output power density for the monofacial IBC SHJ cell to the total resistive power loss density. Typically, this should greatly exceed unity in a cell. At α = 0.3, the analytic solution is benchmarked against simulation results. Strong agreement is observed in Fig. The optimum power scales linearly with albedo (i.e. 1 + α), although the geometric mean of albedo and the relative loss coefficient (i.e., √α/c) suppresses some optical gain. The generalized analytic expression allows one to simply estimate the optimum w and resulting benefit of a bifacial cell over a monofacial cell in the best case. Interestingly, Eq. ( . Recall that for high quality solar cells, resistive power loss is a small fraction of the total power output, therefore c is much greater than 2 and α c turns out to be very close to zero. For this specific numerical example, w opt = 0 is reached when α c ≤ 0.01. In summary, we have explored the optimization of back contacted design for bifacial IBC SHJ solar cell which theoretically outperforms the fast growing PERC technique as a pathway towards low cost of PV technologies. By incorporating a realistic series resistance model that reflects both extrinsic and intrinsic resistive losses into our well-calibrated 2D electro-optically coupled device simulation framework, we have identified the w opt between Al back contacts for bifacial IBC SHJ solar cell under various α. For a practical α of 0.3, we find that a bifacial IBC SHJ cell outperforms monofacial IBC SHJ cell by 4.5 mW/cm 2 in the best case. Furthermore, a generalized analytical expression addressing the balance of resistive loss and optical loss of shadowing was also derived, which shows that bifacial IBC solar cells offer a significant advantage in power production across a broad range of albedos and materials. As a result, this study may serve as a general guideline for the design and optimization of future bifacial IBC SHJ solar cells. 