Effective thermal management and high thermal conductivity mechanisms are becoming more and more crucial in today's more demanding electronic circuits. Ever since the high thermal conductivity in cubic boron arsenide (c-BAs) was predicted theoretically by Lindsay et. al in 2013, countless studies have zeroed in on this particular material. Most recently, c-BAs has been confirmed experimentally to have a thermal conductivity of around 1,100 W/m-K. In this study, we investigate the seldom studied two dimensional hexagonal form of boron arsenide (h-BAs) using a first-principles approach and by solving the Boltzmann Transport Equation for phonons. Traditionally, a good indicator of a high thermal conductivity material is its high Debye temperature and high phonon group velocity. However, we determine h-BAs to have a much lower Debye temperature and average phonon group velocity compared to the other monolayer boron-V compounds of boron nitride (h-BN) and boron phosphide (h-BP), yet curiously it possesses a higher thermal conductivity. Further investigation reveals that this is due to the phonon frequency gap caused by large mass imbalances, which results in a restricted Umklapp phonon-phonon scattering channel and consequently a higher thermal conductivity. We determine the intrinsic lattice thermal conductivity of monolayer h-BAs to be 362.62 W/m-K at room temperature, which is considerably higher compared to the other monolayer boron-V compounds of h-BN (231.96 W/m-K), h-BP (187.11 W/m-K), and h-BSb (87.15 W/m-K). This study opens the door for investigation into a new class of monolayer structures and the properties they possess. As the demand for electric power increases in today's more advanced electronics, the demand for electronics cooling and therefore materials with high thermal conductivity, κ, increases as well. Two-dimensional materials are gaining momentum for these applications because of their capability to be implemented in a wide range of next-generation electronic devices. Graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice, has been confirmed to have an ultrahigh κ that is able to outperform bulk thermal conductors like its expensive and rare cousins of graphite and diamond In 1973, Slack pinpointed four properties of high thermal conductivity non-metallic crystals, where thermal transport is dominated by phonons: (I) the material must have a low average atomic mass, (II) the material must have strong interatomic bonding, (III) the material must have a simple crystal structure, and (IV) the material must have low anharmonicity. We follow a well-known approach using combina-arXiv:1811.05597v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 14 Nov 2018 tions of Density Functional Theory, frozen phonon calculations, and phonon Boltzmann Transport theory to arrive at our final κ values for the four monolayer honeycomb compounds of boron nitride, boron phosphide, boron arsenide, and boron antimonide. In Section II, we detail these computational methods. In Section III, our results and discussion are displayed. Finally, in Section IV we conclude our project and discuss future research. All first-principles calculations are performed based on the Density Functional Theory (DFT) implemented using the ABINIT 41 code. We utilize the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) In order to calculate forces, supercells are generated using Eq. 1, where α and β represent Cartesian indices, j and j ' represent indices of atoms in the unit cell (before and after displacement, respectively), l and l ' are indices of the unit cell (before and after displacement, respectively), ∆r α (jl) is the finite displacement, and F β (j l ; ∆r α (jl) are the forces on atoms. 4 × 4 × 1 and 3 × 3 × 1 supercell sizes are chosen for second and third order displacements, respectively. For both sets of calculations, a 4 × 4 × 1 k-mesh is used. Phonon dispersion and group velocities are obtained from harmonic second order supercells. The intrinsic lattice thermal conductivity is calculated within the Phono3py 47 package based on anharmonic force constants inputted into the Boltzmann Transport Equation (BTE) for phonons. We employ the single-mode relaxation time approximation (RTA) to solve the BTE and to obtain the κ tensor, where V 0 is the unit cell volume, λ describes phonon mode, C λ is the mode-dependent specific heat capacity, v λ is the modal group velocity, and τ λ is phonon relaxation time at phonon mode λ. In this section, we report our results on various different phonon and thermal transport properties and analyze the underlying causes of their behavior. We first analyze the lattice dynamics properties, such as phonon dispersions, Debye temperature, and group velocities. These quantities reflect the results obtained from analysis of harmonic interatomic force constants. Then, we delve deeper into comparing our κ results and offer many comparisons from other materials. All materials tested in our study follow the same planar honeycomb structure as seen in Fig. Analysis of the partial density of states (PDOS) is also important to understand contributions to thermal conductivity. In all four dispersions, it can be seen that the boron atom contributes the most to optical modes, and the group V atoms contribute the most to acoustic modes. Consequently, the group V atoms thus have more contribution to thermal transport and their atomic masses play a large role in restricting thermal conductivity. In Table where is Planck's constant, ω D is the Debye frequency (the highest frequency of normal mode vibration), and k B is Boltzmann's constant. Phonon group velocities play an important role in determining the final thermal conductivity of materials. Not only do they offer insight on how much each phonon mode contributions to κ, but correlates directly to κ by kinetic theory analysis: where C v is specific heat, c is phonon group velocity, and l is the phonon mean free path. where ω is the phonon mode frequency and q is the wave vector. Thus we can infer that larger frequency ranges within acoustic phonon branches in the dispersions will correspond to steeper slopes, and, consequently higher modal group velocities. The slope of acoustic branches near the Γ wave vector signifies the material's sound velocity. From the graphs, the sound velocities are determined and displayed in Table After understanding the impact of phonon dispersions and group velocities, we look deeper into our final results. Fig. The calculated thermal conductivity of our basis material of monolayer h-BN differs drastically from the inaugural study that reported κ to be around 600 W/m-K. Many of Sahin et. al's massive collection of dynamically stable honeycomb compounds in 2009 have been probed for their thermal conductivity. An example where frequency gap does not compensate for high average atomic mass is monolayer GaN, Fig. In summary, we investigated the two-dimensional forms of boron-V compounds for thermal conductivity and found that monolayer boron arsenide has higher thermal conductivity than its other boron-V cousins. Because of its electronic band gap and high κ, integration of monolayer boron arsenide into next-generation technology would prove to be possible and impactful. Monolayer boron-V compounds such as boron phosphide, arsenide, and antimonide are infrequently tested today both experimentally and theoretically. A deeper look into their ther-mal and mechanical properties would likely reveal captivating trends such as the ones we observed in this study. For example, in boron nitride it was shown that equibiaxial strains significantly enhanced thermal conductivity. : Average atomic masses (M ), frequency gaps (ω gap ), Debye temperatures (Θ D ), sound velocity of the TA phonon mode (v T A ), and sound velocity of the LA phonon mode (v LA )