The metal-semiconductor contact is a major factor limiting the shrinking of transistor dimension to further increase device performance. In-plane edge contacts have the potential to achieve lower contact resistance due to stronger orbital hybridization compared to conventional top contacts. However, a quantitative understanding of the electron transport properties in the edge contact is still lacking. In this work, we present full-band atomistic quantum transport simulations of the graphene/MoS 2 edge contact. By using a Wannier function basis to accurately describe the electronic bands, together with a full self-consistent solution of the electrostatics, we are able to efficiently model device structures on a micron scale, but with atomic level accuracy. We find that the potential barrier created by trapped charges decays fast with distance away from the interface, and is thus thin enough to enable efficient injection of electrons. This results in Ohmic behavior in its I-V characteristics, which agrees with experiments. Our results demonstrate the role played by trapped charges in the formation of a Schottky barrier, and how one can reduce the Schottky barrier height (SBH) by adjusting the relevant parameters of the edge contact system. Our framework can be extended conveniently to incorporate more general nanostructure geometries. For example, a full 3D solution of the electrostatics will also lead to better modeling of the electrical potential. Furthermore, better ab-initio calculations can be conveniently added to our methods to further improve their accuracy. Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are pushing the forefront of complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology beyond the Moore's law, In order to better model the graphene/MoS 2 interface at the atomic scale and quantitatively calculate the charge transfer properties, we introduced a custom-built self-consistent quantum transport solver based on the Keldysh Nonequilibrium Green's Function formalism We confirm the validity of our solver by comparing the converged electrostatic potential profile to the analytical predictions from Thomas-Fermi screening theory, beyond angstrom distances from the contact region. Finally, we calculate the transport properties based on the Keldysh formalism and discuss how to further improve device performance. Wannier functions can accurately and efficiently capture delicate electronic structures. We used them to extract the tight-binding parameters of both materials after obtaining the band structures in the DFT framework. Figure The geometry of the graphene-MoS 2 edge contact is sketched in Figure where H 0 are the interactions within a strip of width, H ± are the interactions with a neighbor strip along the +y or -y direction, and ∆ is the width of the supercell. To make secondnearest-neighbor interactions negligible, we choose ∆ to be exactly 4 times the width of the graphene unit cell, and approximately 3 times that of the MoS 2 unit cell, resulting in a lattice mismatch of only 4.2%. We do not change the lattice constant of graphene because it has a much larger Young's modulus. where Γ L and Γ R are the linewidth functions that describe the coupling between the scattering region and the two leads on the left and right. In Figure From the results in Figure To check the reliability of our interface modeling, we integrate the boundary DOS over energy within the band gap of the MoS 2 interior states, and obtain the number of the interfacial states to be about n ≈ 9.4 states nm -1 . This is close to the full DFT simulation results reported by Chen et al 21 ranging from 6.3 to 8.3 states nm -1 , and therefore proves the accuracy of our modeling method. However, the ohmic behavior in our simulation requires doping level one order of magnitude larger than the one reported by experiments. One possible explanation is that we only assume electron hopping between graphene supercells and sulfur atoms immediately next to the interface. By considering interactions of longer range, one can make the overlap states couple better with the conduction band. This could potentially improve transport efficiency and lower the needed doping level to achieve ohmic behavior in our simulation. Also, although we find that relative perpendicular positions of the two materials hardly affect the transmission efficiency, other boundary configurations including different edge types (armchair or zigzag) and interface roughness could still alter the positions of the overlap states, and in turn change the tunneling current. We leave a systematic examination of the above factors to future work. To explore more on the ohmic behavior of graphene-MoS 2 edge contact, we calculate the source-drain currents under different biases and temperatures. The electric current can be calculated as: where T (E, V L , V R ) is the transmission coefficient given by equation ( In conclusion, we have developed a computational pipeline to study the electrostatic and transport properties of the 2D graphene-MoS 2 edge contact, and proposed a possible explanation for its ohmic behavior observed in experiments. By applying the custom-built quantum transport simulation scheme, we obtain the charge density profile self-consistently with the electrostatic potential profile of the device. We find that the potential barrier decays fast away from the interface and is thin enough for the electron to tunnel through efficiently. Our results are consistent with both analytical Thomas-Fermi screening theory and the experimental measurements. Because our methods can be scaled effectively to large systems, but maintain the fidelity of ab initio band structures, they can be used to efficiently predict the electrostatic and transport properties for nanostructures, including those with complex geometries. These findings could have broad implications in the design and fabrication of metal-semiconductor junction for realizing low-resistance contacts. Run charge solver once for each material seperately to get fixed charges Fixed charges E. So the total electron density at site i is given by We then input the charge densities into the following Poisson equation and use a nonlinear Newton-Raphson scheme to solve for the electrostatic potential. The Poisson equation for our system is where V is the electrostatic potential, n is the electron density, N is the fixed charge density, and is the permittivity. In our simulation, we choose the permittivity to be graphene = 6.9 for monolayer graphene Due to the exponential dependence of the carrier concentration on the electrostatic potential, a small potential variation can cause large variation in the carrier concentration and makes it difficult for the Newton-Raphson method to converge. A non-linear scheme takes such an exponential dependence into account and can lead to faster convergence when a linear method cannot even converge at all. Still, we have to use a damping factor between two consecutive Poisson iterations to achieve convergence. A larger damping factor is required for lower temperatures due to small kT values. For example, at the simulation temperature of 50 K, a damping factor as large as 0.98 has to be used. The coupled system of charge and Poisson equations can also be solved by iteration with appropriate numerical damping, which terminates if a convergence criterion is satisfied. In our calculation, the convergence criterion of the self-consistent iterations between two subsequent steps is set to a less than 5 × 10 -4 relative difference (with respect to the L1 norm) in the electrostatic potential with the charge density obtained from the previous step. We show the convergence of a typical self-consistent simulation in Figure Here, we show the effects of different model parameters the simulation results, including the local density of states (LDOS) and transmission spectrum. This also demonstrates the robustness of our model. We study below the following four parameters: MoS 2 doping, graphene doping, interfacial hopping strength, and temperature. The LDOS is evaluated using the the equation: MoS 2 doping We match the doping level induced by gate voltages by adjusting the Fermi level of MoS 2 . For the device used in our manuscript, we used a MoS 2 doping of 4 × 10 14 cm -2 . Here in Figure eV . We find that the main effect of the MoS 2 doping concentration is shifting the bands of MoS 2 . A higher doping level makes its conduction band minimum move downward, and leads to a larger transmission around the Fermi level. Graphene doping The Fermi level of graphene is lowered to account for an unavoidable p-type doping of approximately 10 12 cm -2 resulted from the manufacturing process in the lab. In our paper, we suggest that the usage of n-doped graphene could potentially improve transport efficiency. The related simulation results are shown in Figure Interfacial hopping strength We consider interfacial interactions only between the p zlike WFs of graphene edge carbon atoms and the p x , p y -like WFs of MoS 2 edge sulfur atoms. The hopping parameter is modeled by an exponential dependence on the distance as t = t 0 e -(r-r 0 ) , where r is the distance between two MLWF centers and t 0 is the interaction strength at a distance of r 0 = 1.5 Å, which is assumed to be the shortest distance between the graphene and the MoS 2 region. We manually set t 0 to be comparable to the strength of the covalent bonds formed at the interface. Comparison of the number of interfacial states in our simulation with the first-principles one proves the accuracy of our interface modeling method. From Figure Temperature In Figure where λ s (x) is the screening charge and A is the cross section area. We assume A = 1 in the following. The Thomas-Fermi theory approximates the local electron density n(x) as a free-particle system where the Fermi wave vector k F is now a local quantity. It can also be determined by the condition that the chemical potential μ is independent of position: We write the screening charge as the difference between n(x) and the equilibrium charge density n 0 λ s (x) = -e [n(x)n 0 (x)] and the above approximations result the equation Assuming V /E F << 1, we can expand the root as 1 -V (x)/E F ≈ 1 -V /2E F to obtain the equation where q T F is the Thomas-Fermi screening wave vector. This equation may be solved in 1D Fourier transform space to give V (x) = -4πe dq 2π λ i (q) q 2 + q 2 T F e iqx (13) In the case of edge contact, the interfacial trap charge acts as the impurity residing around x = 0, and can be represented as λ i (q) = Q i . We can then evaluate the integral and obtain an analytical result The interactions declines rapidly at large distances because of the exponential dependence e -q T F x and thus allows efficient electron tunneling through the interface.