The nature of the pseudogap and its relationship with superconductivity are one of the central issues of cuprate superconductors. Recently, a possible scenario has been proposed that the pseudogap state is a distinct phase characterized by spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking called "nematicity" based on transport and magnetic susceptibility measurements, where the symmetry breaking was observed below the pseudogap temperature T * . Here, we report a temperature-dependent ARPES study of nematicity in slightly overdoped Bi 1.7 Pb 0.5 Sr 1.9 CaCu 2 O 8+δ triggered by a uniaxial strain applied along one of the Cu-O bond directions. While the nematicity was enhanced in the pseudogap state as in the previous studies, it was suppressed in the superconducting state. These results indicate that the pseudogap state is characterized by spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking and that the nematicity may compete with superconductivity. These new experimental insights may provide clues for the nature of the pseudogap and its relation to the superconductivity. The pseudogap in cuprate superconductors is characterized by the suppression of the density of states around the Fermi level below a characteristic temperature T * and above the superconducting transition temperature T c . Broadly speaking, two possible scenarios for the pseudogap have been discussed, that is, a precursor to the superconducting state and distinct order which competes with superconductivity Recently, electronic nematicity that the electronic structure preserves the translational symmetry but breaks the rotational symmetry of the underlying crystal lattice has been found to exist in the pseudogap state Motivated by those previous studies on nematicity in the cuprates, we have performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements on slightly overdoped Bi 1.7 Pb 0.5 Sr 1.9 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Pb-Bi2212) (T c = 91 K) by applying a uniaxial strain along the Cu-O bond direction to detect nematicity below T * . At the doping level we chose, T * was not too high for ARPES experiments but the divergence of the nematic susceptibility in Pb-Bi2212 was sufficiently strong Pb-Bi2212 single crystals were grown by the floatingzone method. The hole concentration was slightly overdoped one (T c = 91 K) after annealing the samples in a N 2 flow, which allowed us to measure samples above and below T * (∼160 K) rather easily compared to the underdoped samples whose T * 's are too high YBCO has Cu-O chains in addition to the CuO 2 plane, which helps nematic domains to align in one particular direction, while Pb-Bi2212 has no such an internal source of strain as the Cu-O chains and the in-plane crystal structure is tetragonal. Therefore, we applied a tensile strain to the sample along the Cu-O bond direction in attempt to align nematic domains in one direction using a device similar to that used for Fe-based superconductors, a picture and a schematic figure of which are shown in Supplementary Fig. In Fig. To understand the anistropy of the constant-energy surface more quantitatively, we have estimated it with the tight-binding model in the following way. The band dispersion near the Fermi level of the cuprates can be fitted using the standard tight-binding model where t, t , and t are the nearest-neighbor, secondnearest-neighbor, and third-nearest-neighbor hopping parameters, respectively, and μ is the chemical potential In order to examine the possibility of the C 4 rotational symmetry breaking into C 2 symmetry, we introduce an anisotropy parameter δ which represents the orthrombicity of the hopping parameters (t and t ) By fitting the constant-energy surface using Eq. ( The temperature evolution of the anisotropy parameter δ thus derived is shown in Fig. From the theoretical side, dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) combined with the fluctuation exchange (FLEX) approximation for the Hubbard model has shown that a Pomeranchuk instability, where the C 2 anisotropy of the Fermi surface is induced, appears in the overdoped region but coexists with superconductivity Nematicity has also been considered as arising from fluctuations of charge-density wave (CDW) or stripes In Fe-based superconductors, nematicity has been observed as the different populations of different orbitals (such as yz vs zx orbitals) revealed by ARPES experiments In conclusion, we have demonstrated the presence of nematicity in the pseudogap state of Pb-Bi2212 by temperature-dependent ARPES experiments as suggested in previous studies. On top of that, possible suppression of the nematicity in the superconducting state was also indicated. However, there are still unsolved issues regarding the pseudogap, that is, how the nematicity is related to the other proposed orders inside the pseudogap phase, e.g., CDW The bottom energy of the bonding band at (0, π) of the overdoped (T c = 91 K) sample studied in the present work was around -110 meV, which was estimated from the peak position of the corresponding EDCs as shown in Fig. In the nematic state where the electronic structure becomes inequivalent between the k x and k y directions, one expects that the electronic structure around the node is less affected by the nematicity. In order to see if this is the case or not, we compare energy distribution curves (EDCs) around the nodes in the first and third quadrants of the first Brillouin zone at 125 K, the temperature at which the greatest anisotropy was observed between the a and b directions. As shown in Fig. In vacuum, the vector potential A( r, t) satisfies the wave equation, and one of the solutions of this equation is where ε denotes the polarization (the oscillating direction of the electric field), and k and ω are the wave vector and the frequency of light, respectively (ω = ck). The probability of photoemission is given by where according to Fermi's golden rule. In ARPES measurements, we often use vacuum-ultra violet, whose photon energy is about 100 eV i.e., the wave length is about 100 Å which is much longer than the distance between neighboring atoms in the material, so that one obtains Then the matrix element in Eq (S4.3) can be expressed as using the Hermite property of H 0 and the commutation relationship In summary, the transition probability can be approximated by Here we show raw data of momentum distribution curves (MDCs) at all the measurement temperatures. As noted in the main text, each MDC has been integrated within ± 10 meV of E -E F = -30 meV. The MDC at each tilt angle was fitted with Lorentzian functions plus a linear background around the peaks. The fitted range was chosen arbitrarily. The constant energy surface at E -E F = -30 meV in Fig. As seen in the raw MDC data, we have observed some additional features in the constantenergy-surface mapping on top of the intrinsic feature analyzed in the main text. In the cooling series (200 K, 100 K, 50 K, and 5 K), so-called shadow bands, replicas of the main Fermi surface shifted by k = (π, π) of the structural origin where MDC peak positions are crucial to study the distortion of the constant-energy surface representing the nematicity. Therefore, when the intensities of such extrinsic features are not negligibly small, the peak positions of MDCs may be deviated from the intrinsic ones. We have excluded such data points for analyzing the anisotropy of the constant-energy surfaces to eliminate the effect of extrinsic features. S7. Fitting procedure using the tight-binding model Fitting procedure to estimate the anisotropy of the constant energy surface shown in Fig. 3 is as follows. First, the experimental data points which represent the constant energy surfaces at 200 K and 210 K, the highest temperature in the cooling and heating series, respectively, were fitted using the tight binding model Eq. ( Note that, despite the fact that we did not assume δ = 0 in the procedure to define the sample angles, the anisotropy parameter δ converged to almost zero. At lower temperatures, t /t was also fixed within ± 1 % of t /t at the highest temperatures. The misalignment angles at lower temperatures were defined with the same method as the one at the highest temperatures, however, using Eq. (1), i.e., imposing δ = 0, instead of Eq. ( The aim of this further constraint is to avoid the sample angles and the parameter δ from being trapped at a local minimum of the fitting error. After defining the sample angles at each temperature, the data points were fitted with Eq. (2), i.e., δ was allowed to vary. From Eq. ( This small shift is consistent with the fact that a clear energy shift of the band bottom was not observed in Fig. 