Bloch oscillations (BOs) refer to a periodically oscillatory motion of particle in lattice systems driven by a constant force. By temporally modulating acoustic waveguides, BOs can be generalized from spatial to frequency domain, opening new possibilities for spectrum manipulations. The modulation can induce mode transitions in the waveguide band and form an artificial frequency lattice, with the mismatched wave vector during transitions acting as a constant force that drives frequency Bloch oscillations (FBOs). Furthermore, the modulation phase accompanying transitions serves as a gauge potential that controls the initial oscillation phase, providing an additional degree of freedom to tailor FBOs. We report that multiple FBOs with judiciously designed oscillation phases can be further cascaded to realize acoustic spectrum self-imaging, unidirectional transduction and bandwidth engineering. The study proposes the concept of FBOs in acoustic systems and functionalizes its cascade configurations for advanced control of sound spectrum. This paradigm may find versatile applications in underwater secure communication, voice encryption and signal processing. applications However, the conversion efficiency is quite low even for high-intensity acoustic waves. Alternatively, spectrum shift for acoustic waves has also been realized through dynamic scattering from rotating objects According to the energy conservation law, the frequency of a system can be changed by applying time-variant perturbations. In this Letter, we propose an acoustic waveguide system with temporal modulation of bulk modulus, so as to manipulate the spectrum and energy of sound. In the presence of the modulation-induced frequency lattice, the wave vector mismatch during transitions acts as an effective constant force that induces frequency Bloch oscillations (FBOs). The initial phase of time modulation mimics an effective gauge potential that controls the initial oscillation phase of FBOs. By driving two cascade FBOs with different oscillation phases in two separated modulated waveguides, we demonstrate a prototype of acoustic secure communication based on the spectrum self-imaging effect. By cascading multiple waveguides with out-of-phase time modulations, we also break the intrinsic localized feature of FBOs and realize spectral unidirectional transduction and bandwidth manipulation. Our study reveals the capability of cascade FBOs in the manipulation of acoustic spectrum for a plethora of important applications. We start from revealing the effect of FBOs induced in one time-modulation acoustic waveguide. The waveguide is filled with silicone rubber , where ’ü▓(r, t), p(r, t) and v(r, t) are the medium mass density, pressure, and particle velocity. ’ü▓0 is the time-independent background mass density. The governing equation for the acoustic wave thus reads For simplicity, we consider the one-dimensional case with ’āæ 2 =’éČ 2 /’éČz 2 and r replaced by z. As shown in Fig. where Cn=C0=k0(╬ö’üó/4’üó0) is the coupling strength between adjacent modes in the frequency lattice. To understand the spectrum evolution, we consider the eigen Bloch mode in the frequency lattice, namely, an infinite-width frequency comb with pn(z)=p0exp(in’ü”0)exp(ikzz), where p0 is the uniform amplitude, ’ü”0 the Bloch momentum in the frequency dimension and kz the collective propagation constant along the waveguide direction. Plugging the Bloch mode into Eq. ( where ’ü” ’üĘ (z)=’ü”0’ĆŁ╬ökz is the z-dependent Bloch momentum. Since z=c0t, the Bloch momentum also varies in time ’ü” ’üĘ (t)=’ü”0’ĆŁ╬ökc0t, where c0 is the speed of sound in the medium. As denoted in Fig. The band structure shift induced by the gauge potential is analogous to the situation where the kinetic momentum of an electron is substituted by the conical momentum in the presence of an electromagnetic vector potential where Žē(0) denotes the initial central frequency. The center-of-mass of the wave packet undergoes an oscillatory motion in the frequency lattice, which is termed frequency Bloch oscillations (FBOs). The corresponding oscillation period is ZB=2ŽĆ/|╬ök|, which is inversely proportional to the magnitude of the driving force. Since Žē(z)=Žē(z+vZB), (v=1, 2, ŌĆóŌĆóŌĆó), the frequency comb manifests self-imaging at integer multiples of oscillation period ZB. Furthermore, we point out that the initial oscillation phase is determined by the gauge potential, namely, the initial phase of time modulation. In the following, we will exploit this gauge degree of freedom by cascading multiple FBOs with different oscillation phases, aiming to extend the functionalities of acoustic spectrum manipulation. Firstly, we consider a configuration comprising two modulation waveguides separated by an unmodulated waveguide channel. We find this system has the potential for acoustic long-range, secure communication where the information encoded in the frequency dimension can be perfectly reconstructed at the output port. As shown in Fig. , ( = 2) To realize the spectrum reconstruction at the output port of the whole system, two conditions must be simultaneously satisfied. Condition 1: The Bloch momentum at the output port of the encoding waveguide should equal that at the input port of the decoding waveguide, namely, where ╬ö’ü”=’ü”2’ĆŁ’ü”1, ╬ö’ü”p=╬ökLp. In Eq. ( When Condition 2 is satisfied, namely, ╬ök(L1+L2)=2ŽĆ, the output frequency center is If the Condition 1 is also satisfied with ’üż’ü”=0, we have ’üĘout=’üĘ(0). The frequency center comes back to its initial position, verifying the two conditions in Eq. ( The above theoretical analysis can be verified by solving Eq. ( We choose ’ü▓0=990kgŌĆóm ’ĆŁ3 and ’üó0=9.824’é┤10 ’ĆŁ10 Pa ’ĆŁ1 for silicone rubber, such that c0=1014mŌĆós ’ĆŁ1 , a single frequency instead of a frequency comb is incident into the system, which also restores to a single frequency at the output port though the large spectrum distortion during propagation. More generally, since the spectrum self-imaging relies only on the conditions in Eq. ( Due to the periodically oscillatory nature for FBOs For simplicity, we consider M modulation waveguides are directly cascaded without unmodulated channels in between. The length and modulation phase of the mth waveguide are Lm and ’ü”m, for which the band structure and group velocity are respectively kz,m(’ü” ’üĘ (z))=’ĆŁ2Ccos[’ü” ’üĘ (z)’ĆŁ’ü”m] and The trajectory of frequency comb evolution is ) cos cos( ) . ( To realize unidirectional spectrum transduction, we can fix each waveguide length as Lm=ZB/2 and choose out-of-phase modulations ╬ö’ü”=’ü”m+1’ĆŁ’ü”m=ŽĆ in adjacent waveguides. For an initial phase difference ’ü”1’ĆŁ’ü”0=0 or ŽĆ, the frequency comb will exhibit unidirectional blue or red shift where we choose +(’ĆŁ) for ’ü”1’ĆŁ’ü”0=0(ŽĆ). For both cases, the total accumulated frequency shift is |╬ö’üĘ|max=’üĘm(mZB/2)’ĆŁ’üĘ(0)=4MC’üŚ/╬ök, which is proportional to the number of modulation waveguides. On the contrary, for ’ü”1’ĆŁ’ü”0=’é▒ŽĆ/2, the frequency shift will vanish with |╬ö’üĘ|=0. For other choice of phase difference ’ü”1’ĆŁ’ü”0ŌēĀ0, ŽĆ or ’é▒ŽĆ/2, the frequency shift satisfies 0<|╬ö’üĘ|<|╬ö’üĘ|max, which can be precisely tuned by varying the modulation phases. The theoretical analysis has also been verified by simulations in Fig. 