The site preference and magnetic properties of Zn, Sn and Zn-Sn substituted M-type strontium hexaferrite (SrFe12O19) have been investigated using first-principles total energy calculations based on density functional theory. The site occupancy of substituted atoms were estimated by calculating the substitution energies of different configurations. The distribution of different configurations during the annealing process at high temperature was determined using the formation probabilities of configurations to calculate magnetic properties of substituted strontium hexaferrite. We found that the magnetization and magnetocrystalline anisotropy are closely related to the distributions of Zn-Sn ions on the five Fe sites. Our calculation show that in SrFe11.5Zn0.5O19, Zn atoms prefer to occupy 4f1, 12k, and 2a sites with occupation probability of 78%, 19% and 3%, respectively, while in SrFe11.5SnO19, Sn atoms occupy the 12k and 4f2 sites with occupation probability of 54% and 46%, respectively. We also found that in SrFe11Zn0.5Sn0.5O19, (Zn,Sn) atom pairs prefer to occupy the (4f1, 4f2), (4f1, 12k) and (12k, 12k) sites with occupation probability of 82%, 8% and 6%, respectively. Our calculation shows that the increase of magnetization and the reduction of magnetic anisotropy in Zn-Sn substituted M-type strontium hexaferrite as observed experimentally is due to the occupation of (Zn,Sn) pairs at the (4f1, 4f2) sites. Hexagonal strontium hexaferrite SrFe 12 O 19 (SFO), along with other M -type hexaferrites XFe 12 O 19 (X = Sr, Ba, Pb), has large saturation magnetization, high coercivity, and excellent chemical stability Theoretical studies on pure and substituted M-type hexaferrite have also been performed. In this work, we used first-principles total-energy calculations to investigate the relationship between the site occupation and magnetic properties of substituted strontium hexaferrite, SrFe 12-x M x O 19 with M = Zn or Sn and SrFe 12-2x (ZnSn) x O 19 with x = 0.5. The Boltzmann distribution function was used to determine the formation probabilities of various configurations at a typical annealing temperature (1000 K) of strontium hexaferrite, which was further used to compute the weighted average of various magnetic properties. We show that our model predicts an increase of saturation magnetization as well as a decrease in magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) of SrFe 11 (ZnSn) 0.5 O 19 compared to the pure M -type SFO in good agreement with the experimental observations SFO belongs to space group P 6 3 /mmc (No. 194) and has a hexagonal magnetoplumbite crystal structure The magnetic properties of SFO can be modified by substitution of foreign atoms for Fe. There are five crystallographic inequivalent Fe sites in SFO. When foreign atoms are substituted in a SFO unit cell, there can be several energetically different configurations. Due to the ferrimagnetic nature of SFO, the magnetization of substituted SFO strongly depends on site preference of the substituted atoms. In order to investigate the effect of substitution on the magnetic properties, it is imperative to understand site preference of substituted atoms. The site preference of the substituted atom can be determined by calculating the substitution energy. The substitution energy E sub [i] for configuration i at 0 K is given by where E SFXO [i] is the total energy per unit cell of substituted SFO in configuration i, while E SFO is the total energy per unit cell of pure SFO and α is the total energy per atom for element α (α = Zn, Sn and Fe) in its most stable crystal structure. Zn belongs to space group P 6 3 /mmc (No. 194) has a hexagonal crystal structure while Sn belongs to F d 3m (No. 227) with cubic crystal system. Zn , Sn and F e were found to be -0.789 eV, -3.835 eV and -8.461 eV, respectively. n α is the number of atoms of type α added or removed; if one atom is added then n α = +1 while n α = -1 when one atom is removed. The magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy, E a , was also calculated. E a in the present case, is defined as the difference between the two total energies where the spin quantization axes are aligned along two different directions where, E (100) is the total energy with spin quantization axis in the magnetically hard plane and E (001) is the total energy with spin quantization axis in the magnetically easy axis. The total energies in Eq. ( The uniaxial magnetic anisotropy constant, K 1 , can be computed as where V is the equilibrium volume of the unit cell, and θ is the angle between the two spin quantization axis orientations (90 • in the present case). The anisotropy field, H a , which is related to the coercivity can be expressed as where K 1 is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant and M s is the saturation magnetization. When the separation between E sub of different configurations is not too big compared to the thermal energy during the synthesis of these hexaferrites at a high annealing temperature ( 1000 K), we can expect the site preference of substituted atoms to change at such an elevated temperature. This change in the site occupation preference can be modeled using Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The site occupation probability or the formation probability P i (T ) of configuration i at temperature T is given by where ∆G i , ∆E i , ∆V i , and ∆S i are the change in free energy, substitution energy, unit cell volume and entropy of the configuration i relative to the ground state configuration. P , k B and g i are the pressure, Boltzmann constant and multiplicity of configuration i. g 0 is the multiplicity of the ground state configuration. In our earlier work, we considered ∆S i to be the same for all configurations where P 1000K (i) and Q i are the formation probability at 1000 K and a physical quantity Q of the configuration i. During the annealing process when the material is maintained at high temperature, substituted atoms have sufficient energy to overcome the local energy barriers and acquire energetically the various configurations that have sufficient formation probability. We note that the substituted SFO considered in the present work loses its magnetic properties at a typical annealing temperature (1000 K or higher) that is near or above its Curie temperature. When the material is cooled down to a low temperature below the critical temperature, it regains the magnetic properties while the configurations are locked in those with higher substitution energy due to energy barriers between them. Consequently, the weighted average calculated by Eq. ( In this work, two types of substitutions have been studied. In the first case one Zn or Sn atom was substituted in a SFO unit cell. In the second case, a pair of Zn and Sn atoms were substituted in a SFO unit cell. Although there are 24 Fe atoms in SFO unit cell, the application of crystallographic symmetry operations shows that many of these Fe sites are equivalent and leaves only five inequivalent sites. Therefore, one foreign atom can be substituted in five different ways, giving rise to five different configurations. We label these inequivalent configurations using the crystallographic name of the Fe site: , and [12k]. E sub corresponding to the substitution of one Zn at different inequivalent Fe sites is given in Table The total magnetic moment m tot upon the substitution of a single Zn and Sn atom at various Fe site of SFO is given in Table E a , K 1 , and H a of various configurations are presented in Table Table Using first-principles total energy calculations based on density functional theory, we calculated substitution energies of Zn, Sn, and Zn-Sn pair substituted strontium hexaferrite. These energy values were used to determine site preferences of the substituted atoms at 0 K as well as at a high annealing temperature. The site occupation probabilities or the formation probabilities of different configurations were then used to estimate magnetic properties of substituted SFO. We found that in SrFe 11.5 Zn 0.5 O 19 , Zn atoms prefer to occupy 4f 1 , 12k, and 2a sites with occupation probability of 78%, 19% and 3%, respectively, while in SrFe 11.5 SnO 19 , Sn atoms occupy the 12k and 4f 2 sites with occupation probability of 54% and 46%, respectively. We further showed that in SrFe 11 Zn 0.5 Sn 0.5 O 19 , the pair of (Zn,Sn) atoms prefers to occupy the (4f 1 , 4f 2 ), (4f 1 , 12k) and (12k, 12k) sites with occupation probability of 82%, 8% and 6%, respectively. The results from our model based on the formation probability were found to be in good agreement with recent experimental observations showing enhancement of magnetization and the reduction in anisotropy for Zn-Sn substituted strontium hexaferrites. TABLE