A simple means of detecting and spatially mapping volatile and nonvolatile conductive filaments in metal/oxide/metal cross-point devices is introduced and its application demonstrated. The technique is based on thermal discolouration of a thin photoresist layer deposited on the top electrode of the cross-point device and relies on the increase in temperature produced by local Joule heating of an underlying conductive filament. Finite element modelling of the temperature distribution and its dependencies shows that the maximum temperature at the top-electrode/photoresist interface is particularly sensitive to the top-electrode thickness. The technique is demonstrated on NbOx based metal-oxide-metal cross-point devices with a 25 nm thick top (Pt) electrode, where it is used to undertake a statistical analysis of the filament location as a function of device area. This shows that filament formation is heterogeneous. The majority of filaments form preferentially along the top-electrode edge and the fraction of these increases with decreasing device area. Transmission electron microscopy of the top and bottom electrode edges is used to explain this observation and suggests that it is due to a reduction in the effective oxide thickness in this region. Characteristic resistance changes are observed in two-terminal metal-oxide-metal (MOM) structures subjected to large electric fields or current densities and are of interest as the basis of non-volatile memory and neuromorphic computing devices Knowledge about the structure, composition and spatial distribution of filaments is essential for a full understanding of filamentary resistive-switching and for effective modelling and optimisation of associated devices. As a consequence, there is great interest in methods for detecting and characterising conductive filament. The existence of filamentary conduction is often inferred from area-independent switching characteristics In this study, we introduce a simple alternative technique for locating volatile or nonvolatile filaments in MOM cross-point devices based on thermal discolouration of a thin photoresist layer deposited on the top electrode of the cross-point device. The technique relies on the increase in temperature at the top-electrode/photoresist interface produced by local Joule heating of an underlying conductive filament and can be used to identify the number and position of filaments. The efficacy of this approach is demonstrated by applying it to filament formation in MOM cross-point devices comprised of a Pt/Nb(Cr)/NbOx/Pt heterostructure. Pt/Nb(Cr)/NbOx/Pt cross-point test structures, as shown schematically in Fig. The oxide layer covering the bottom contact pads was then removed by etching to provide direct electrical contact to the pad. The test-devices had electrode dimensions ranging from 2 μm × 2 μm to 20 μm × 20 μm. As-deposited NbOx films were analysed by grazing incident-angle X-ray diffraction (GIAXRD) and Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) to determine their structure and composition. To simplify the RBS analysis, NbOx films were simultaneously deposited on vitreous carbon substrates. These analyses showed that the as-deposited films were amorphous, with a stoichiometry of NbOx, where x=2.60±0.5 (i.e. oxygen rich Nb2O5). Electrical measurements were performed using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter analyser attached to a Signatone probe station (S-1160). All the measurements were executed at room temperature in atmospheric condition by applying voltage on the top electrode, while the bottom electrode was grounded. As fabricated devices were in highly resistive state (>10 10 Ω) and required a one-step electroforming process to initiate resistive switching characteristics. This was achieved by applying a positive voltage sweep from 0 V to +6 V to the top electrode while limiting the maximum current through the device (compliance current (ICC)) to ~2 mA to avoid permanent damage. Fig. The high current density associated with filamentary conduction is known to cause a rapid increase in temperature due to local Joule heating. Indeed, in-situ thermal mapping has shown that the surface temperature of the filament can increase by several hundred degrees Here we exploit this temperature increase to thermally denature a thin photoresist layer and record the location of the filament. To achieve this, the cross-point devices are coated with a thin positive photoresist (AZ 1512HS) layer and a photolithographic step used to reopen access to the device contact pads. The photoresist was then baked for 2 minutes in air using a hot plate kept at a temperature of 358 K (85 o C). Fig. To determine the relationship between the temperature of the filament and that at the topelectrode/photoresist interface a finite element model of the device structure and filamentary Joule heating was constructed using the COMSOL package. Details of the model are presented in the Supplementary Information. Suffice it to say that the simulation used a 2Daxiosymetric model of the device structure and filamentary conduction process to calculate the steady-state temperature distribution in the device as a function of applied current. This shows that the temperature is a strong function of both parameters and reaches a value of 456 K for a current of 2.0 mA and electrode thickness of 25 nm, more than sufficient to modify the photoresist. However, as shown in Fig. For example, the forming voltage for randomly distributed filaments is expected to decrease with increasing device area and to have a dependence of the form where V f is the forming voltage, C 1,2 are constants associated with statistics of the forming process, a 3 is a characteristic material volume, and A is the device area. Fig. wetting layer is expected to react with the NbOx to extend the effective oxide thickness. The oxide layer is therefore thinner at the top-electrode edge where it is in direct contact with Pt, possibly explaining why the majority of filaments form in this region. In summary, we have demonstrated a simple technique to detect and spatially map volatile and nonvolatile conductive filaments in micron-scale metal/oxide/metal cross-point devices based on thermal discolouration of a thin photoresist layer. Finite element modelling showed that the temperature of the top-electrode/photoresist interface can easily exceed that required to discolour photoresist but that the maximum temperature is a strong function of electrode thickness. The application of this technique to metal-oxide-metal cross-point devices confirmed that electroforming generally created one dominant filament, and showed that filament formation was heterogeneous, with filaments preferentially forming along the edge of the top electrode. TEM analysis of the top and bottom electrode edges suggested that this was due to a reduction of the effective oxide thickness in this region. While further work is required to confirm this hypothesis, the study serves to illustrate the efficacy of the proposed filament mapping technique for understanding such effects. We also note that the sensitivity and spatial resolution of the technique could be improved by using a more temperaturesensitive polymer and further reducing the top electrode thickness. The physical properties of the other materials were taken from the COMSOL material library where available. Exceptions were the thermal and electrical conductivities of SiO2 which were set to 1.3 [W/(m.K)] and 1x10 -10 S/m, respectively, and the specific heat and electrical conductivity of PMMA which were set to 1.66 [J/(kg.K)] and 1x10 -10 S/m, respectively. The temperature at the top of the PMMA layer and the bottom of the SiO2 layer were set to To further clarify the edge effect, additional cross-sectional TEM images of the bottom electrode of a Pt/HfO2/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si structure are demonstrated in Figure 