Nanocrystalline metals typically have high fatigue strengths, but low resistance to crack propagation. Amorphous intergranular films are disordered grain boundary complexions that have been shown to delay crack nucleation and slow crack propagation during monotonic loading by diffusing grain boundary strain concentrations, suggesting they may also be beneficial for fatigue properties. To probe this hypothesis, in situ transmission electron microscopy fatigue cycling is performed on Cu-1 at.% Zr thin films thermally treated to have either only ordered grain boundaries or to contain amorphous intergranular films. The sample with only ordered grain boundaries experienced grain coarsening at crack initiation followed by unsteady crack propagation and extensive nanocracking, whereas the sample containing amorphous intergranular films had no grain coarsening at crack initiation followed by steady crack propagation and distributed plastic activity. Microstructural design for control of these behaviors through simple thermal treatments can allow for the improvement of nanocrystalline metal fatigue toughness. While nanocrystalline metals, defined as having an average grain size less than 100 nm, have excellent structural properties such as high strength Nanocrystalline metals can usually achieve longer overall fatigue lifetimes compared to coarsegrained counterparts Complexions are defined as thermodynamically-stable grain boundary features that can assume a range of ordered or disordered structures In this study, in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) fatigue was performed on nanocrystalline Cu-1 at.% Zr thin films processed to have either only ordered grain boundaries ("ordered grain boundary sample") or to contain AIFs scattered throughout the grain boundary network ("AIF-containing sample"). Microstructural analysis during crack initiation and propagation reveals grain growth at crack initiation with unstable crack growth and extensive nanocracking in the ordered grain boundary sample, whereas the AIF-containing sample had no grain growth at crack initiation with stable crack growth and distributed plasticity. Both samples were extrinsically toughened through grain bridging, while the more ductile AIF sample was also toughened intrinsically through crack tip plasticity mechanisms. By tuning grain boundary structure and composition, traditional extrinsic and intrinsic fatigue toughening mechanisms can be applied to resist crack propagation in nanocrystalline metals. Cu-1 at.% Zr thin films were produced with magnetron co-sputtering using an Ar plasma with a Kurt J. Lesker Lab 18 modular thin film deposition system. The films were deposited at room temperature using 400 W for Cu and 46 W for Zr at 12 mT onto polished salt substrates. The films were then floated onto Protochips, Inc. Fusion heating chips through dissolution of the salt substrate in a solution of water and isopropyl alcohol. Additional details describing the film deposition and sample preparation are provided in Supplementary Note 1. The films were annealed under vacuum using an Aduro double tilt heating holder in an FEI Tecnai G(2) F30 S-Twin 300 kV TEM. The samples were subjected to different heat treatments on separate heating chips in order to create the ordered grain boundary or AIF-containing samples. First, both samples were heated from 25 to 850 °C over the course of 1 h (ramp rate of 0.23 °C/s) and then held at 850 °C for 1 h. AIFs have been previously observed in ball milled Cu-Zr alloys that were annealed at this temperature The in situ TEM fatigue methodology was modeled after a prior study by Bufford et al. Bright field TEM images of the ordered grain boundary sample and AIF-containing sample are shown in Figs. Locally thin regions are present in both films, which may be due to the sputter deposition process A few abnormally large grains at the notch, visible in Fig. Analysis of crack initiation, the first stage of fatigue damage, is presented first. Crack initiation is defined as when a crack ingress has been observed beyond the FIB-created notch. In both the ordered and AIF-containing grain boundaries, the nanoscale fatigue cracks first initiated about one grain diameter (~20 nm) ahead of the notch, presumably due to the higher stresses ahead of the notch and/or weaker microstructural features to enable crack initiation. Grain growth preceded crack initiation in the ordered grain boundary sample, reminiscent of prior nanocrystalline metal fatigue studies The grain adjacent to the lower interior crack in Fig. Crack propagation, the second stage of fatigue lifetime, is analyzed next. Grain bridging is defined as when a grain spans the opposing fracture surfaces in the crack wake, dissipating energy that would have extended the crack tip Unlike early fatigue studies in the TEM This extremely low crack growth rate is comparable to the value reported previously for in situ measurements on pure Cu Plastic activity was identified dynamically through observation in the video in frame by frame analysis, where moving dislocations and grain boundaries differentiated from bend contours through their discrete and asynchronous motion For the ordered grain boundary sample, very few plastic events were recorded at nanocracks outside of the main crack, suggesting these features likely formed through sub-critical cleavage. Similar events were observed previously for sputtered thin films The unstable crack propagation in the ordered grain boundary sample propagated through the formation of nanocracks and grain bridges. The evolution of one such grain bridge with progressive cycling is shown in Fig. Next, analysis of the fracture surfaces post failure is presented. Tortuosity can be defined as the ratio between the total crack length and the distance between the crack starting and ending points, excluding the notch Toughening mechanisms can be categorized based on where they occur in relation to the crack tip and the shielding mechanisms. Extrinsic toughening operates behind the crack tip and lowers the effective force felt by the crack tip. Intrinsic toughening operates in front of the crack tip primarily through plasticity and normally operates in more ductile materials Cu-1 at.% Zr thin films were thermally processed to have either ordered grain boundaries or contain AIFs and then subjected to in situ TEM fatigue. A number of observations are made, with our main findings categorized by fatigue lifetime stage. Gluing was completed before lift-out of the sample from the heating chip onto the PTP device in order to minimize handling of the completed sample, where even the slightest vibration or pressure on the PTP device can break the extremely delicate sample once stretched across the gauge section. The methodology used minimizes FIB damage since the deposited film thickness was sufficiently electron transparent with no further FIB thinning required, indicated by the increased brightness of the thin film over the gauge region in Supplementary Fig. 