Controlled deposition of DNA on graphene films obtained with the aid of mechanical splitting of graphite on a substrate with an epoxy sublayer is demonstrated. The DNA molecules are visualized using AFM. Considerable recent interest in the DNAgraphene hybrid structures A method for fabrication of graphene based on mechanical splitting of graphite using epoxy adhesive has recently been proposed in The method for fabrication of graphene of For the deposition of DNA molecules on graphene, we use a procedure that is similar to the procedure for deposition of DNA molecules on graphite We employ AFM to monitor the DNA deposition. The landscapes of samples are measured in the semicontact resonance regime on an NT-MDT Integra Prima setup using NOVA 1.1 software. High-resolution supersharp silicon cantilevers from Nanotyuning are used for the measurements. The resonance frequencies of the cantilevers range from 190 to 325 kHz, the radius of curvature of the tip is less than 2 nm, and the apex angle is less than 22. The amplitude of the free oscillations of the cantilever in air ranges from 1 to 1o nm. The automatically maintained amplitude of the cantilever oscillations in the vicinity of the surface (SetPoint parameter) is fixed at a level of 60-70% of the amplitude of the cantilever oscillations in air. The NOVA 1.1 software from NT-MDT is used for signal processing, digitization, and imaging. The experimental results are represented as 2D images in which light and dark surface fragments correspond to hills and wells, respectively (Figs. Figure Practical results show that the modifier must be deposited on graphene immediately after splitting, since relatively long exposure of the graphene surface to air leads to contamination, so that the modifier cannot be deposited after short exposures. The graphite sur-face with the modifier is more stable in air: DNA was successfully deposited on the graphene sample that was stored under forvacuum conditions over three months after deposition of the modifier (Fig. For comparison of the efficiencies of the proposed and conventional methods, we make attempts at deposition of the modifier and DNA molecules on graphene fabricated using the classical method of We have also tried to measure the transport characteristics of graphene prior to and after DNA deposition. In our opinion, the observed variations in the graphene conductivity after the deposition predominantly result from variation in the position of the Fermi level relative to the Dirac point We have proposed laboratory technology for deposition of DNA molecules on graphene that is obtained with the aid of mechanical splitting of natural graphite using epoxy adhesive. The procedure involves preliminary deposition of the modifier layer on the freshly prepared graphene. DNA molecules are deposited on top of the modifier layer. The stages of the procedure are monitored using AFM. The comparison have shown that the proposed procedure for the deposition of DNA molecules is superior (with respect to quality and technological simplicity) to alternative methods. The results of this work can be used in the development of nanoelectronic sensors for biomedical applications.