The 3ω method is a dynamic measurement technique developed for determining the thermal conductivity of thin films or semi-infinite bulk materials. A simplified model is often applied to deduce the thermal conductivity from the slope of the real part of the ac temperature amplitude as a function of the logarithm of frequency, which in-turn brings a limitation on the kind of samples under observation. In this work, we have measured the thermal conductivity of a forest of nanowires embedded in nanoporous alumina membranes using the 3ω method. An analytical solution of 2D heat conduction is then used to model the multilayer system, considering the anisotropic thermal properties of the different layers, substrate thermal conductivity and their thicknesses. Data treatment is performed by fitting the experimental results with the 2D model on two different sets of nanowires (silicon and BiSbTe) embedded in the matrix of nanoporous alumina template, having thermal conductivities that differ by at least one order of magnitude. These experimental results show that this method extends the applicability of the 3ω technique to more complex systems having anisotropic thermal properties. Thermal management is a key issue in microelectronic industry for several essential cases specially heat dissipation (heat pipes, heat sink), local cooling and energy recovery either to prevent premature aging or to do self powering of sensors Among nanostructured materials, nanowires (NWs) have shown a great potential in thermoelectric applications with remarkable increase in the figure of merit Several techniques have been developed in the past for the measurement of the in-plane thermal conductivity Here, we report the thermal conductivity measurements on large assemblies of nanowires embedded in nanoporous alumina templates using the 3ω method. These large assemblies of nanowires lead to anisotropic 2D heterostructures, whose derivation of thermal conductivity through experimental ways is not straightforward. A detailed description of the fabrication of two different types of nanowires, namely Bi 0.37 Sb 1.49 Te 3.14 and silicon, is presented. Since the sample structures are complex, the simplified analytical solution for the 3ω method can no longer be applied to deduce the thermal conductivity of the nanowires. Moreover, the embedded-nanowire film has anisotropic thermal properties, meaning, the inplane and the cross-plane thermal conductivities differ. We show experimentally that the two-dimensional heat conduction model proposed by Borca-Tasciuc et al. in 2001 can be used for the general case of a multilayer film-on-substrate system with anisotropic thermophysical properties for the extraction of thermal conductivity of the nanowires Measurement on such large number of nanowires reduces significantly the error arising from the existence of thermal contact resistances during the single nanowire measurements or from possible dispersion of properties from one nanowire to another. We finally demonstrate that using this method the thermal properties of nanowires fabricated in a bottom-up technique can be obtained with reasonable sensitivity. Highly dense array of nanowires (10 9 /cm 2 ) are fabricated with a bottom-up growth technique. In order to have a large density of nanowires with high aspect ratio, nanoporous alumina templates have been used for the growth of nanowires. In order to perform the 3ω measurement, a thin layer (50 nm) of Al 2 O 3 is deposited on the top of the sample for electrical isolation of the transducer from the mattress of nanowires that are usually electrically conductive. With the help of laser lithography and magnetron sputtering, a platinum transducer (120 nm thick) is deposited on the top surface with a four probe geometry (Fig. AAO was fabricated by anodizing aluminum by a twostep anodization technique 43 in 3% weigh/volume (w/v) oxalic acid solution. The diameter and the interpore distance is tuned with the help of anodizing potential and the concentration of the acid. Aluminum foil, 99.99% pure, is used for the fabrication of nanoporous alumina template with the applied anodizing voltage of 40 V in 3% w/v oxalic acid solution. Pore widening is done by dipping the AAO template in 5% phosphoric acid solution at 35 • C for six minutes. The resulting pore diameter is 60±5 nm. The ptype Bi 0.37 Sb 1.49 Te 3.14 NW array is fabricated by pulse electro-deposited in the AAO at room temperature with the applied potential of -0.3 V 44 . Aluminum (10±0.05μm) is deposited on a highly pdoped silicon wafer < 100 > (750 μm thick) by Electron Beam Physical Vapor Deposition (EBPVD). Anodization is carried out by two-step anodisation technique The 3ω method is very well known technique for the measurement of thermal conductivity of thin films and bulk materials The resulting 3ω voltage component contains the information about the thermal conductivity of the underlying layers. This method can be employed to measure the thermal conductivities of thin films down to several nanometers where, α is the temperature coefficient of resistance for the thermometer (obtained from Eq. 1), R is the resistance of the thermometer, I is the applied rms current, l is the length of the thermometer line, V 3ω-real is the in-phase component of the 3ω voltage, ω is the electrical angular frequency, ∆T real is the in-phase temperature change and P is the power dissipated by Joule heating. The electronic setup used in the 3ω measurements is schematically detailed in Fig. As mentioned before, most of the data treatment of 3ω experiment can be done by using the slope method, a one-dimensional heat conduction model to determine the thermal conductivity of thin films where, , i = 2...n ( (5) where, n refers to the total number of layers including the substrate with subscript i for the i th layer from the top, subscript x and y correspond respectively to the direction perpendicular to the transducer and to the film/substrate, b is the heater half width, κ is the thermal conductivity, κ xy is the anisotropy in thermal conductivity, it is the ratio of in-plane to the cross-plane thermal conductivity, d is the layer thickness and, γ is the thermal diffusivity. The thermal anisotropy κ xy contains by definition the interface thermal resistance between the nanowire and the alumina matrix. For the substrate layer, i = n and for substrates with finite thickness, the value of A n depends on the boundary condition at the bottom of the substrate. For adiabatic boundary conditions A n = -tanh(B n d n ) and for isothermal conditions, The 3ω experiments are carried out in the temperature range of 260-300 K and the fitting of the experimental data is done with the above-described model. The physical properties of all the layers play a crucial role in the fitting along with their precise thicknesses. In order to get the thermal properties of the embedded nanowires only, we need to get information about the thermal properties of the porous matrix that carries also part of the heat. The empty porous alumina templates were closed from the top with the help of thin layer (100 nm) of aluminum oxide deposited by Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD). Then, the thermal conductivity of empty nanoporous AAO membranes having the very same structure (size of pores, filling factors) has been measured using the same 3ω method. FIG. 4. Variation of the specific heat and thermal conductivity with temperature of empty nanoporous alumina templates. The specific heat measurements are done with the help of the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) and the thermal conductivity is derived by fitting the measurements data obtained from the 3ω measurements with the model of empty nanoporous AAO. The error bars are estimated from the absolute error of the PPMS equipment used for the specific heat measurement and from the measurement of the 3ω voltage plus the error induced by the physical parameters used for the fitting of the final value of thermal conductivity. In the Fig. , where φ is the porosity. The error in the determination of thermal conductivity includes the absolute error arising from the 3ω measurements along with the error in parameters used in the data fitting. With these known thermal properties of the empty nanoporous AAO templates, measurements on the forest of nanowires of Bi 0.37 Sb 1.49 Te 3.14 and silicon can now be performed. A. Thermal conductivity of Bi0.37Sb1.49Te3.14 nanowires Thermal conductivity of highly dense forest of Bi 0.37 Sb 1.49 Te 3.14 nanowires has been measured with the 3ω method. In Fig. The cross-plane thermal conductivity of Bi 0.37 Sb 1.49 Te 3.14 nanowires extracted through the modeling is 0.57 ± 0.02 Wm -1 K -1 . In table I, all the physical parameters used in the data fitting are detailed. The thermal conductivity anisotropy κ xy in the layer of embedded nanowires is a fitting parameter. The thermal conductivities of the nanoporous alumina template and of the bismuth telluride nanowires are comparable, this is the reason why in-plane and cross-plane thermal transport are on the same order of magnitude (κ xy ∼ 1). The highly dense forest of Si nanowires has been also measured using the 3ω method. Fig. As the thermal conductivity of the nanoporous alumina is very small compared to silicon, very low thermal anisotropy is expected in the system, most of the FIG. In this article, thermal conductivity measurements were done on systems that are thermally anisotropic: dense arrays of nanowires of Bi 0.37 Sb 1.49 Te 3.14 and silicon using the 3ω method. Nearly 5 × 10 5 NWs were probed simultaneously during the measurements. The extrac- tion of the thermal conductivity of the anisotropic films has been presented with the help of a two-dimensional heat conduction model. Thermal anisotropy along with the thermal conductivity of the films were determined with a high accuracy in the temperature range of 250 K to 300 K. The model has been applied to two materials with very different bulk thermal conductivities to prove the versatility of this data treatment method. This work demonstrates the possible extension of the applicability of the 3ω method to complex systems having thermal anisotropic layer or multilayers and consequently the measurement of a large number of nanowires.