Quasi-freestanding monolayer graphene (QFMLG) can be fabricated by decoupling of an epitaxially grown buffer layer from the underlying SiC substrate, e.g., via hydrogen intercalation. State-of-the-art QFMLG can be fabricated with high quality proven by low defect-related D-peak intensities in local Raman measurements and high charge carrier mobilities in transport measurements of micrometer-sized Hall bars. In this study, we first focus on the influence of mass flow rate of argon which is used as an inert atmosphere for the epitaxial buffer layer and graphene growth processes. After that, we show ultra-smooth buffer layer and graphene monolayer fabricated by taking into account the influence of the Ar flow rate as well as other growth determining parameters. The high quality of the produced samples is further demonstrated after hydrogen intercalation. Inert gas (N2, Ar, etc.) counter pressure was used for many years to improve SiC sublimation growth which prevents unwanted crystal growth before reaching the optimal growth temperature. The experiments were performed on the Si-face of the samples (5 x 10 mm 2 ) cut from a semi-insulating 6H-SiC wafer with a nominal miscut of about -0.06° towards [1100] (from II-VI Inc.). The substrates were prepared by liquid phase deposition of polymer adsorbates on the surface as described for the polymer assisted sublimation growth (PASG) technique in Refs. The impact of the Ar mass flow rate on the graphene growth was investigated on two samples G0 and G20 grown at 1750 °C (Ar atm., 900 mbar, 6 min), under zero and 20 sccm Ar mass flow, respectively. All other parameters were kept constant. The optimized buffer layer sample B0 was grown under 0 sccm Ar flow (900 mbar) by an annealing procedure with temperature steps at 1200 (10 min), 1400 (5 min) and 1500 °C (5 sec). Finally, we conducted hydrogen intercalation on B0 (buffer layer) at 900 °C (60 min) to obtain freestanding monolayer graphene (QFMLG). Similarly, quasi-freestanding bilayer graphene (QFBLG) was achieved by hydrogen intercalation on G0 (epi-Graphene) at 1050 °C (2 h). The intercalation was done in hydrogen (5%) and argon (95%) gas mixture (1000 mbar). The optimal temperature was determined by Raman spectroscopy, see supporting information. Influence of Ar flow rate in epitaxial buffer layer/ graphene growth. The surface morphology of the buffer layer samples grown under different Ar mass flow rates (S0, S100 and S1000) are plotted in Figure For higher 100 sccm Ar flow the surface morphology changes. Although the (6√3 × 6√3) 30° LEED pattern indicates the formation of the buffer layer on the terraces, Figure For much higher Ar flows (Figure .1g and h) the accelerated SiC decomposition induces an etching of the SiC surface. No buffer layer can be formed under these conditions as indicated by the (1x1) LEED pattern of the bare SiC surface, Figure Our investigations show that with increasing Ar mass flow the SiC surface decomposition is enhanced while the Ar pressure in the reactor is kept constant. This can be understood in a model in which a quasi-thermal equilibrium exists between Si and C species in a surface layer and those in the adjoining gas phase. In the following, we demonstrate that the rate of the Ar mass flow also has a substantial impact on the surface morphology of epitaxial monolayer graphene. We compare exemplary two graphene samples, G0, and G20, which were grown at 1750°C under 0 and 20 sccm Ar gas flow, respectively. The AFM images for both samples (Figure The structural homogeneity and lateral coverage of the buffer layer B0 are further verified by Raman measurements. The spectrum of this sample shows broad features, between 1200 and 1700 cm -1 (upper spectrum in Figure Additionally, the atomic structure was investigated using an Omicron low-temperature STM at 77 K with a tungsten tip. The detailed topography of the QFMLG sheet near 0.25 nm high and 0.5 nm high step edges are displayed by high-resolution STM images in Figure The appearance of the 2D peak in the Raman spectra of the QFMLG sample (lower spectrum in Figure The Raman mapping of the FWHM of the 2D peak in Figure Also, QFBLG was produced by hydrogen intercalation from the optimized monolayer graphene sample (G0). The upper Raman spectrum in Figure The homogeneity of the samples was derived from the VdP sheet resistances Rpar and Rperp measured in two orthogonal directions, parallel and perpendicular to the step edges. As before higher resistance values were obtained for perpendicular transport. The QFMLG and QFBLG samples show anisotropy values (Rperp / Rpar) values of 1.18 and 1.37 (at room temperature) which are in very good agreement with the microscopic four-point probe measurements. This result indicates the very good electronic homogeneity over mm scales of our QFMLG and QFBLG samples in excellent agreement with the AFM and Raman data. For QFBLG a comparable VdP study In summary, we have presented AFM, STM, LEED, electronic transport and Raman measurements which indicate the strong influence of the argon mass flow rate on the formation of the buffer layer and the graphene growth. For a given temperature and constant Ar pressure, the Ar mass flow rate controls the SiC decomposition rate which can be qualitatively understood by thermal equilibrium considerations. This new finding has the potential to improve the graphene quality by avoiding accelerated step bunching at higher temperatures and graphene roughening for lower Ar pressures, respectively. By properly chosen growth parameters it is possible to prevent structural defects (canyon defects and step defects) and to obtain a continuous, large-area buffer layer without graphene inclusions. This meets the demands of intercalation purposes and could further be used as a platform for growing other 2D materials or metamaterials. The QFMLG and QFBLG produced by hydrogen intercalation exhibit excellent homogeneity and very small resistance anisotropy over areas in the millimeter range. This indicates the presence of a coherent layer of freestanding monolayer graphene over large areas which is a prerequisite for application in electronic devices. ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. The Supporting Information is available at the end of this document. Corresponding Author *E-mail: davood.momeni.pakdehi@ptb.de *E-mail: klaus.pierz@ptb.de Results of VdP measurements at 5 mm x 5 mm large samples with QFMLG, epitaxial graphene, and QFBLG.