Non-destructive eddy current testing of defects in metal plates using the magnetic resonance signal of a radio-frequency atomic magnetometer is demonstrated. The shape and amplitude of the spatial profile of signal features that correspond to defects are explored. By comparing numerical and experimental results on a series of benchmark aluminium plates we demonstrate a robust process for determining defect dimensions. In particular, we show that the observed images represent the spatial distribution of the secondary field created by eddy currents in the sample. We also demonstrate that the amplitude and phase contrast of the observed profiles enables us to reliably measure defect depth. Accurate identification of structural flaws, such as corrosion in pipes or cracks in an aerofoil, has obvious benefits across many industries. In particular, the global cost of corrosion is estimated to be USD 2.5 trillion every year Most eddy current NDT systems use an rf coil to generate b, but the material response can be detected in two ways, namely by measurement of coil inductance or with a magnetic sensor. Measurements based on coil inductance monitoring The ability to extract information about defects such as cracks, bends and pipe thinning from measurement signals lies at the heart of NDT. Therefore, understanding how the observed signal is created and linked to the anomaly is one of the first issues that needs to be addressed when developing an NDT system. In this pa- per we explore how the spatial variation in the signals recorded by an rf magnetometer correspond to the physical dimensions of structural defects in aluminium (Al) plates. Non-magnetic samples have been chosen to minimise changes in the local field detected by the atomic magnetometer. However, while we examine the spatial profiles generated by the thinning of Al targets, similar profiles have been observed in the case of ferromagnetic (carbon steel) plates The measurement signal comes from the phase and am-arXiv:1811.01050v1 [physics.app-ph] 16 Oct 2018 plitude change in the rf resonance spectra registered by an rf atomic magnetometer as a conductive sample is moved under the rf coil (Fig. Figure In order to gain insight into the recorded images, we created a simple 2D model based on Faraday's law, by calculating the coupling between the primary field B and the conductive sample containing an inhomogeneity. We The minimum spatial extent of the profile representing the defect (recess) is defined by the coil diameter, lift off distance, operating rf frequency, and conductivity of the sample. The radial dimension of the rf coil defines the B spatial distribution and the size of the region containing the greatest density of eddy currents 