We study d-wave superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene and reveal phenomena that arise due to the moiré superlattice. In the d-wave pairing, the relative motion (RM) of two electrons in a Cooper pair can have either d + id or d -id symmetry with opposite angular momenta. Due to the enlarged moiré superlattice, the center-of-mass motion (COMM) can also carry a finite angular momentum while preserving the moiré periodicity. By matching the total angular momentum, which has contributions from both the RM and the COMM, Cooper pairs with d + id and d -id RMs are intrinsically coupled in a way such that the COMM associated with one of the RMs has a spontaneous vortex-antivortex lattice configuration. Another phenomenon is that the chiral dwave state carries spontaneous bulk circulating supercurrent. The chiral d-wave superconductors are gapped and also topological as characterized by an integer Chern number. Nematic d-wave superconductors, which could be stabilized, for example, by uniaxial strain, are gapless with point nodes. The twist angle in van der Waals bilayers has emerged as a new tuning knob to control electronic properties. In this work, we study d-wave superconductivity in TBLG, and reveal phenomena that arise due to the enlarged moiré superlattices. The d wave has been proposed to be a candidate pairing symmetry for TBLG in Coulomb repulsion mechanism We demonstrate two phenomena for chiral d-wave states in moiré superlattice, i.e., spontaneous vortices in the pairing order parameters and spontaneous bulk supercurrent. The presence of spontaneous vortices can be anticipated by examining the angular momentum of a Cooper pair, which is explained briefly in the following and thoroughly in Sec. III. In the d-wave pairing, the relative motion (RM) of two electrons in a Cooper pair has either d + id (d + ) or d -id (d -) symmetry, which carry opposite angular momenta under the transformation of a three-fold rotation. The total angular momentum of a Cooper pair has contributions from both the RM and the center-of-mass motion (COMM). Due to the enlarged moiré superlattice, COMM can also carry a finite angular momentum while preserving the moiré periodicity. By matching the total angular momentum, Cooper pairs with d + and d -RMs are intrinsically coupled. Overall, there are still two independent chiral pairing channels, which are respectively labeled as Γ1 and Γ2 [see Eq. (8) for definition]. In Γ1 , COMM associated with d + RM has an s-wave symmetry, while COMM for d -RM has a spontaneous vortex-antivortex lattice configuration. The other channel Γ2 is the time-reversal counterpart of Γ1 . The above order parameter structures are illustrated in Fig. We also discuss the gap structure in the superconducting states. The chiral d-wave states are gapped and also This paper is organized as follows. Section II sets up the single-particle moiré Hamiltonian. In Sec. III, we study d-wave pairing within mean-field theory, present the critical temperature, and discuss the superconductivity order parameters, including the spontaneous vortices. In Sec. IV, we illustrate the spontaneous supercurrent in the chiral d-wave state. Sections V and VI respectively present the gap structure of chiral and nematic d-wave states. In Sec. V, we also show that the chiral d-wave state is topological by computing the Berry curvature and the Chern number. Finally, a brief discussion and summary are given in Sec. VII. We construct TBLG with point group D 6 by starting from AA stacked bilayer graphene, and then rotate the bottom and top layers by angles -θ/2 and +θ/2 around one of the hexagon center, as illustrated in Fig. At a small twist angle θ, TBLG has a triangular moiré pattern with a long period a M = a 0 /[2 sin(θ/2)], where a 0 is the lattice constant of monolayer graphene. In the moiré pattern, there are three notable regions, where the local interlayer coordinations are of AA, AB and BA types, as highlighted in Fig. where τ = ± is the valley index. h τ b and h τ t are the Dirac Hamiltonians of the bottom (b) and top (t) layers where is +1 (-1) for the b (t) layer, v F is the bare Dirac velocity(∼ 10 6 m/s), and σ x,y are Pauli matrices that act in the sublattice space. Because of the rotation, the Dirac cone position in layer and valley τ is shifted to τ κ . We choose a moiré Brillouin zone (MBZ) in which κ is located at the corners, and refer to the MBZ center below as the γ point. κ is then given by [4π/(3a M )](-√ 3/2, -/2). The interlayer tun-neling terms are sublattice-dependent and vary periodically with the real space position r where b ± are moiré reciprocal lattice vectors given by [4π/( √ 3a M )](±1/2, √ 3/2) and T (j) τ = w 0 σ 0 + w 1 cos(2πj/3)σ x + τ w 1 sin(2πj/3)σ y . Here w 0 and w 1 are parameters that respectively determine the tunneling in AA and AB/BA regions. w 0 and w 1 are different because the interlayer distance in the AA region is larger than that in AB/BA regions, and therefore, |w 0 | < |w 1 | is expected. We take w 0 = 90 meV and w 1 = 117 meV from Ref. 57. For this choice of parameters, the largest magic angle, at which the Dirac velocity reaches a minimum value, is about 1.025 • . Near this magic angle, the two nearly flat bands close to zero energy (set by the Dirac point energy) are separated from higher or lower energy bands by a gap of about 35 meV, which is consistent with experiments We note that the moiré Hamiltonian builds in the D 6 point group symmetry and also the time-reversal symmetry T , as , where ε τ is the band energy in valley τ K and q is the momentum relative to the γ point. The band structure within one valley has strong trigonal warping as demonstrated in Fig. We studied the coupling between moiré electrons and in-plane optical phonon modes associated with each graphene layer in Ref. 43, and found that this coupling mediates the following intervalley electron pairing interactions where the operators ψ † and ψ are at the same coarsegrained position r. The subscript ± distinguish the two valleys, A and B label sublattices, refers to layers, and s and s are spin indices. In Eq. ( In H BCS , there are two distinct spin-singlet pairing channels: (i) intrasublattice pairing, e.g., , where is the fully antisymmetric tensor with ↑↓ = 1. While the intrasublattice pairing channels are generated by both Γ and ±K phonons, only the ±K phonons contribute to intersublattice pairing. The intra-and intersublattice pairings respectively have s-wave and d-wave symmetries because electrons at different sublattices and opposite valleys share the same angular momentum under the threefold rotation Ĉ3 ψ † (r) Ĉ-1 , where R 3 is the real-space three-fold rotational matrix. Intersub- Here the angular momentum is defined based on the Ĉ3 operation and therefore is determined up to modulo 3. P + and P -correspond to chiral d + and d -pairings, respectively. At the atomic scale, chiral d-wave pairings are realized by forming nearest-neighbor spin-singlet Cooper pairs with bond-dependent phase factors, as illustrated in Figs. We focus on the d-wave pairing, assuming that the swave pairing is suppressed by Coulomb repulsion effects. In Ref. 43, the d + and d -pairings are considered to be independent, which is a good approximation when estimating the critical temperature. Here we present the full theory and show that d + and d -pairings are coupled in the linearized gap equation, although only weakly. We perform mean-field theory, and the local pair amplitude is given by (1,+) (r) and ∆ (1,-) (r) in Γ1. In (c), ∆ (1,+) (r) normalized by its value at r = 0 (AA region center) is real. In (d), ∆ (1,-) (r) also normalized by ∆ (1,+) (0) is complex, and its magnitude and phase are indicated respectively by the color scale and the vectors. (e) Schematic plots of the Γ1 pair amplitudes around r = 0. (f), (g) and (h) are corresponding plots for pair amplitudes in Γ2. given by where A is the system area, q is a momentum within moiré Brillouin zone, n 1,2 are moiré band labels in +K valley for one spin component, ε n and |u n are the corresponding energies and wave functions, n F (ε) is the Fermi-Dirac occupation function, and μ is the chemical potential. The band energy ε n is measured relative to the Dirac point. The overlap function ... b, is the layer-resolved matrix element of the combined operator exp(ib • r)σ ± , where σ ± = (σ x ± iσ y )/2. Note that the time-reversal symmetry of the moiré Hamiltonian has been employed to simplify (7). The operator σ ± is closely related to the velocity operator vτ = ∂H τ /∂k. Near the magic angle, the velocity of the flat bands is strongly suppressed, but the layer counterflow velocity, which is approximately determined by the operator σ ± , remains large The largest eigenvalue of χ corresponds to two degenerate eigenvectors λ 1 and λ 2 , where the degeneracy is protected by the point group symmetries and also time-reversal symmetry. The pair amplitudes [∆ (j,+) (r), ∆ (j,-) (r)] associated with λ j (j = 1 and 2) lead to the following mean-field pair potential Γj = -4g A1 dr Γj (r), Γj (r) = ∆ (j,+) (r) P + (r) + ∆ (j,-) (r) P -(r). We distinguish Γ1 and Γ2 by the Ĉ3 rotational symmetry which is realized by requiring that We interpret the pair amplitude ∆ (j,±) as the envelope wave function for the COMM of the Cooper pair. In the linearized gap equation, Cooper pairs with relative motions d + and d -are coupled by adjusting their COMMs according to Eq. (10). The COMM can carry a finite angular momentum without breaking the moiré periodicity. The total angular momentum of the pair potential Γj is contributed by both the RM and the COMM. The pair amplitudes [∆ (1,+) (r), ∆ (1,-) (r)] in Γ1 are shown in Figs. (1,+) (r) has an s-wave symmetry and peaks near AA regions following the electron density distribution, while ∆ (1,-) (r) has a vortex-antivortex lattice configuration, in which vortices centered around AA, AB and BA regions have vorticity +2, -1 and -1 respectively. Therefore, ∆ (1,-) (r) satisfies (10) and preserves the moiré periodicity because of the zero total vorticity. As shown in Figs. (1,-) can be regarded as a secondary effect. Figs. We also calculate T c by neglecting the coupling between d + and d -relative motions, and the maximum T c calculated in this way is slightly lower than that obtained from the full calculation [Fig. As a side remark, we note that the periodic modulation of the pair amplitude is actually a ubiquitous phenomenon in crystalline superconductors. We can take superconducting aluminum as an example, which has a long coherence length (∼ 1600 nm). However, the swave pair amplitude ∆(r) = ψ ↓ (r)ψ ↑ (r) in aluminum has the lattice periodicity and varies within one unit cell following the variation of the normal state electron wave function We demonstrate that the chiral d-wave states support spontaneous bulk supercurrent. We first present various current operators. The in-plane current density operator for layer is given by where -e 0 is the electron charge (e 0 > 0) and J τ is the velocity operator that acts in the sublattice space Note that J τ derived from the Dirac Hamiltonian is independent of momentum and position. j (r) is a twocomponent vector representing the in-plane current flow in layer , and has the unit of current per length. The total in-plane current j is the sum of j b and j t . The interlayer tunneling leads to the following out-ofplane current density operator [ ψ † τ bs (r)T τ (r) ψτts (r) -H.c.], (13) where j z has a unit of current per area. We calculate the current density j α (r) in the chiral dwave states using a perturbation theory by expanding the Green's function in a power series of the pair amplitudes ∆. We retain only the leading-order contributions, and j α (r) is then proportional to ∆ * ∆, as required by gauge invariance. The bulk current distribution calculated in this way for the Γ1 pair potential is illustrated in Fig. Overall, the current flow can be decomposed into two components. One component is the circulation around the ẑ axis as shown in Fig. The current flow pattern is characterized by two different moments, the magnetic dipole moment m and the magnetic toroidal dipole moment Because the total bulk current vanishes, both m and t are extensive quantities proportional to the total number of moiré unit cells. For the current distribution illustrated in Fig. Our calculation of the supercurrent was initially motivated by the vortex structure in the pair amplitudes. However, even if the vortices in the pair amplitudes are neglected theoretically, for example by taking ∆ (1,-) in Γ1 to be zero, we find that the bulk circulating supercurrent remains qualitatively the same. The supercurrent is therefore not directed tied to the vortices, although both are phenomena that arise due to the enlarged moiré superlattice. We study the gap structure and topological characters of the d-wave superconducting states. The meanfield Hamiltonian for spin-singlet superconductivity can be generally written as where the subscripts ± of ψ again refer to valleys, and ↑ and ↓ still label spins, but the layer and sublattice indices are suppressed for conciseness. The Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians H BdG for ξ and ζ are the same, which reflects the spin SU(2) symmetry of the spin singlet superconductivity. In momentum space, H BdG can be organized as follows where q is the momentum within the moiré Brillouin zone. H 0 (q) is the moiré Hamiltonian (including chemical potential term) in valley +K, while the moiré Hamiltonian in valley -K after performing the particle-hole transformation is given by -H 0 (q) . The off-diagonal terms Λ and Λ † are matrix representation of the pair potentials. In our case, Λ is independent of q because the pairing interaction in (4) is local in space. It is instructive to project H BdG (q) to states on the Fermi surface, leading to the following 2 × 2 matrix HBdG (q) = 0 ∆(q) ∆ * (q) 0 , where ∆(q) = u(q)|Λ|u(q) , and |u(q) is a state with momentum q on the Fermi surface. ∆(q) is generally referred to as the gap function. If the pair potential is timereversal symmetric, then Λ = Λ † and therefore, ∆(q) is real; otherwise, ∆(q) is generally complex. We apply the above discussion to chiral d-wave states. Fig. To characterize the topological property, we calculate the Berry curvature for all occupied bands in Fig. Chiral and nematic d-wave pairing order parameters belong to the same multiplet. Two independent basis functions for nematic d-wave pairings are given by Γx and Γy transform respectively as d x 2 -y 2 and d xy under Ĉ6 rotation. A generic nematic pair potential can be parametrized as where η = (η x , η y ) is the nematic director. A superconductor with the nematic pair potential preserves time-reversal symmetry but breaks rotational symmetry, which is characterized by a nematic order parameter Because Γη is time-reversal symmetric, there is no spontaneous bulk supercurrent and the corresponding gap function ∆ η (q) is real. On the other hand, ∆ η (q) integrated over the Fermi surface (FS) vanishes q∈F S dq∆ η (q) = 0. ( Therefore, ∆ η (q) must have point nodes on the Fermi surface, as illustrated in Fig. An external uniaxial strain breaks the six-fold rotational symmetry, and therefore, lifts the two-fold degeneracy between Γx and Γy . The uniaxial strain tensor ij couples linearly to the nematic order parameter N , and extrinsically stabilizes nematic superconductivity near T c . An in-plane magnetic field B also breaks the rotational symmetry, and could play a role similar to uniaxial strain. An interplay between the B field and the strain ij field can lead to a two-fold anisotropy in the critical in-plane magnetic field. The nematic superconductivity could also be intrinsically stabilized by density wave fluctuations as proposed by a recent theoretical work In TBLG, optical phonon modes can mediate d-wave pairing because of the sublattice pseudospin chirality. It recently became recognized through the study of topological superconductivity that phonon fluctuations assisted by strong spin-orbital coupling can generate non s-wave pairing interactions. In summary, we have studied the pairing order parameters, gap structure and topological character of dwave superconductivity in TBLG. The presence of spontaneous vortices and supercurrent could be a very generic effect for multicomponent superconductivity and superfluidity in superlattices; a theory that incorporates microscopic physics within the superlattice unit cell is crucial to study this effect. Two-particle bound states with a finite center-of-mass angular momentum were also recently studied in the context of excitons in moiré pattern * wufcheng@umd.edu 1 J. M. B. Lopes dos Santos, N. M. R. Peres, and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 256802 (2007).