Perovskite photoelectrodes are being extensively studied in search for photocatalytic materials that can produce hydrogen through water splitting. The solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of these materials is critically dependent on the electrochemical state of their surface. Here, we develop an embedded quantum-mechanical approach using the self-consistent continuum solvation (SCCS) model to predict the relation between band alignment, electrochemical stability, and photocatalytic activity taking into account the long-range polarization of the semiconductor electrode under electrical bias. Using this comprehensive model, we calculate the charge-voltage response of various reconstructions of a solvated SrTiO3 surface, revealing that interfacial charge trapping exerts primary control on the electrical response and surface stability of the photoelectrode. Our results provide a detailed molecular-level interpretation of the enhanced photocatalytic activity of SrTiO3 upon voltage-induced restructuring of the semiconductor-solution interface. Hydrogen is a sustainable energy carrier whose electrocatalytic reaction with oxygen produces electricity and heat without emitting carbon dioxide. A highly attractive approach for the production of hydrogen fuels consists of splitting water molecules by photocatalytic means; however, engineering photoactive electrode materials that can efficiently promote this reaction remains an outstanding question at both the experimental and theoretical levels. Strontium titanate (SrTiO 3 ) is a photocatalytic material that has shown promising solar-tohydrogen performance To date, considerable efforts have been dedicated to understanding the microscopic mechanisms that underlie the water-splitting performance of SrTiO 3 A central aspect of these studies has been to elucidate the structure of the SrTiO 3 -water interface. Through surface-sensitive characterization and electronic-structure calculation, it has been shown that SrTiO 3 can undergo a TiO 2 -rich surface reconstruction Beyond their descriptive power, density-functional theory simulations are now frequently applied to address many of the questions that surround the performance of water-splitting catalysts. These calculations have been used to evaluate the band edge positions against redox potentials in electrolytic media Using these newly available computational models, we undertake here a detailed analysis of various reconstructions of the SrTiO 3 electrodes to predict and understand their photoelectrochemical properties. By simulating the effects of band bending and band alignment, we examine the influence of surface termination on the electrical response and electrochemical stability of SrTiO 3 under voltage to shed light into its photocatalytic performance as a function of preparation and operation conditions. First, we outline the computational methods in Sec. II with a presentation of the surface models and description of the voltage-dependent surface calculations. We then report computational predictions of voltage-induced charge accumulation and band bending as a function of the surface termination in Sec. III. Finally, we discuss the consequences of these predictions in understanding the electrochemical stability and photocatalytic activity of the reconstructed SrTiO 3 electrodes. A. First-principles simulations Self-consistent-field calculations are performed at the semilocal Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof level The TiO 2 surface termination has been reported to form when SrTiO 3 is annealed at 850-1,000 • C Based on this structural survey, four symmetric slab models are constructed, including 7 bulk layers with a periodic separation of approximately 15 Å along the transverse axis. A schematic of the slab models is shown in Fig. To describe the solvation environment, the structure is immersed in an implicit polarizable solvent parameterized by the self-consistent continuum solvation (SCCS) model To derive the charge-voltage characteristics of the SrTiO 3 -water interfaces, we employ the procedure initially proposed by Campbell and coworkers The capacitive responses of the electrodes are obtained by varying the amount of charge added to the electrode (the opposite of the Helmholtz charge) These simulations show that the charge-voltage responses are critically dependent on the interface structures and terminations. More specifically, the bare 1 ML structure behaves similarly to an ideal semiconductor, with a limited amount of electronic charge trapped as surface states. This interface exhibits a moderate capacitive response across the low-voltage range, whereas an upshift of the capacitive response is observed for the hydrated interface 1 ML-H 2 O * , which indicates stronger charge trapping compared to the bare interface. Besides those two terminations, both the O * and OH * interfaces show substantial charge pinning, yielding a linear (ohmic) response. Such surface states reduce the extent of band bending, thus diminishing charge transport within the depletion region. It is interesting to note that, for the substantially reconstructed 3 ML surface, the O * and OH * terminations still maintain the semiconductor-like characteristics. This indicates that these surface structures could potentially provide a charge transport pathway for photocatalytic reactions. Having determined the electrical characteristics of the proposed surface terminations, we now turn our attention to comparing their stability in electrolytic media in an effort to describe the voltage-induced reconstruction of the surface and its effects on photocatalytic durability and activity. Such surface-energy calculations are highly sensitive to the slab thickness and to the sampling of the Brillouin zone, potentially impacting the calculated surface energies. These sources of error can be eliminated by employing the methods proposed by Singh-Miller and Marzari where N is the number of slab layers, E slab and E bulk are the slab and bulk total energies, respectively, and A s stands for the surface area. In the limit of large N , Eq. 3 can be recast as reflecting the fact that the total energy of the slab should vary linearly as a function of the slab thickness with a slope equals to the bulk energy E bulk of the material and an intercept corresponding to its surface energy γ 0 . We then consider the non-stoichiometry of the termination by taking into account the chemical potentials of the leaching and adsorbing elements in expressing the grand-canonical free energy γ of the surface in terms of the chemical potentials μ TiO2 = F (TiO 2 ) and Once the energy of the neutral interface is calculated, one obtains the free energy γ * of the charged interface from Lippmann's equation where Φ is the applied potential and σ is the voltagedependent surface charge density derived from the charge-voltage responses, leading in particular to significant changes in the surface stability of the more metallic The adsorption energy ∆F H is expressed as where F H * is the energy of the proton adsorbed on the SrTiO 3 surface and F * is the total energy of the adsorption site. The adsorption free energy of H * is then calcu- lated from where ∆ZPE H is the change of zero-point vibrational energy of hydrogen, and ∆S H is the change in entropy upon the adsorption. We compute ZPE H * at the interfaces using Γ-point phonon calculations. The zero-point energy of reference hydrogen is computed in the gas phase as ZPE H2(g) . The entropy contributions are obtained from experimental data at 300 K The volcano plot exhibits large changes in the overpotentials for different surface structures and clearly indicates that the outermost oxygen site from the 3 ML-O * interface is the closest to the volcano peak, with an overpotential of 0.11 V. All other terminations tend to adsorb the protons either too strongly or too weakly. Comparing these results to the previous charge-voltage curves and surface reconstruction diagram (Fig. In this work, we have investigated the surface structures of SrTiO 3 under electrochemical conditions. By applying an embedded quantum-mechanical model based on the self-consistent continuum solvation approach, we have determined the electrical response of the reconstructed interfaces of SrTiO 3 from first principles. We have shown that the surface terminations strongly affect the electrification of SrTiO 3 photoelectrodes, leading to a variety of interfacial charge-voltage behaviors ranging from ohmic to semiconducting. The 3 ML termination has been found to be among the surface structures that provide potential charge transport pathways. We have then computed the surface free energies of all interfaces under applied potential in alkaline solutions. These electrochemical calculations have suggested that the 3 ML-O * is the most stable of the structures considered under positive bias. The catalytic activity of the 3 ML termination has been estimated to be the strongest for the hydrogen evolution reaction based on vacuum calculations of hydrogen binding energies. Our calculations provide direct molecular insights into the voltage-induced formation of the triple-TiO 2 termination and into the beneficial influence of this reconstruction on the photocatalytic activity of SrTiO 3 .