In this paper, the interaction of few tens of atoms containing gold nanoclusters with two dimensional nanosheets of transition metal dichalcogenides nanosheets has been explored. The gold nanoclusters have been synthesized using chemical reduction method in presence of protein molecules as stabilizing agent. The transition metal dichalcogenides nanosheets of molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) has been chemically exfoliated. Different microscopic and optical spectroscopic tools have been used for characterizing the physical properties of the gold nanoclusters and the two dimensional nanosheets of MoS 2 . The gold nanoclusters exhibit fluorescence emission at 690 nm. However, the interaction with transition metal dichalcogenides diminishes drastically the fluorescence intensity of the nanoclusters. The spectroscopic methods used for understanding the interaction in the system reveals the absence of energy transfer and dynamic nature of the fluorescence quenching. In recent years, the metal nanoclusters (NCs) consisting of few tens of metal atoms have been studied extensively due to their intriguing physical properties and excellent chemical stability. a) Electronic mail: arunspatel.jnu@gmail.com b) Electronic mail: anirban@jnu.ac.in arXiv:1811.06910v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 29 Jan 2020 Gold nanoclusters are less toxic as compared to other metal nanoclusters. Hence, gold nanoclusters can be a good choice as fluorescent materials in comparison with available fluorescent dye molecules. The dye molecules that are used as fluorescent tags in spectroscopic analysis have toxic nature; so, they have limitations in direct use in biological studies. In recent years, there has been great interest among the researchers to understand the interaction of fluorescent materials with different kinds of nanomaterials, starting from dye molecules with quantum dots to quantum dots with 2D nanomaterials. 9-14 These interactions have been explored for different areas of application like sensing, solar cell, imaging, etc. Since discovery of graphene, people started searching for other forms of 2D nanosheets and in recent times different 2D nanomaterials, which have varying band gap from UV to IR region, are being extensively studied. Among these 2D nanosheets, the nanosheets of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), which have band gap in the visible wavelength range found great interest. For synthesis of gold nanoclusters, chloroauric acid (HAuCl 4 .3H 2 O, Sigma Aldrich) was used as precursor of gold nanoclusters. Gold nanoclusters were synthesized using chemical reduction method. In typical synthesis procedure, 50 mg bovine serum albumin (BSA) was dissolved in 1 mL of distilled water. In the BSA solution, 1 mL of 10 -2 M gold salt aqueous solution was added, and the mixture was stirred for 5 min. Further, 0.1 mL aqueous solution of 1M sodium hydroxide was injected into the solution, and the mixture was allowed to be stirred for 10 min. As-prepared solution was incubated at 37 0 C for 24 h. The yellow colored solution turned to a reddish-brown after formation of gold nanoclusters. The aqueous dispersion of gold nanoclusters was kept at 4 0 C for further study. Chemical exfoliation of MoS 2 nanosheets: The MoS 2 nanosheets were obtained by chemical exfoliation of the bulk MoS 2 powder using ultrasonication technique. For this purpose, a stock solution of BSA was prepared (1 mg/mL). The solution was used as solvent for dispersion of bulk MoS 2 powder. 50 mg of MoS 2 powder was dispersed in 10 mL of the aqueous solution of BSA. The dispersion of MoS 2 was ultrasonicated for 20 h. After ultrasonication, the precipitate was allowed to settle down and the supernatant was collected, and a stock solution of MoS 2 was made. Characterization techniques: The gold nanoclusters and MoS 2 nanosheets were characterized by different spectroscopic and microscopic techniques. The absorption spectra of these nanomaterials were recorded using UV-visible spectrophotometer (IMPLEN, Inkarp). The Raman spectrometer from WITEC was used to investigate the Raman active vibrational modes of MoS 2 . For this purpose, Raman spectrometer, with 532 nm laser excitation source was used. The shape and size of the nanosheets were analyzed by transmission electron microscope (JEOL-2010) operated at 200 keV. The fluorescence spectra of gold nanoclusters in absence and presence of MoS 2 nanosheets were recorded using fluorimeter. The fluorescence lifetime decay was monitored using time correlated single photon counting set-up (FL920, Edinburgh Instruments, UK). The excitation source was 370 nm pulse laser with operating frequency of 20 MHz. The shape and morphology of MoS 2 nanosheets were monitored by TEM analysis. The TEM image of MoS 2 nanosheets is shown in Figure The Raman spectrum of MoS 2 nanosheets is shown in Figure The optical absorption of gold nanoclusters and MoS 2 nanosheets are recorded using absorption spectrophotometer in the visible range. The absorption spectra of gold nanoclusters, MoS 2 and mixture of both are shown in Figure In order to investigate the effect of the presence of MoS 2 on the fluorescence property of the gold nanoclusters, the fluorescence spectra of gold nanoclusters have been recorded, both in absence and presence of different quantities of MoS 2 nanosheets. The fluorescence spectra of gold nanoclusters in the absence and presence of MoS 2 are shown in Figure where F DA and F D are fluorescence intensities of gold nanoclusters in presence and absence of MoS 2 nanosheets. The Fl quenching efficiency was found to be 41 and 89 % for MoS 2 nanosheets with 0.1 mL and 0.7 mL of the acceptor quantities, respectively. Further, the nature of the fluorescence quenching was investigated using time resolved fluorescence where α j is the weighing factor, τ j is the fluorescence lifetime associated with j th component. For gold nanoclusters, the Fl decay curves were fitted with triple exponential decaying functions. The three components are associated with three different environments of the emitters. In gold nanoclusters, it has been observed that there are few gold atoms in Au(I) state, while the emission comes out due to Au(0) atoms, which are forming core of the gold nanoclusters. The gold nanoclusters are formed with 25 gold atoms, which are in conjugation with BSA molecules. Few gold atoms bind with sulfur atoms of the BSA molecules and thus the inner gold atoms are in Au(0) state. Thus, one component is arising due to core and the other due to outer interacting nanoclusters. The outer component is responsible for high Fl lifetime value, while the inner one is responsible for small value of the Fl lifetime. The average Fl lifetime of gold nanoclusters is found to be 1.1 μs. From Figure In summary, the interaction of gold nanoclusters with the molybdenum disulfide was explored. It had been observed that the BSA, protein molecules, stabilized gold nanoclusters had strong florescence emission around 700 nm and its emission intensity can be altered in presence of MoS 2 nanosheets. The florescence quenching was found to be static in the nature. It was observed when distance between donor and acceptor was short in case of R6G molecules and MoS 2 nanosheets the energy transfer phenomenon took place. The authors are thankful to AIRF and SBT, JNU for characterization techniques. D. S. Yarramala, A. Baksi, T. Pradeep, and C. P. Rao, "Green synthesis of protein-protected fluorescent gold nanoclusters (auncs): Reducing the size of auncs by partially occupying the ca2+ site by la3+ in FIG. 8. Fluorescence lifetime decay curves of R6G molecules in absence and presence of MoS2 nanosheets, here MoS2 nanosheets are exfoliated in NMP solvent.