Solar energy promises a viable solution to meet the ever-increasing power demand by providing a clean, renewable energy alternative to fossil fuels. For solar thermophotovoltaics (STPV), hightemperature absorbers and emitters with strong spectral selectivity are imperative to efficiently couple solar radiation into photovoltaic cells. Here, we demonstrate refractory metasurfaces for STPV with tailored absorptance and emittance characterized by in-situ high-temperature measurements, featuring thermal stability up to at least 1200 oC. Our tungsten-based metasurface absorbers have close-to-unity absorption from visible to near infrared and strongly suppressed emission at longer wavelengths, while our metasurface emitters provide wavelength-selective emission spectrally matched to the band-edge of InGaAsSb photovoltaic cells. The projected overall STPV efficiency is as high as 18% when employing a fully integrated absorber/emitter metasurface structure, much higher than those achievable by stand-alone PV cells. Our work opens a path forward for high-performance STPV systems based on refractory metasurface structures. Photovoltaics (PV) Recently, several proof-of-concept STPV experiments have been reported employing various absorber/emitter intermediate structures Here, we experimentally demonstrate refractory tungsten (W) metasurface solar absorbers and thermal emitters for STPV intermediate structures. The metasurface structures exhibit desirable wavelength selective absorptance and emittance, and their structural integrity does not show any significant degradation following exposure to repeated heating cycles between room temperature and 1200 °C. Furthermore, the absorptance/emittance spectra are thermally stable up to at least 1200 °C in vacuum by in situ high temperature measurements. Using a detailed balance calculation, we predict that a fully integrated intermediate structure based on our metasurface absorber/emitter would yield an STPV efficiency of 18% under 4000 suns concentrated solar radiation and operated at 1380 °C, much higher than that of a stand-alone InGaAsSb PV cell. The design of the refractory solar absorbers is based on a metal/dielectric/metal metasurface structure As shown in Figure We found that the fabrication process of the W thin films (i.e., sputtering vs. e-beam evaporation) has a significant impact on the performance of the metasurface absorbers as shown in Figure The metasurface absorber using e-beam evaporated W-films exhibits high absorptance in the visible and near-infrared regions, but the absorptance remains high at longer wavelengths, which is undesirable as it causes a higher radiation loss. The contrast of absorption spectra can be understood by the very different optical and structural properties of the W-films deposited by sputtering and evaporation (see Supplementary Figures According to Kirchhoff's law, the design of a wavelength-selective thermal emitter is equivalent to that of a wavelength-selective absorber. Similar to the broadband metasurface absorbers described above, we employed single-size W-nanodisks to demonstrate our metasurface thermal emitters, as shown in Figure Practical metasurface intermediate structures for STPV should maintain their optical and structural properties after long-time operation and repeated heating cycles. The thermal stability of the Wmetasurfaces was investigated using an in-house high-temperature optical characterization set-up (see Methods and Supplementary Figure The observed redshift may result from the observed morphology change of the tungsten nanodisks during thermal annealing. As can be seen in the high-magnification SEM images (see Supplementary Figure Similar heating cycles were applied to the W-metasurface solar absorbers. As shown by SEM images in Figures In Figures For STPV application the spectral characteristics of the W-metasufaces should be retained at high operational temperatures. We characterized in-situ the absorptance spectra of the W-metasurface solar absorbers at 1200 °C. As shown in Figure The demonstrated W-metasurface absorbers and emitters are promising for further enhancing the current STPV efficiency due to their superior spectral selectivity and thermal stability. Compared to numerous absorbers and emitters reported elsewhere In particular, tantalum has lower emittance in the near-and mid-infrared compared to tungsten We estimated the performance of a potential STPV system employing a fully integrated Wmetasurface absorber/emitter intermediate structure based on a detailed balance calculation (see Methods). In the calculation, the after-annealing experimental data of the HfO2-coated Wmetasurface absorber and the d = 360 nm thermal emitter were used. In Figures For comparison, the efficiency of the InGaAsSb PV cell is only 7.9% under the same solar concentration. More importantly, we find that η 8<=> could exceed that of the InGaAsSb cell at solar concentrations of as low as ~ 70 suns for Ae/Aa = 5, and readily reach 10% at ~200 and 400 suns for two practical emitter-to-absorber area ratios Ae/Aa = 5 and 15, respectively (see Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated tungsten-based refractory metasurfaces with desired spectral selectivity for STPV applications. The metasurface solar absorbers exhibit high absorption at visible and near-infrared wavelengths where the solar spectral intensity is significant, while the emittance is greatly suppressed at longer wavelengths to reduce the thermal radiative loss. The metasurface thermal emitters allow for wavelength selective emission matching the bandgap of narrow-gap photovoltaic cells and the spectral peak of blackbody radiation to maximize the thermal energy harvesting. We find the metasurface structural integrity and spectral response do not show any significant degradation following prolonged high temperature operation and repeated heating cycles between room temperature and up to 1200 °C. When the metasurface solar absorber and thermal emitter are fully integrated to form the intermediate structure, through a detailed balance calculation we estimated the overall STPV efficiency as high as 18.5% with a practical solar concentration and emitter-to-absorber area ratio, much higher than those achievable by standalone PV cells, therefore providing a path forward for high-performance STPV systems based on refractory metasurface structures. All metasurfaces were fabricated on 1 cm × 1 cm, double-sided polished, high-resistivity (ρ > 10,000 Ω-cm) silicon substrate, with an active area typically 1 mm × 1 mm. A 150-nm-thick W-film was first deposited on the substrate surface by DC sputtering at room temperature (power = 100 W, pressure = 3 mT), followed by an Al2O3 thin film using atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 250 °C using trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water precursors. After another 50-nm-thick W-film also by sputtering, a thin layer of chromium (Cr) was deposited by e-beam evaporation to be used as an etching mask for the nanodisks, which were defined by e-beam lithography (JEOL JBX-6300FS) using negative e-beam resist (Dow Corning XR-1541). The nanodisk patterns were transferred into the underlying Cr layer by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching with Cl2/Ar chemistry, and subsequently into the W-film by fluorine-based reactive-ion etching (RIE). The Cr etching mask was removed thereafter by a wet chemical etching process, leaving behind square arrays of W-nanodisks on the Al2O3/W layers. HfO2 protective coating was deposited by ALD at 250 °C using tetrakis (dimethylamido) hafnium (TDMAH) and water precursors. XRD and SEM characterization. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses of tungsten thin films were conducted using a Rigaku Ultima III diffractometer with a Cu Ka (1.5406 Å) X-ray source. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of tungsten thin films and the fabricated Wmetasurfaces were taken on a high-resolution FEI Nova NanoSEM 450 system. FDTD simulations. Full-wave numerical simulations of metasurface absorbers and emitters were carried out in the frequency domain with periodic boundary conditions using commercial simulation software packages (COMSOL Multiphysics and CST Microwave Studio). The measured frequency dependent dielectric properties of tungsten and aluminum oxide were used in the simulations of the specular scattering S parameters, including the transmission S21 and reflection S11 coefficients, and the absorptance was then derived using A = 1 -|S AA | B , as S21 is zero due to the thick W-ground plane. The absorptance was also calculated by integrating the dissipated power density over the entire volume of the metasurface unit cell. No difference with respect to 1 -|S AA | B was observed and, hence, high order diffraction modes are not excited in our structures. Although the absorber does not present continuous rotational invariance, it was numerically checked that its absorptance depends weakly on the azimuthal angle j. is the open circuit factor, and m(T 78 , T => ) is the impedance matching factor, all computed using the measured external quantum efficiency of the PV cell The authors declare no competing financial interest. Here, I UU (λ, T) is the blackbody spectral irradiance at temperature T, T ; is the temperature of the sun, J with Ω ;