Zeeman spectroscopy is used to demonstrate that phenomenological crystal-field parameters determined for the two C 1 point-group sites in Er 3+ :Y 2 SiO 5 may be transferred to other ions. The two crystallographic sixand seven-coordinate substitutional sites may be distinguished by comparing the spectra with crystal-field calculations. Yttrium orthosilicate (Y 2 SiO 5 ) doped with rare-earth ions has been widely used over the past decade in the development of quantum-information devices. Yttrium has a very small nuclear magnetic moment, while isotopes of Si and O with non-zero nuclear spin have very low natural abundances. This minimises decoherence due to spin flips, giving outstanding coherence properties. Furthermore, the rare-earth substitutional sites in Y 2 SiO 5 has C 1 point-group symmetry, giving highly admixed wavefunctions and enabling efficient and diverse optical pumping schemes Performance improvements for these devices rely on accurate modelling of magnetic-hyperfine structure. For example, the spin Hamiltonian for Eu 3+ :Y 2 SiO 5 was utilized in a computational search for magnetic field orientations exhibiting a near-zero gradient with respect to hyperfine energy levels. This Zero-First-Order-Zeeman (ZEFOZ) technique enabled an experimental demonstration of a coherence time of six hours in 151 Eu 3+ :Y 2 SiO 5 Spin Hamiltonians are not transferable between electronic levels of the same ion, or to other ions. This limits the opportunity to explore candidate systems by theoretical modelling. On the other hand, crystal-field calculations Determination of crystal-field parameters for low-symmetry systems is non-trivial. Data from Zeeman splitting is essential to give orientation information necessary to determine a unique set of parameters We have recently developed techniques that make full phenomenological crystal-field fits for C 1 point-group symmetry sites practical. These methods have been applied to both sites of Er 3+ :Y 2 SiO 5 In this work we demonstrate the transferability of the crystal-field parameters to the ions Sm 3+ and Nd 3+ by performing Zeeman spectroscopy. Calculations based on the Er 3+ parameters clearly distinguish the two sites, and this information may be combined with EPR and ab-initio calculations for particular ions to allow the identification of sites. 2h space group symmetry. The yttrium ions occupy two crystallographically distinct sites, each with C 1 point-group symmetry, referred to as site 1 and site 2, corresponding to oxygen coordination numbers of six and seven, respectively Samples of Y 2 SiO 5 doped with Er 3+ (50 ppm) and Nd 3+ (200 ppm) were prepared in Paris. The Sm 3+ (5000 ppm) sample was supplied by Scientific Materials. All samples were oriented using Laue backscattering. The samples were cuboids with the D 1 and D 2 and b axes through the faces and dimensions of approximately 5 mm. Infrared spectroscopy was performed using a 0.075 cm -1 resolution Bruker Vertex 80 with an optical path purged by N 2 gas. Zeeman spectroscopy was performed using a 4 T, simple solenoid, superconducting magnet with samples cooled by thermal contact with a copper sample holder fixed through the centre of the solenoid. Measurements were carried out at 4.2 K. The Hamiltonian appropriate for modelling the 4f N configuration is The terms in this equation represent the free-ion contribution, the crystalfield interaction, the Zeeman term, and the electron-nuclear hyperfine interaction. The free-ion Hamiltonian may be written as + βG(G 2 ) + i=2,3,4,6,7,8 E avg is a constant configurational shift, F k Slater parameters characterizing aspherical electrostatic repulsion, and ζ the spin-orbit coupling constant. The other terms parametrize two-and three-body interactions, as well as higher-order spin-dependent effects The crystal-field Hamiltonian has the form for k = 2, 4, 6 and q = -k • • • k. The B k q parameters are the crystal-field expansion coefficients and C (k) q are spherical tensor operators. In C 1 symmetry all non-axial (q = 0) B k q parameters are complex, leading to a total of 27 parameters. We do not explicitly consider hyperfine interactions in this work. The reader is referred to Refs. The Zeeman interaction for an external magnetic field is represented by where μ B is the Bohr magneton, and L and S are the total orbital and spin angular momenta. In this work we only consider Kramers ions (with total spin a multiple of h/2). For Kramers ions in low-symmetry sites all electronic levels are doubly-degenerate in the absence of an applied magnetic field. For low magnetic fields the splitting of these doublets may be parametrized by g values, such that the splitting ∆ E is a function of the magnetic field B applied in a particular direction: Transitions between the ground electronic state and an excited electronic state will, in general, contain four spectral lines, as indicated schematically in Figure Zeeman spectra for Nd 3+ , Sm 3+ , and Er 3+ in Y 2 SiO 5 crystals are given in Figure We begin with Er 3+ :Y 2 SiO 5 , since this is the ion for which the crystal-field parameters were determined Figure The absorption for the Site 1 and Site 2 transitions is comparable, so if the oscillator strengths are assumed to be similar then the concentration of Er 3+ in each site is comparable. The crystal-field splitting for Site 1 is larger than for Site 2 Nd 3+ has 3 4f electrons, so has a larger ionic radius than Er 3+ and substitution into the seven-coordinate site is expected to be favoured. The site with the largest absorbance, labelled Type 1 in Ref. Figure Sm 3+ is a Kramers ion with a large number of absorption lines in the IR, visible, and UV spectral regions. It is, therefore, an ideal ion for extensive Zeeman measurements. Sm 3+ has 5 4f electrons, so it has an ionic radius slightly smaller than Nd 3+ and, again, substitution into the seven-coordinate site is expected to be favoured. Figure The magnetic splitting for the transitions with highest absorbance is consistent with the Site 2 calculation. The g values for the ground state for both sites are small (Table We have used Zeeman spectroscopy to demonstrate that crystal-field parameters determined for Er 3+ in the two Y 2 SiO 5 substitutional sites give a reasonable account of magnetic splittings in other ions. Future work will use more extensive measurements to refine the crystal-field parameters across the rare-earth series. This will provide improved modelling relevant to the development of quantum-information applications. Table 