Room-temperature superconductivity has been one of the most challenging subjects in modern physics. Recent experiments reported that lanthanum hydride LaH 10±x (x<1) raises a superconducting transition temperature T c up to ∼260 (or 250) K at high pressures around 190 (170) GPa. Here, based on first-principles calculations, we reveal that compressed LaH 10 has the topological Dirac-nodal-line (DNL) states that create a van Hove singularity (vHs) near the Fermi energy. Contrasting with the previously proposed bonding nature based on a charge transfer picture from cationic La to anionic H, we identify a peculiar characteristic of electrical charges with anionic La and both cationic and anionic H species, caused by a strong hybridization of the La f and H s orbitals. We find that a large number of electronic states at the vHs are strongly coupled to the H-derived highfrequency phonon modes that are induced via the unusual, intricate bonding network of LaH 10 , thereby yielding a high T c . Our findings elucidate the microscopic origin of the observed high-T c BCS-type superconductivity in LaH 10 , which can be generic to another recently observed high-T c hydride H 3 S. Ever since the first discovery of superconductivity (SC) in 1911 To explore the origin of the high-temperature BCS-type SC of compressed LaH 10 , we here, based on first-principles calculations, not only investigate the salient characteristics of the electronic, bonding, and phononic properties, but also identify which electronic states are coupled with H-derived highfrequency phonon modes. We reveal that LaH 10 has the topological Dirac-nodal-line (DNL) states including seven onedimensional (1D) dispersive nodal lines near the Fermi energy E F . Remarkably, four DNLs are split into hole-like and electron-like bands at the high-symmetry point L on the Brillouin zone boundary, forming a van Hove singularity (vHs) close to E F . We find that the electronic states near E F exhibit a strong hybridization of the La 4 f and H s orbitals, leading to a peculiar electrical charge characteristic of anionic La and both cationic and anionic H atoms. This unusual, intricate bonding network of LaH 10 induces the high-frequency vibrations of H atoms, which are, in turn, strongly coupled to large numbers of electronic states at the vHs. The resulting strong EPC significantly enhances T c , as measured by recent experiments We have performed the density-functional theory (DFT) calculations for the electronic, bonding, and phononic properties of compressed LaH 10 at 300 GPa. We used the Vienna ab initio simulation package with the projector-augmented wave method Figures It is remarkable that the hole-like and electron-like bands are degenerate at the L point to form a DNL along the ΓL line, showing the 1D nodal line with a large band width ∼6 eV [see Fig. In order to examine the ionic character between the La atoms and the H 32 cages, we calculate the charge density difference, defined as ∆ρ = ρ tot -ρ La -ρ H , where the second and third terms represent the charge densities of the LaH 0 lattice (i.e., LaH 10 structure without H atoms) and the La 0 H 10 lattice (LaH 10 structure without La atoms), respectively. Obviously, ∆ρ illustrates that electron charge is transferred from the H 2 atoms as well as the void space (marked '×' region in Fig. To conclude, our first-principles calculations for the electronic, bonding, and phononic properties of the compressed f cc-LaH 10 phase have revealed two unique features that play important roles in increasing T c of the BCS-type SC. One is the existence of vHs near E F , which originates from the hole-like and electron-like bands arising from the topological DNL states, and the other represents H-derived high vibrational frequencies that are induced via the unusual, intricate bonding network with anionic La and both cationic and anionic H atoms. These two features cooperate to produce a strong EPC, thereby enhancing T c in f cc-LaH 10 . It is noted that the f cc-LaH 10 phase can be stabilized at higher pressures above ∼170 GPa Supplemental Material for "Origin of High-Temperature Superconductivity in LaH 10 " 