Single-layer pentagonal materials are an emerging family of two-dimensional (2D) materials that could exhibit novel properties due to the building blocks being pentagons instead of hexagons as in numerous 2D materials. Based on our recently predicted single-layer pentagonal CoS2 that is an antiferromagnetic (AFM) semiconductor, we replace two S atoms by As atoms in a unit cell to form single-layer pentagonal CoAsS. The resulting single-layer material is dynamically stable according to the phonon calculations. We find two drastic changes in the properties of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS in comparison with those of CoS2. First, we find a magnetic transition from the AFM to FM ordering. We understand that the transition is caused by the lower electronegativity of As atoms, leading to the weakened bridging roles on the superexchange interactions between Co ions. Singlelayer pentagonal CoAsS also shows significantly stronger magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy due to stronger spin-orbit coupling. We additionally perform Monte Carlo simulations to calculate the Curie temperature of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS and the predicted Curie temperature is 103 K. Second, we find that single-layer pentagonal CoAsS exhibits piezoelectricity, which is absent in single-layer pentagonal CoS2 due to its center of symmetry. The computed piezoelectric coefficients are also sizable. The rare coexistence of FM ordering and piezoelectricity makes single-layer pentagonal CoAsS a promising multifunctional 2D material. Multifunctional materials have been immensely studied due to their combinations of two or more chemical and physical properties that can be used and tailored for specific applications. To discover novel 2D materials with both magnetism and piezoelectricity, we adopt the strategy of exploring structure-properties relationships by modifying the building blocks of a 2D material from hexagons to pentagons. In particular, we used pentagonal geometries in conjunction with density functional theory (DFT) calculations to predict novel 2D materials. To break the inversion symmetry of single-layer CoS 2 , we partially replacing the S atoms bridging the Co atoms by As atoms to form single-layer CoAsS. We expect the substitution will introduce the piezoelectricity. Figure We use the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP, version 5.4.4) We follow the same procedure applied to single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 to determine the ground-state magnetic ordering of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS. We also see from Table Co:3d As:4p S:3p as in single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 To examine the effects on the dynamical stability caused by partially replacing S by As atoms, we calculate the phonon spectrum of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS. Figure Figure To understand the mechanism of the transition from single-layer pentagonal, AFM CoS 2 to FM CoAsS, we note that the Co-S-Co superexchange interactions in single-layer pentagonal, AFM CoS 2 are rather weak and the calculated exchange integral is 3.01 meV leading to the low Néel temperature. Unlike the Co-Co exchange interactions in single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 bridged only by the S ions, the Co-Co exchange interactions in singlelayer pentagonal CoAsS are bridged by both As and S ions. This is reflected by the orbital mixing in the orbitalresolved band structure shown in Fig. The electrons surrounding the As and S ions in singlelayer pentagonal CoAsS play the roles of bridging the exchange interactions between the Co ions. The magnitude of electron density around an As or S ion therefore qualitatively determines the "bridge width" describing the strength of exchange interactions. Intuitively, the larger "bridge width" corresponds to stronger exchange interactions. To compare the "bridge width" of As and S ions, Fig. To further demonstrate the importance of electronegativity in affecting the magnetic ordering of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS, we perform an energy calculation on an imaginary 2D material CoOS. Namely, the As atoms are replaced by more electronegative O atoms (3.5 on the Pauling scale). Having understood the mechanism of magnetic transition, we set to evaluate the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS. To calculate the MAE, we consider the spinorbit coupling (SOC) in the calculations. , plotted as a solid blue line. ergy maximum (460 μeV/Co ion) along the c axis. This maximum MAE is much higher than that (153 μeV/Co ion) of single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 due to the presence of heavier As ions associated with stronger SOC. Strong magnetocrystalline anisotropy is a necessary condition for single-layer pentagonal CoAsS to exhibit long-range magnetic ordering. where E AFM and E FM are the energies of a unit cell of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS with the same structure and different magnetic configurations (AFM and FM, respectively). We obtain a larger J (12.77 meV) than that (3.01 meV) of single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 . and we obtain an estimated Curie temperature T C of 103K and the critical exponent β of 0.45. Although the T C is still below room temperature, it appears higher than the Néel temperature (∼ 20K The strength of piezoelectricity is quantified by piezoelectric coefficients. To calculate the piezoelectric coeffi-cients of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS, we first compute the elastic constants with a symmetry-general method. We next calculate the piezoelectric coefficients e ijk and d imn of single-layer pentagonal CoAsS. These two sets of piezoelectric coefficients are related via the following equation using the Einstein notation: ( To obtain e ijk , we calculate the polarizations from both electronic and ionic contributions using density functional perturbation theory. In summary, we have predicted a single-layer ternary compound CoAsS with pentagonal structure using DFT + U calculations. In comparison with single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 with the AFM ordering, single-layer pentagonal CoAsS exhibits the FM ordering and significantly stronger MAEs. We suggest that electronegativity plays an important role in leading to the magnetic transition from the AFM to the FM ordering. In addition to the FM ordering, we find single-layer pentagonal CoS 2 possesses piezoelectricity with sizable piezoelectric coefficients. Our prediction shows that this novel single-layer pentagonal material may be useful for a variety of applications owing to its multifunctional properties. a Spin-up component b Spin-down component