Realization of topological superconductors is one of the most important goals in studies of topological phases in quantum materials. In this work, we theoretically propose a novel way to attain topological superconductors with non-trivial Fermi surfaces of Bogoliubov quasiparticles. Considering the interacting Luttinger model with j = 3/2 electrons, we investigate the dominant superconducting channels for a multi-orbital quadratic band-touching system with finite chemical potential, which breaks the particle-hole symmetry in the normal state. Notably, while the system generally favors d-wave pairing, the absence of the particle-hole symmetry necessarily induces parasitic s-wave pairing. Based on the Landau theory with SO(3) symmetry, we demonstrate that two kinds of topological superconductors are energetically favored; uniaxial nematic phase with parasitic s wave pairing (d (3z 2 -r 2 ) +s) and time-reversal-symmetry broken phase with parasitic s wave pairing (d (3z 2 -r 2 ,xy) + id x 2 -y 2 + s). These superconductors contain either nodal lines or Fermi pockets of gapless Bogoliubov quasiparticles and moreover exhibit topological winding numbers ±2, leading to non-trivial surface states such as drumhead-like surface states or Fermi arcs. We discuss applications of our theory to relevant families of materials, especially half-heusler compound YPtBi, and suggest possible future experiments. Recent surge of research activities on topological materials has paved novel avenues to obtain a variety of topological phases of quantum materials, such as topological insulators, topological semimetals, and topological superconductors. The selection of these superconducting states occur at the level of quartic interactions between order parameters. This is distinct from the cases of pure d-wave paring states that may be chosen at the sixth order interactions between order parameters, which was considered in previous studies of the Luttinger model with fine-tuned particle-hole symmetry or zero chemical potential. Below we discuss details of our theoretical analyses and possible applications of our theory to superconductivity in relevant materials. We also suggest possible ways to control the nature of the superconducting states using chemical doping, hydrostatic pressure, and temperature. We first introduce the multi-orbital Hamiltonian described by the Luttinger model with j = 3/2 electrons. where ) is the four component spinor for j = 3/2 electrons, μ is the chemical potential, γ a are the 4 × 4 gamma matrices and d a (k) = ( √ 3/2)k i k j M a ij with 3 × 3 real Gell-Mann matrices M a . (See Section I of Supplementary Information (SI) for details) | so that there is a single Fermi surface (with double degeneracy) for μ = 0. For interacting system, one can include additional terms, ( The former corresponds to the onsite density-density interaction and the latter corresponds to the interactions between d-wave-orbital densities since ψ † γ a ψ transforms as d-wave orbitals or "quadrupolar" moments (See Section I of SI). Similar to the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian, we set coefficients g a = g 1 for SO(3) symmetry. Note that these interactions correspond to so-called "particle-hole" channel interactions and tend to condense the particle-hole composites ∼ ψ † ψ , when the coefficients are sufficiently negative. For instance, when g 1 < 0 becomes large, the system undergoes a nematic quantum phase transition toward a state with distorted Fermi surfaces. Here, we consider repulsive interactions, g 0 , g a > 0. We first use the Fierz identity for j = 3/2 electrons to exactly decompose the particle-hole channel interactions into pairing channels. where γ ab ≡ iγ a γ b , ∆s = ψ T γ 45 ψ is the s-wave pair that is invariant under all the symmetries of the system, and ∆d,a = ψ T γ 45 γ a ψ, a = 1, 2, • • • 5 are the d-wave pairs that transform exactly the same as the regular d-wave spin-singlet pair. From the Fierz identity, we find It is important to note that there is an instability toward superconducting states even when the bare interactions are all repulsive, i.e., g 0 > 0 and g 1 > 0, due to the minus sign relating g d and g 1 . Hence, the system can have attractions only in the d-wave superconducting channels without the s-wave component. In the conventional single-band spin-1/2 electron system, the bare particle-hole channel interactions are neither decomposed exactly into the pairing channels nor favoring dwave pairings. After integrating out the j = 3/2 electrons, we now expand the Ginzburg-Landau free energy functional in terms of the superconducting order parameters ∆ s = ∆s and ∆ a = ∆d,a . In the presence of the SO(3) symmetry, one defines symmetric traceless 3×3 tensor order parameter, φ ≡ a ∆ a M a with M a being the real Gell-Mann matrices. The free energy functional is written as, Here, ∆ represents the vector (∆ We assume that there is a range of parameters such that r s > 0 and r d < 0 with dominant attractive d-wave channels. Within one-loop expansion, q d3 is always zero and so we drop it from here (See Section II of SI). The last m 1 term which couples d-wave and s-wave pairs, is zero within the leading one-loop computation in the presence of particlehole symmetry, i.e. m 1 = 0 for μ = c 0 = 0 (See Section II of SI for details). The absence of m 1 term allows the previous studies to access the pure d-wave superconductors. However, when the fine-tuned particle-hole symmetry is absent so that m 1 is finite, we find that the non-zero d-wave condensates ∆ = 0 always induce the parasitic s-wave superconductivity (∆ s = 0) and change the nature of the superconducting states. With these in mind, we look for the global phase diagram by minimizing the free energy in Eq. We now numerically minimize the free energy. In the presence of time-reversal symmetry, we find that the lowestenergy state is given by ∆ = (0, ∆ 2 , 0, 0, 0) with parasitic ∆ s , i.e., uniaxial nematic phase with subdominant s-wave (d 3z 2 -r 2 + s). Within the real manifolds of ∆, one can also perform tensorial differentiation and show that the stable equilibrium phase is indeed uniquely determined to be the uniaxial nematic state with parasitic s-wave pairing Without m 1 term in Eq.( Here, where ψ k is defined in Eq.( To recap our discussion above, superconductivity in the Luttinger model prefers topologically non-trivial d-wave pairings with parasitic s-wave component; the time-reversalinvariant uniaxial nematic phase with (d 3z 2 -r 2 + s) pairing and the time-reversal-symmetry broken superconductor with (d (3z 2 -r 2 ,xy) + id x 2 -y 2 + s) pairing. As long as the Fermi level is not exactly at the quadratic band-touching point, the subdominant s-wave pairing always makes the system to select these particular choices of d-wave pairings. It is important to note that the nature of such superconducting states can easily be changed by tuning the chemical doping or applying hydrostatic pressure, with the underlying assumption of small Fermi surface, i.e, small k F . In particular, chemical doping is directly related to the magnitude of m 1 coefficient in the Landau free energy functional, which can be used to drive the transition between two topological superconductors, as shown in the phase diagram of Fig. Finally, we briefly discuss application of our theory to relevant materials. In principle, our theoretical results can be generally used to investigate any systems, where the low energy kinetics is described by the Luttinger Hamiltonian. There are potential candidate materials which include lacu- nar spinel compounds GaM 4 X 8 , rare-earth cage compounds Pr(TM) 2 X 20 and half-heusler compounds. Luttinger Hamiltonian for a quadratic band touching system In this section, we give the explicit expressions of Gell-Mann matrices M a and gamma matrices γ a and also discuss the relation between our model and general Luttinger Hamiltonian. J i , which gives i-th component of angular momentum of j = 3 2 states, are represented as follows, The 3 × 3 real Gell-Mann matrices M a and 4 × 4 γ a matrices are given as below, where γ a matrices satisfy the Clifford algebra {γ a , γ b } = 2δ ab . Then, d a (k) can be written as follows, The general form of the Luttinger Hamiltonian matrix considering cubic symmetry without inversion is given as, with s 1,2 = -1 and s 3,4,5 = +1. We set = k B = 2m * = 1 where m * is the effective electron mass. Here (α + 5 4 β) and μ quantify particle-hole asymmetry, (-β + γ) measures cubic-anisotropy, δ is related to inversion odd terms which should vanish for centrosymmetric system. When β = γ and δ = 0, h0 (k) describes SO(3) symmetric system and is consistent with h 0 (k) introduced in the main text. Considering fully spherical symmetric system, we set (α + 5 4 β) = c 0 and (β + γ) = 1 from here. For a half-heusler material YPtBi, it has been estimated α = 20.5eVa 2 /π 2 , β = -18.5eVa 2 /π 2 , γ = -12.7eVa 2 /π 2 , δ = 0.06eVa/π and a is the lattice constant. The bare on site Coulomb interaction, on the other hand, is written as, Here, Eq.9 clearly shows that ψ † γ a ψ transforms as d-wave orbitals or quadrupolar moments. Using the Fierz identiy, Eq.12 is exactly decomposed as h s + a h da with where For fully spherical symmetric case, g a = g 1 which leads to Here, γ 45 ≡ iγ 4 γ 5 and the time-reversal operator is represented as T = γ 45 K, where K indicates complex conjugation. Now we define order parameters, ∆ s ≡ ψ T γ 45 ψ and ∆ a ≡ ψ T γ 45 γ a ψ which corresponds to s-and d-wave superconducting order parameters, respectively. In this section, we show the Ginzburg-Landau free energy F introduced in the main text. We consider the decomposed interactions and calculate the coefficients of F within one-loop expansion upto quartic order. Before proceeding, we first introduce the free electron propagator as below, where K ≡ (k 0 , k) and k 0 = 2π/T (n + 1/2) indicates fermionic Matsubara frequency. The free energy can be written as, where ∆ = γ 45 ∆ s + a γ a γ 45 ∆ a . Let F n (∆ s , ∆) be the gathering of an expansion of F (∆ s , ∆) which contains n-th power of ∆ s or ∆ a . with which can be represented as diagrams shown in Fig. with φ ≡ a ∆ a M a . We take specific configurations of ∆ i ≡ (∆ s , ∆) as below, By applying 27 into Eq.21-22, we get and Then one can extract relevant coefficients of the quadratic terms and quartic terms as below. with In Eq.48, one can clearly see that m 1 should vanish for fine-tuned particle-hole symmetric case i.e., c 0 = 0 and μ = 0, as stated in the main text. We also note q d3 = 0 within one-loop expansion regardless of the presence of particle-hole symmetry so we drop it from here. Free Energy analysis within real manifolds of superconducting order parameters Within real manifolds of superconducting order parameters, one can find R such that Rφ R T = φ where R ∈ SO(3), φ = a=1-5 ∆ a M a and φ = a=1,2 ∆ a M a for general φ . Here φ and φ represent physically equivalent order parameters of the system, which respect global SO(3) symmetry. So we can write down our free energy as below without loss of generality within real manifolds. ≡ tr(φ 2 )a 1 + tr(φ 3 )a 2 + (tr(φ 2 )) 2 a 3 + r s ∆ 2 s + q s ∆ 4 s . Equilibrium condition of Eq.( where D denotes tensorial differentiation and 1 3 is 3 × 3 identity matrix. Another equilibrium condition is given by, which clearly shows that ∆ 1 = 0 and non-zero m 1 and ∆ 2 lead to the emergence of parasitic s-wave pairing ∆ s = 0. Substituting ∆ 2 using Eq.55 gives us the exact value of ∆ s , ∆ 2 and F for a given parameter set, (r d , r s , q d1 , q d2 , q s , m 1 , m 2 , m 3 ). Within complex manifolds, there exist R and α such that ∆ s e iα = ∆ s and Rφ R T e iα = φ where R ∈ SO(3), α ∈ R, φ = a=1-5 ∆ a M a and φ = a=1-5 ∆ a M a for general φ . Here, 4 as stated in the main text. The off-diagonal component, h 0 (k) -i∆γ † 45 , can be explicitly expressed as follows, and the corresponding eigenvalues are given as, For the superconducting phase with pure (d 3z 2 -r 2 ) pairing, the order parameters are explicitly given as, ∆ s = 0, ∆ = (0, ∆ 2 , 0, 0, 0). Then in the weak pairing limit, the eigenvalues, λ ± , can be expanded as a function of ∆ 2 up to the first order. ). (69) The first three terms are exactly the normal energy of the Luttinger Hamiltonian, which vanishes near the Fermi surface. i.e. it changes the sign at the Fermi surface. The third term is purely imaginary, which is proportional to the nodal structure, 2k 2 zk 2 xk 2 y . As a result, the complex phase of λ +(-) winds by 2π as we encircle the nodal ring of the superconductor when μ > 0(μ < 0). The winding of λ manifests as the non-trivial topology of the nodal ring. To explicitly see this, we now define the topological invariant Here, q(k) is given as, where |n is the eigenvectors of h 0 (k) -i∆γ † 45 . Without loss of generality, we can integrate on the k y = 0 plane where dθ tr(e -iΦm |m m|∂ θ e iΦn |n n|) where the signs for the top nodal ring (k z > 0) and the bottom nodal ring (k z < 0) are opposite to each other. This winding number is topologically robust in the presence of the time-reversal and inversion symmetries. However, each nodal ring can shrink to a point at north pole and south pole (k = ±|k|ẑ) when the s-wave pairing order parameter ∆ s adiabatically deforms the nodal structure. The critical value of ∆ s where nodal rings shrink to nodal points can be derived by inspecting P (k x , k y = 0, k z ). The value is shown to be ∆ s = -∆ 2 when c 0 = 0 and ∆ 2 , μ > 0. If we further increase ∆ s , nodal points become gapped out on its own where each nodal point doesn't carry any topological charge at all. Meanwhile, the nodal rings can also pair-annihilate at the equator (k z = 0) when ∆ s increases. The critical value of ∆ s that pair-annihilate nodal rings is given by ∆ when c 0 = 0 and ∆ 2 , μ > 0. For the superconducting phase with (d (3z 2 -r 2 ,xy) +id x 2 -y 2 +s) pairing, our BdG Hamiltonian is classified as class D which supports doubly charged surface nodes. Topological charges of the surface node, a Bogoliubov Fermi pocket, can be characterized as where k -(k + ) denotes k inside(outside) a Bogoliubov Fermi pocket. Meanwhile, the 2nd homotopy charge is related to the Chern number for a closed surface S 2 which enclose a nodal surface. For numerical calculation of Chern number, we adopt the Kubo type formula given below. where H(k) indicates the BdG Hamiltonian matrix at a given k, E F is the Fermi level and |u n (k) and E n (k) denote the nth Bloch state and energy respectively. To investigate the topological properties of the (d (3z 2 -r 2 ,xy) + id x 2 -y 2 + s) pairing, we decompose the d-wave order parameter as below. ∆ = ∆ 2 (0, 1, 0, 0, 0) + ∆ T SB (i, 0, 0, 0, 1) Instead of calculating the Chern number of each Bogoliubov Fermi pocket, we integrate out the Berry curvature over k z = 0 plane and define the Chern number Ch z . On the k z = 0 plane, the BdG Hamiltonian can be simplified and block-diagonalized as the following two sub-matrices with c 0 = 0. Similarly, Fig. 