We present first-principles many-body perturbation theory calculations of the quasiparticle electronic structure and of the optical response of HfO 2 polymorphs. We use the GW approximation including core electrons by the projector augmented wave (PAW) method and performing a quasiparticle self-consistency also on wavefunctions (QSGW ). In addition, we solve the Bethe-Salpeter equation on top of GW to calculate optical properties including excitonic effects. For monoclinic HfO 2 we find a fundamental band gap of E g = 6.33 eV (with the direct band gap at E d g = 6.41 eV), and an exciton binding energy of 0.57 eV, which situates the optical gap at E o g = 5.85 eV. The latter is in the range of spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) experimental estimates (5.5-6 eV), whereas our electronic band gap is well beyond experimental photoemission (PE) estimates (< 6 eV) and previous GW works. Our calculated density of states and optical absorption spectra compare well to raw PE and SE spectra. This suggests that our predictions of both optical and electronic gaps are close to, or at least lower bounds of, the real values. Introduction Hafnia (HfO 2 ) is a transition metal oxide having attracted much attention due to its numerous technological applications, mainly related to its optical and electrical insulating properties. It is used for optical coatings 1 in the near-ultraviolet (UV) to infrared (IR) wavelengths range, or as a high permittivity dielectric 2 in submicrometer silicon-based technologies. More recently, it is gaining interest as an insulating layer in resistive random access memories (ReRAM) At ambient pressure, bulk HfO 2 exists in three thermodynamically stable crystalline polymorphs. At low temperature, the most stable phase exhibits a monoclinic P 2 1 /c symmetry (m-HfO 2 ), and transforms into a P 4 2 /nmc tetragonal phase (t-HfO 2 ) around 2000 K. Several experimental techniques have been employed to characterize HfO 2 thin films. On the one hand, both X-ray (XPS) and ultraviolet (UPS) photoemission spectroscopy (PES), and inverse photoemission (IPS) have been used to study the electronic structure. The electronic structure of HfO 2 polymorphs has also been studied theoretically. First works on m-HfO 2 In this work we revisit the situation. We calculate the electronic structure in the framework of MBPT within the GW approximation, In Table , are closer to the NCPP PW ones In the following we consider only PBE relaxed atomic structure, the closest to the experiment. Our GW 0 and QSGW calculations systematically yield larger band gaps than previous theoretical studies. For the monoclinic phase, our values are 0.4∼0.5 eV larger than the highest GW 0 estimates of Refs. 30 and 31 and the TB-mBJ-orig of Ref. 29. The latter are in very good agreement with the 5.7 and 5.86 eV band gap values determined from photoemission experiments, Optical gap and spectra In Table The nature of this small peak at the optical onset observed in SE spectra Conclusions In this work we combine QSGW calculations to compute the electronic structure of HfO 2 with BSE to compute optical spectra. We compare our calculated DOS and optical absorption with raw, as-acquired, experimental spectra measured for the monoclinic phase. Our calculated electronic band gap (E g = 6.33 eV) is significantly larger than the values obtained in previous theoretical and experimental studies. However the direct comparison between QSGW DOS and experimental spectra shows a good agreement and even indicates that our band gap value slightly underestimates by ∼ 0.2 eV the real value. In contrast, we obtain an optical gap of 5.85 eV, in agreement with SE estimates. We find that the difference is due to the presence of a bound exciton with a large binding energy of 0.57 eV. Supplementary Material See supplementary material for information about the relaxed structures and convergence studies of GW and BSE calculations. Structural parameters All our calculations are based on density functional theory within local density approximation (LDA) or generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the parametrization of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) in the framework of plane wave projector-augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented in the vasp code. We study cubic (spacegroup F m3m), tetragonal (spacegroup P 4 2 /nmc) and monoclinic (spacegroup P 2 1 /c) phases of HfO 2 . Each structure is relaxed until the maximum residual forces are less than 10 -3 eV/ Å. For the relaxation we use a fine k mesh of 12 × 12 × 12, 12 × 12 × 8 and 8 × 8 × 8 for cubic, tetragonal and monoclinic phases, respectively. Calculated structural parameters are summarized in Table One-shot G 0 W 0 convergence We carefully examine the convergence of our GW calculations in order to achieve QP band gap values converged within 0.1 eV. Indeed, to calculate the response function and the corre- lation part of self-energy, a summation over empty states is required and quasi particle (QP) energies exhibit a very slow convergence with respect to the number of virtual orbitals. Furthermore, the number of empty bands N b , the corresponding orbital basis set N pw (controlled by the plane waves cutoff E pw ) and the size of the response function basis set N χ pw (controlled by the plane waves cutoff E χ pw ) have to be increased simultaneously convergence study suggests that a 500 eV plane waves cutoff (3603 plane waves) allows to achieve a band gap converged within 80 meV. For this basis set, the number of empty bands can be decreased to 2000 without deteriorating the convergence (see bottom right panel of Fig. We also check the influence of the number of frequency points and k mesh. We find that increasing the frequency grid from 100 to 200 points only changes the QP band gap by 15 meV but tend to compensate the error done due to incompleteness of the plane waves basis set. When using a finer k-point sampling of 6 × 6 × 6, change in the QP band gap is below 1 meV. Our convergence study shows that the numerical convergence of our calculated QP band gaps is below 80 meV. In table IV, we summarize the convergence parameters used in our work with those from previous theoretical studies. Self-consistent GW convergence Self-consistent GW calculations are carried out with the same parameters as for G 0 W 0 . For GW 0 and QSGW calculations, we include respectively 256 and 512 QP energies in the selfconsistent procedure for monoclinic HfO 2 . In the case of GW 0 , 4 self-consistent iterations are enough to get converged band gap. For QSGW , 8 self-consistent GW iterations allowed to get converged QP energies and band gaps within 5 meV as shown in Fig. A more complete convergence study with respect to kmesh could be carried out using a model BSE (mBSE) scheme or interpolation techniques but have not been considered in this work. DOS For monoclinic HfO 2 , we present in Fig. M. Gilo and N. Croitoru, Thin Solid Films 350, (1999). 2 J. Robertson, Rep. Prog. Phys. 69, 327 (2006).