We examine magnetic domain patterns in symmetric [Co/Ni]M and asymmetric [Pt/(Co/Ni)M /Ir]N multi-layers using Fresnel mode Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (LTEM). In the symmetric multi-layer, where the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction is expected to be zero, we observe purely Bloch type domain walls with no preferred chirality. In the asymmetric multi-layers, where significant interfacial DMI is present, we observe domain patterns with chiral Néel domain walls, which evolve into sub-100nm isolated Néel Skyrmions with the application of a perpendicular field. The impact of layer thickness and film stack on interfacial magnetic properties is discussed in the context of developing a tunable multi-layer system for future spintronic applications. Magnetic objects with added topological stability, such as Skyrmions and chiral domain walls (DWs), have garnered a great deal of attention in recent years due the unprecedented efficiency by which they can be manipulated with electric current for use in future spintronic devices The discovery of DMI has opened the door to a range of new magnetic materials and multi-layer designs to support the formation of such chiral configurations. Parameters such as FM/HM interfaces In this work we examine the magnetic domain structures of asymmetric multi-layers based on [Pt/(Co/Ni) M /Ir] N using Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (LTEM). In these films, interfacial DMI is induced at the interface of Pt/Co and Ni/Ir. It has been reported that Pt and Ir induce DMI of opposite sign leading to an additive effect when placed on opposite surfaces of a magnetic heterostructure Multi-layers were deposited onto 5 nm thick SiN membranes via magnetron sputtering in an Ar environment with working pressure fixed at 2.5 mTorr and base pressure at < 3.0 × 10 -7 Torr. All film stacks were deposited onto seedlayers of Ta(3)/Pt(3) with units in nm. Asymmetric and symmetric multi-layers had the following subsequent layers: [Pt(0.5)/(Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)) M /Ir(0.5)] N and [Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)] M /Co(0.2), respectively. Magnetic hysteresis loops of these multi-layers were measured using alternating gradient field magnetometry (AGFM). Fresnel-mode LTEM imaging was performed on an aberration-corrected FEI Titan G2 80-300 operated in Lorentz mode. Magnetic induction maps were produced by solving the Transport of Intensity Equation (TIE) using over-and under-focused Fresnel images as in Symmetric [Co/Ni] M based multi-layers were first examined to serve as a limiting case where there is no impact from Ir and Pt. Perpendicular M-H loops from these films indicate perpendicular magnetic anisotropy is present. The shearing and pinched shape of the loop, which is characteristic of bubble materials, suggests the formation of a multi-domain state at zero applied field. Fresnel mode LTEM images of both symmetric multilayers (M = 10, 100) display magnetic contrast in the absence of tilt (FIG. M-H loops of asymmetric multi-layers (FIG. Fresnel mode LTEM images of these asymmetric multilayers displayed no magnetic contrast in the non-tilted state (FIG. Next we examined the effects the number of film stack repeats, N , has on magnetic domain characteristics in V. SUMMARY In summary, we have examined asymmetric Pt/Co/Ni/Ir based multi-layers using Lorentz trans-mission electron microscopy. The properties of these multi-layers were tuned through variations in ferromagnetic layer thickness and overall thickness, which were reflected in the magnetic domain structure. Symmetric Co/Ni multi-layers displayed only Bloch walls indicating no DMI was present; with the addition of a Pt and Ir layer sandwiching Co and Ni, DMI is induced which is reflected in the presence of exclusively Néel walls in Fresnel mode images. Although the effective DMI was diminished with greater ferromagnetic content in film stack repeats, Néel walls were still observed. Additionally, asymmetric Pt/Co/Ni/Ir multi-layers with greater number of total film stack repeats were observed to support the formation of sub-100 nm Skyrmions at room temperature in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field. Overall, this materials system provides a tunable platform for further exploration of chiral spin textures and the development of spintronic devices. .