The development of inverse design, where computational optimization techniques are used to design devices based on certain specifications, has led to the discovery of many compact, nonintuitive structures with superior performance. Among various methods, large-scale, gradient-based optimization techniques have been one of the most important ways to design a structure containing a vast number of degrees of freedom. These techniques are made possible by the adjoint method, in which the gradient of an objective function with respect to all design degrees of freedom can be computed using only two full-field simulations. However, this approach has so far mostly been applied to linear photonic devices. Here, we present an extension of this method to modeling nonlinear devices in the frequency domain, with the nonlinear response directly included in the gradient computation. As illustrations, we use the method to devise compact photonic switches in a Kerr nonlinear material, in which low-power and high-power pulses are routed in different directions. Our technique may lead to the development of novel compact nonlinear photonic devices. In recent years, there has been significant interest in using computational optimization tools to design novel nanophotonic devices with a wide range of applications Up to now, in photonics the adjoint method has been mostly applied to gradient-based optimization of linear optical devices. The generalization of the adjoint method to nonlinear optical devices would create new possibilities in several exciting fields such as on-chip lasers To solve for the adjoint sensitivity of a nonlinear system, the standard option is to work within a time-domain adjoint formalism, which entails simulating an additional linear system with a time-varying permittivity In this work we outline, in detail, how the adjoint method may be used to optimize the steady-state response of a nonlinear optical device in the frequency domain. We first outline a formalism for generalizing adjoint problems to arbitrary nonlinear problems. Then, as a demonstration, we use our method to inverse-design photonic switches with Kerr nonlinearity. Our results may be applied more generally to other objective functions and sources of nonlinearity and provides new possibilities for designing novel nonlinear optical devices. We first outline the formulation of the adjoint method for the inverse design of nonlinear optical devices. The goal of inverse design is to find a set of real-valued design variables φ that maximize a real-valued objective function L = L(e, e * , φ), where the complex-valued vector e is given by the solution to the equation f (e, e * , φ) = 0. (1) For example, eq. (1) may represent the steady-state Maxwell's equations with an intensity-dependent permittivity distribution where e is the electric field distribution. The solution to eq. (1) may be found with any nonlinear equation solver, such as with the Newton-Raphson method The aim of the optimization is to maximize the objective function with respect to the design variables φ. For this purpose, it is essential to compute the sensitivity of L with respect to each element of φ. For simplicity, we derive the derivative of the objective function with respect to a single parameter φ, which is written Or, in matrix form as To compute de/dφ and de * /dφ, we differentiate eq. (1): Eq. ( Thus, formally we can rewrite eq. ( ∂L/∂e ∂L/∂e * ∂f /∂e ∂f /∂e * ∂f * /∂e ∂f * /∂e * -1 ∂f /∂φ ∂f * /∂φ . In analogy with the linear adjoint method, we can now compute the gradient by solving an additional linear system. We define a complex-valued adjoint field e aj as the solution to and the gradient of the objective function is then where R denotes taking the real part. In deriving eq. ( We now apply the general formalism as discussed above to the optimization of nonlinear optical systems. Since the formalism is applicable to linear optical systems as well, for illustration purposes here we use it to treat both the linear and the nonlinear cases, in order to highlight aspects that are unique to nonlinear systems. A schematic outlining the two cases is presented in Fig. ) where E(r) is the electric field, J(r) is the electric current source, r (r) is the relative dielectric permittivity, and we have assumed relative permeability μ r = 1 everywhere. Compactly, and to make connection to the general formalism in the previous section, this can be written in matrix form as where A is a linear operator, vectors e and r now contain the electric fields and the relative permittivity, respectively, and b is a vector proportional to the current source. The design parameters φ in this case is the permittivity distribution r . Eq. ( We assume an objective function L that depends on the field solution to eq. ( as shown in Fig. Once the adjoint field is computed, the gradient of the objective function with respect to the permittivity distribution is given, through eq. ( Having reviewed the adjoint formalism for linear optical systems we now consider nonlinear optical systems. As an example, we introduce Kerr nonlinearity into the system The nonlinear system containing a medium with Kerr nonlinearity (red). The electric fields are the solution to a nonlinear equation. (d) The adjoint problem for the nonlinear system, which is a linear system of equations for the adjoint field and its complex conjugate. The Kerr medium is replaced by a linear region whose permittivity depends on the nonlinear fields. where χ (3) (r) is the nonlinear susceptibility distribution. Other types of nonlinear terms can also be treated with the formalism outlined above. Replacing r (r) in Eq. ( where Here, is element-wise vector multiplication and diag(v) represents a diagonal matrix with vector v on the main diagonal. The vector χ corresponds to the term 3ω 2 0 0 χ (3) (r) and |e| 2 ≡ e e * . Again, for concreteness, the design parameters φ correspond to the permittivity r . The solution to this problem is diagrammed in Fig. From eq. ( With this, we then express the adjoint field as a solution to the linear system which is diagrammed in Fig. Once the adjoint field is computed, the gradient dL/d r is evaluated from eq. ( Here for simplicity we do not assume any explicit dependence of the nonlinearity on the design variable. However, the formalism is straightforward to extend to that case, as explained in the Supplementary Information. We now demonstrate the use of this nonlinear adjoint formalism to inverse design optical switches with desired power-dependent performance characteristics. In Figs. For each device, we seek to maximize the corresponding objective function with respect to the permittivity distribution within a fixed design region. To perform the numerical optimization of the structure, we use the finite-difference frequency-domain method (FDFD) We choose optimization parameters corresponding to a device made from chalcogenide glass (Al 2 S 3 ), which exhibits a strong χ (3) response and high damage threshold To create a more realistic final structure, the strength of the nonlinear susceptibility was assumed to be proportional to the "density" of material, ρ, defined as where m is the permittivity of the material. This assumption ensures that air regions do not exhibit a nonlinear refractive index. Eq. ( Our first device, as shown in Fig. where e low and e high are the simulated fields with a low and a high input power, respectively, m is the modal profile of the electric field for the waveguide in the output port, and the objective function is normalized such that its maximum value is 1. The optimization setup and the optimized structure are diagrammed in Fig. Reaching the final optimized structure shown in Fig. We also use the same technique for the inverse design of a 1 → 2 port switch where light is guided to the right port in the linear regime and to the bottom port in the nonlinear regime. To achieve this design, we define the objective function as where m r and m b denote the mode profiles of the waveguides in the right and bottom ports, respectively. These are normalized such that the objective function has a maximum value of 1 for a perfect switching operation. The setup of the optimization problem and the final design are diagrammed in Fig. In Fig. We have presented an extension to the adjoint variable method applied to the optimization of an electromagnetic system with Kerr nonlinearity. Our approach can be straightforwardly applied to other types of nonlinearities which do not mix frequencies, such as saturable gain or absorption. Moreover, the methods here should be straightforwardly generalizable to treat nonlinear problems involving frequency mixing. For example, one can imagine implementing a similar adjoint method in combination with the multi-frequency finite-difference frequency-domain implementations for nonlinear wave interactions In addition to the design of optical switches, our formalism may prove useful for many other interesting problems in nonlinear photonics. For example, one could apply our approach to design nonlinear elements in optical neural networks To summarize this paper, we have developed an adjoint method, which enables gradient optimization of nonlinear photonic devices. Our work broadens the capability of inverse design for producing novel nonlinear devices. This work is supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF4744); the Swiss National Science Foundation (P300P2 177721); and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) (FA9550-17-1-0002). When choosing to relative permittivity distribution as the set of design variables, φ = r , the nonlinear adjoint problem requires the calculation of the partial derivatives ∂f /∂e, ∂f * /∂e, and ∂f /∂ r . When choosing the form of χ from eq. (S1), the partial derivatives ∂f /∂e and ∂f * /∂e are the same as derived in the main text. However, the term ∂f /∂ r takes on a more complicated form given by ∂f where we make use of the fact that ∂A ∂ r ijk = δ ij δ jk , where δ is the Kronecker delta. Thus, while the adjoint field e aj will have the same form as in the main text, when computing the sensitivity as in eq. ( To create realistic devices with sufficiently large minimum feature sizes and binarized permittivity distributions, we employed filtering and projection schemes during our optimization. These schemes are discussed in great detail in Rather than updating the permittivity distribution directly, one may instead choose to update a design density ρ, which varies between 0 and 1 within the design region. To create a structure with larger feature sizes, a low pass filter can be applied to ρ to created a filtered density, labelled ρ: where D denotes the design region, and W is the spatial filter, defined for a feature size of R as with |r i -r j | being the distance between points i and j. This defines a low-pass spatial filter on ρ with the effect of smoothing out features with length scale below R. Now, for binarization of the structure, a projection scheme is used to recreate the final permittivity from the filtered density. For this we define ρ as the projected density, which is created from ρ as ρi = tanh (βη) + tanh (β [ρ i -η]) tanh (βη) + tanh (β [1 -η]) . (S7) Here, η is a parameter between 0 and 1 that controls the mid-point of the projection, typically 0.5, and β controls the strength of the projection, typically around 100. The relative permittivity can then be determined from ρ as where m is the maximum permittivity. The effect of these filtering and the binarization techniques on a sample permittivity set is illustrated in Fig. 