Mode-division-multiplexing (MDM) is attractive as a means to increase the link capacity of a single wavelength for optical interconnects via the use of multiple mode-channels in multimode bus waveguides. In order to route the data in MDM systems, waveguide bends are typically needed. In particular, ultra-sharp bends are desirable for reducing the chip area occupied by high-density photonic integrated circuits (PICs). In this work, we propose and demonstrate a novel meta-surfaced waveguide structure on silicon, which enables ultra-sharp multimode waveguide bends to have low-loss and low-crosstalk among different mode-channels. An ultra-sharp S-bend with a bending radius of R=10μm is realized for an MDM optical interconnect with three mode-channels. The numerical simulation shows that the proposed ultra-sharp meta-surfaced multimode waveguide bend (MMWB) has low excess losses (0.2~0.5 dB) and low inter-mode crosstalk (<-30 dB) over a broad wavelength-band (>100 nm) for all the three mode-channels. This is verified by experimental results, which show that the fabricated S-bends have excess losses of 0.5~0.8dB and inter-mode crosstalk of <-20 dB over a wavelength-band of >60 nm. The experimental results were partially limited by the measurement setup, particularly the on-chip mode (de)multiplexers which had inter-mode crosstalk of about -20 dB. The proposed MMWB can be extended for the transmission of more than three mode-channels. Our work paves the way to use meta-surfaced silicon photonic waveguide structures for on-chip multimode optical interconnects. Bandwidth requirements for data transmission is increasing exponentially for a wide range of optical networks, including on-chip optical interconnects The other key element for MDM systems is a multimode bus waveguide with sharp bends enabling low-loss and low-crosstalk transmission for multiple mode-channels. Sharp bends are indispensable for multimode waveguide interconnects in photonic networks-on-chip to enable efficient use of valuable chip area. As is well known, for a singlemode optical waveguide, what is concerned is to achieve low bending loss only, and sharp bends can easily be achieved with low loss by introducing a high index-contrast Δ. For example, for a singlemode silicon-on-insulator (SOI) nanophotonic waveguide, low-loss sharp bend with a micro-scale bending radius R (e.g., ~3μm) can be achieved due to the ultra-high index-contrast Δ However, for a multimode SOI nanophotonic waveguide, the situation becomes very complicated because all modal fields become highly asymmetric when the bending radius becomes small In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a novel ultra-sharp multimode waveguide bend by introducing meta-surface structures to enable low-loss and low-crosstalk MDM on-chip optical interconnects. Silicon-based all-dielectric metasurfaces have been very attractive for potentially low loss and used widely for light at normal-incidence to the surface Figure In order to make the structural optimization simplified, we make the present MMWB equivalent to a dual-core BWG, as shown in Figure where n 1 and n 2 are the refractive indices of the waveguide core and cladding, respectively. In the present case, one has n 1 =3.48 (silicon) and n 2 =1.444 (silica), respectively From Figure It can also be seen that one can obtain similar results when choosing different duty-cycles η 0 (η 0 ≠0.5), e.g., η 0 =0.4 and 0.6. When choosing η 0 =0.4 and 0.6, the corresponding optimal values (η 10 , η 20 ) for a sharp bend with R=10μm are (0.8, 0) and (1, 0.2), respectively, as shown in Figure Figure The proposed approach for MMWB can be extended for more than three mode-channels. For example, we consider the design with w co =1.8 μm for supporting four guided modes of TE polarization. In this case, the bending radius is marginally increased to R=20 μm for achieving low excess losses and low inter-mode crosstalk. The other parameters for the MMWB designed optimally are given as p = 250 nm, η 0 = 0.5, η 1 = 0.9, η 2 = 0.1, h Si = 220 nm, and h e = 80 nm. Figure These two MMWBs designed for supporting three and four guided-modes are then fabricated with nanofabrication technologies (see Device Fabrication). Figure By comparing these measurement results, one sees that the MMWB works well without introducing notable excess losses and inter-mode crosstalk for the four mode-channels. These measurement results show that a single 90°-MMWB has excess losses of ~0.5 dB, ~0.8 dB, ~0.5 dB and ~0.4 dB for the TE 0 , TE 1 , TE 2 and TE 3 modes, respectively, while the crosstalk is <-15 dB over a 90 nm (1520~1610 nm) wavelength-band. Table Lumerical MODE software with uniform grid sizes (10nm) were used for the numerical simulations, including the analyses of the mode fields in SWGs, BWGs, and MMWBs, as well as the calculation of the overlap integral between different modes. The 3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method provided by Lumerical FDTD was used to calculate the light propagation in the designed silicon PICs and the output optical fields with non-uniform grid sizes. The wavelength dependence of the excess losses and the inter-mode crosstalks for all the mode-channels were calculated with the mode expansion method provided by Lumerical FDTD. Assume that the j-th mode at the output SWG has a mode excitation ratio ξ ij when the i-th mode is launched at the input SWG and propagates along a given silicon PIC. The excess loss for the i-th mode-channel is given by EL i =log 10 (ξ ii ). The inter-mode crosstalk from the i-th mode-channel to the j-th mode-channel is then given by (j≠i) CT ij =log 10 (ξ ij ). For the design of the present MMWB, the maximum of CT ij is evaluated for the optimization, i.e., CT j, max =max(CT 1j , CT 2j , ..., CT Ij ). All devices were fabricated on a 220nm-thick silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer with a 2μm-thick SiO 2 under-cladding layer. An electron-beam lithography (EBL) process with the MA-N2403 photoresist and an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry-etching process were carried out to fabricate the straight/bent waveguides on the top-silicon layer. Another shallowly-etched overlay process with an etching step of 80nm was applied to fabricate the meta-surfaced structures in the bent section as well as the grating couplers for fiber-chip coupling. A SiO 2 upper-cladding was deposited by using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). For the characterization of the fabricated chips, a broad-band amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) light source (1510~1610 nm) was used at the input side. The total optical power of the ASE is about 16 dBm. An optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) was used to receive light at the output side. The OSA has a high resolution (~0.02 nm). On-chip grating couplers at the input/output ends were used for achieving efficient fiber-chip coupling. The grating coupler has a coupling efficiency of ~9.1 dB (@ 1550nm) and a ~40 nm 3dB-bandwidth.