We report a low cost and scalable method to synthesize solar selective nanofluids from 'used engine oil'. The as-prepared nanofluids exhibit excellent long-term stability and photo-thermal conversion efficiency. Moreover, these were found to retain their stability and functional characteristics even after extended periods of high temperature (300°C) heating, ultra violet light exposure and thermal cyclic loading. Building upon it, we have been able to successfully engineer an efficient volumetric absorption solar thermal platform that employs the as-prepared nanofluids and achieves higher steady state temperatures (approximately 5% higher) relative to the conventional surface absorption based solar thermal system under the sun. The developed volumetric absorption solar thermal platform could prove to be significant step in the evolution of efficient solar thermal systems which could potentially be deployed for host of applications ranging from solar driven heating, airconditioning, and desalination units to solar energy electricity generation systems. Nature has carefully engineered itself to utilize solar energy to run the entire life cycle on the planet earth. Mimicking natural processes, we are continuously striving to build efficient solar energy conversion platforms which could convert solar energy to more usable forms such as electricity (photovoltaic), chemical energy of the fuel (artificial photosynthesis) and heat (solar thermal). Amongst these, the technology of electricity generation via solar to heat conversion is currently the most efficient (~30%) and cost effective one. In comparison, the fossil-fuel based counterparts operate at efficiencies on the order of ~60%. One of the key reasons for lower efficiency is that we have not been able to efficiently engineer the solar (photon) to thermal energy (heat) conversion process Presently, a lot of efforts are underway to tailor solar selective, low cost, high temperature, and long term stable nanoparticle dispersions In the present work, small fractions of 'used engine oil' (after undergoing filtration process) have been mechanically mixed with compatible non polar base oil (paraffin oil light). The mixture was then ultra-sonicated to get the required nanoparticle dispersions (see Fig. As a first step, optical signatures of various nanofluid concentrations have been measured in the UV-VIS-NIR region (300 nm -1100 nm). Figure where S λ is the spectral solar irradiance (AM 1.5 spectra), K aλ is the spectral absorption coefficient, and y is the fluid layer thickness. Solar absorption fraction essentially gives the fraction of the incident solar energy that could be absorbed by a given thickness of the fluid layer. Clearly, solar absorption capability increases rapidly with increase in concentration. Moreover, to achieve the desired value of solar absorption fraction, we could either increase the concentration or increase the physical thickness of the nanofluid layer -in effect increasing the optical depth. In order to clearly gauge the photo-thermal conversion efficiency of the as-prepared nanofluids, laboratory scale experiments have been carefully designed. Nanofluids (housed in a cylindrical column with reflective surface at the bottom) of different concentrations were illuminated with a broad spectrum white light source [see Fig. Thermal conductivity and viscosity are amongst the key thermo-physical properties that impact the redistribution of the absorbed energy within the fluid and pumping power requirements respectively. The as-prepared nanofluids show thermal conductivity enhancement [see Fig. As 'heat transfer fluids' in volumetric absorption platforms; nanofluids are expected to maintain their optical and thermo-physical properties under extended periods without any appreciable degradation for consistent and efficient photo-thermal conversion. Long-term stability of the as-prepared nanofluid dispersions has been assessed under natural and accelerated sedimentation (centrifugation) conditions. Furthermore, during centrifugation, the fluid experiences severe shear stresses In addition to high photo-thermal conversion efficiency, the nanofluids should maintain their desired characteristics under constant and cyclic thermal loads. In its service life, the nanofluids are expected to absorb high solar flux (particularly in high solar concentration solar thermal systems), which in turn shall result in rapid and significant temperature rise. Furthermore, the nanofluid shall transfer the absorbed energy to a secondary fluid (such as water) -thus experiencing rapid temperature drops. These rapid heating and cooling cycles form the integral part of any power cycle in general and solar electricity generation systems (SEGS) in particular. The as-prepared nanofluids were found to posses excellent stability and retain their functional characteristics under constant as well as cyclic thermal loads. During cyclic thermal loading, the nanofluid was rapidly heated to a particular fixed temperature and then was suddenly cooled by dipping it into the water bath maintained at room temperature (see Fig. Although ultraviolet radiations form only a small fraction of the incident solar energy; given the fact that these are very high energy radiations, and may amount to significant values in case of concentrating solar thermal systems -the as-prepared nanofluids were tested exclusively under UV exposure. Interestingly, the nanofluids were found to be stable and retain their properties even after prolonged exposure to UV radiations (see Rigorous testing of the as-prepared nanofluids has revealed that indeed these could operate under real world service conditions without losing their functional properties. Building upon this, we have carefully designed a volumetrically absorbing solar thermal system, wherein a linear Fresnel lens is used to concentrate the incident normal solar irradiance onto the receiver lying along the focal line of the concentrator. The receiver is essential a closed rectangular conduit in which the fluid is made to flow. The conduit has been so designed that it could be employed both in surface as well as volumetric absorption modes -the internal three sides (bottom and sides) being 'state of the art' solar selective surfaces (having high solar weighted absorptivity, ~0.96; and low infrared emissivity, ~0.12) and the top side being made of glass to allow the sunlight to pass through and reduce thermal losses. Furthermore, the outside three sides have been insulated to reduce thermal losses [see Fig. On the other hand, in volumetric absorption mode, the as-prepared nanofluids (of different concentrations) were made to flow through the receiver. Herein, the nanofluid directly absorbs the solar energy -nanoparticles owing to their broad wavelength absorption characteristics; convert the solar energy into thermal energy through non-radiative decay of the absorbed photons. Subsequently, the absorbed energy is transferred to the surrounding medium at staggeringly rapid rate (owing to the extremely small size of the particles). This results in efficient photo-thermal conversion of the incident solar energy. Comparison between the two absorption modes (surface and volumetric) clearly points out that indeed higher steady state temperatures (~5% higher) could be achieved in case the sunlight is allowed to directly interact with the nanofluid i.e., volumetric absorption outperforms the surface absorption case under real world flow conditions and under the sun [see Fig. Nanofluid preparation. Used engine oil has been collected from a 15000 km run 4-stroke diesel engine. To filter out sludge, resin etc. a cotton cloth has been used. Subsequently, the filtered 'used engine oil' was furthered filtered with 0.7um filter paper. Desired fractions of the resulting filtered used oil were then mixed into pure paraffin oil followed by 30 minutes of ultra-sonication in a bath type ultasonicator -thus forming nanofluids of different concentration.