Polaritonic devices exploit the coherent coupling between excitonic and photonic degrees of freedom to perform highly nonlinear operations with low input powers. Most of the current results exploit excitons in epitaxially grown quantum wells and require low temperature operation, while viable alternatives have yet to be found at room temperature. Here we show that large single-crystal flakes of two-dimensional layered perovskite are able to sustain strong polariton nonlinearities at room temperature with no need to be embedded in an optical cavity. In particular, excitonexciton interaction energies are measured to be remarkably similar to the ones known for inorganic quantum wells at cryogenic temperatures, and more than one order of magnitude larger than alternative room temperature polariton devices reported so far. Thanks to their easy fabrication, large dipolar oscillator strengths and strong nonlinearities, these materials hold great promises to realize actual polariton devices at room temperature. In efficient communication and computing systems, information carriers are required to both travel long distances without losing coherence and simultaneously interact between them in order to implement logic functions such as switches or logic gates. Microcavity polaritons, quasiparticles that form in a semiconductor when an elementary excitation field interacts sufficiently strongly with the electromagnetic radiation field, could in principle fulfill these requirements and are promising candidates for a new generation of optoelectronic devices. Indeed, these "dressed" photons exhibit enhanced non-linearities thanks to their electronic component From a wider perspective, hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite systems have recently attracted a considerable attention driven by exceptional progress in photovoltaics, photonics, and optoelectronics In fact, these 2D layered structures share strong similarities with multi-quantum well heterostructures made of epitaxially grown inorganic semiconductors, but they possess larger binding energies and display stronger dielectric confinement in the inorganic layers. 2D hybrid perovskites show also enhanced collective effects due to the large number of layers stacked in a single crystal, which is an advantage over TMD monolayers. Strong light-matter coupling has already been observed in M AP bBr 3 micro/nanowire cavities Here we address, for the first time, the nonlinear properties of polaritons in monocrystalline 2D hybrid perovskites by directly estimating the exciton-exciton interaction energy. The understanding and control of this property is of paramount importance to assess the material potentialities for room temperature polaritonics, such as all-optical transistors, switches and gates, up to now only demonstrated at cryogenic temperatures in GaAs based semiconductors. To this aim, we employ large flakes of high-quality 2D perovskite single crystals to directly measure the excitonic response without being limited by non-radiative losses and grain-to-grain heterogeneity, usually present in polycrystalline films. Remarkably, at room temperature we find the exciton oscillator strengths to be much larger than in epitaxial GaAs QWs at cryogenic temperatures, and with comparable nonlinearities. Most importantly, thanks to the large oscillator strength of the excitons, and the very good crystal structure of the flakes, formation of polaritonic bands and strong nonlinearities are observed even when these structures are not embedded in a microcavity. This is an important step towards the realization of polaritonic devices working at room temperature with easy fabrication and minimal processing, avoiding complex heterostructures comprising top and bottom Bragg mirrors. We synthesize phenethylammonium lead iodide (C 6 H 5 (CH 2 ) 2 N H 3 ) 2 P bI 4 (PEAI) by an Anti-solvent Vapor assisted Crystallization method The observed spin-dependence is then a strong indication that polariton-polariton interactions not only are the dominant effect responsible for the energy shift of the modes upon optical excitation but also that 2D perovskites can be used for polariton spintronics. The dashed lines in figure Strikingly, we observe spin-dependent nonlinearities similar to those observed in GaAs based systems at cryogenic temperatures. In the mean-field approximation and at low particle density the blueshift E pol depends linearly on the polariton density n pol : E pol = g pol n pol . The polariton density n pol is proportional to the excitation power incident on the sample. By analyzing the power dependence of the blueshift it is possible to measure the polariton interaction constant and then, knowing the polariton excitonic fraction (or Hopfield coefficient) one can finally infer the excitonic interaction constant g exc,lay per layer. The estimated excitonic interaction constant values for the microcavity sample is g exc,lay ∼ 3 ± 0.5 μeV μm 2 (Supplementary Information). This value is comparable with the one typically estimated for a single GaAs quantum well Figure Figure This choice of the incident angle, in addition to being in the highest reflectivity region, allows also to probe polariton modes having a higher excitonic fraction and smaller linewidth. The bandwidth of the fs laser is large enough to resonantly excite essentially three adjacent lower polariton branches. Figure The TIR geometry chosen to perform resonant excitation allows us to neglect the transmission through the sample, simplifying the estimation of the incident power (see also the Supplementary Information). The two lower polariton branches fitted by the dashed orange lines (LP1 and LP2) originate from the two optical modes highlighted by the two black dashed lines. Polariton modes originating from different cavity modes and coupled to the same excitonic transition possess a different excitonic fraction at a given excitation angle. Figures 4c shows the blueshift measured for the lower polariton branches LP1 and LP2 of figure 4a as a function of the polariton density by using a linearly polarized pulsed laser. We observe that, for a given incident power (i.e. a given polariton density), the measured blueshift is higher for the polariton branch having the higher excitonic fraction, LP1, which confirms that the energy blueshift increases as the excitonic component increases. By fitting the data of figure 4c with a straight line and considering the relation between E pol and n pol we can obtain the excitonic interaction constant per layer g exc,lay . In fact, given the incident power values and considering that all the absorbed light is transformed into polaritons (which is a very conservative approximation, see Supporting Information) the upper density limit for the exciton density per layer is of about n exc,layer = 10 12 cm -2 . Accounting for the different excitonic fraction of the two lower polariton branches, we obtain a value of the excitonic interaction constant g exc,lay ∼ 1 ± 0.2 μeV μm 2 per inorganic layer. This value is comparable with that obtained for the 2D single crystal embedded in a microcavity, as shown in Figs. In summary, we have observed highly interacting polaritons in hybrid organic-inorganic 2D perovskites single crystals at room-temperature. These materials spontaneously crystallize in a multiple layered quantum well-like structure and, thanks to the high oscillator strength of the excitonic transition, strong coupling is achieved at room temperature even without highly reflecting mirrors. The resulting polaritons are highly interacting with an excitonic interaction constant g exc,lay 1±0.2 μeV μm 2 . This value is two orders of magnitudes higher than the values measured for organic excitons and it is the highest measured at room temperature so far. Moreover, we observe that polariton-polariton interactions in our sample are spin-dependent, with repulsive interaction between polaritons having the same spin being the dominant effect. These results demonstrate that 2D hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites sustain highly interacting polaritons working with interaction constants which are very promising for future polaritonic and spintronic devices at room temperature. Most important, we observe highly interacting polaritons at RT without embedding the active medium in an optical cavity. These findings are extremely important and promise to greatly reduce the cost and the complexity of fabrication and post-processing of polaritonic devices. 