Due to the non-trivial topological band structure in type-II Weyl semimetal Tungsten ditelluride (WTe2), unconventional properties may emerge in its superconducting phase. While realizing intrinsic superconductivity has been challenging in the type-II Weyl semimetal WTe2, proximity effect may open an avenue for the realization of superconductivity. Here, we report the observation of proximityinduced superconductivity with a long coherence length along c axis in WTe2 thin flakes based on a WTe2/NbSe2 van der Waals heterostructure. Interestingly, we also observe anomalous oscillations of the differential resistance during the transition from superconducting to normal state. Theoretical calculations show excellent agreement with experimental results, revealing that such a sub-gap anomaly is the intrinsic property of WTe2 in superconducting state induced by the proximity effect. Our findings enrich the understanding of superconducting phase of type-II Weyl semimetals, and pave the way for their future applications in topological quantum computing. Weyl semimetal, hosting low-energy quasiparticle excitations -Weyl fermions Comparing to Type-I Weyl semimetals with a closed point-like Fermi surface, type-II Weyl semimetals possess unique features such as titled Weyl cone-like energy spectrum and paired Weyl nodes formed at the boundary of electron and hole pockets In this work, we report proximity effect induced superconductivity in thin WTe2 flakes. The observed superconductivity is found to give rise to a long superconducting coherence length (above 30 nm) in WTe2 along its c axis. In addition, we observe anomalous oscillations in the differential resistance spectra as the bias current drives the system from superconducting to normal state. Moreover, our theoretical calculations show that the anomaly could be associated with the sub-gap features in the density of states (DOS) spectra in superconducting WTe2. Our work enriches the understanding of superconducting phase in type-II Weyl semimetals and paves the way towards further exploration of topological superconducting states. To realize proximity-induced superconductivity, a high-quality interface between thin WTe2 flake and superconductor is desirable. To that end, we chose layered niobium diselenide (NbSe2) as the superconductor (with Tc ~ 7.2 K and ∆ ~ 1.2 meV We first examined the low temperature transport properties of thin WTe2 flakes by using a four-probe lock-in setup (with an AC current of 1 μA) (see Figure The achievement of superconductivity in the 10 nm-thick sample implies a long superconducting coherence length along c axis in WTe2. Based on the measured mobility along a axis μμ~2100 cm 2 /V -1 s -1 (see Fig. To further investigate the proximity-induced superconducting properties in WTe2, we performed differential resistance measurements (dV/dI vs. V) at various temperatures, with typical results shown in Figure To shed light on the observed anomaly during the transition from superconducting to normal state, we further investigated the magnetic field dependence of the differential resistance spectra and I-V characteristics at T=1.6 K (See Figure Exceptionally, we find that the two main peaks become broad as B increases within small magnetic field range (lower than 0.1 T), in contrast to the temperature-induced behavior. Furthermore, we observe that all sub-features in spectra vanish at 0.3 T and that only two broad symmetric peaks are retained. Similarly, I-V characteristics (in Figure At lower magnetic fields, the I-V curves also show two current points indicating critical current and transition to normal state. At higher magnetic fields, the linear parts indicating the normal state in I-V curves are obviously separated by various magnetic fields, consistent with the magnetic field dependence of normal resistance of WTe2. We calculated the DOS of type-II Weyl semimetal and s-wave superconductor in the WTe2/NbSe2 heterostructure to understand the anomalous experimental features of dV/dI spectra with results shown in the Figure Based on the calculated results, we can understand the sub-gap anomaly observed in the differential resistance spectra in the following way. The total current in the sample is composed of the supercurrent and normal current when the bias current goes beyond the critical current. The dissipative normal current is carried by quasi-particles, which are excited by breaking the Cooper pairs self-consistently via the voltage drop induced by the normal current (as well as the Doppler shift effect in the presence of the current). The induced gap on the electron and hole Fermi pockets of WTe2 is non-uniform, as evidenced by the peaks in DOS in Figure To further prove that the unusual differential resistance spectra of superconducting WTe2 thin flake root in the unique DOS of WTe2, we carried out both theoretical and experimental studies on graphene/NbSe2 device with 10 nm thick graphene flake (the device structure is shown in the inset of Figure Compared with the properties of superconducting graphene, the DOS of WTe2 in the superconducting state is indeed unique and shows consistency with the experimental results. The trivial dV/dI spectra of graphene without any sub-peaks would result in one-step increase in resistance when driving superconducting to normal state. Such usual behavior indicates that Cooper pairs are broken into quasiparticles in an abrupt manner, different from multiple-step process occurring in the superconducting WTe2 thin flake. Combining all the evidence above, we believe that the nontrivial signature in the dV/dI spectra of WTe2 is unique and roots in its intrinsic band structure. Note that the sub-gap features in WTe2 may occur in another type-II Weyl semimetal MoTe2 In summary, we achieve superconductivity for the first time in type-II Weyl semimetal WTe2 by proximity effect based on a WTe2/NbSe2 heterostructure. The superconducting transition occurs at 6.4 K in WTe2, close to Tc of NbSe2. Most importantly, we discover anomalous oscillations of dV/dI spectra in superconducting WTe2. Furthermore, our theoretical calculations confirm that such peculiar feature in the dV/dI spectra in superconducting WTe2 results from its nontrivial DOS spectrum. This work suggests that superconductivity in type-II Weyl semimetals exhibits distinctive feature from conventional superconductors and will stimulate further interest in exploration of topological superconductivity. We grew the high-quality NbSe2 single crystals with a standard chemical vapor transport method. High purity powders of elements Nb and Se are stoichiometric mixed and thoroughly grounded. Then the mixture was sealed under vacuum in a quartz tube with iodine (5mg cm -3 ). The tube was placed into a two-zone horizontal furnace with the hot end of 780 °C and the cold end of 700 °C for two weeks. High-quality platelike NbSe2 single crystals are obtained. Single crystals of WTe2 were grown by a high temperature self-flux method. Highpurity W powders (99.9%) and Te pieces (99.999%) were put in alumina crucibles with a molar ratio of 1:30 in a glove box filled with pure argon then sealed in quartz tubes under high vacuum. The tubes were heated to 1373 K and maintained for 10 hours. Then the furnace was slowly cooled down to 923 K with a rate of 2 K/h followed by separating the Te flux in a centrifuge at 923 K. We mechanically exfoliated h-BN onto a highly doped Si wafer covered by a 300nm-thick SiO2 layer. The bottom electrodes (5 nm Ti/40nm Au) were patterned on h-BN flake using standard electron beam lithography method and deposited by standard electron beam evaporation. The WTe2, NbSe2 and graphene thin flakes were mechanically exfoliated from single crystals onto the PDMS (Polydimethy lsiloxane) substrate in a glove box filled with an inert atmosphere, followed by dry transferring on the top of bottom electrodes layer by layer. Finally, a Boron Nitride thin flake was transformed on to WTe2/NbSe2 heterostructure to avoid the device degradation in the air. All the transfer processes mentioned above were finished in the glove box to achieve the best quality of the device. Bruker Multimode 8 atomic force microscopy was used to identify the thickness of WTe2, NbSe2 and graphene thin flakes. The devices were measured in an Oxford cryostat with a base temperature of about 1.6 K. The resistance signals were collected using a low-frequency Lock-in amplifier. The differential resistance signals were collected by applying an AC excitation current of 1 nA added on top of a variable DC bias current. 