Single layers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are excellent candidates for electronic applications beyond the graphene platform; many of them exhibit novel properties including charge density waves (CDWs) and magnetic ordering. CDWs in these single layers are generally a planar projection of the corresponding bulk CDWs because of the quasi-twodimensional nature of TMDCs; a different CDW symmetry is unexpected. We report herein the successful creation of pristine single-layer VSe2, which shows a (√7 × √3) CDW in contrast to the (4 × 4) CDW for the layers in bulk VSe2. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) from the single layer shows a sizable (√7 × √3) CDW gap of ~100 meV at the zone boundary, a 220 K CDW transition temperature twice the bulk value, and no ferromagnetic exchange splitting as predicated by theory. This robust CDW with an exotic broken symmetry as the ground state is explained via a first-principles analysis. The results illustrate a unique CDW phenomenon in the two-dimensional limit. Two-dimensional (2D) systems have attracted great interest for their wide varieties of novel properties well suited for advanced electronic applications CDWs in single layers of TMDCs are generally a planar projection of the corresponding bulk CDWs because of the quasi-two-dimensional nature of TMDCs; a different CDW symmetry is unexpected In our experiment, VSe2 thin films were grown in situ in the integrated MBE/ARPES systems at beamlines 12.0.1 and 10.0.1, Advanced Light Sources, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Substrates of 6H-SiC(0001) were flash-annealed for multiple cycles to form a wellordered bilayer graphene on the surface Calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio package (VASP) The structure of single-layer VSe2 [Fig. Additional ARPES mapping Fermi surface maps in k space for the single layer taken at T = 300 and 10 K [Figs. To further characterize the gap for the single layer as revealed by the CDW-induced dark spots in the Fermi contours, we plot measured E-k ARPES maps along the MK ̅̅̅̅̅ direction for the single layer at 10 and 300 K [Fig. The transition temperature of the CDW is of interest. Figure where A(k, ω) is the spectra function, B(k) is the corresponding weight, ∑(k, ω) is the self energy, and Δ is the gap. An example of the fit to the EDC at 10 K is shown in Fig. where A = 1.19 is a proportional constant and  is the unit step function. The result of the fit, shown as the blue curve in Fig. This single-layer transition temperature is twice the bulk transition temperature (110 K). Prior studies of nanoscale and single-layer VSe2 samples have reported conflicting observations of both enhanced and reduced TC Based on our first-principles calculations, the total energy for (√7 × √3) is lower by 4 meV per chemical unit than the (4 × 4) structure, after energy minimization for both. The calculated electronic susceptibility and nesting function for the single layer reveal strong features at q1 and q2 associated with the (√7 × √3) instability [35] in agreement with our ARPES measurements, but these features are generally lacking for the bulk. The computed phonon dispersion relations for the (1 × 1) phase show imaginary modes at the (√7 × √3) CDW q1 wavevectors, but they also show imaginary modes at wavevectors between Γ ̅ and M ̅ related to a (4 × 4) distortion Evidently, the imaginary modes at q1 dominate, causing the formation of the (√7 × √3) structure as the ground state. The total evidence based on both experiment and theory indicates that single-layer VSe2 is a Peierls system for which nearly perfect Fermi surface nesting over long segments of the Fermi contour leads to a robust CDW. The resulting (√7 × √3) symmetry breaks the three-fold symmetry of the (1 × 1) normal phase, and the CDW is characterized by strong features in the electronic susceptibility and nesting function and a corresponding phonon instability. Nearly ideal nesting is extremely rare in 2D and 3D systems. CDWs in single layers of TMDCs are generally a planar projection of the corresponding bulk CDWs. Single-layer VSe2 is a unique case; its (√7 × √3) CDW in contrast to the (4 × 4) CDW for the layers in bulk VSe2 involves a spontaneous breaking of the triangular crystal symmetry. This different behavior can be attributed to small differences in the Fermi contours in going from the single layer to the bulk. The sensitivity illustrates that closeness of Fermi surface nesting in 2D may have a strong influence on the energetics of the system, and it explains why the CDW transition temperature for the single layer is substantially higher than the bulk CDW. An interesting prospect for future research is to modify the Fermi contours in single-layer VSe2 by, for example, alloying, strain, and interfacial engineering, and thereby to create a 2D ferromagnet The energy gap is extracted by fitting each symmetrized EDC with a phenomenological selfenergy formula 