We design and fabricate large-area (1.1 mm × 1.1 mm) photonic crystal quantum cascade lasers, enabling single-mode (wavelength ∼ 8.5 μm) surface emission at room temperature, with a maximum peak power up to 176 mW. The beam divergence is < 1 • and without side-lobes. Moreover, by introducing asymmetry into the photonic crystal pillar shape, a single-lobed far-field is realized. The photonic band structure is measured with high spectral (0.72 cm -1 ) and angular (0.1 • ) resolution by using the photonic crystal quantum cascade laser itself as a detector. Quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) are semiconductor laser sources that operate in the both mid-infrared Therefore, conventional vertical cavity surface emission design is not suitable for QCLs. In order to realize a surface-emitting QCL, novel coupling structures have been implemented, for example, photonic crystal (PhC) The active region (with a thickness of 2.05 μm) is fabricated with lattice-matched In-GaAs/AlInAs materials via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth. The emission wavelength is approximately 8.5 μm After processing, the laser is epi-down mounted on an AlN submount, and the power is extracted from the substrate side. The light-current-voltage (LIV) characteristics (at pulsed operation, collected through the surface) of our lasers are presented in Fig. The maximum peak powers in Fig. The surface-emitted far-field pattern of the circular-shaped PhC-QCL is shown in Fig. At the Γ 2 point of the square-lattice PhC-QCL, there are four band edge modes: two doubly degenerate dipole modes, a monopole mode and a quadrupole mode The photonic band structure is a crucial property of PhC structures. Previously, the most conventional way to measure the band on a PhC laser is by driving the laser below threshold and collecting the angular-resolved luminescence A schematic drawing of our band measurement setup is described in Fig. To vary the angle between the PhC-QCL relative to the incident beam, the PhC-QCL is mounted on a rotation stage. The spectral range of such approach is the overlap between the gain of the QCL comb and the absorption bandwidth of the PhC-QCL detector. The band structure is measured with the circular-pillar PhC-QCL (the same circular PhC-QCL characterized above). The bands of such a structure are calculated with our 3D coupled wave theory, and also simulated with the finite element method (COMSOL Multiphysics), as shown in Fig. Since the PhC is designed into square lattices, both Γ-X and Γ-M directions need to be measured to explore a whole band of the Brillouin zone. Experimentally, after the sweeping in Γ-X direction, the PhC-QCL is rotated in-plane by 45 • , to scan along the Γ-M direction. Figure We attribute the shift between the theory and experimental measurements to our imperfect knowledge of the refractive indexes. Since the vertical symmetry of this structure is broken, the transverse electric (TE) modes also have E z components, i.e. there is a relatively strong coupling between the TE and TM modes. Therefore, the TE modes can also appear on the band. Besides, in Fig. In this work, large-area (1.1 mm ×1.1 mm) surface-emitting PhC-QCLs are presented. The laser works at room temperature with a narrow far-field beam (< 1 • ). In the band measurements, the angular step is 0.1 • (5 × 10 -4 in normalized wavevector, ka/2πc). The horizontal linewidth of the band is around 0.003 , which has the same order of magnitude as the diffraction limit due to the size of the device (0.001) The resolution of the FTIR is 0.25 cm -1 (7.5 GHz, 7 × 10 -5 in normalized frequency, ωa/2πc). The spectral resolution of the band measurement is limited by the repetition frequency of our QCL comb (0.72 cm -1 , 2 × 10 -4 ωa/2πc). All of these parameters thus ensure the highest resolution measurement of band structure on PhC-QCLs. In the end, it is our belief that there is still a large room for improvement to optimize the performance of PhC-QCLs, and the large-area PhC-QCLs will eventually play a significant role in both industry and research applications. A COMSOL simulation on the non-uniform electrical pumping In the COMSOL model, the device width is 1.1 mm. The substrate is 200 μm thick, with the doping of 1.5 ×10 16 cm -3 . The electron mobilities in InP:Si and active region are 2 ×10 3 cm 2 /V/s and 1 ×10 3 cm 2 /V/s, respectively Figure 