Here we show that addition of Hf to Nb4Ta can significantly improve the high field performance of Nb3Sn, making it suitable for dipole magnets for a machine like the 100 TeV future circular collider (FCC). A big challenge of the FCC is that the desired non-Cu critical current density (Jc) target of 1500 A/mm 2 (16 T, 4.2 K) is substantially above the best present Nb3Sn conductors doped with Ti or Ta (~1300 A/mm 2 in the very best sample of the very best commercial wire). Recent success with internal oxidation of Nb-Zr precursor has shown significant improvement in the layer Jc of Nb3Sn wires, albeit with the complication of providing an internal oxygen diffusion pathway and avoiding degradation of the irreversibility field HIrr. We here extend the Nb1Zr oxidation approach by comparing Zr and Hf additions to the standard Nb4Ta alloy of maximum Hc2 and Hirr. Nb4Ta rods with 1Zr or 1Hf were made into monofilament wires with and without SnO2 and their properties measured over the entire superconducting range at fields up to 31 T. We found that group IV alloying of Nb4Ta does raise HIrr, though adding O2 still degrades this slightly. As noted in earlier Nb1Zr work with an O source, the pinning force density Fp is strongly enhanced and its peak value shifted to higher field by internal oxidation. A surprising result of this work is that we found better properties in Nb4Ta1Hf without SnO2, FpMax achieving 2.35 Times that of the standard Nb4Ta alloy, while the oxidized Nb4Ta1Zr alloy achieved 1.54 times that of the Nb4Ta alloy. The highest layer Jc(16 T, 4.2 K) of 3700 A/mm 2 was found in the SnO2free wire made with Nb4Ta1Hf alloy. Using a standard A15 cross-section fraction of 60% for modern PIT and RRP wires, we estimated that a non-Cu Jc of 2200 A/mm 2 is obtainable in modern conductors, well above the 1500 A/mm 2 FCC specification. Moreover, since the best properties were obtained without SnO2, the Nb4Ta1Hf alloy appears to open a straightforward route to enhanced properties in Nb3Sn wires manufactured by virtually all the presently used commercial routes employed today. The Future Circular collider (FCC) or upgrades to the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) require Nb3Sn dipole magnets to operate up to 16 T Analysing the challenges emphasizes that high field performance of Nb3Sn conductors requires minimal loss of upper critical field (Hc2) or the more practical irreversibility field (HIrr). Hc2 sets the thermodynamic upper limit of superconductivity: pure binary Nb3Sn has a Hc2 of 23.4 T (4.2 K), whereas doping with Group IV (Ti, Hf, Zr) or Group V (Mo, Ta) elements increases the Hc2 up to ~27 T A separate issue is the value of significant enhancement of vortex pinning in the A15 layer. In the general absence of Jc measurements in the 20-25 T range up to HIrr, an important indication of enhanced vortex pinning is an upward shift of the field at which the pinning force density Fp (= |Jc  0H|) is maximum (HMax), typically 4-5 T. The history of attempts to enhance vortex pinning in Nb3Sn is quite lengthy. A common theme has been to try to reduce the A15 grain size and to introduce additional pinning centres (APCs) into the Nb3Sn. Ta This impasse for the FCC conductor motivated the principal questions of this work: a) Is it possible to maintain the high HIrr of present commercial Nb3Sn conductors made with Nb4Ta/Ti alloys while increasing the pinning site density with ternary alloys based on Nb4Ta-X (X being Zr or Hf)? b) Does the introduction of oxygen in the system have detrimental effects on the irreversibility field? c) To what extent are A15 grain size refinement and point pinning effects of insulating ZrO2 or HfO2 pins individually separable and additive? In the work reported below we show that Hf is an even more powerful additive to Nb4Ta than Zr and that an external oxidant is not necessary to greatly enhance vortex pinning. We conclude that the FCC specification is attainable in present commercial Nb3Sn conductor designs without internal oxygen sources. We prepared custom alloys with composition Nb4Ta1X, using Hf, not just Zr, because they both have high oxygen affinity and can create XO2 precipitates in the presence of SnO2. Our Nb3Sn reaction package is a mixture of Cu-Sn powder surrounding the alloy rod inside a Ta/Cu tube shown in the inset of Figure The in-lens secondary electron (SE) SEM images of fractured wire surfaces of Figure After the A15 reaction heat treatment, significant Nb alloy rod remains unreacted, leaving a clear microstructural contrast between the alloy rod and the Nb3Sn as seen in Figure Figure of the precipitates are in progress. Preliminary Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) indicated that the precipitates are Sn deficient without detectable oxygen. Since the Nb3Sn layers formed by Sn diffusion develop compositional and/or microstructural gradients away from the Sn source, we also examined the Nb3Sn layer close to the Cu-Sn region, confirming that the Sn-rich Nb6Sn5 phase was also produced in this rod-in-powder-in-tube design. Figure Magnetization measurements were performed in the 1.3-14 K temperature range on all the monofilament wires and, for comparison, a Ta-doped RRP® conductor which was similarly heat treated (666°C/50h). The 35 T magnet allowed us to evaluate the entire hysteresis loops so as to accurately estimate the temperature dependence of HIrr. The layer Jc and Fp were estimated using the Bean model combined with the cross-sectional dimensions determined by SEM image analysis. The A15 Thickness and area fraction was identified based on BSE contrast differences. Because of the simple wire design and some non-uniform deformation of the Nb alloy rods during wire drawing, a noticeable variation in the residual rod cross-section was found within each wire, affecting the calculation of Nb3Sn cross-sectional area. To estimate the layer Jc, we analysed 10 different wire cross-sections to determine the average rod and Nb3Sn cross-sectional areas and their respective standard deviations. The deduced layer Fp and Jc values are plotted in Fig. Despite the observation of a upward shift in FpMax towards higher field, earlier Nb1Zr PIT conductors showed degraded HIrr of ~20 T or less, lower than binary Nb3Sn, thus depressing the high field Jc properties significantly below standard Ta or Ti-doped conductors Nb4Ta in a PIT wire have also been recently reported by Xu et al. Perhaps the most surprising result of the present study is that the Nb3Sn grain size can be reduced to much less than 100 nm without SnO2 and its internal oxidation potential when Nb4Ta1Hf alloy is used, perhaps because some nanoprecipitates form in the A15 layer even without internal oxidation by SnO2. The explanation may lie in another unexpected observation, namely that neither the Nb4Ta1Zr nor the Nb4Ta1Hf alloys recrystallized during the A15 reaction heat treatment, quite unlike the case with Nb4Ta (or pure Nb) rods. As seen in Figure In considering the practical implications of these experiments, we note that the highest non-Cu Jc(4.2 K, 16 T) obtained by optimized heat treatment of state-of-the-art commercial Ti-doped RP® conductor is so far only ~1300 A/mm 2 . This new record for an RRP conductor emerged from a detailed study of a wide range of RRP billets made available through the US Magnet Development Program and Oxford Superconducting for study by Sanabria et al. In summary we have shown that 1Hf additions to Nb4Ta show many benefits and suggest straightforward routes to much higher Jc Nb3Sn conductors made by all of the present commercial routes, bronze, internal Sn and other variants. A potential concern may be that both Zr and Hf additions to Nb4Ta degrade alloy drawability, but, so far, after a true strain of 8, no problems of work hardening and filament breakage have been encountered. Further studies to higher strains are in progress. We have demonstrated that adding 1Hf or 1Zr to Nb4Ta greatly reduces the HIrr suppression encountered in Nb3Sn wires made from Nb1Zr wires previously examined at OSU and SupraMagnetics/FSU 