Proximity-induced magnetism (PIM) in graphene (Gr) adjacent to magnetic specimen has raised great fundamental interests. The subject is under debate and yet no application is proposed and granted. In this paper, toward accomplishment of fundamental facts, we first explore the effect of particle size and clustering in the PIM in Gr nanoplates (GNPs)/yttrium iron garnet (YIG) magnetic nanoparticle (MNP) composite. Microscopic analyzes suggest that fine MNPs distributed uniformly on the GNPs have higher saturation magnetization due to the PIM in Gr. We propose that such magnetic plates can thus be used to shield the stray field generated on the surface of magnetic sensors and play a role as a magnetic lens to prevent the field emanating outside the body of magnetic specimen. The GNPs/YIG composites are coated on a magnetic ribbon and proposed for application in magneto-impedance (MI) sensors. We show that such planar magnetic flakes enhance the MI response against the external applied magnetic field significantly. The suggested application can be furthermore developed toward bio-sensing and magnetic shielding in different magnetic sensors and devices. Proximity-induced magnetism (PIM) is a process where a non-magnetic material acquires magnetization due to coupling with a magnetic film In this paper, we report evidence of induced ferromagnetism at room temperature in graphene nanoplates (GNPs) with layer number less than three that is decorated by YIG-MNPs. Technical application of magnetic Gr that is magnetized via the PIM is rare. Such magnetic plate can have alternative benefits compared to known MNPs, as they are being frequently used. The planar shape of Gr with high surface to volume ratio, while being magnetized, can be applied as magnetic shielding to absorb undesired magnetic field presented in different devices such as sensors. Nonetheless, such MNPs on the surface of Gr plates that provides PIM, occupy a little portion of the Gr plates surface. Hence, together with other well-known Gr functionalities, such PIM in Gr can be applied in many systems, such as bio-sensors and many other magnetic functional elements. Here, we introduce technological application of such magnetic GNPs. Magnetic properties of such planar magnetic plates is employed to improve the sensing of the magnetoimpedance (MI) effect through their magnetic shielding ability. High sensitivity and facile technological requirements have presented the MI effect a rich research field. Recently, we presented surface modification of MI sensor made of magnetic ribbons for environmental sensitivity and stability by coating vertical-Gr-oxide (GO) The MI sensor is not only affected by the magnetization of these plates, but it can be influenced by their shielding performance thanks to their planar shapes. We show that the MI response increases significantly at the proximity of the magnetic-GNPs composites coated on surface of the sensor. GNPs (N002-PDR, XY=7μm, z=50-100nm) is supplied by Angstron materials Inc. Ferric nitrate (Fe(NO3)3•9H2O), yttrium nitrate (Y(NO3)3•6H2O), citric acid, ethylene glycol, dimethylformamide (DMF) were all from Merck (99.9% pure) to prepare YIG MNPs. Following our previous work on the preparation of MNPs The solution was heated to dry and then annealed in ambient air at the temperature of 800 °C with a heating rate of rate of 10 °C/min for 2hrs. For synthesis of YIG-MNPs by MCP, we mixed the required amount of Y and Fe nitrates in stoichiometric ratio of Y: Fe = 3:5 in DMF to form metalorganic solution. Ethylene glycol was then added into prepared metal-organic solution. A small amount of ammonia was added to the solution to adjust pH value to about 10.5. During the procedure, the precipitate continuously stirred using a magnetic agitator. Then the precipitate collected and washed with distilled water and ethanol. The collected precipitate dissolved in distilled water with small amount of citric acid to reach pH=2. Finally, the solution precursor heated to dry and annealed to 700 °C for 2 h. Details of the MCP method is well-discussed in our recent work. 0.015 g YIG powder from each set was added to 35 ml ethanol followed by probe sonication for 30 min. 0.015 g of GNPs was added to the mixture followed by additional sonication for 30 min. After the ultrasonic treatment, the solution was heated inside an oven at 75 °C for 12 h to dry the sample. Conventional melt-spinning technique was used to fabricate Co68.15Fe4.35Si12.5B15 magnetic ribbons with 0.8 mm width, 40 mm length and about 28 μm thickness. The impedance measurement was done using four-point probe method. An AC current passed through longitudinal direction of the ribbon (length= 4 cm) with different frequencies supplied by function generator with constant amplitude of 30 mA. The impedance was evaluated by measuring the voltage and current across the sample using a digital oscilloscope. An external magnetic field was applied along the ribbon axis to perform MI measurements. This magnetic field was produced by passing electrical current in a 40 cm long solenoid, which can generate a magnetic field up to 120 Oe. The longitudinal direction of samples was set perpendicular to the Earth's magnetic field to minimize its undesired impact on the measurements. Figure In order to understand the impact of GNPs/YIG on the MI response, MI ratio of the samples were measured at different frequencies of 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5 and 15 MHz. The magnetic field was applied up to 120 Oe during MI measurements. The MI ratio can be defined as where Z refers to the impedance as a function of external field (H) and Hmax is the maximum field applied to the samples in the MI measurement. MI response for the bare ribbon and the ribbons drop coated by GNPs/CN-YIG and GNPs/MCP-YIG are presented in Figure MI is a surface sensitive effect due to the low skin depth of the ribbon. This property is the key to high functionality of MI sensors. amorphous ribbons there are many fringe fields present at the surface. According to the similar amounts of the YIG concentration presented at each sample and therefore similar surface coverage, there is a similar contribution to the reduction of fringe fields from the YIG in both samples while the MI is different. Thus, we speculate that there should be another source for different MI responses between these two samples. As seen in VSM results, the proximity of GNPs to MCP-YIG yields a bigger magnetic moment in GNPs. On the other hand, the MI enhancement of ribbon for the sample coated with GNPs/MCP-YIG is higher than the ribbon coated with GNPs/CN-YIG. Therefore, according to the differences between the GNPs/CN-YIG and GNPs/MCP-YIG samples, it is deduced that PIM in GNPs is caused such a difference in the MI response of the two samples. As schematically presented in Figure Moreover, in comparison to methods like X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), magneto optical Kerr effect (MOKE), In summary, we have observed the PIM effect in GNPs/YIG composites. It is verified that the PIM affected by the size and clustering of YIG-MNPs, probed with microscopic observation and magnetization measurements. The higher surface area of the interface between GNPs and YIG-MNPs has resulted in the enhancement in magnetization mediated by PIM effect and also probed indirectly through the MI effect. The MI enhancement of ribbon for the sample coated with GNPs/MCP-YIG is higher than the ribbon coated with GNPs/CN-YIG. Therefore, according to the differences between the GNPs/CN-YIG and GNPs/MCP-YIG samples, it is conceived that planar magnetized GNPs has higher impact on vanishing the magnetic flux at the surface of MI element. The results of MI measurements reveal a great improvement of sensing performance and ability as a probe to detect the PIM. Our different results for PIM in GNPs/YIG composites mediated by particle size and clustering, and their effect on a proposed MI sensor can convey for further application in other magnetic systems and sensors with different mechanisms.