Integration of superconducting nanowire single photon detectors and quantum sources with photonic waveguides is crucial for realizing advanced quantum integrated circuits. However, scalability is hindered by stringent requirements on high performance detectors. Here we overcome the yield limitation by controlled coupling of photonic channels to pre-selected detectors based on measuring critical current, timing resolution, and detection efficiency. As a proof of concept of our approach, we demonstrate a hybrid on-chip full-transceiver consisting of a deterministically integrated detector coupled to a selected nanowire quantum dot through a filtering circuit made of a silicon nitride waveguide and a ring resonator filter, delivering 100 dB suppression of 1 From visible to mid-infrared, superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs) have demonstrated excellent performances in terms of efficiency, 1-3 temporal resolution, All these features make SNSPDs ideal candidates for photon detection in advanced quantum 7 and neuromorphic integrated optical circuits. The sample was mounted on a printed circuit board to allow electrical bias and read out. For the purpose of prototyping and due to the limited range of the translation stages, each chip houses 16 devices fabricated on a sample of size 1.8 × 1 cm 2 as shown in Figure Figure Silicon nitride was selected for the waveguide core in our photonic circuit. It offers a wide optical transparency window from visible to mid-IR, A histogram of the critical current spread for 64 devices before and after PECVD deposition is shown in Figure The majority of detectors show a critical current variation of less than 1 μm. However, we notice larger changes in the critical current for a few devices, for instance devices 3 and 6 show a change in critical current by more than 2 μA. Out of 64 fabricated devices only one device shows open-circuit electrical response after deposition. Furthermore, we performed timing-jitter measurements for the highest performing detectors after etching the circuit. The experimental set-up used to perform the timing-jitter measurements is discussed in detail in. As a result, 91.4 % of the light is absorbed after 25 μm of propagation. Based on the simulation results, we fabricated a full-quantum transceiver on-chip. The circuit consists of a ring resonator filter (Figure In summary, we have shown a deterministic method to integrate high performance SNSPDs with photonic circuits. We realized on-chip full-transceiver, completely deterministic from source to detector and validated it by measuring the lifetime of a selected quantum dot. The integration process demonstrated in this article is CMOS compatible, detectors can be mass-produced and their characterization can be fully automated. Afterwards, only the best detectors are integrated with the photonic circuit. We believe that our method provides the needed accuracy and performance to realize future large scale quantum and neuromorphic photonic circuits. 