In the present contribution, we introduce a wireless optical communication-based system architecture which is shown to significantly improve the reliability and the spectral and power efficiency of the transcutaneous link in cochlear implants (CIs). We refer to the proposed system as optical wireless cochlear implant (OWCI). In order to provide a quantified understanding of its design parameters, we establish a theoretical framework that takes into account the channel particularities, the integration area of the internal unit, the transceivers misalignment, and the characteristics of the optical units. To this end, we derive explicit expressions for the corresponding average signal-to-noise-ratio, outage probability, ergodic spectral efficiency and capacity of the transcutaneous optical link (TOL). These expressions are subsequently used to assess the dependence of the TOL's communication quality on the transceivers design parameters and the corresponding channels characteristics. The offered analytic results are corroborated with respective results from Monte Carlo simulations. Our findings reveal that OWCI is a particularly promising architecture that drastically increases the reliability and effectiveness of the CI TOL, whilst it requires considerably lower transmit power compared to the corresponding widely-used radio frequency (RF) solution. During the past decades, medical implants have been advocated as an effective solution to numerous health issues due to the quality of life improvements they can provide. One of the most successful application of such devices is cochlear implants (CIs), which have restored partial hearing to more than 350, 000 people worldwide, half of whom are pediatric users who ultimately develop nearly normal language capability Overcoming the above constraints in CIs calls for investigations on the feasibility of transcutaneous wireless links that operate in non-standardized frequency bands. In light of this and due to the increased bandwidth availability, the partial transparency of skin at infrared wavelengths and the remarkably high immunity to external interference, the use of optical wireless communications (OWCs) has been recently introduced as an attractive alternative solution to the conventional approach (see To the best of the authors' knowledge, the use of OWCs for establishing TOLs in CIs has not been reported in the open technical literature. Motivated by this, in the present work, we propose a novel system architecture which by employing OWCs improves the reliability as well as the spectral and power efficiency of the TOL. We refer to this architecture as optical wireless cochlear implant (OWCI). A list of the advantages and disadvantages of the OWCI and RF cochlear implant (RFCI) is depicted in Table • We establish an appropriate system model for the TOL, which includes all different design parameters and their corresponding interactions. These parameters include the thickness of the skin through which the light is transmitted, the size of the integration area of the optics, the degree of transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX) misalignment, the efficiency of the optical system, and the emitter power. • We derive a comprehensive analytical framework that quantifies and evaluates the feasibility and effectiveness of the OWC link in the presence of misalignment fading. In this context, we provide novel closed-form expressions for the instantaneous and average SNR, which quantifies the received signal quality. Additionally, we evaluate the outage performance and the capacity of the optical link by deriving tractable analytic expressions for the outage probability and the spectral efficiency. These expressions take into account the technical characteristics of the link as well as the transcutaneous medium particularities; hence, they provide meaningful insights into the behavior of the considered set up, which can be used as design guidelines of such systems. Finally, we deduce novel expressions and simple bounds/approximations for the evaluation of the OWCI capacity. Interestingly, our findings reveal the superior reliability and effectiveness of OWCI compared to the baseline CI RF solution. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The system model of the OWCI is described in Section 2. In Section 3, we provide the analytical framework for quantifying the performance of the OWCI by deriving novel analytic expressions for the instantaneous and average SNR, the outage probability, as well as the spectral efficiency and the channel capacity. Respective numerical and simulation results, which illustrate the performance of the OWCI along with useful related discussions are provided in Section 4. Finally, closing remarks and a summary of the main findings of this contribution are presented in Section 5. Notations: Unless stated otherwise, in this paper, | • | denotes absolute value, exp(•) represents the exponential function, while log 2 (•) and ln(•) stand for the binary logarithm and the natural logarithm, respectively. In addition, P (A) denotes the probability of the event A, whereas erf(•) denotes the error function and Φ(•, •, •) represents the Lerch Φ function As illustrated in Fig. where R denotes the responsivity of the RX's photodiode, which is given by In (2), η represents the quantum efficiency of the photodiode, q is the electron charge, v denotes the photons' frequency and p is the Planck's constant. Likewise, the channel, h, can be expressed as where h l and h p denote, respectively, the deterministic channel coefficient, due to the propagation loss, and the stochastic process that models the geometric spread, due to the misalignment fading. Also, we assume a Gaussian spatial intensity profile of the beam waste on the RX plane at distance δ from the TX, w δ , and a circular aperture of radius β. As a result, the stochastic term of the channel coefficient, h p , represents the fraction of the collected power due to geometric spread with radial displacement r from the origin of the detector. Moreover, by assuming that the elevation and the horizontal displacement (sway) follow independent and identical Gaussian distributions, as in To this effect, the deterministic term of the channel coefficient can be evaluated as where α(λ) represents the skin attenuation coefficient at wavelength λ and δ denotes the total dermis thickness, which is approximately equivalent to the TX-RX distance. The skin attenuation coefficient can be derived from In the same context, the noise component can be expressed as where n s , and n th represent the shot noise and the thermal noise, respectively, which can be modelled as zero-mean Gaussian processes In more detail, the shot noise can be expressed as where n b , and n DC represent the background shot noise and dark current shot noise, respectively, which can be also modeled as a zero-mean Gaussian processes with variances and respectively In this section, we provide the mathematical framework that quantifies the performance of the proposed system. In this context, we derive closed-form expressions for the instantaneous and average SNR, outage probability and ergodic spectral efficiency and capacity. Capitalizing on them, we also derive simple and tight lower bounds for the ergodic capacity that provide useful insights. Hence, these expressions can be used to validate the feasibility of the system as well as to introduce design guidelines for its effective utilization. Based on (1)-( where P s denotes the average optical power of the transmitted signal, whereas Ps and N 0 represent the signal and noise optical power spectral density (PSD), respectively. The average SNR in the considered set up is derived in the following theorem. The average SNR in the considered system can be expressed as where denotes the fraction of the collected power in case of zero radial displacement, with In the above equations, β and w δ denote, respectively, the radius of the RX's circular aperture and the beam waste (radius calculated at e -2 ) on the RX plane at distance δ from the TX. Moreover, ξ is the square ratio of the equivalent beam radius, w eq , and the pointing error displacement standard deviation at the RX, namely with σ 2 s denoting the pointing error displacement (jitter) variance at the RX, whereas Proof 1 The proof is provided in Appendix A. From In this section, we quantify the OWCI capability in terms of spectral efficiency. In this context, a novel closed-form expression for the ergodic spectral efficiency of the proposed system is derived in the following theorem. where Proof 2 The proof is provided in Appendix B. It is recalled that the Shannon ergodic spectral efficiency in C = 1 2 E log 2 (1 + ψγ) is a valid exact expression for deriving the ergodic spectral efficiency for the heterodyne detection technique, while it acts as a lower bound for the IM/DD scheme [46, eq. ( Furthermore, it is noticed that ( It is noted here that the above lower bound is particularly tight; as a result, equation ( Based on the above and with the aid of ( which with the aid of Proposition 1 it can be lower bounded as follows: It is noticed in Based on the presented channel model, the optical transcutaneous link is wavelength selective. Also, the bandwidth over which the channel transfer function remains virtually constant is hereby denoted as ∆ f . Thus, the capacity can be obtained by dividing the total bandwidth, B, into K narrow sub-bands and then summing up the individual capacities Of note, for the special case in which B ≤ ∆ f , equation which is a common case since the values of ∆ f are in the order of GHz, whereas those of B are in the order of MHz. Based on this and with the aid of Proposition 1, equations ( and respectively. As in the previous scenarios, the above inequalities are particularly tight; as a result, they can be also considered as simple and accurate approximations. The reliability of the OWCI can be additionally evaluated in terms of the corresponding outage performance. To this end, we derive the outage probability of the considered set up in the presence of misalignment fading which is a critical factor in optical wireless communication systems. The outage probability of the considered system can be expressed as Proof From According to which indicates that for given γ th and γ, the outage performance of OWCI improves as A 0 increases. Moreover, it is shown that for a fixed γ th and A 0 , the outage probability decreases as γ increases. Finally, it is observed that as γ th increases, the outage probability also increases. It is evident that the derived analytic expressions in the previous sections allow the determination of the pointing error displacement (jitter) and its variance for given quality of service requirements. To this end, it readily follows from (26) that where The above expressions provide useful insights into the practical design of OCWI, since they allow the quantification of the amount of pointing error displacement, and its variance, that can be tolerated with respect to certain outage probability requirements. More specifically, the system parameters, in the practical designs, will be initially selected in order to achieve a target outage probability that is slightly better than the target one, under the assumption of no pointing error displacement. Then, using Finally, the above expressions allow us to express the ergodic capacity representation in (23) in terms of the corresponding outage probability, namely which in turn allows the quantification of the required ergodic capacity for certain design parameters and target outage probability requirements. In addition, further insights on the role of the involved parameters on the overall system performance can be obtained by tightly lower bounding It is noted that similar expressions can be deduced if ( In this section, we evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of OWCI by providing analytical results and insights for different scenarios of interest as well as sets of design parameters. The validity of the offered analytical results is extensively verified by respective results from Monte Carlo simulations. Unless otherwise stated, we henceforth assume that the photodiode (PD) effective area, A = π β 2 , with β denoting the radius of the RX's circular aperture, is 1 mm 2 . Also, we assume that the divergence angle, θ, is 20 o , whilst the skin thickness, δ, is assumed to be equal to 4 mm and the noise optical PSD, N 0 , is set to 1.3 pA/ √ Hz 2 The remainder of this section is organized as follows: The impact of the skin thickness on the performance of the OWCI is described in Section 4.1, while the degradation of the TOL due to the misalignment fading is presented in Section 4.2. The joint effect of the skin thickness and the misalignment is provided in Section 4.3. Finally, the impact of various design parameters is analyzed in Section 4.4. Fig. Figure Figure In Fig. In Fig. Figure Figure Figure In this section, we present the impact of different design selections in the effectiveness of OWCIs in terms of the average SNR, ergodic spectral efficiency and channel capacity. The investigated design parameters are related to the transmission LED and PD physical characteristics. Figure Similarly, the ergodic capacity lower bound is illustrated in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. This section discusses the impact of the physical characteristics of the RX optical unit. To this end, Fig. Figure Figure Figure In Fig. The above findings revealed that OWCIs outperforms the corresponding baseline CIs in terms of received signal quality, outage performance, spectral efficiency and channel capacity. In addition, they require significantly less transmit power, which renders them highly energy efficient. Notably, this difference in required power is about three orders of magnitude, since OWCI can achieve Mbps capacity levels with only few μW, contrary to conventional RF based CIs that require at least few mW to achieve this capacity. Furthermore, another advantage of OWCIs in comparison with RF based CI solutions is that they operate in a non-standardized frequency region, where there is a significantly large amount of unexploited bandwidth; as a result, there is no interference from other medical implanted devices. Therefore, it is evident that all these factors constitute OWCI a particularly attractive alternative to the RF CI solution. Appendix A According to This is a well-known approximation that has been used in several reported contributions (see for example given by By combining x ξ-1 , 0 ≤ x ≤ A 0 which upon substituting The CDF of h 2 p can be obtained as which, by using Moreover, the PDF of h 2 p can be obtained as f h 2 p (x) = dF h 2 p (x) dx Finally, the average SNR can be defined as Thus, by substituting ( which, by performing the integration yields By assuming full knowledge of the channel state information (CSI) at both the TX and the RX, the ergodic spectral efficiency, C, (in bits/channel use) can be obtained by By substituting where or By applying integration by parts into (49), we obtain which, by using Finally, by substituting (51) into technology (e.g. graphene) to achieve improved that allows compact designs features in the same integration area Existing design guidelines from several Matured standards (i.e. IEEE Std 1073.3.2-2000, standardization IEC Laser Safety Standard, IrDA, (i.e. IEEE 802.15.4, JEITACp-1223,EuropeanCOST 1101,etc.) IEEE Std 1073.3.2-2000, etc.) Stringent alignment requirements Susceptible misalignment