We study the stress distribution in a polymer brush material over a range of graft densities using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and theory. Flexible polymer chains are treated as beads connected by nonlinear springs governed by a modified finitely extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) potential in MD simulations. Simulations confirmed the quartic variation of the normal stress parallel to substrate, within the bulk of the brush, as predicted in our previous work, for low graft densities. However, in the high graft density regime, the Gaussian chain elasticity assumption is violated by finite extensibility effects (forceextension divergence) and the restriction to binary interaction among monomers is insufficient. This motivated us to extend a semi-analytical strong stretching mean field theory (SST) for polymer brushes, based on Langevin chains and a modified Carnahan-Starling equation of state to model monomer interactions. Our extended theory elucidates the stress and monomer density profiles obtained from MD simulations, as well as reproduces Gaussian chain results for small graft densities. A good agreement is observed between predictions of MD and Langevin chain SST for monomer density profile, end density profile and stress profile in high graft density regime, without fitting parameters (virial coefficients). Quantitative comparisons of MD results with various available theories suggest that excluded volume correlations may be important. Long polymer chains end-grafted on an impermeable substrate stretch away, in the presence of a good solvent 1 , forming a polymer brush (PB) structure This work builds on an earlier study The structure of a PB results from excluded volume interactions generated by solvent molecules surrounding monomers, entropic resistance to stretching of polymer chains, and the constraint imposed by end grafting. While excluded volume repulsion among monomers makes a polymer chain stretch away from the grafting surface, the entropic spring effect brings the two ends of a chain together, and their resulting balance dictates the brush formation. Mechanistically, a brush grafted to a substrate can be seen as an elastic surface layer with stress For several decades, polymer brushes have been a system of immense interest to polymer physicists. Multiple, often complementary, theoretical approaches have emerged to relate the macroscopic brush properties such as brush height (H) to molecular scale parameters such as effective monomer size (a), number of monomers in a chain (N ), graft density Alexander A departure from these lattice-based numerical calculation is the recognition that, starting from any free-end, polymer chains follow classical paths, provided the brush is strongly stretched. In this strong stretching regime, the classical paths of polymer chains dominate the partition function of the brush and fluctuations from these paths can be ignored End to end distance of a chain in a good solvent is large at high grafting densities, and hence the force-extension divergence While numerical mean field calculations show good match with SST-G for graft densities ρ g < 0.2 (V (z)) is dependent on local monomer density (φ(z)), which in turn governs the chemical potential μ(φ), thus giving In a brush in good solvent, monomer density is 0 at z = H. Hence, usually μ(φ(H)) is also assumed to be 0. The chain ends are distributed throughout the brush and the distribution function g(z) obeys H 0 g(z) = ρ g . The brush structure results from the competition between monomer-monomer interaction and stretching of the brush. So, free energy per unit substrate area of a brush, F , is the sum of interaction free energy F int and chain stretching free energy F el . In a strong stretching mean field description of a brush, where each chain is assumed to follow a minimum energy path away from the grafting surface, free energy density f (z) (free energy per unit volume) within the brush can also be obtained. Then, free energy of the brush can be written as: where f int (z) and f el (z) are interaction and elastic free energy densities, respectively. The free energy density in a brush is nonuniform. By applying an infinitesimally small uniform horizontal strain xx to the brush and calculating the change in free energy density in the brush, with the assumption of plane strain in y-direction, and that all the shear stresses as well as normal stress in the z-direction are zero, stress distribution within the brush can be obtained. It is shown in where zz is the infinitesimal normal strain in the z-direction due to strain xx applied in the x-direction. When the extension parameter β e ≤ 1/3, the divergence-free Gaussian elasticity is reasonable, and stress calculations in this regime, fully derived in an earlier work We calculate f el (z) and f int (z) based on Gaussian elasticity and FH solution theory With the above truncation due to the restrictions placed on the monomer interactions, the mean field potential is then obtained in Using ( where k B and T are Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature, respectively. SST-G provides the following expressions for φ(z), H, g(ζ), and E(z, ζ) Noting that ∂ zz ∂ xx = -1 3 , and evaluating ∂f (z) ∂ xx , the stress distribution in a brush was obtained by using (4) in Two important conclusions emerge in the Gaussian elasticity setting. First, a quartic variation of stress with respect to distance from the grafting surface with the maximum at the grafting surface. Second, a strong dependence on graft density (ρ g ) compared to number of effective monomers (N ) in a polymer chain. In this work, we seek to validate these theoretical predictions for stress with MD simulation results, which are free from the assumptions of SST-G (see Table The average distance z between ends of a Langevin chain with N effective monomers of length a, due to a force p at the ends is given by Langevin function (L(•)) Force extension relations of a Gaussian chain and a Langevin chain are compared in Fig. Gaussian Langevin Figure To find stress in a brush with Langevin chains, we extend SST-L described in Free energy density in a brush with Langevin chains has two contributors: (a) Langevin chain elasticity, f el and, (b) interactions among the monomers, f int . Intuitively, the area under force-extension curve in Fig. In the previous equation, the complementary energy (second term) is evaluated inside the integral first and then subtracted from the total energy (first term). Also notice that the stretching force and height have been normalized in the above. A polymer chain in a brush is like a chain in a one dimensional external field. This results in a stretching force p in the chain which varies along the chain length. To find stretching free energy in this case, we consider chain segments in a slit of width dz in the brush, as shown in Fig. Moreover, the stretching force (p) in the above depends on height z of the segment above the grafting surface as well as the height of the chain end ζ (= ζ/(N a)). For a given mean potential field (V (z) = V (z)), p at height z for a chain with end at ζ is obtained by the following relation where V (z) is given by So, we can conclude that end density, g(ζ), plays a significant role in determining the stretching free energy density at z. Now, the total elastic free energy density of the brush at height z can be written in terms of end-density distribution function, g(ζ), as: Note that the above form of V (z) is an empirical rational fraction approximation to the accurate power series in z reported in To calculate f int , we make use of CS equation of state for hard sphere mixtures with a correction for connection between monomers in a polymer chain where φ is monomer density, and V f is volume fraction (V f = A 0 aφ), the interaction free energy density follows: where μ = μ(φ) = μ(V f ). Chemical potential per unit chain length (μ(V f )) from the modified CS equation of state is See Appendix A for the calculation of V f . In summary, to numerically calculate f int , V f is calculated first for a brush of a given height (see Appendix A), followed by ( In this section, we first calculate ∂ zz ∂ xx and ∂f ∂ xx , and subsequently numerically calculate the stress variation σ xx (z). The derivative of zz with respect to the applied strain, xx , can be expressed as: where ū = u/(N a) and u is the displacement of a thin layer at z (see Fig. with the boundary condition: The derivative of volume fraction with respect to the applied strain, ∂ xx , is obtained by taking derivative of both sides in The derivative of H with respect to the applied strain is evaluated numerically. and ∂ H ∂ρg is obtained by finding H = H(ρ g ) using (A.1). After substituting 3 ) obtained from SST-G We also observed another interesting feature predicted by the SST-L. For ρ g ≥ 0.5, the predicted values of ∂ zz ∂ xx for z > 0.73 become positive indicating that the layers above this height undergo an expansion when the brush is stretched in x-direction. The critical point at which this occurs, is highlighted in the plot with a blue marker (*). This change in the sign of strain is observed only for very high graft density brushes and is only captured by SST-L. Note that, to smooth the curve for ∂ (see becomes positive for z > 0.73, which is not captured by SST-G. a high order polynomial was fit to ∂ ū ∂ xx vs z curve and the fitted polynomial was differentiated. To evaluate derivative of free energy density at height z with respect to the applied strain, we find the derivative of interaction part, ∂fint ∂ xx , and stretching part, ∂f el ∂ xx , independently, and then sum them up. ∂fint ∂ xx is obtained by taking derivative of Finding ∂f el ∂ xx is more involved. Taking derivative of the expression for f el in To evaluate the above relation, we need to obtain the derivative of local stretching force ( ∂ p ∂ xx ) and normalized end density . By making use of the implicit relation involving p in ∂ xx = 0 as ζ is the integration variable in See Appendix A for calculation of ∂ ḡ( ζ) ∂ xx . On solving the above numerically and substituting the values of f , ∂f ∂ xx and ∂ zz ∂ xx in (4), we obtain the stress profile σ xx (z). SST-G and SST-L stress profiles are compared in Fig. The purpose of MD simulations is to verify the predictions of SST-G and SST-L without placing any restrictions a priori on (a) virial truncation, (b) Langevin or Gaussian assumptions for chain elasticity, and (c) classical paths restriction on chain conformations. We use the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) where m i and r i are mass and position, respectively, of the i th unconstrained bead, U is the total potential energy of the system, and Γ is bead friction. In the simulations, Γ = 2.0τ -1 , where τ is unit of time in Lennard-Jones (LJ) units. Note that LJ units are used throughout the MD simulation section. F i (t) is a Gaussian white noise satisfying the following relation: in accordance with the fluctuation-dissipation theorem The total potential energy of the system has three-main contributions: (i) bond potential U FENE , (ii) non-bonded pair potential U LJ , and (iii) potential governing interaction of the beads with the grafting surface U wall . where r ij = |r ir j | is the distance between beads i and j, and r ik g = |r ir g k | is the distance between bead i and constrained (grafted) bead k. z i is the perpendicular distance of a bead from the grafting surface. Also, the beads fixed to a substrate interact only with the unconstrained bead bonded to it. Beads of unit mass are connected by finite extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) spring representing a bond between effective monomers as done in earlier MD studies on brushes where b ij is a bond order parameter that is 1 for adjacent beads in a polymer chain, and 0 otherwise, K is a constant determining stiffness, R 0 is the maximum extension in the spring. and σ are the energy and length scales associated with the second term which is LJ potential. p c is a piecewise continuous function used to truncate the LJ potential to only account for repulsion forces. Thus, p c = 1 for r ij ≤ r c = 2 1/6 σ and is 0 otherwise. Note that this σ is different from the symbol for stress tensor (σ ij ), which always has a subscript in this work. The first term in the expression above is attractive and is balanced by the repulsive second term at equilibrium bond length. In the simulation, R 0 = 1.5σ. In an athermal simulation at reduced temperature T = 1.2 /k B and for K = 30 /σ 2 , average bond length is equal to 0.97σ. So, while comparing MD simulation results with SST-L, we take a = 0.97σ and d = σ in interpreting MD results. Fig. The interaction between nonbonded beads is governed by LJ potential with appropriate cut-off (see Fig. where r ij is the distance between a pair of interacting monomers, and r c is the cut-off distance. To simulate brush in a good solvent condition, r c = 2 1/6 σ such that pair interaction is purely repulsive. This is often referred to as athermal simulation since the potential is close to a hard sphere potential The polymer chains have their one end fixed to a rigid wall. To ensure that the polymer chains do not cross the wall, the bead-wall interaction is repulsive, and governed by the following potential: Athermal simulations at T = 1.2 /k B are performed. Length and width of the simulation box and hence, of the grafting surface, is chosen to be the same and slightly larger than the brush height except for ρ g ≥ 0.2, wherein to limit the total number of beads (N tot ) at ∼ 500, 000, the box size was smaller than the brush height. The first monomer of each of the chains is fixed to one of the uniformly spaced grid points on the grafting surface. A random walk conformation of a chain starting at each of the grafting points is obtained and used as the starting brush configuration. An efficient way to generate initial configuration, particularly for low graft graft density brushes, is described in Appendix B. In the directions along the length and width of the box (x and y), periodic boundary conditions are specified, see Fig. Particle velocities are randomly assigned to ensure a reduced temperature of T = 1.2 /k B . Note that the initial brush configuration may have an overlap between monomers. Because LJ potential is unstable when the distance between interacting particles approaches zero, we initially run the system with the following soft pair potential instead of LJ pair potential for ∼ 30, 000 time steps, before switching to the LJ potential. where r ij is the distance between a pair of interacting monomers. r c was chosen to be σ, and A was increased from 0 to 30 in 10 steps to ensure that the configuration becomes stable upon switching to LJ potential. After switching to LJ pair potential, the system is run for ∼ 10 7 steps to equilibrate. Once the monomer density profile becomes stable, we run the system for another ∼ 5×10 6 steps to obtain data to calculate property values. Note however that for very small graft densities, where length of each chain (N a) is large, equilibration took ∼ 10 times more steps. To obtain the variation of the brush properties, for example number density, end density, stress etc., with distance from the grafting surface, we divide the simulation volume in bins of thickness σ, and length and width along the grafting surface the same as that of the simulation box. Value of any of the above properties at the center of a bin is calculated by averaging the property values over the bin, and over the length of the simulation. We take virial stress as the stress measure. At each time step, we compute the following quantity for the i th bead: where m i is the mass of the i th bead, r i a and v i a are the a th component of position vector and velocity of the i th bead, N p and N b are the number of pair neighbors and bonds of the i th bead, respectively. P ij b is b th component of force on the i th bead due to pair interaction with the j th bead, and p ik b is b th component of force on the i th bead due to bond interaction with the k th bead. Now, let us consider the n th bin with volume V bin . It has N bin beads at the l th time step. The instantaneous virial stress in the n th bin, defined at the l th time step, is: which accounts for the behavior of multiple beads in the bin. In order to report statistically meaningful quantities, we computed the averaged stress tensor per bin at the k th time step as follows: where N k is a number of consecutive time steps of the simulation. We observe that the number of time steps used to average the stress components needs to be large enough to reduce fluctuations and spurious measures that could appear during entropic oscillations of the polymer brush. Our simulations showed that for N k ≥ 1000 the results are insensitive to the choice of N k . Thus, we took N k = 1000. We systematically do this for multiple time instances (N I ∼ 5000) and report the phase-averaged virial stress components in the n th bin as: We remark that the reported values of the components of virial stress reflect the stress state of a collection of beads, and not a point wise measure of stress in the system. To obtain a point wise measure, other stress metric We compare the results from SST calculation and MD simulation in this section. Since we have used generic potentials in MD simulation, the results are qualitative and quantitative mapping to a physical system requires one to determine and σ for the system first. We studied brushes with graft densities ranging from 0.005 to 0.5. To start with, we ensure that chains are strongly stretched so that brush height is proportional to number of beads in a chain N . This allows an accurate comparison between MD and SST. To achieve this, we performed a convergence test wherein N was increased to ensure that φ(z) vs z/(N a) curves for different N converge to a single curve as shown in Fig. Monomer density in a brush varies with distance from the grafting surface as shown in Fig. To validate monomer density profile predicted by SST-G in the low graft density regime, we plot scaled monomer density (φ(z)/ρ 2/3 g ) with scaled distance from the grafting surface ((z/H) 2 ) in Fig. Due to the presence of a tail in monomer density profile, height is difficult to identify clearly. So, average height is defined as the first moment of monomer density The normalizing pre-factor 8/3 ensures that the height predicted by SST-G matches with the calculation above if parabolic monomer density profile obtained from SST-G is used in the above formula. The dependence of brush height on graft density is shown in Fig. We use the the height obtained from MD to calculate β s and β e . Table E(0, ζ) is lower than 0.33 for ζ < ζ0 = 0.22. The proportion of chains with ζ < ζ0 , P ( ζ < ζ0 ), can be obtained using For ρ g = 0.02, H = β e = 0.32, hence P ( ζ < ζ0 ) = 0.62. Only 62% of chains satisfy the condition for ρ g = 0.02. For ρ g = 0.01, this fraction is 85%. So, Gaussian chain assumption is not valid for ρ g = 0.02 and only lower graft densities may follow the assumption. Based on Fig. We plot the variation of the scaled end density of monomers with scaled distance from the grafting surface in Fig. We also plot effective stretching ratio γ, defined as ζ / ζ 0 , where ζ is mean chain end height in a brush and ζ 0 is mean end height of a single polymer chain with no neighbouring chains as a function of β s in Fig. After validating our simulations and presenting a detailed study of the structural properties of a brush in the previous sections, we now consider the variation of stress in the polymer brush using MD and theory. The typical variation of the components of the virial stress in a brush obtained as described in Section 4.1 are shown in Fig. in the x direction for the lowest graft density and the fraction decreases with increasing graft density to become less than 1% for the highest graft density. This likely results from the fact that brush is not very strongly stretched at low graft densities. Fig. For higher graft densities, SST-G theory eventually breaks down and hence, we have to rely on SST-L to find stress profile. Fig. Remarkably, for very high graft densities, the stress obtained with MD simulations suggests a bilinear profile when plotted against (1 -(z/H) 2 ) 2 as seen in Fig. Finally, we plot the dependence of the resultant surface stress (τ s ) with graft density (ρ g ) in Fig. the surface stress up to ρ g = 0.08. Below, we discuss the deficiencies of different methods to understand this discrepancy. Table Stresses in a polymer brush is studied in this work using mean field theories and MD simulations. The conclusions are as follows. 1. Molecular dynamics simulations verify the quartic stress profile prediction of SST-G from our earlier work Free energy Surface stress Scaling theory ∼ ρ 2. Gaussian elasticity of chains breaks down at higher graft densities and has lead to discrepancies between the SST-G and MD results. This motivated the advancement of a semi-analytical parameter free theory (SST-L) based on Langevin elasticity of polymer chains, which accounts for the divergence in force-extension relation. Further, SST-L does not restrict itself to binary interactions among monomers as does SST-G. These two features are found to explain the MD results satisfactorily. 3. Prediction from SST-L for monomer density (see Fig. A natural extension of this work is to consider semiflexible polymer chains, common in biology, based on worm-like chain models for elasticity. Also, the effect of stimuli on stress in a brush can be modelled by adding an enthalpic term to the CS equation of state, SST-L (NanoMat program at UBC), and the Collaborative Health Research project jointly with the Canadian Institute of Health Research. We thank Compute Canada for providing computational resources through its Westgrid consortium. Manav would like to thank UBC for the award of four year fellowship (4YF). The calculation of stress in a brush requires evaluation of where d a H(2 H4 -4 H2 + 5) (1 -H2 ) 2 (1 -V f ) 4 6 + 3V f -4V For low graft density brushes, achieving hight β s to be able to make comparisons with SST requires large number of beads per chain (N ). However, equilibrating a brush with large N is very difficult due to the fact that relaxation time for a chain increases very fast with increasing N . So, starting from a good initial configuration is imperative. As brushes at low graft density show parabolic profile, SST-G results, summarized in Section 3.1, can be used to generate initial brush configuration. Below we describe the steps involved. 1. Determine total number of chains, N g , in the brush. Define a surface and decide locations of N g grafting points. I chose equispaced grid points as grafting points. 2. Calculate a tentative brush height, H t , using A Flory-Huggins equation of state or an enthalpic correction to CS equation of state can be considered to include different solvent qualities. Number of chains grafted to unit area of a substrate.