We investigated quantized modes of kinks in the phase space of superconducting gaps in a superconductor with multiple gaps. The kink is described by the sine-Gordon model in a two-gap superconductor and by the double sine-Gordon model in a three-gap superconductor. A fractionalflux vortex exists at the edge of the kink, and a fractional-flux vortex will be stable in a three-gap superconductor with time-reversal symmetry breaking. The kink and fractional-flux vortex exhibit massless modes as a sliding motion. We show further that there are one zero-energy mode (massless mode) and quantized excitation modes in kinks, which are characteristic features of multi-gap superconductors. The equation of quantized modes for the double sine-Gordon model is solved numerically. The correction to the ground-state energy is calculated based on the renormalization theory. The study of multiband superconductors started from old works by Moskalenko In a two-band superconductor, a solution of the halfflux vortex exists. The dynamics of phase difference φ between two gaps is described by the sine-Gordon model where α is a constant proportional to the Josephson coupling constant. We adopt that the phase difference φ has spatial dependence only in one direction x. We have a kink solution for the boundary condition that φ → 0 as x → -∞ and φ → 2π as x → ∞. We assume that we have two equivalent bands with the same intraband coupling constants. A half-quantum flux vortex exists at the edge of the kink Let us discuss a stability of fractional-flux vortices. We need energy to form the kink between fractional vortices, where the energy is proportional to the square root of the Josephson coupling In this paper, we first consider a stability of fractionalflux vortices in multi-component superconductors. We argue that fractional-flux vortices indeed can be stabilized in a three-band superconductor with time-reversal symmetry breaking. Second, we examine excitation modes of kinks in two-and three-gap superconductors, and show that there are zero-energy mode and quantized excitation modes. Generally, there are zero-energy modes when there are fractional vortices and kinks. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss a stability of fractional-flux vortices on a kink in a superconductor with time-reversal symmetry breaking. In Section III, we investigate the quantization of a kink solution of the sine-Gordon model for two-and three-gap superconductors. We give a summary in the last Section. In a two-component (two-gap) superconductor, there may exist a kink that runs from one end of the boundary to the other end as shown in Fig. where θ j is the phase of the gap function in the j-th gap for j = 1, 2, • • • , N (N is the number of gaps) and Γ ij are constants. We assume that Γ ij = Γ ji . When all the Γ ij are negative, the ground state is at θ i -θ j = 0 mod2π. We have a kink that connects two states, for example, (θ A fractional-flux vortex can exist at the edge of the kink as in the two-band case. We assume that the kink surface is a plane and the magnetic field is applied being parallel to the plane. When the vortex with unit flux φ 0 exists just at the plane (Fig. Let us turn to examine the time reversal symmetry broken superconducting state. In a three-band superconductor, the time reversal symmetry (TRS) is broken when Γ 12 Γ 23 Γ 31 > 0. In this case, a fractional vortex has two kinks because we have two phase-difference modes A fractional-vortex pair on the kink can be stable in a superconductor with time reversal symmetry breaking. This is shown in Fig. The ground state has a 2π/3 structure in this case. We adopt that there is a kink that connects two states with (θ 1 , θ 2 , θ 3 ) = (2π/3, 0, -2π/3) and (θ 1 , θ 2 , θ 3 ) = (-2π/3, 0, 2π/3). Now we put a vortex with unit flux φ 0 on the kink. This vortex will be separated into two fractional vortices as shown in Fig. ( ) (a) A kink with in a three-band superconductor with equivalent bands. We assume that the time reversal symmetry is broken The phases of gap functions below the kink is Φ1 ≡ (2π/3, 0, -2π/3) and above the kink is Φ2 ≡ (-2π/3, 0, 2π/3). Two states with Φ1 and Φ2 are degenerate with the same energy. (b) A vortex with the unit flux approaching the kink in (a). (c) The unit-flux vortex in (b) is separated into two fractional vortices on the kink. We defined Φ3 ≡ (0, -2π/3, 2π/3), Φ4 ≡ (0, 2π/3, -2π/3) and φ 1/3 = (2π/3, 2π/3, 2π/3). Note that Φ2 = Φ4 + 2φ 1/3 mod2π. The phases of gaps are shown in the figure. We consider the Hamiltonian given by where n and m stands for band indices and where μ is the chemical potential and m n is the mass of electrons in the n-th band. For a two-band superconductor, the Lagrangian density concerning phase variables is given by where θ i is the phase of the i-th gap ∆ i , ρ i is the density of states in the i-th band, n i is the electron density and m i indicates the mass of electrons in the i-th band. γ 12 is the Josephson coupling constant given by γ 12 = (g -1 ) 12 for the BCS coupling constants g = (g ij ). We adopt that γ 12 < 0 and put We define the phase difference φ and the total phase φ as φ = θ 1 -θ 2 and φ = θ 1 + aθ 2 where a is a real constant. We put v 0 as The Lagrangian is written as Here we set aK 1 = K 2 and integrate out the field φ to obtain the effective action L φ for φ. We have where v is the velocity defined by and we put We assume that γ 12 < 0. The coefficient α has the dimension of the inverse of square of the distance. In the three-gap case, the Lagrangian for the phase part is given as where we assume that γ ij = γ ji . We define the total phase and phase differences as follows. We choose a and b as a = K 2 /K 1 and b = K 3 /K 1 . We obtain the effective Lagrangian after integrating out the total phase φ as Let us consider the static kink in a two-gap superconductor and examine the energy functional given by We consider a two-dimensional superconductor where there is a one-dimensional kink with variable y being independent of the other space variable x. The kink satisfies the equation A one-kink solution is with the boundary condition φ → 0 as y → -∞ and φ → 2π as y → ∞. y 0 indicates the position where the kink exists and take any real value. A set {y 0 } y0∈R represents a moduli space of one-kink solution. We here regard y 0 as a variable that depends on time t: y 0 = y 0 (t). We obtain Then the action for y 0 (t) is given by (20) This indicates that the kink motion exhibits a zeroenergy mode (massless mode) with the mass where L x is the length of the kink in the x direction. The kink would move with a constant velocity u: y 0 (t) = y 0 (0) + ut. When two bands are equivalent in a simple case with with where d is the spatial dimension and ξ 0 is the coherence length ξ 0 = hv F /(π∆). 1/ √ α indicates the spread of kink that is proportional to ξ 0 . In two dimensions, M α is proportional to the electron mass m, This massless mode is the sliding motion of kink A fractional-flux vortex is regarded as a monopole in a superconductor where the fractional vortex exists at the end of the kink, for instance, at (x, y) = (x 0 , 0) and the other end is at the boundary of superconductor. The phase of the second gap is represented as and that of the first gap is θ 1 = -θ 2 + θ where θ is the rotation angle about the point (x 0 , 0). The gauge field corresponding to this phase configuration has a singularity and represents a monopole in the phase space The action for φ is given as where the mass M mp is given by where a is a cutoff. In two spatial dimensions, using ρ i = m i /(2π), M mp is proportional to the effective mass of electron: with m * = m 1 m 2 /(m 1 + m 2 ). A fractional-flux vortex, namely, the monopole exhibits a massless mode with the mass proportional to log L x . Let us examine the excitation modes of kinks in twogap and three-gap superconductors. The kink solution has a continuous parameter called a moduli which forms a space of solution. Since the kink solution is a classical solution of the equation of motion, there is a zero-energy mode in the tangent space of the classical solution. We write the solution of kink as φ = φ 0 + φ (1) where φ 0 is the kink state given in eq.( Since the eigenvalue is zero or positive, we put λ = ω 2 where ω (times A) indicates the excitation energy. The eigenfunctions and eigenvalues are given by φ φ (1) q = e iqx √ α (q + i tanh( √ αx)), λ q = (q 2 + 1)α, where η(q) is the phase difference when x is large given by tan η(q) = 1/q. The parameter q is quantized as q = q n for n = 0, 1, • • • . φ (1) 0 represents the zero energy mode, and φ (1) 1 and φ where u = γ 13 ∆ 1 /(γ 12 ∆ 2 ) and g = A -1 given as The parameter α is We assume that γ 12 < 0 and u > -1/2. We consider a one-dimensional kink with variable x as before and the solution is given by where we put s = α(1 + 2u). When we regard the parameter x 0 as a time-dependent parameter, x 0 (t) represents a gapless mode with the mass where ρ * F is the effective density of states and L k is the length of the kink. The kink solution is written as φ = φ 0 + φ (1) as before where φ (1) represents a correction to the kink state. We examine the following eigenvalue equation: We change the variable x to z = s(x -x 0 ) to the eigenvalue equation as follows: where ν = λ/s 2 . The zero-energy mode is easily found as with the eigenvalue ν 0 = λ 0 = 0. It is not easy to obtain an exact expression for excited states with positive eigenvalues. An approximate solution of the first excited state for small u and large x is obtained as The eigenvalue is ν 1 ≃ 1, namely, λ 1 ≃ s 2 . The third and higher excited states have continuous spectra when the system size L is very large. Under the same condition, φ q will be approximated as with the eigenvalue ν q ≃ q 2 + 1. We solve the eigen-equation in eq.( Here let us discuss the energy of kink. The energy of the solution φ 0 is given by where a constant -(1 + u/2) is introduced to subtract the divergence. This is evaluated as The excitation modes are approximated as a set of harmonic oscillators. The field φ is written as φ = φ 0 (x -x 0 (t)) + n c n (t)φ (1) n (x -x 0 (t)), The Lagrangian for c n with n = 0 is given by where we set λ n = ω 2 n . The excitation modes are described by harmonic oscillators with frequencies vω n . The corrections to the energy from quantized modes are written as where N 1 and N qn are integers, and in the two-gap case (u = 0) and in the three-gap case. We put ω 1 = √ λ 1 = s √ ν 1 and ω qn = λ qn = s √ ν qn . According to numerical calculations in Fig. Then, E kink is approximated as (52) The ground state energy of kink is given as Since the summation with respect to q n diverges, we subtract k 2 n + s 2 from s q 2 n + 1. We obtain for large L where we used partial integration and η(k) ∼ s/k for large |k|. The last integral diverges, which is removed by the renormalization of α ∝ s 2 . In fact, the same divergence appears from the interaction term -(α/g) cos φ. The one-loop contribution is given by by subtracting 1 form cos φ 0 to regularize the integral. This gives the same correction as in eq.( Then the ground-state energy of kink is IV. SUMMARY The observation of fractional-flux vortices in a layered superconductor indicates that there are indeed kinks in the phase space of a multi-component superconductor We investigated quantized excitation modes of the kink in a two-gap and a three-gap superconductor. There are zero-energy mode (massless mode) and quantized excitation modes with energy gaps proportional to s ∝ √ α. Second and higher excitation modes have almost continuous spectra when the system size L is large. Since α is proportional to the Josephson coupling, properties of excitation modes are determined by the Josephson coupling between different gap states. Although the energy of kink has a divergence, it is regularized by the renormalization of coupling constants in the Lagrangian. The zero-energy mode has a peak at the position of the kink, which indicates a fluctuation of the amplitude of domain wall at the position of the kink. We expect that this mode can be observed by some experimental equipments such as scanning tunneling spectroscopy. There are two massless modes so far; one is the massless mode of the kink and the other is that of sliding motion of the kink. The former is a small oscillation mode of the kink, which may be called the ripple mode. A fractional vortex itself also exhibits a massless mode as a motion of a monopole. We also examined a stability of fractional-flux vortices in a multiband superconductor. In a two-band superconductor, a fractional-flux vortex is unstable because of the energy cost of kink. Two fractional vortices connected by a kink are glued to be a vortex with the unit flux. In a real superconductor, however, fractional-flux vortices may be stabilized due to some vortex pinning effect and magnetic interaction between vortices and external magnetic field outside the superconductor. An interesting possibility of stable fractional vortices was found in a three-gap superconductor with time-reversal symmetry breaking. It was shown that fractional vortices can exist on the transverse kink that connects two states with the same energy. The unit flux is decomposed into two vortices with flux φ 0 /3 and 2φ 0 /3 along the transverse kink. This is a vortex pinning by kinks. The vortex pinning by kinks indicates a possibility of high critical current of a superconducting wire.