We show the occurrence of Dirac, Triple point, Weyl semimetal and topological insulating phase in a single ternary compound using specific symmetry preserving perturbations. Based on first principle calculations, k.p model and symmetry analysis, we show that alloying induced precise symmetry breaking in SrAgAs (space group P63/mmc) leads to tune various low energy excitonic phases transforming from Dirac to topological insulating via intermediate triple point and Weyl semimetal phase. We also consider the effect of external magnetic field, causing time reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking, and analyze the effect of TRS towards the realization of Weyl state. Importantly, in this material, the Fermi level lies extremely close to the nodal point with no extra Fermi pockets which further, make this compound as an ideal platform for topological study. The multi fold band degeneracies in these topological phases are analyzed based on point group representation theory. Topological insulating phase is further confirmed by calculating Z2 index. Furthermore, the topologically protected surface states and Fermi arcs are investigated in some detail. The degrees of band degeneracy near the Fermi level classify the topological gapless phases into three distinct categories; namely Dirac Semimetal (DSM), SrAgAs was first synthesized by Albrecht Mewis in 1978 We have performed first principle calculation using Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP). Results and Discussions: We start with a question; what exactly defines the states of a topological material ? Is it DSM, TPSM, TI or WSM ? The answer lies in its point group symmetry. The central concept is that two bands which are composed with atomic orbitals will cross each other at any k-points in the BZ and the degeneracy of that crossing points will be protected by the site-symmetry group of that points and the band hybridization will be restricted by the group orthogonality relations. Next, we induce a triple point semi-metallic (TPSM) phase in SrAg 1-x Cu x As via symmetry allowed Copper (Cu) alloying. The parent compound SrAgAs possess two equivalent positions of Ag-atoms in the unit cell. We replace one of the Ag with a Cu (i.e 50% alloying) to realize TPSM state in SrAgAs. Such alloying breaks the center of inversion, three dihedral mirror planes (σ d ) and C 6 rotational symmetries which in turn deduces the D 6h point group symmetry to D 3h . The little group along the Γ-A path is now C 3v in SrAg 1-0.5 Cu 0.5 As alloy. The C 3v point group allows two one-dimensional (Λ 4 and Λ 5 ) and one two-dimensional (Λ 6 ) representations in the 2π spin rotational sub-space. The electronic structure of SrAg 0.5 Cu 0.5 As alloy with SOC effect is shown in Fig. , -3 2 as basis sets considering the above atomic like orbitals under inversion, time reversal and D 6h symmetry. The superscript ± in the basis set represents the parity of the states. The 4×4 minimal Hamiltonian around Γ using these basis for D 6h point group is given by, ) with M 0 , M 1 , M 2 > 0 to confirm the band inversion. Finite value of parameter D introduces broken inversion symmetry. Therefore, D=0 for centro-symmetric Dirac semimetal SrAgAs. The eigenvalues of the above Hamiltonian are, This eigen value equation gives two gapless solution at k d = (0, 0, ± M 0 /M 1 ), which are nothing but the two Dirac nodes on k z axis. Under three fold rotational symmetry, the off diagonal term B(k) takes only the higher order form of B 3 k z k 2 + . So, in the vicinity of the Dirac nodes, the higher order terms vanish, i.e., B(k) = 0. We have fitted the energy spectrum of the above model Hamiltonian with ab-initio band structure of SrAgAs in the vicinity of Dirac node (Fig. H mag (k) = H(k) + hσ z τ z The external magnetic field (h = 0.008 eV) decouples the Dirac nodes into two Weyl nodes and they appear at k W SM = (0,0, ± M 0 ± h/M 1 ) points on k z -axis as shown in Fig. In general, robustness of the Fermi arcs come from either symmetry or topology or both. Dirac Fermi arcs are the doubly degenerate Fermi arcs and its formation mechanism can be understood from the super-imposition of two Weyl nodes of opposite chirality in momentum space. In that sense, four fold Dirac nodes give rise to the doubly degenerate Fermi arcs. However, these Fermi arcs are not topologically protected because the Dirac nodes do not have any topological invariant protection. In conclusion, we predict a single material SrAgAs which can host topologically distinct phases (DSM, TPSM, WSM and TI). Using the appropriate symmetry analysis and first principles calculations, we show that all these distinct topological phases can be realized in SrAgAs via proper alloy engineering. We systematically explain the multi dimensional band degeneracies and phase transition from one to another, within the concept of group theoretical analysis. Further, the non-trivial bulk band signatures of DSM and TPSM have been projected onto the rectangular (100) surface. Our surface analysis indeed show the existence of topological surface states and Fermi arc, originating from the nodal points of DSM and TPSM. We believe that the stoichiometric SrAgAs can serve as a host for all distinct topological phases and hence pave a path for experimentalists to verify the outcomes with appropriate probe. Such discovery of new promising topological candidates using alloy engineering is extremely useful to guide the further design of topological materials.