Large-area two-dimensional (2D) materials for technical applications can now be produced by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Unfortunately, grain boundaries (GBs) are ubiquitously introduced as a result of the coalescence of grains with different crystallographic orientations. It is well known that the properties of materials largely depend on GB structures. Here, we carried out a systematic study on the GB structures in CVD-grown polycrystalline h-BN monolayer films by transmission electron microscope. Interestingly, most of these GBs are revealed to be formed via overlapping between neighboring grains, which are distinct from the covalently bonded GBs as commonly observed in other 2D materials. Further density functional theory (DFT) calculations show that the hydrogen plays an essential role in overlapping GB formation. This work provides an in-depth understanding of the microstructures and formation mechanisms of GBs in CVD-grown h-BN films, which should be informative in guiding the precisely controlled synthesis of large area single crystalline h-BN and other 2D materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), etc. have gained great interest because of their remarkable and technologically useful properties A rich variety of GB configurations in monolayer h-BN can be identified due to the broken of inversion symmetry in the corresponding binary honeycomb lattice Here, we build a full picture of GB structures in CVD-grown monolayer h-BN by conducting dark-field imaging analysis at the grain size scale, and spherical aberration-corrected high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) imaging to get the atomic structures. Our results show that OLGBs are found to be dominant in CVD-grown h-BN based on statistical analysis of over one hundred GBs. We also explored the structure of GBs formed between two rotationally aligned grains, which shows a folded structure feature instead of the perfect connection between two grains. To have a deep understanding on the formation mechanism of OL-GBs in h-BN, we carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations and revealed the energetic competition between CBGBs and OLGBs responsible for the formation of GBs, and the role of hydrogen during the formation of GBs. Cu 85 N i 15 alloy substrate was used for the CVD synthesis of h-BN domains as reported previously As grown monolayer h-BN on a Cu 85 N i 15 substrate was spin coated with Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and treated by oxygen plasma to remove the backside samples. And then the sample was transferred onto a TEM grid (quantifoil with a pore size of 1.2 μm) and ultrathin carbon film using electrochemical bubbling method First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out by using the Vienna ab initio simulation Package (VASP) To model the structures of various h-BN edges and grain boundaries (GBs) on Cu substrate, a Cu(111) slab consisting of 3 atomic layers was constructed as the substrate, of which the unit cell size was 6.6534.5620.81 3 and the bottom layer was fixed to mimic the bulk Cu foil. Due to the lattice mismatch between h-BN and Cu, the lattice constant of Cu substrate has already been reduced by less than 4% to keep commensurate with h-BN. To model the formation of h-BN GBs, a pair of twin h-BN ribbons placed on Cu substrate was used. Their edges are either passivated by H or by the substrate. The kpoint mesh was sampled as 511. All the structures were optimized until the force on each atom is within 0.01 eV/. We adopt two types of h-BN samples grown on CuNi alloy (Cu 85 N i 15 ) substrates with (100) dominated crystallographic facet at two different growth time (60 mins for discrete film and 90 mins for continuous film, respectively), as shown in Figure To fully reveal the GB structures in CVD-grown h-BN, information on both grain scale and atomic scale is necessary. The former one gives us the size, shape and edge orientations of grains as well as GB's morphology, while the latter one provides information of atomic structures. Herein, we use dark-field TEM (DF-TEM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) to obtain the general picture of GBs, combined with atomically resolved HRTEM operating at 80 kV to get the detailed structures. The dark field images and corresponding atomic resolution images of three representative GBs are displayed in Figure It is natural to propose that grains with the same orientation could coalesce and form a large single crystal with no line defects formed in between, if we ignore the relative sliding of the two grains As for the case of neighboring grains with misorientation angles of 30 • and 60 • , OLGB with a finite width is observed, as indicated by atomic-scale images in Figure In order to have a comprehensive understanding of the formation process of these different GBs, we counted the width of three types of GBs in both discrete and con- tinuous h-BN films, as summarized in Figure There are no conventional CBGBs found in our data, in contrast to the cases of CVD-grown graphene and TMDs, where CBGBs account for a certain proportion To understand the formation mechanism of OLGBs, we further conduct DFT calculations. During the CVD growth process of h-BN, the growing edges should be either passivated by the metal atoms or by hydrogen atoms Moreover, we studied the evolution of the formation energy during the process of an overlapping GB in h-BN. As shown in Figure Based on the mechanism explored above and the results of the grain-scale analysis, we can prove that the grain boundary formation is a kinetic process Our results demonstrate that the dominant GB structure in CVD-grown h-BN is overlapping GBs (and folded GBs for aligned grains), rather than covalently bonded GBs. This gives an entirely different view of GBs in h-BN and 2D material family, and provides a model system for researchers to further explore the effects of GBs on properties. Since CVD is one of the most suitable methods for massive production of h-BN, such OLGBs should be paid more attention and be considered when 2D membranes are used in industrial applications. From previous discussions, we could propose that we can change the GB structure by tuning the H 2 pres-sure. Moreover, when h-BN forms in-plane heterostructures with other 2D materials such as graphene, if they nucleate independently from each other, the edges of h-BN/graphene will be passivated either by H or by metal substrates, and thus results in different interfaces. This can explain the formation of overlapping heterostructure between h-BN and graphene as previously observed We prove that wrinkling should be considered during the synthesis of large-area single-crystalline h-BN films by coalescence of numerous grains grown from aligned h-BN nuclei. In fact, the mismatch of thermal expansion coefficient between materials and substrates are ubiquitous in all the 2D materials, which would easily lead to the folding process in the region between two grains or in inside the grain. The structure of the connection region in other materials should be similar to the structure we presented here. Jang et al.demonstrated wafer-scale wrinkle-free multilayer h-BN growth on a sapphire substrate by LPCVD In summary, we have shown that overlapping GBs are the primary structure in CVD grown h-BN. And there is folded structure in two rotational aligned grains. The theoretical study shows that the edges of h-BN on CVD growth are dominantly passivated by H atoms, which is a precondition of forming overlapping GBs. And an energetic competition between covalently bonded GB and overlapping GBs are systematic theoretical studied. This study reveals the GB nature in CVD-grown h-BN and gives the mechanism behind the phenomenon, which will allow us to precisely control the growth of desired h-BN and other 2D materials. the atomic structure from the images. However, there is a strong signal in FFT as seen in Figure Detailed angle definition in geometric analysis is displayed in Figure In the experiments, we can get the orientation of the left and right grains, and the orientation of the hexagonal lattice of the interlayer based on the FFT. However, we can not distinguish the boron or nitride atoms in the hexagonal lattice of the interlayer. Therefore, the orientation of the interlayer is represented as hexagon which results in two β values, β 1 and β 2 , as shown in Figure The formation energy of H-passivated h-BN edge is first calculated, which is defined by the following equation: (1) where E T and E S are the energies of the total system and the substrate, respectively. N and N H are the number of BN pairs and H atoms, respectively. ε BN and ε H2 are the energies of a BN pair in h-BN on Cu substrate and H 2 molecule, respectively. L is the width of the unit cell. The formation energy of substrate passivated h-BN edge is thus calculated by: E F -S = ((E T -E S -N ×ε BN -N H ×ε H2 /2)/l-2E F -H )/2 (2) and the formation energy of a covalently bonded GB in h-BN on Cu substrate is Calculation of the formation energy evolution during the overlapping of two h-BN domains The formation energy during the overlapping of two neighboring h-BN domains is calculated by: where ∆μ BN is the chemical potential difference between a BN pair in h-BN on Cu substrate and in growth precursor. The hydrogen chemical potential μ H in H 2 gas at a temperature T and a pressure P is calculated by where ∆E T is the total energy difference between H passivated h-BN edges and covalently bonded grain boundary or Cu passivated h-BN edges. ∆F V is the vibration entropy difference between the H passivated h-BN edges and covalently bonded grain boundary or Cu passivated h-BN edges. Calculation of the formation energy of covalently bonded h-BN GBs as a function of its mis-orientation angle. To calculate the formation energy of covalently bonded GBs in h-BN as a function of its mis-orientation angle, θ, twin GBs in h-BN are chosen. The GB formation energy is defined as: 