We perform density functional theory calculation to investigate the structural and electronic properties of various two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, MX 2 (M=Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta, or W, and X=S or Se), and their straininduced phase transitions. We evaluate the relative stability and the activation barrier between the octahedral-T and the trigonal-H phases of each MX 2 . It is found that the equilibrium and phase transition characteristics of MX 2 can be classified by the group to which its metal element M belongs in the periodic table. MX 2 with M in the group 4 (Ti, Zr, or Hf), forms an octahedral-T phase, while that with an M in the group 6 (Cr, Mo, or W) does a trigonal-H phase. On the other hand, MX 2 with M in the group 5 (V, Nb, Ta), which is in-between the groups 4 and 6, may form either phase with a similar stability. It is also found that their electronic structures are strongly correlated to the structural configurations: mostly metallic in the T phase, while semiconducting in the H phase, although there are some exceptions. We also explore the effects of an applied stress and find for some MX 2 materials that the resultant strain, either tensile or compressive, may induce a structural phase transition by reducing the transition energy barrier, which is, in some cases, accompanied by its metal-insulator transition. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) in the form of a monolayer have emerged as they have been easily exfoliated to a single layer due to the weak interlayer interaction like in graphene. One of the unique properties of TMDCs is polymorphism with distinct electronic properties. The relative arrangement of chalcogen atoms to the transition metal atom determines the structural symmetry, and thus the phase, trigonal prismatic H (D 3h ) or octahedral T phase (O h ). Although there are a variety of combinations in TMDCs, most TMDC studies have focused mainly on MoS 2 . It was interestingly revealed that MoS 2 can have completely different electronic characteristics that are semiconducting and metallic in the H and T phases, respectively. In this paper, we report a first-principles study of the structural and electronic properties of MX 2 (M=Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta, or W, and X=S or Se) and their phase transitions. Our study revealed that each MX 2 has a preferred phase or either phase depending on the group to which its metal atom M belongs in the periodic table. For the phase transitions, we evaluated the relative stability during phase transition between two different phases (octahedral-T and trigonal-H) of each composition, mimicked by the intralayer gliding of one of the chalcogen atom X planes relative to the metal atom M plane. We also explored the external strain effects on the phase transition by considering changes in activation energy barriers and reaction energies. We found that the external tensile strain may induce the phase transition in MX 2 with M in the group 6. To systematically investigate the structural stabilities and the electronic properties of various single-layered TMDCs, and the strain effect on their phase transitions, we used ab initio density functional theory (DFT) It has been known that the TMDCs have a characteristic layered structure and can form different structural types due to the complex registry of atomic stacking sequence of metal and chalcogen atoms. For clear description of 18 different TMDC materials and their systematic analysis, we denoted each TMDC by a notation of M P G X 2 , where the superscript P and the subscript G denote the period and the group to which the transition metal element M belongs in the periodic table, and X is either sulfur (S) or selenium (Se) categorizing into sulfide or selenide. We further grouped the respective chalcogenides in terms of groups G of M: M P 4 =Ti, Zr, Hf for P = 4, 5, 6, respectively, and similarly M P 5 =V, Nb, Ta, and M P 6 =Cr, Mo, W. Figure We found an overall common trend from Fig. Another interesting common trend was observed in the structural stiffness. As shown in Fig. Table From these results, we extracted the corresponding in-plane strain values ( ), activation barriers (∆E b ) and reaction energies (∆E r ) are summarized in Tables As clearly seen in Figs. equilibrium, but as external stress increases, its T phase becomes more stable than its H counterpart. Such phase crossover is clearly seen in Fig. As shown in Figs. We further investigate the strain effects on the electronic properties of all MX 2 materials in the H-and the T-phases. Earlier studies showed that the H phase of MoS 2 is semiconducting, Our calculation revealed that as shown in Fig. For the group 5 (G = 5), all the M P 5 X 2 materials remain metallic under any strain values, whatever the chalcogen element X is, except for VS 2 and VSe 2 in the H phase. Both exceptions are semiconducting within the strain range of -5 %< +8 % with the maximum energy band gap of around 1 eV. The group 6 (G = 6) cases exhibit interesting phase-dependent electronic characteristics: all the T-phase M P 6 X 2 materials remain metallic at any applied strain, while their H-phase counterparts experience their gap opening and closing as the applied strain increases from -15 % to +15 %, as shown in Fig. We found that even in GW calculations, its T phase remains metallic and its H phase does semiconducting at their corresponding equilibria. For the latter case, its DFT-based band gap was underestimated by ∼1.4 eV from its GW value. (See Fig. In summary, we investigated the structural and electronic properties of MX 2 (M=Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta, or W; X=S or Se) and its phase transition using density functional theory (DFT). We found that each group to which M belongs in the periodic table determines its characteristic equilibrium phase. The stable structural phases of group 4 (Ti, Zr, Hf) are mainly octahedral, while those of group 6 (Cr, Mo, W) are trigonal. Interestingly, those of group 5 (V, Nb, Ta) can be either one, since their two phase structures have almost the same total energy near their corresponding equilibrium lattice constants. We also explored phase transitions between octahedral-T and trigonal-H phases for all MX 2 compositions by evaluating the relative stability during their transition processes under various strain conditions. This exploration yielded the activation energy barriers between two phases as well as the reaction energies. Our results revealed that the compounds with M in the group 4 would experience phase transitions from their equilibrium T phases to their H counterpart under mainly compressive strains for X=S and any strain conditions for X=Se. However, such transitioned phases would be converted back to their original equailibrium phases. Compounds with M in the group 5, which can exist in either the T or the H phase near their equilibrium or under compressive stress and would experience the phase transitions between two phases, tend to form the H phases more easily under larger tensile stresses. Most interesting structural phase transitions were observed in compounds with M in the group 6, which form the H phases at their equilibria and hardly experience their phase transition to the T phases due to large energy barrier values, but large tensile strain may make their transition to the T phases relatively easily, and for some cases such transitions occur almost spontaneously with very small energy barriers. It was, moreover, found that external stress can be used to control the electronic properties, such as electronic energy gap, and eventually metal-semiconductor transition. Based on these results, we can surmise that the electron-phonon coupling may be an important property in some of MX 2 materials, which will be considered as our future work.