High speed imaging was used to capture the fast dynamics of two injection methods. The first one and perhaps the oldest known, is based on solid needles and used for dermal pigmentation, or tattooing. The second, is a novel needle-free micro-jet injector based on thermocavitation. We performed injections in agarose gel skin surrogates, and studied both methods using ink formulations with different fluidic properties to understand better the end-point injection. Both methods were used to inject water and a glycerin-water mixture. Commercial inks were used with the tattoo machine and compared with the other liquids injected. The agarose gel was kept stationary or in motion at a constant speed, along a plane perpendicular to the needle. The agarose deformation process due to the solid needle injection was also studied. The advantages and limitations of both methods are discussed, and we conclude that micro-jet injection has better performance than solid injection when comparing several quantities for three different liquids, such as the energy and volumetric delivery efficiencies per injection, depth and width of penetrations. A newly defined dimensionless quantity, the penetration strength, is used to indicate potential excessive damage to skin surrogates. Needle-free methods, such as the micro-jet injector here presented, could reduce the environmental impact of used needles, and benefit the health of millions of people that use needles on a daily basis for medical and cosmetic use. Tattooing, also known as dermal pigmentation, is done by inserting exogenous substances such as pigments into the dermis and leaving a permanent mark The societal acceptance of tattoos has varied over the years, however, there is a recent worldwide increase in its numbers and the social groups having tattoos or permanent make-up. According to a recent report, 12% of the European population has one or more tattoos Despite the advances made in electronics and improved hygienic conditions, the basic injection process has not changed much. According to experts, depending on the skin type and individual, a tattoo can be painful, cause skin related allergies, while 20-50% of the ink is not injected Less known is the fact that tattoo machines have been adapted for intradermal injections to evenly inject into a large area of the skin, dividing effectively the dose in smaller portions To the best of our knowledge, a rigorous description of the tattooing process -one of the oldest transdermal injection methods-is presented for the first time. A comparison with a novel micro-jet injector device -a needlefree injection method A. Solid needle injector A solid needle injector was vertically fixed in order to inject liquid into a skin surrogate made of agarose gel, as shown in figure Front view images were obtained using a color highspeed camera (Fastcam SA2, Photron) capturing 1000 frames per second; an example of the images acquired is shown in figure In order to characterize the needle vertical displacement, we used the high-speed camera varying the nominal frequency f n from 50 to 150 Hz. The videos were recorded at 10000 frames per second, with a spatial resolution of 300 pixels per millimeter. The tip position is obtained and plotted with respect to time, as shown in figure In order to measure the force exerted by the solid needle injector into the agarose, we performed a separate experiment where the injector and skin surrogate setup were placed on a precision balance (Denver Instrument, APX-1000, ∆m=0.1 mg), as shown in figure where | g| is the magnitude of the gravitational accelera- tion. When the solid needle starts to move, an initial peak mass m rupture is measured. This mass corresponds to the moment when the agarose gel is ruptured, i.e. when the needle penetrates into the gel. After that, the measured mass reaches a stable value m ∞ , corresponding to the average effective mass due to the the oscillatory movement of the needle y needle . We have measured an effective mass m rupture = 0.34 ± 0.04 gr and m ∞ = 0.16 ± 0.02 gr, for an agarose gel of 1%wt and needle displacement frequency f m = 70 Hz (f n = 50 Hz), which corresponds to an applied normal force: F rupture needle = 3.3 mN , F ∞ needle = 1.6 mN. A continuous wave CW laser diode was focused at the bottom surface of a glass microfluidic device, which was partially filled with aqueous solutions of a molecular dye matching the laser wavelength. The liquid heats up above its boiling point in a few microseconds with an explosive phase transition resulting in a fast growing vapour bubble inside the microdevice; this phenomenon is known as thermocavitation The bubble growth, the liquid jet formation and the penetration into agarose slabs were recorded at ∼ 400000 frames per second using a ultrahigh-speed camera (Phantom v2640). The camera sensor is protected from the laser light using a colored glass filter centered at λ = 450 nm. Three different liquid inks were used on the experiments: commercially available Permanent make-up (PMU) inks, red dyed water and red dyed glycerin-water mixture at 10%wt. By adding glycerin, the injection process, i.e. the adhesion to the needle tip and the diffusion in the agarose, is modified with respect to pure water. In order to maximize the absorbed energy by the liquid from the focused laser, in the needle-free micro-jet injector, the aqueous solutions are coloured using a red dye (Direct Red 81, CAS No. 2610-11-9) diluted at 0.5 %wt. The PMU inks are colloidal dispersions with flowdependent viscoelastic properties. They are composed mainly by water and glycerol, and extra additives such as surfactants, solvents, binders and fillers We performed rheology measurements of the liquid inks. Specifically, we have measured the viscosity η varying the shear rate γ using a rheometer (Anton Paar MCR502) with a cone-plate geometry (with diameter d = 50 mm and cone angle α = 1 • ). As shown in figure 5, the red colored water and the glycerin-water mixture behave as Newtonian fluids with measured constant viscosity η water = 0.9 mPa•s and η glyc10% = 1.2 mPa•s. On the contrary, the PMU inks show a shear thinning behaviour, i.e. the viscosity of the fluid decreases when the applied shear rate increases. The measured viscos-ity at high shear rates, γ 100 s -1 , for the PMUblack and PMU-red inks are η PMU-black ∼ 300 mPa•s and η PMU-red ∼ 2000 mPa•s, respectively. The larger viscosity value of PMU inks is provided by the high concentration of pigment particles, and other additives not present in the colored water, and waterglycerin solutions. PMU inks were not used on the needle-free micro-jet injector due to visualisation limitations caused by the light absorption of the pigments that impeded the observation of thermocavitation. Among the skin surrogates widely used to simulate the mechanical properties of soft tissues, agarose is one of the most used due to its transparency which allows the optical quantification of injections In this section, we analyze the solid needle injector method in three stages: micro-indentation, stationary injection and moving injection. The micro-indentation process is one where the needle pushes the skin surrogate down without causing the rupture of the surrogate. The stationary injection is when the needle start the injection of the ink into the surrogate, immediately after the rupture occurs, keeping the gel fixed with respect to the injector hand piece. Finally, the moving injection process corresponds to a scenario closer to real life injection conditions, in which the needle is moved perpendicular to the skin surface. A micro-indentation hardness test is used to describe the hardness of a material to deformation with low applied loads. Recently, the interest to develop microindentation testing to characterize skin surrogate hydrogels has grown where δ corresponds to the indenter tip position with respect to the gel surface and r is the radius of the immersed indenter volume, as shown in figure In our experiment, the needle solid injector can be considered as a dynamic micro-indentation measuring instrument with a conical indenter. The solid needle travels rapidly and does not allow the relaxation of the gel, and as consequence, the measured force is the instantaneous force F 0 in relation to the needle displacement. The micro-indentation measurement will be valid before the rupture of the surface agarose gel occurs, typically before a millisecond. Furthermore, the tip of the solid needle has a right circular conical geometry, as shown in figure After that, when y needle ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0.2 ms, the needle pushes the agarose gel down and the dynamic microindentation process starts. Finally, the force applied by the needle against the agarose is high enough to induce gel rupture, and the ink delivery, effectively starting the injection process. The maximum deformation δ caused by the needle tip displacement is plotted in figure In the micro-indentation stage, the maximum deformation measured is δ max = 0.1062 mm which corresponds to the applied force F rupture = 3.3 mN. We compare this force with F 0 as, F rupture = 3.3 mN = 4Gδ max r max = F 0 , where r max = r tip δ max /h tip = 0.042 mm. We can calculate the shear modulus G of the skin surrogate, which represents the hardness, rigidity or stiffness of the ma- terial, obtaining G = 185 mN/mm 2 = 185 kPa. This value matches the shear modulus range, ∼[30-3000] kPa, reported in the literature for the agarose concentrations used Stationary injections were performed to understand the delivery process without the influence of specific factors, such as the needle injection angle, and translational speed with respect to the skin surrogate. The injection process in the case of a new needle holder loaded with PMU-black ink, is shown in figure In the case of D(t)/D needle , the spreading behaviour is the opposite, for the PMU ink the change from zero to one is almost instantaneous and continues to increase up to D/D needle = 2 in around 100 injections. For the aqueous solutions, D(t)/D Needle saturates very quickly Assuming a circular conical injection shape, we estimate the injected volume as and plotted in figure This means that the viscosities between the aqueous and the PMU inks are two order of magnitude different, from 1 mPa•s to 300 mPa•s. The PMU ink has a high adherence to the needle, making necessary to clean the needle in between experiments to prevent agglomeration. Moreover, the images show that the residual -not injected-ink accumulates in the surface, making the solid needle injection method highly inefficient for low viscous inks. Furthermore, there is remarkable difference of the liquid adhesion onto the needle when the viscosity increases from η water = 0.9 mPa•s to η glyc10% = 1.2 mPa•s. The images in figure A qualitative characterisation of conventional tattoo injection processes is performed by moving the translation stage at 2 mm/s orthogonal to the hand-piece. A total number of 50 injections, corresponding to t ∼ 700 ms, are studied. Figure Images of the injected skin surrogate were taken immediately after the moving injection experiment. The agarose gel was cleaned before the imaging with a professional cleansing tonic (LaBina Aloe Vera tonic, PERMANENT-Line), in order to observe the postinjection result at the front and bottom, as shown in figure Those observations are quantified in figure The needle-free micro-jet injector exhibited different penetration characteristics from what we observed with the solid needle injector. The needle-free injector creates liquid micro-jets with a tip diameter D jet ∼ 50 μm and a total ejected volume of ca. 50 nl, with a 100% of the liquid delivered into the agarose for jet speeds larger than ∼ 40 m/s, which indicates no splash-back of liquid due to the sufficient kinetic energy of the jets. Figure Experiments with glycerin-water mixture were performed in order to compare the injection process with the solid needle injection method. The shear rate experienced by the liquid jets is at least two order of magnitude higher than the shear rates provided by the solid needle injector. An image sequence of a single injection with micro-jet speed v jet ∼ 25 m/s, γ = 5•10 5 1/s, for pure water and glycerin-water mixture is shown in figure We observed that inertial effects are more relevant in the early stages of jetting and penetration, while viscous dissipation gains prominence towards the end-point injection. The penetration speed of both jets right after entering the agarose drops to a comparable speed, 8 m/s and 7 m/s respectively. Afterwards, during jet deceleration, water jets penetrate much deeper than glycerinwater jets (120% increase) due to the differences in the liquid viscosities of 25% (η water = 0.9 mPa•s and η glyc10% = 1.2 mPa•s). Though not visible in these figures, water jets spread (laterally) faster into the agarose gel, while the spread area of glycerin jets remains almost the same after each injection. In contrast with the solid needle injector, no evident damage was observed on the agarose surface after multiple injections recorded with an image resolution of 150 pixels per millimeter. Moreover, the agarose shows a capacity of self-recovery as the path created by the microjet closes, and encapsulates the injected ink, see figure 13 (a) first image, second injection. The fact that no solid object is needed to rupture the surrogate with the needle-free micro-jet injector is a clear advantage in practical terms. To make a fair comparison, the agarose gel surface rupture and damage, the spreading of the ink, among other observations are detailed in this section. The values calculated for all inks and both injection methods are presented in table I, using the results in figure The electric energy supplied to the injectors is calculated as E = P •t. The solid needle injector input power is P = 7 W, and the time of a single injection is t = 1/70 s, with a consumed energy E = 100 mJ. The needle-free micro-jet injector input power corresponds to the laser power P laser = 0.5 W, and the corresponding time needed for the liquid to cavitate t = 1 ms, corresponding to E = 5 mJ. The kinetic energy transferred from the liquid to the skin is calculated as K = 1/2mv 2 , where the speed for the solid needle is v SN = a m • 2πf m and for the jet is v jet . Therefore, the injection efficiency in terms of energy per injection is calculated as energy = K/E × 100 %. We have calculated that the needle-free micro-jet injector has a energy three orders of magnitude higher than the solid injector. The liquid volume deposited by the solid needle injector in each injection was estimated as the thickness of the liquid film around the needle tip: where η is the liquid viscosity, ρ the liquid density, v the flow velocity and g the gravitational acceleration. This equation assumes that the flow velocity corresponds to the needle velocity, and that the surface tension role is negligible The injection efficiency in terms of volume injected per injection event, we calculate it as the ratio between the deposited (solid needle) or ejected (needle-free micro-jet injector) volume V 0 , and the volume remaining inside the agarose gel. For the former case, this is defined as the moment in which of solid needle retracts, and the latter is after the hole in the agarose closes. This efficiency is represented as vol = V inj /V 0 × 100 %. For the solid needle, the efficiency increases with each new injection because of the remaining ink from prior injections. There is, however, excess of liquid on the top of the agarose gel that does not penetrate at all, and contributes of the well known ink loss of 50% in tattooing and permanent make up procedures (personal communication with several tattoing and PMU companies). The vol is much higher for the needle-free micro-jet injector than the solid needle: five orders of magnitude. In order to quantify the skin rupture and penetration characteristics, we compare the local stress induced by the solid needle and the jet impact, with a materialdependent critical local stress as proposed before where r max = 0.042 mm is the radius of the inmersed needle volume at the moment of the maximum deformation of the skin surrogate, as explained in section III A. The pressure exerted by the jet onto the skin is p jet = 1 2 ρv 2 jet , where ρ is the density of the liquid, and v jet the jet speed The penetration depth L and diameter D in the latest stages or end-point of injection -after 50 injections for the solid needle, and after two injections for the needlefree injectors-show two interesting results. First, that with only two jets is possible to reach the same depth as with solid needles. Second, that the injection reso-lution in spreading value (D), which corresponds to the practical level of detail in tattooing, is half for the jet injections. The current experimental setup for jet injections did not allow us to have the same reproducibility of conditions to reach larger number of injections. Contrary to the solid needle injections, each new jet carries a slightly higher velocity because of the reduction in liquid inside the microfluidic chamber. In future studies we will attempt to design a microfluidic device that ensures all jets in a sequence are ejected with the same velocity and total volume delivered. We consider that this study will advance the knowledge of injection processes into soft substrates based on solid needles and needle-free micro-jet injectors. Our novel needle-free micro-jet injector employing thermocavitation is still in early development phases, however, the results indicate that the injection outcomes are superior to solid needle injectors in several aspects. Further work is required, particularly aimed at increasing the repeatability, frequency of injections, and overcoming challenges related to the use of commercial inks with unknown ingredients. Our results indicate that: • The power consumption of needle-free jet injections, 0.5 W, is an order of magnitude lower than the solid injector (7 W). This has practical relevance in future scenarios, where portability of injector devices is limited by the need of incorporating heavy batteries. • The calculated penetration strength S, reflects the proportional final damaged state of the skin surrogate. Values of S slightly above unity (jet injections) seem to correspond to an effective penetration with minimal damage, in contrast with irreversible skin surrogate deformations when S∼10 (solid needle). • The damage to the gel during the moving injections indicate that needle-free micro-jet injectors could have less negative effect than solid needles when injecting into skin. In real-life conditions, the displacement velocity and pressure applied with a hand-piece can fluctuate, damaging the skin because of the hardness needles. • The injection spreading increase with decreasing ink viscosity. However, the volume and energy effi-ciencies seem to increase proportionally to the viscosity of inks. • The injection efficiencies, energy and vol , are higher for the needle-free micro-jet injector, with comparable end-point injections. The needle-free microjet injector in a single injection reaches penetration depths and widths comparable to ∼50 injections with a solid needle. Even though multiple injections were not possible with the current needlefree micro-jet injector, the higher efficiency values demonstrate the superiority over the older solid needle method. For needle-free micro-jet injectors to compete with established injection methods in real-life scenarios, however, future designs should give multiple and reproducible injections, e.g. with multiple nozzles or microfluidic geometries ensuring self-refill of ink after each jet. We conclude that needle-free micro-jet injections hold potential to mitigate health problems associated to needle-based injections, and avoid technical limitations of solid needle injections in medical treatments, e.g. vaccines, scar camouflaging, alopecia, etc. The reduction of environmental contamination with needle-free injections could be huge, while benefiting millions of people using needles on a daily basis for medical and cosmetic uses. With a long list of challenges ahead, we believe there will be a time, not far from now, when needle-free micro-jet injectors will be reliable, safer, and efficient liquid delivery platforms, and where needles will not be that much needed.