Motivated by recent experiments realizing correlated phenomena and superconductivity in 2D van der Waals devices, we consider the general problem of whether correlation effects may be enhanced by modifying band structure while keeping a fixed weak interaction strength. Using determinantal quantum Monte Carlo, we study the 2D Hubbard model for two different band structures: a regular nearest-neighbor tight-binding model, and a partially flat band structure containing a non-dispersing region, with identical total non-interacting bandwidth W . For both repulsive and attractive weak interactions (|U | W ), correlated phenomena are significantly stronger in the partially flat model. In the repulsive case, even with U an order of magnitude smaller than W , we find the presence of a Mott insulating state near half-filling of the flat region in momentum space. In the attractive case, where generically the ground state is superconducting, the partially flat model exhibits significantly enhanced superconducting transition temperatures. These results suggest the possibility of engineering correlation effects in materials by tuning the non-interacting electronic dispersion. Introduction.-The recent discovery of superconductivity in the twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) There are no reliable theoretical tools to obtain the effective low energy action for the PFB. Perturbation theory fails due to the divergence of the DOS over a finite portion of the BZ. Other conventional methods of strongly correlated systems such as the Wolff-Schrieffer transformation become inapplicable. These difficulties are tied to the existence of three significantly different energy scales: (i) the bandwidth associated with the flat region, (ii) the total bandwidth, and (iii) the interaction energy scale which is much greater than (i) yet far smaller than (ii). Interactions can mix the smoothly connected Wtot. The blue region denotes occupied energy states when the interaction is switched off. However, using DQMC we find that all single particle states inside the flat region are (almost) equally occupied upon considering interaction effects (see the text). Due to the absence of any mass gap between the flat and dispersive areas, the two regions are strongly coupled through interactions. flat and dispersive regions. These two regions may actively exchange particle and energy. Thus, if the nearly flat region is partially filled, the dispersive region cannot be disregarded. A projection of the interactions onto the flat region is unjustified. In order to better grasp the physics of PFB systems, we introduce a toy model allowing numerical studies on general lattices. Herein, a large fraction (of order one) of the band structure is (nearly) flat. We utilize the Determinental Quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) approach to obtain the phase diagram for both repulsive and attrac-tive weak Hubbard interactions. Due to the existence of flat areas, correlation effects are pronounced and we expect to encounter evidence of strong correlation physics despite only weak interactions. In particular, we observe an emergent Mott insulating state near half-filling of the flat region in momentum space. Our calculations show that the momentum space electron occupation number becomes nearly uniform and fractional all over the flat region. This is inconsistent with the Luttinger theorem and constitutes another indication that we either have a gapless non-Fermi liquid or a Mott insulating phase. Lastly, we find a considerable enhancement of the superconducting transition temperature for attractive interactions which can be generated via, e.g., retarded phononmediated electron-electron coupling Model.-The Hubbard model Hamiltonian is given by Here, c † kσ creates an electron of momentum k and spin σ, the (non-interacting) band dispersion is k , and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ is the number operator on site i. The local (onsite) interaction is parameterized by U . Thanks to its possible relevance to high-T c cuprate superconductors, the repulsive (U > 0) Hubbard model on a square lattice has been the focus of many numerical studies. Due to the fermion sign problem in quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations of the repulsive Hubbard model, unbiased numerical results are absent at temperatures relevant to the putative superconducting phase of the model (though a variety of techniques suggest the presence of dwave superconductivity and various competing phases). By contrast, the attractive Hubbard model (U < 0) is amenable to sign-problem-free QMC simulations, allowing for detailed characterization of the s-wave superconducting phase, including calculation of T c . We will study both the repulsive and attractive realizations of this model. For simplicity and to ease comparison to existing studies of Hubbard models, we performed the simulations on the commonly studied periodic L × L square lattice geometries. Here, the band structure The parameter f controls the flatness of the band. For f = 0, k = 0 k corresponding to nearest neighbor hopping dispersion. Here, both the nearest neighbor hopping amplitude t and the lattice constant are set to unity. (In this work, all energies will be given in units of t(= 1) and we will further set the Boltzmann constant k B to unity.) For f = 1, the dispersion k = 0 when 0 k ≤ 0 (half the BZ) and k = 2 0 k otherwise. We refer to the f = 0 model as the "regular band" Hubbard model and to the f = 1 system as the "PFB Hubbard model". Importantly, the total bandwidth is fixed to W tot = 8 in either case. Hence, our data showcases the effects of introducing a flat region in the non-interacting dispersion, while keeping the total bandwidth constant. In all cases, we will focus on the hole-doped model (i.e., an average occupancy n = n ↑ +n ↓ < 1), such that if f = 1, the non-interacting Fermi level lies inside the flat region. Repulsive interaction.-We first consider the repulsive model with a partially flat band and weak interactions U ≤ 2. The presence of the fermion sign problem restricts accessible temperatures to T > ∼ U/15 for moderate system sizes (∼ 100 sites), with certain fillings amenable to somewhat lower temperatures. Interestingly, the average sign in the DQMC simulation is enhanced near a density of n ∼ 0.6 per unit cell and decreases rapidly away from this value [Fig. To confirm this, we examine the charge compressibility χ = ∂ n ∂μ in Fig. Knowing that a Mott insulating state appears in the PFB model when n ∼ 0.6, we now explore in greater depth the momentum and energy dependence of the single-particle properties. In Fig. As is evident from Eq. 3, the non-dispersive flat region is delineated by In this region, the electron occupancy varies from 0.52 to 0.55 while the total filling (Fig. To corroborate these statements, we computed the single-particle spectral function A(k, ω) by an analytical continuation of the imaginary time Green's function using the Maximum Entropy method by studying the attractive Hubbard model via DQMC Here, j x (i) is the x component of the current density operator at lattice site i, j(i) = jσ it ij (r ir j ) c † iσ c jσ where t ij is the hopping between sites i and j (related to the dispersion through k .) We show the results of this analysis in Fig. A PFB requires many real-space hopping amplitudes to be non-zero. Consequently, the computation of the current correlator becomes expensive. As an alternative, we infer T c from the behavior of the pair field susceptibility and of the static spin susceptibility. The equal-time s-wave pair field susceptibility is given by where is the s-wave pair field creation operator at zero net momentum. The spin susceptibility is given by where We focus on the static spin susceptibility at q = 0: χ zz (q, ω = 0) = β 0 dτ χ zz (q, τ ). (We consider only the z component of spin; χ xx , χ yy , and χ zz are identical within statistical errors). Upon cooling below T c , one expects that the formation of singlet pairs suppresses the static spin susceptibility. In the absence of a pseudogap, the onset temperature of this suppression provides an estimate of T c . A corresponding rise of the pair field susceptibility would confirm that the suppression of spin susceptibility is due to the onset of superconductivity. Figs. An enhancement of superconductivity in the attractive PFB appears for different interaction strengths and dopings. In Figs. The ideal PFB (i.e., the model exhibiting exactly flat subregions of the band) requires the existence of finite hopping amplitudes between distant sites. Nonetheless, we may truncate these amplitudes beyond a cutoff distance without impacting the low energy physics. In doing so, we may still achieve nearly flat regions with enhanced correlation. Remarkably, augmenting a nearest neighbor hopping tight binding amplitude (t = 1) by an additional next nearest neighbor hopping amplitude t 2 ≈ -0.54 suffices to achieve a high DOS in the lower half of the band structure on the square lattice. Such a simple model might be realizable in 2D van der Waals devices with square lattice symmetry or in cold atoms systems via photo-induced coupling experiments or through applying pressure, and is expected to have an amplified superconducting transition temperature. In the conventional band Hubbard model, the Fermi-Dirac distribution can rationalize the appearance of antiferromagnetic order at half-filling. However, at the mean field level, any doping away from half-filling (relative to the entire band structure), even if infinitesimal, will eradicate the antiferromagnetic order. Using the modified mean-field approximation, we find that although the flat subregion is partially occupied, the staggered magnetization is non-zero. Consequently, the anti-ferromagnetic spin-density wave (SDW) will open up a mass gap separating the (nearly) flat sub-region from the dispersive sub-regions. In other words, an interaction-induced SDW mass gap will appear at the |k x | + |k y | ≤ π surface corresponding to half-filling. Thanks to the existence of finite gap separating the modified (nearly) flat region from the remaining band structure, we can focus on the lower flat sub-band and employ the standard techniques of the strongly correlated system on a modified (nearly) flat sub-band. One consequence of this simple analysis is that the system will exhibit a Mott insulating phase at half-filling of the lower (nearly) flat emergent sub-band (i.e., at a quarter filling of the original band). To summarize, the interaction generates an SDW order, doubles the unit cell, and the relevant flat sub-band around the chemical potential becomes separated from other bands (which were otherwise smoothly connected to the flat sub-band in the absence of interaction). Note that the bandwidth and structure factors of the emergent (nearly) flat sub-band differ from those of the original flat subregion. The emergent well-separated (nearly) flat sub-band is not fully occupied and the interaction projected the emergent flat sub-band will dictate its fate. Mott physics, as well as other related strong correlation phenomena, are possible. This picture can be easily generalized to more complicated situations where the (nearly) flat subregion is smaller by considering smaller nesting vectors (different and shorter Q vectors) that lead to larger unit cells.