Polycrystalline samples of Fe2BiMO7 (M = Sb, Ta) compounds with pyrochlore-type structure were synthesized for the first time by the molten salts method. The compounds were obtained in one hour at 950oC. The structures were determined by Rietveld refinement. Through Mössbauer spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, the site occupancies and ionic states of the cations in the pyrochlore structure were investigated. Synthesis by the molten salts method represents an alternative route to the typical solidstate reaction to obtain ceramic powders. The molten salts synthesis uses a low melting point, water-soluble salts as a reaction medium that enhances the mobility of the powder oxide reactants, promoting the rapid diffusion at relatively low temperatures. This fact allows achieving the formation of ceramic products in relatively short times respect to the solid-state reaction synthesis Pyrochlore type structure compounds have been subject of interest in the latest years because they possess many types of interesting properties. Some pyrochlores, like Yb2Ti2O7, have useful applications for immobilization of lanthanides and actinides from nuclear fuel reprocessing Polycrystalline samples of Fe2BiMO7 (M = Sb, Ta) were synthesized by the molten salt method. The precursors were Fe2O3 (Sigma-Aldrich >99%), Ta2O5 (Sigma-Aldrich 99.99%), Sb2O5 (Sigma-Aldrich 99.995%), Bi2O3 (Sigma-Aldrich 99.99%) and a mixture of salts NaCl-KCl (1:1) (Sigma-Aldrich 99.9%) in a 4:1 molar proportion respect to oxide powder reactants for M = Sb and 5:1 molar proportion for M = Ta. In the reaction, the salts were first mixed in an agate mortar until a fine homogeneous powder was attained. The same procedure was followed for the precursor reactants and then both powders were mixed and heated at 950 °C for 1 hour. The product obtained was washed and stirred in distilled deionized water for 3 hours to remove the salts. Then it was filtered in a Nalgene® system using a 0.22μm Millipore® filter. A first rapid X-ray scan suggested an incomplete reaction (Section 3.1), so a final wash of the samples was done with HCl (J.T. Baker at 36%) diluted at 28% at 60oC for two hours to eliminate the remaining iron oxide phase The room temperature Mössbauer spectra were recorder with a constant acceleration spectrometer, using thin absorbers (20 mg/cm 2 ) made with the obtained powders and using a 25 mCi 57 Co source in a rhodium matrix. All the Mössbauer spectra were fitted with the Recoil 1.05 software X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system Scanning XPS microprobe PHI 5000 Versa Probe II, with an Al Kα X-ray source (h= 1486.6 eV), and an MCD analyzer. The surface of the samples was etched for 10 to 30 minutes with 2.0 kV Ar + . The XPS spectra were obtained at 45 o to the normal surface in the constant pass energy mode, E0 = 100 eV (surface survey) and 10 eV (high-resolution narrow scan). Deconvolution adjustment for the XPS spectra was made by a least square process with the Spectral Data Processor software [12]. Figure Doublet 1 was fitted with an δ = 0.34 mm/s and a ΔQ = 0.48 mm/s and a population of around 80%, associated with the B(16c) site while the doublet 2 was fitted with a δ = 0.34 mm/s, a ΔQ = 2.11 mm/s and an approximated population of 20%, related with the A(16d) site (table The Fe2BiTaO7 sample, figure To determine the valence state of ions in the Fe2BiSbO7 and Fe2BiSbO7 pyrochlore compounds, room temperature X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy studies were performed. Figure High-resolution XPS spectra for the Bi4f core level are shown in figure Figure Rietveld refinement analysis together with Mössbauer spectroscopy make clear that in the Fe2BiSbO7 compound the Fe 3+ cations can occupy both the A(16d) or the B(16c) nonequivalent crystallographic sites. In consequence, the Mössbauer spectrum (figure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy establish the oxidation states that the different cations forming both pyrochlores compounds can acquire: Fe 3+ , Bi 3+ , Ta 5+ , O 2-, Sb 3+ -Sb 5+ . The chemical shift between Fe2BiTaO7 and Fe2BiSbO7 for similar core level regions is due to the ~ 0.04 smaller ionic radius of Ta respect to the corresponding radius of Sb, slightly affecting the core level energies values, and is not related to the oxidation state of Sb and Ta. Moreover, the isomeric shift measured in the Mössbauer spectra of the compounds is the same. Remembering that the isomer shift in Mössbauer spectroscopy is a measure of the electronic density at the nucleus (s and p1⁄2 electrons), associated indirectly to the oxidation state, there is no discrepancy between the XPS and Mössbauer measurements. Pyrochlore type compounds Fe2BiSbO7 and Fe2BiTaO7 where synthesized for the first time by molten salts method at 950oC in just one hour of heat treatment. Rietveld refinement, Mössbauer spectroscopy, and XPS spectroscopy lead us to clarify the cation behavior inside the two different pyrochlore compounds. In one case, for the Fe2BiSbO7, the impossibility of the Sb cations of being eight coordinated promotes that Fe 3+ cations in high spin state partially occupying the A(16d) site in the crystal structure but at the same time this complex cation occupancy promotes a mixed oxidation state for the Sb cations in the pyrochlore structure. Meanwhile for the Fe2BiTaO7 pyrochlore the fact that Ta 5+ could be eight coordinated permits that this kind of cations partially occupies the A(16d) sites promoting a more stable crystal configuration.