Neurons in the brain behave as a network of coupled nonlinear oscillators processing information by rhythmic activity and interaction. Several technological approaches have been proposed that might enable mimicking the complex information processing of neuromorphic computing, some of them relying on nanoscale oscillators. For example, spin torque oscillators are promising building blocks for the realization of artificial high-density, low-power oscillatory networks (ON) for neuromorphic computing. The local external control and synchronization of the phase relation of oscillatory networks are among the key challenges for implementation with nanotechnologies. Here we propose a new method of phase programming in ONs by manipulation of the saturation magnetization, and consequently the resonance frequency of a single oscillator via Joule heating by a simple DC voltage input. We experimentally demonstrate this method in a pair of stray field coupled magnetic vortex oscillators. Since this method only relies on the oscillatory behavior of coupled oscillators, and the temperature dependence of the saturation magnetization, it allows for variable phase programming in a wide range of geometries and applications that can help advance the efforts of high frequency neuromorphic spintronics up to the GHz regime. Neuromorphic computing describes the use of verylarge scale integrated logic (VLSI) systems to mimic neurobiological architectures Here, the building block for a network -two magnetic vortex oscillators, coupled via their stray fields The magnetic vortex structure V - V Figure In addition, the contour lines of the temperature distribution at U heat = 0.4 V are plotted as can be seen, the driven disk (disk d ) remains at ambient temperature. tion structure causes flux closure of the in-plane magnetization with only the out-of-plane core with a size of 10 nm to 30 nm generating a small stray field The oscillators are excited by a cw excitation in the range of several hundred MHz applied to the right driven disk (disk d ) harnessing the Spin Transfer Torque effect (STT) heat with T 0 = 293 K being ambient temperature, R d = 90 Ω the electrical resistance of the disk, and R c the resistance of the electrical contacts. R thermal = 63300 K W is the thermal resistance calculated using 3D finite elements methods (FEM). The right disk d stays close to ambient temperature as shown by the 3D FEM simulations (see fig. where -→ R i = (x i , y i ), i ∈ {d, h} is the vortex core displacement vector from the center of the disk i and R i /dt is the corresponding velocity vector. b j = P μ B /[eM S,d (1 + ξ 2 )] is the coupling constant between the applied current density -→ j and the magnetization, where P is the spin polarization of the conduction electrons, and ξ the degree of nonadiabaticity The first constant term represents the potential energy for a central core position, i.e. -→ R i = (0, 0). The second term represents the stray field energy and for small deflections can be modeled as a parabolic potential To experimentally determine the two resonance frequencies of the coupled resonators and match the cal- When plotted against the applied frequency two resonance frequencies can be resolved as expected for the system of two coupled oscillators, see fig. To further investigate the phase relation between the two oscillators time-resolved STXM measurements at the MAXYMUS Beamline at Bessy II in Berlin were performed. First disk d was excited by a 0.15 V cw excitation at the two previously determined resonance frequencies (f in = 238 MHz and f out = 270 MHz). The gyration was resolved with a time resolution of 66 ps leading to a series of 62 images. The bright spot on the dark background is a direct image of the z-component of the magnetization M z and allows to determine the polarities p d = p h = 1. The sense of rotation for both disks is counter clockwise (ccw) and hence, the chirality can be determined to be c d = c h = 1 Now, to manipulate the phase relation between the vortex core trajectories, a voltage U heat is applied to disk h . The increase of temperature causes a decrease of the saturation magnetization M S,h of disk h while M S,d remains constant. U heat is increased stepwise from 0 V to 0.43 V while the frequency of the excitation is kept constant at 239 MHz. For each heating voltage a series of images with the same time resolution is captured (see fig. ). By doing so, the Curie temperature T c can be used as a parameter in a least square fit of the calculated phase to the experimentally retrieved values. Obviously, this is a very indirect method of determining T c , however, the obtained value of T c = 885 K ± 200 K is in good agreement with literature values In summary, we have successfully shown fine-grain phase manipulation of a pair of magnetic vortex oscillators in a controlled manner with high resolution (basically only limited by the measurement time) by a simple DC voltage input. The measurements were carried out at 239 MHz but vortex dynamics are easily scalable from the kHz to the GHz regime Acknowledgements: The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the DFG within the SpinCaT Priority Program (SPP 1538). Part of this work was supported by National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development Program (NSF-CAREER) Grant No. 1452670. We would like to thank M. Weigand for help with the STXM experiments. We would also like to acknowledge A. Hoffmann for fruitful discussions. As shown in table I in the main text the transition from the in-phase to the out of-phase-state by heating disk h is combined by a change of the eccentricity from e h < 1 to e h > 1 for disk h while the eccentricity of the excitation in disk d does not. The change of the eccentricity from e > 1 to e < 1 indicates a change in the overall elongation of the ellipse. If e > 1 the ellipse is elongated along the x-axis, and if e < 1 the ellipse is elongated along the y-axis. This behavior is also reproduced by the simulation derived from the coupled Thiele equation model (see solid lines in fig. 1 ± 12 169.5 1.11 0.95 > 1 < 1