Influence of a nonmagnetic surface on the density of states in a spin-split superconductor, which is realized on the basis of a S/F bilayer, is investigated. It is demonstrated that if the ferromagnet magnetization has a defect in the form of a domain wall in the vicinity of the surface, the superconducting density of states is reconstructed manifesting the spin-split Andreev resonances. Formation of these resonances is not connected to any superconducting order parameter inhomogeneities. Andreev reflection processes forming the resonances occur at the inhomogeneity of the spin-split gap generated by the domain wall. These resonances can be used as a spectroscopic probe of a domain wall presence and motion. Active development of superconducting spintronics, caloritronics and spin caloritronics raised a renewed interest in studying hybrid structures of superconductors and ferromagnets. This research is motivated, in particular, by the desire to employ the spin torques generated by the dissipationless spin supercurrents Another extremely important for superconducting spintronics property of S/F hybrids is the spin-split superconducting density of states (DOS). The last property is a key ingredient for superconducting spintronics and spin caloritronics because a series of interesting phenomena have been studied in superconductor/ferromagnet structures with spin-split DOS. Among them are the giant thermoelectric In spite of great interest in spin-split superconductors the research of the spin-split DOS in hybrids with textured ferromagnets is only at the very beginning. The influence of the domain structure on the position-averaged superconducting DOS in S/FI bilayer was studied as experimentally, so as theoretically It is very well known that for a conventional s-wave superconductor the DOS is of the bulk BCS-like shape even in the vicinity of the surface. This is not true for surfaces of unconventional superconductors, where the superconducting order parameter can be suppressed at the surface and the Andreev bound states can appear In the present paper we investigate the influence of a conventional nonmagnetic surface on the DOS in a spinsplit superconductor. It is easily seen that for a case of homogeneous spin-splitting the DOS at the surface of the closed end is not modified with respect to the bulk just like the case of a surface of a conventional s-wave BCS superconductor. However, this is not the case if the exchange field of the ferromagnet is spin textured. For concreteness we study the magnetic inhomogeneity in the form of a domain wall (DW). If the magnetic DW is close enough (at the distances of several coherence lengths) to the end of the bilayer, the DOS at the end is modified. The most striking feature of the DOS reconstruction is the appearance of the Andreev resonances in the region between the DW and the end of the bilayer. We unveil the mechanism of these quasi-bound states formation and demonstrate that it does not connected to pair breaking of superconductivity by the surface. It is a direct consequence of the spatially-dependent spin-splitting of the DOS in the system. The interest of these characteristic DOS features is manifold. They can be used as a spectroscopic probe of the DW presence and as a spectroscopic detector of the DW motion. The DOS reconstruction also should be taken into account if one thinks about operating the device by nonequilibrium spin injection. It is also worth noting that if one is interested in the proximityinduced DOS in the ferromagnetic part of the bilayer, then the DOS can be modified due to the closed end of the superconductor even for the case of a homogeneous ferromagnet The model system, sketched in Fig. where ∆ is the effective order parameter in the film, which is reduced to some extent with respect to the bulk value due to the suppression by the proximity to the ferromagnet. Here in the ballistic case it is convenient to use the so-called Riccati parametrization for the Green's function where γ and γ are matrices in spin space. Please note that they differ from the conventional definition and γ obeys the same equation with the substitution ε → -ε, h ef f → -h ef f and ∆ → ∆ * . In this work we assume ∆ = ∆ * . Moreover, we neglect the spatial variations of the order parameter and assume ∆ = const. If we consider a locally spatially inhomogeneous magnetic texture like a domain wall the Riccati amplitudes γ and γ can be found from Eq. ( and γ∞ = -γ ∞ . Eq. ( where N F is the normal state DOS per spin, ... means averaging over the 2D Fermi surface of the superconducting film and ĝ = (1+ γγ ) -1 (1-γγ ) is the normal Green's function, that is the upper left element in the particlehole space of Eq. ( where in general the both angles depend on x-coordinate. The equilibrium shape of the DW is dictated by the interplay between the magnetic anisotropy energy and the exchange energy and is given by and δ = const for the classical in-plane DW. First of all, we consider a toy model of infinitely thin DW h ef f (x) = -h ef f sign(x)e x . The qualitative picture of the Andreev bound states formation is explained in Figs. The shortest way to calculate the bound state energies analytically is to solve the Andreev equations for the quasiparticle two-component wave function, where σ = ± is the spin subband index, v x is the Fermi velocity component along the x-axis and h ef f (x) has a step-like form described above. For the more realistic profile of the DW taking into account the finite DW width Eq. ( where The mechanism of the bound states formation resembles the mechanism of the well-known de Gennes-Saint-James bound states formation due to the inhomogeneity of the superconducting order parameter near the surface (or in the hybrid superconductor/normal metal/insulator structures) Having this physical mechanism of the bound states formation at hand, below we calculate numerically (making use of the method of the Riccati-amplitudes described above) the DOS near the closed end of the superconductor taking into account the realistic profile of the DW magnetization. As it was discussed above the bulk DOS of a spin-split superconductor has a typical two-peak shape and is plot- N for DWs of different widths d W is presented in Fig. Fig. The DOS at the end of the superconductor, which is a part of a S/F bilayer, is considered. We study the case when the ferromagnet magnetization has a defect in the form of a DW in the vicinity of the superconductor end. It is shown that in this case the superconducting DOS is reconstructed near the end manifesting spin-split Andreev resonances in the spatial region between the DW and the superconducting end. So far, all types of surface bound states at nonmagnetic surfaces discussed in the literature are known to be formed due to the order parameter absolute value or phase variations along the quasiparticle trajectory near the surface. On the contrary, these states are formed as a combination of the specular reflection from the closed end and the Andreev reflection from the spin-split gap position shift, which arises due to the DW presence. The order parameter variation along the quasiparticle trajectory near the surface is not required for their arising. V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS