One approach to discovering topological superconductor is establishing superconductivity based on well-identified topological insulators. However, the coexistence of superconductivity and topological state is always arcane. In this paper, we report how pressure tunes the crystal structure, electronic structure, and superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. The first pressure-induced structure transition start from 8.4 GPa, followed by the structure sequence of R-3m -C2/m -C2/c -Im-3m up to 37 GPa. Superconductivity starts to present at 2.4 GPa with the T c around 6.6 K. Moreover, at around 2.5 GPa, the abnormal changes of c/a and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of mode indicate the occurrence of electronic topological transition (ETT). These results suggest that ETT highly promotes the superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 in the low-pressure rhombohedral phase. Our work clarifies the complex electronic structure in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 and sheds light on the new candidate for superconductivity in topological insulators. Topological insulators are new states of quantum matter that have time-reversal symmetry protected surface or edge states residing in the bulk insulating gap and are, therefore, robust with nonmagnetic impurities and external environment. suggesting the zero-bias conductance peak can be tuned by the contact barrier strength. Bi2Se3 and its isostructural compounds Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 are well-known thermoelectric materials. In this paper, we tune the superconductivity by selenium substitution for tellurium in Bi2Te3, then track down how ETT varies with pressure. Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 is the solid solution of Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3, and they share a similar structure and topological state. Figure Figure Both Raman and XRD measurements provide consistent evidence for the pressure-induced phase transitions. We refined the XRD patterns to obtain the accurate crystal structures of various Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 phases. Figures Where B0 denotes the isothermal bulk modulus, B ' 0 is the first pressure derivative of the bulk modulus, 3 (1 2 ) is the reduced pressure, and is the Eulerian strain, with where V0 is the volume per atom at ambient pressure, and V is the volume per atom at pressure P given in GPa. Without the ETT, the reduced pressure H vs. the Eulerian strain ƒE should be linear. Figure The kink present in the slop of Ha, however, is absent in the pressure dependence of Hc, providing an anisotropy nature in the ETT. It indicates that the compressibility perpendicular to the layers shows great change after ETT, while the compressibility parallel to the layers is not. The resulting is selfconsistent with the abnormal changes of c/a shown in figure Slight selenium substitution for tellurium in Bi2Te3 shifts the appearance of ETT from 3.2 to 2.5 GPa. In the meantime, the superconductivity presents follow the shifts of ETT at 3.2 GPa in Bi2Te3 and 2.4 GPa in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. Clearly, the superconductivity in this compound is pinned with the ETT, which indicates the ETT may play a crucial role in the appearance of superconductivity in Bi2Te3-xSex at the initial phase of R-3m symmetry. These results underline that ETT highly promotes or even induces superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 in the low-pressure rhombohedral phase. In summary, we have explored the high-pressure behaviors of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 using X-ray diffraction, Raman scattering, and electrical resistance measurements. By electrical resistance measurement, electrical resistance measurement can observe superconductivity at 2.4 GPa with a Tc of about 6.6 K in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. X-ray diffraction and Raman experiments indicate that the first crystal phase transition occurs at about 8.4 GPa, much larger than the pressure value where superconductivity arises. Moreover, at about 2.5 GPa, the abnormal changes in the c/a ratio and the FWHM of A 1 1g mode indicate the occurrence of electronic topological transition (ETT). Compared with the well-investaged sample Bi2Te3, Our results suggest that ETT and superconductivity are highly coupled in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 at the low-pressure rhombohedral phase. Our results and finding clarifies the complex electronic structure and may shed light on the superconductivity mechanism in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. The elements Bi, Te, and Se (99.5%, Alfa Aesar Co.) were weighted according to the molecular formula Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. After being thoroughly grounded and pressed into a pellet, the mixture was loaded into a quartz tube sealed under a vacuum degree of 10 -4 Pa. Then, the quartz tube was put into a muffle heated at the rate of 5 K/min to 1073 K and kept at the temperature for 12 hours to get the pure phase of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. The ingot was grounded to nanoscale powder and compacted by a vacuum hot-pressing furnace at a pressure of 55 MPa for 0.5 h. The sample was polycrystal with a relative density above 99.7% of the theoretical density. The crystal phase of the sample was confirmed by Xray diffraction at room temperature using Cu Kalpha radiation. The high-pressure electrical transport properties were investigated using the standard four-probe method in a diamond anvil cell (DAC) made of CuBe alloy. Slim Pt wires of 10 um in diameter were used as electrodes. 