We report the magneto-transport properties of CaAl4 single crystals with C2/m structure at low temperature. CaAl4 exhibits large unsaturated magnetoresistance ∼3000% at 2.5 K and 14 T. The nonlinear Hall resistivity is observed, which indicates the multi-band feature. The first-principles calculations show the electron-hole compensation and the complex Fermi surface in CaAl4, to which the two-band model with over-simplified carrier mobility can't completely apply. Evident quantum oscillations have been observed with B//c and B//ab configurations, from which the nontrivial Berry phase is extracted by the multi-band Lifshitz-Kosevich formula fitting. An electron-type quasi-2D Fermi surface is found by the angle-dependent Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations, de Haas-van Alphen oscillations and the first-principles calculations. The calculations also elucidate that CaAl4 owns a Dirac nodal line type band structure around the Γ point in the Z-Γ-L plane, which is protected by the mirror symmetry as well as the space inversion and time reversal symmetries. Once the spin-orbit coupling is included, the crossed nodal line opens a negligible gap (less than 3 meV). The open-orbit topology is also found in the electron-type Fermi surfaces, which is believed to help enhance the magnetoresistance observed. Topological semimetals have been a recent research focus due to their novel properties in condensed matter physics. Dirac semimetals display a four-fold degenerate Dirac point with two linear crossing bands Motivated by previous results and discussions, we grew the high-quality CaAl 4 single crystals with the space group C2/m at room temperature and studied its transport properties and electronic structure in details. The first-principles calculations reveal that there is a Dirac nodal line around the Γ point in the Z-Γ-L plane, which is protected by the mirror symmetry as well as the space inversion and time reversal symmetries. However, the crossed nodal line opens a negligible gap (less than 3 meV) once the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is included. Interestingly, an electron-type quasi-2D Fermi † Present address: Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. ‡ Present address: Pinggu Branch of High School Affiliated to Beijing Normal University. surface (FS) is observed, which plays an important role in the magneto-transport properties. Magneto-transport measurements on CaAl 4 display a large unsaturated MR up to 3000% at 2.5 K and 14 T. The nonlinear and negative Hall resistivity indicate the multi-band and electron dominant features, which is slightly in disagreement with the calculations. According to the analysis of the two-band model, the electron-hole uncompensation is expected, while the calculations suggest that the electron and hole are compensated. The mismatch is discussed in the main text of this paper. Besides, evident Haasvan Alphen oscillations (dHvA) and Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations (SdH) have been observed at low temperature and high magnetic field. Three fundamental frequencies have been extracted after the fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis with B//c configuration. The multi-band Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) formula fitting yields the nontrivial Berry phase. Angledependent SdH oscillations reveal that the γ pocket displays quasi-2D characteristic which is in agreement with the calculations. The high quality single crystals of CaAl 4 were grown by the self-flux method. The calcium and aluminum granules were put into the crucible and sealed into a quartz tube with the ratio Ca:Al=14:86. The quartz tube was heated to 900 • C, then cooled to 690 • C in 70 hours, and to 660 • C in 30 hours. The excess flux was removed by centrifugation. The atomic composition of CaAl 4 single crystal was checked to be Ca:Al=1:4 by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford X-Max 50). The single-crystal x-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern and temperature dependent powder XRD patterns were collected from a Bruker D8 Advance x-ray diffractometer using Cu K α radiation. TOPAS-4.2 was employed for the refinement. The measurements of resistivity and magnetic properties were performed on a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (QD PPMS-14T). The electronic structure was studied by the first-principles calculations with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method The crystal structure of CaAl 4 is reported to be I4/mmm in the ICSD database. However, Miller et al. pointed out its structure transition from tetragonal to monoclinic at 443 K where n e,h and μ e,h represent the concentration and mobility of electrons and holes, respectively. The red lines in Fig. Quantum oscillation experiment is an effective method in the study of topological materials. CaAl 4 shows obvious dHvA oscillations, as shown in Figs. where λ = (2π 2 k B m * )/(heB). T D is the Dingle temperature. The value of δ depends on the dimensionality, δ = 0 for the 2D system and δ = ±1/8 for the 3D system. β = φ B /2π and φ B is the Berry phase. The insets of Figs. 