Transition-metal compounds pose serious challenges to first-principles calculations based on density-functional theory (DFT), due to the inability of most approximate exchange-correlation functionals to capture the localization of valence electrons on their d states, essential for a predictive modeling of their properties. In this work we focus on two representatives of a well known family of cathode materials for Li-ion batteries, namely the orthorhombic LiMPO4 olivines (M = Fe, Mn). We show that extended Hubbard functionals with on-site (U ) and inter-site (V ) interactions (so called DFT+U+V) can predict the electronic structure of the mixed-valence phases, the formation energy of the materials with intermediate Li contents, and the overall average voltage of the battery with remarkable accuracy. We find, in particular, that the inclusion of inter-site interactions in the corrective Hamiltonian improves considerably the prediction of thermodynamic quantities when electronic localization occurs in the presence of significant interatomic hybridization (as is the case for the Mn compound), and that the self-consistent evaluation of the effective interaction parameters as material-and ground-state-dependent quantities allows the prediction of energy differences between different phases and concentrations. The search for new and more performant materials for Li-ion batteries has received a strong impulse in the last decade, first due to the development and diffusion of portable electronics and now also with a major focus on transportation and energy storage. These applications impose multiple requirements on the materials: of being light-weight, environmentally friendly, of having high gravimetric/volumetric energy density, high power, fast rechargeability, long life, thermal/chemical stability, and low fabrication costs. Despite steady progress in recent years and the introduction of new types of rechargeable batteries (e.g., K-, Na-, Mg-ion The relevance of the electronic and ionic degrees of freedom within the single particles or grains of the electrodes, and their role in determining the performance of Li-ion batteries (e.g., rate capability, energy density), has made the use of first-principles calculations fundamental in the understanding of their functionality and increasingly more common for the characterization and design of battery materials One meaningful alternative to correct for selfinteraction errors is the DFT + Hubbard approach, where the exchange-correlation functional is augmented by a Hubbard-model Hamiltonian acting on localized states The present paper studies in detail a well known class of cathode materials -Li-metal phosphates with the olivine (orthorhombic) structure -with the aim of addressing some of the methodological issues outlined above. These compounds, whose chemical formula is Li x MPO 4 (M = Fe, Mn in this work, with x varying between 0 and 1 during the discharge of the battery), represent a particularly appealing family for Li-ion batteries cathodes The reminder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II is devoted to describing the extended DFT+U+V functional and to discussing the self-consistent linear-response procedure adopted to compute the effective electronic interactions, U and V . Section III presents the results obtained for each of the materials considered, comparing them with available experimental data (e.g., voltages, equilibrium crystal structures) and discussing the accuracy of different computational approaches. Finally, some conclusions are proposed, highlighting the most important results and the main merits of this extended Hubbard approach to study battery materials and to perform quantitatively predictive total energy calculations. In the Supplementary Information A. The DFT+U+V functional and the self-consistent evaluation of U and V The DFT+U+V method was introduced in Ref. where the atomic Hubbard manifold occupation matrices, obtained from the projection of Kohn-Sham (KS) states on the atomic Hubbard manifold, have been generalized to allow for inter-atomic terms (I = J): In Eq. 1 σ labels the spin of electrons while the star "*" over the second summation is a reminder that, for each atom I, the sum runs only over neighboring atoms J within a certain shell. The symbol "T r" indicates the trace of the matrix to which it is applied, while the 1 in the second term represents the unitary matrix. In Eq. 2 f σ kv are the occupations of the KS states ψ σ kv , labeled by a k-point index k and by a band index v, while φ I m are atomic states of the atom I, labeled by the magnetic quantum number m. The present work only uses a finite inter-site interction V between the d states of TM ions and the p states of their oxygen neighbors. Based on the above definitions, we note that Eq. 1 can also be rewritten more concisely as where the "Tr" operator is now understood to act also on implicit site indexes and the interaction matrix W is such that W II = U I and W IJ = V IJ , ∀I = J. In order to understand how this extended corrective functional modifies the electronic structure of a system it is useful to study the action of the Hubbard additional potential on a specific KS state. The generalized KS Hamiltonian can be obtained from the functional derivative of Eq. 3 with respect to the complex conjugate of the KS state: From the equation above it can be seen that while the on-site part of the potential discourages partial atomic occupations, stabilizing states that are either full or empty, the inter-site term favors states having significant overlap with atomic states of neighboring atoms (thus contributing substantially to n JIσ m m with I = J). Given this competition between the two types of interactions an accurate and consistent evaluation of both parameters is crucial. In our work this task is achieved by using the linear-response approach for the calculation of U , introduced in Ref. In order to fully capture the dependence of the effective interactions on the electronic and crystal structures, in the present work we adopt a self-consistent procedure for their calculation that is an evolution of the one introduced in Ref. where "SO" stands for structural optimization and "ES" for equilibrium (crystal) structure. The sequence is terminated when also the equilibrium crystal structure is converged. This procedure, which evolves the effective interactions with the ground state of the system, allows to treat them as material-and environment-specific quantities (rather than as parameters of the calculation, as in most literature on Hubbard corrections, often oblivious to the fact that Hubbard parameters need to be pseudopotentialspecific) and this is one of the key aspects that will be discussed in this work. It is important to stress that the approach chosen for the self-consistent calculation of U 's and V 's is slightly different than that adopted in Ref. For the sake of a precise numerical comparison of the Hubbard interaction parameters obtained it would be appropriate to discuss screening of these quantities and how it is accounted for during their evaluation. This discussion is sketched in Ref. Most of the results presented in this work concern the evaluation of formation energies and (average) voltages, of which this section provides a definition. Given a generic system S (able to reversibly intercalate Li ions in its structure) the formation energy of the compound Li x S (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) with respect to the LiS and S component is evaluated as a weighted difference of total energies: This formula is approximate at finite temperatures, where the difference between free energies (rather than total/internal energies) should be considered. While widely used in literature, the cancellation between the entropic terms seems a reasonable assumption for the vibrational part, while the configurational (e.g., ionic, electronic, magnetic) contributions to the entropy should, in principle, be handled with care. This is a particularly difficult task for intermediate Li concentrations. In fact, while for fully lithiated and delithiated compounds (x = 0 and x = 1) this only involves screening different spin configurations of the transition-metal ions, at fractional values of x additional important terms arise from the Li fractional occupation of available sites In this work, following most of the literature on the topic, the evaluation of the stability of compounds at intermediate Li content will be based on total energies. A significant effort has been focused however on capturing the localization of electrons on transition-metal ions (i.e. the differentiation of these ions in subgroups of different valence) and on the quantitative comparison of different Li configurations at x = 0.5. Another important quantity that can be evaluated from the direct comparison of total energies is the voltage (i.e. the Li intercalation potential) with respect to an ideal Li/Li + anode. For a generic system S, considered as a cathode material, this quantity is in general a function of the Li content (although most valuable systems show no/very low dependence of the voltage on x, at least for a good part of the admissible range). Its average value, between Li concentrations x 1 and x 2 (x 2 > x 1 ) can be computed as: e . (6) The total energies entering this formula are obviously referred to the same amount of material (e.g., one formula unit or one unit cell of the crystal) and E(Li) represents the total energy of an equivalent number of Li atoms in bulk Li (representing the anode), while e stands for the electronic charge. As noted for the calculation of formation energies and also for voltages, total energies should be replaced by total free energies; however, it is a common practice to compare voltages obtained from total energies with the results of experiments at finite T. The assumption of cancellation of the entropic terms in the difference between free energies is on firmer ground than in the evaluation of formation energies if voltages are computed across the whole range of variation of Li content, i.e. between x 1 = 0 and x 2 = 1, because then no calculation is needed at intermediate Li concentrations: for both the fully lithiated and delithiated compounds the configurational entropy due to either electrons or Li ions vanishes, while terms related to spin configurations, broadly independent from the Li content, presumably cancel. In this work we will adopt this common practice and will evaluate the average voltages balancing the total energies of fully lithiated and delithiated compounds. This quantity assumes a particularly simple expression that corresponds to the formation energy of the fully lithiated compounds (with respect to the delithiated one and bulk Li) normalized by the electronic charge: The first-principles calculations presented in this work are all performed using the pseudopotential, plane-wave implementation of DFT contained in the Quantum ESPRESSO distribution The orthorhombic unit cell of the olivine materials considered in this work contains four formula units (24 to 28 atoms, depending on Li content), and is large enough to accommodate few antiferromagnetic configurations (detailed and compared for selected compositions, see the following material-specific sections) and five Li concentrations (specifically, x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) of which x = 0, 0.5, 1 will be explicitly considered in this work. As an illustrative example, Fig. The same four-formula-units supercell is also used to compute the Hubbard interaction parameters using the linear-response method introduced in As mentioned in the previous section, the interaction parameters of the corrective Hubbard functional are computed self-consistently with respect to both the electronic and crystal structures. It is worth keeping in mind that while DFT+U+V total energy calculations (including the ones linear-response calculations are based on) are performed on an orthogonalized Hubbard basis, structural optimizations are performed without orthogonalizing it. This inconsistency, due to the technical difficulty of implementing forces and stresses from DFT+U+V in an orthogonal atomic basis set, is expected to lead to marginal errors, and the crystal structures computed in this paper can be considered essentially identical to the full selfconsistent ones. In any case this is common practice in all implementations of DFT+U. A. LixFePO4 Among TM phosphates with the olivine (orthorhombic) structure, Li x FePO 4 is currently the most widely used in commercial Li-ion batteries and certainly one of the most intensely studied in literature. In fact, after it was proposed as a potential cathode material in 1997 As mentioned in Section III the transition-metal phosphates studied here are modeled with an orthorhombic 24-atoms unit cell (unless explicitly indicated) that corresponds to four formula units (see Fig. The calculations on the Fe olivine were performed using an ultrasoft pseudopotential for Fe (with semicore 3s and 3p states in valence, along with 4s and 4p) that required kinetic energy cut-offs of 85 and 650 Ry for the electronic wavefunctions and charge density, respectively. In this section we compare the results obtained within various approximations, all based on the same GGA (PBEsol) functional, which are labeled as GGA, DFT+U ave , DFT+U, DFT+U+V. For the sake of completeness, in section ?? of the Supplementary Informations Based on these observations, we argue that the Hubbard interactions should not be considered as parameters of the calculation, nor should be thought of as simple functions of average quantities. We prefer instead to view these as quantities that depend on the electronic structure of the system, whose value is determined self-consistently by the ground state they contribute to determine. This point of view justifies our self-consistent calculation of the Hubbard interaction parameters, which is further supported by the overall agreement of the equilibrium crystal structure (Table Regarding the formation energy of the x = 0.5 compound, the GGA calculations return a negative value, that contradicts the lack of observation of stable phases at x = 0.5. These results confirm the conclusions of previous work On a more technical level, it is fair to remark that the DFT+U ave and the DFT+U results presented above can be expected to be slightly less accurate than the others, since the Hubbard U were obtained including the response of oxygen ions into the susceptibility matrices. As mentioned at the end of section II A, this can lead to the under-screening of the effective interaction parameter that results from the linear-response calculations. In order to precisely assess the entity of this approximation DFT+U ave calculations were repeated for Li x FePO 4 with a Hubbard U computed from a linear-response procedure that only involved perturbing Fe ions. The value of the Hubbard U obtained this way (after averaging over the results of the three calculations at x = 0, 0.5 and 1), is 6.25 eV which, due to the additional screening from the oxygen p states, is more than 0.5 eV lower than the one computed previously (see Table After a thorough discussion and a quantitative analysis of the results of various Hubbard corrections a comparison is now performed between different possible configurations of the magnetic moments localized on the Fe ions and between two Li orderings already introduced at the beginning of this section, alternating full and empty Li planes parallel, respectively, to the yz and the xz crystallographic planes. These comparative analyses will be aimed at establishing the most energetically favorable configurations and at assessing, through the evaluation of energy differences, the possibility for the system to visit higher energy (metastable) configurations, e.g. under the non equilibrium conditions it experiences during the charge/discharge transients of the battery, especially in high currents regimes This ordering is consistent with previous work in literature A second important comparative analysis is now developed between two Li configurations for the halflithiated Li 0.5 FePO 4 material, shown in Fig. The potential of Li x MnPO 4 (LMPO) as a possible cathode material for Li-ion batteries was already recognized in the seminal work by Padhi et al. In this work a computational study of this material is presented that focuses on ground state electronic, magnetic and structural properties. The same Li concentrations examined for LFPO are also considered for LFMO and for each of them a ground state consistent with the choice of the Hubbard flavor and the value of the interaction parameters is computed. A similar comparative analysis between the three materials is also performed discussing the crystal structures (with a particular focus on the local environment of Mn ions), the number of electrons on their d orbitals (directly related to their oxidation state) and the total energies. The latter will be employed for the calculation of the formation energy of the x = 0.5 system and of the average voltage vs Li/Li + . Because of the role played by the hybridization between Mn and O in determining the local distortion of the crystal and its transport properties, LMPO will represent a particularly significant test case for the extended Hubbard functional discussed in this work and will highlight the importance of the inter-site interactions to capture the properties of systems where valence electrons do not completely localize on atomic states. As in the case of LFPO, also for this system a comparative analysis is performed between various antiferromagnetic configurations of the x = 1 compound and between different possible ordered phases of the half-lithiated material. Given the similarity between the two systems, the same Li and magnetic configurations of the Fe-based material are considered. The results are discussed in the last part of this section, while its first part concerns the AF1 configuration and the x = 0.5 structure with Li filling alternating yz planes. As mentioned in section III, the computational study on this system was performed using a PAW pseudopotential Table V reports the values of the effective U 's and V 's obtained for the Li x MnPO 4 system (x = 0, 0.5, 1) using the self-consistent linear-response approach discussed in section II A. Similarly to the case of LFPO even in this case the values of the Hubbard parameters referring to Mn ions in the same oxidation state can change quite significantly with Li content, especially for 2+ Mn ions. At the same time, the effective interactions change their values also in dependence of the specific Hubbard functional adopted in their selfconsistent evaluation. For example, the value of U varies quite significantly depending on whether the inter-site V is used in the total energy calculations or not, and on whether structural relaxations are in-volved in the procedure. As in the case of LFPO, the value of Hubbard parameters vary quite significantly with the oxidation state. It is important to remark that the different values of U and V for the 2+ and 3+ ions in the half-lithiated material were obtained as a result of the linear-response approach discussed in section II A. Their differenciation was not enforced in any way, although it is certainly the effect of a different crystal environment around 2+ and 3+ sites. All these observations confirm the scarce portability of the Hubbard parameters and the necessity to compute them consistently for the system of interest and with the same approximate functional (exchangecorrelation and Hubbard correction) that is used in the calculations. Table VI allows to compare the equilibrium crystal structure obtained for this system within various approximations. In general, given the overall agreement on b/a and c/a, it is possible to ascribe the mismatch with the experimental results to an almost uniform linear scale factor. For the fully lithiated compound GGA slightly underestimates (up to about 2%) the lattice parameters with respect to their experimental value. The self-consistent DFT+U over-corrects this tendency resulting in equilibrium cell axes that are longer than predicted by experiments. When the inter-site interaction is turned on the general agree-ment between the computed and the experimental crystal structure is significantly improved with differences that are within a fraction percent for all the structural parameters. The same trends just discussed for x = 1 can be observed for the half-lithiated and delithiated compounds, with DFT+U+V correcting the expansion of the unit cell stabilized when only the on-site U is used and predicting values for the lattice parameters that are intermediate between GGA and DFT+U. However, for x = 0 the best agreement with experimental results is obtained from GGA (slightly overestimating lattice parameters), while DFT+U+V shows a mismatch with the experimental cell parameters in the 2 -3% range. This result, at variance with what was obtained for FPO (see Table Mn 2+ (x = 1) Mn 2+ /Mn 3+ (x = 0.5) Mn 3+ (x = 0) F. E. (meV/f.u.) Voltage (V) GGA 5.30 Table VII reports the total occupation of Mn atoms in the three Mn compounds considered and compares the average voltages and the formation energies for the half-lithiated crystal obtained from different Hubbard corrections. At variance with LFPO, the DFT+U with on-site only corrections is not effective in capturing the disproportionation of the Löwdin charges in the half-lithiated compound and the difference between the occupation of 2+ and 3+ Mn ions in this case is only marginally larger than that predicted by GGA. When using the inter-site V , instead, the occupations of 2+ and 3+ ions are obtained in precise consistency with the fully lithiated (2+) and delithiated (3+) cases, showing the effectiveness of this corrective functional in capturing electronic localization in presence of significant hybridization. Regarding the formation energies, while they result positive in all the approximations considered, their values increase when a Hubbard correction (of any type) is used, probably due to the destabilization of the metallic ground state that is, instead, obtained from GGA calculations for the half-lithiated material. For the average voltage, however, while GGA significantly underestimates experiments, DFT+U overestimates them. The best agreement with experimental measurements of this quantity is obtained again within DFT+U+V. As in the case of LiFePO 4 , in order to fully appreciate the effectiveness of the various Hubbard corrections discussed above, a comparative study between the density of states obtained from these approximations is proposed for one of the materials in the LMPO family, namely MnPO 4 . The de-lithiated member of the Mn olivine system has not been very much studied, probably due to its poor thermal stability (its tendency to decompose and to release oxygen), actually still under investigation (see, e.g., Ref. The hybridization-driven band-gap opening and hole localization described above for MPO is analogous to that discussed in Ref. As in the case of LFPO, the results presented above are validated by a series of self-consistent calculations including structural optimizations and Hubbard parameters evaluations from the DFPT[109]. The results of these calculations are detailed in the Supplementary Information As anticipated at the beginning of this section, the same magnetic configurations considered for the Fe-based system are also compared for LMPO. The total energies have the same ordering as in LFPO (E AF1 < E AF2 < E AF3 < E F M ) with the ground state also in the AF 1 configuration. The energy dif-ferences between these different magnetic orders and the AF 1 ground state show a moderate dependence on the approximation being adopted (while the ordering is robust). In particular, the energy differences are (in meV per formula unit): 2.2, 12.3, 15.5 from DFT+U+V and 4.7, 35.4 and 43.4 in GGA (PBEsol) calculations. In analogy with LiFePO 4 these energy differences are irrelevant for the evaluation of formation energies and average voltages. Their small value (actually comparable with the precision of our calculation) suggest that all these magnetic configurations can be reached even at moderate temperatures. Of greater interest is the comparison between the two Li configurations for the x = 0.5 compound. Based on the clear improvement brought about by the extended DFT+U+V scheme compared to other Hubbard flavors, as evident from the results presented in the previous section, calculations were performed only with this functional and with uncorrected GGA for comparison. As in the case of LiFePO 4 , the configuration with Li filling alternate xz planes has lower energy than the one with Li on alternate yz planes and results about 255 (105) meV per formula unit more stable with DFT+U+V (GGA). At the same time the formation energy of the xz structure thus amounts to 58 (-42) meV per formula unit with DFT+U+V (GGA), which is of the same order of magnitude of the analogous structure of the Fe olivine. The rearrangement of the crystal structure is, however, more pronounced than in the case of the Fe olivine, consistently with the fact that the Mn 3+ ions are Jahn-Teller active and typically induce more pronounced distortions to the octahedral oxygen cages around them. . Consistently with the case of LFPO these cells will be referred to as yz and xz cells. As can be seen already from a visual comparison between Fig. The structural rearrangement that is observed between the two Li configurations also reflects a different distribution of valence electrons (a different spatial configuration of 2+ and 3+ Mn cations). However, as in the case of the Fe olivine, the Mn ions that result closer to the Li atoms consistently assume a 2+ state, while the others result in a 3+ state. Their total d states occupations, approximately equal to 5.21 and 4.97 are, again, consistent with those of the yz configuration for Mn ions in corresponding oxidation states and shown in Tables In this work we have used an extended formulation of DFT+U, named DFT+U+V The results demonstrate that i) material-and sitespecific interaction parameters can be used confidently (provided they are evaluated self-consistently) in energy comparisons without any need of averaging over composition ranges; ii) the addition of the inter-site interaction (V ) to the corrective Hubbard functionals improves significantly the accuracy of the approach and extends considerably the range of electronic localization regimes that can be successfully described. For Li x FePO 4 , the more ionic of the two systems, the improvement that this extension brings is mostly quantitative: it corrects the width of the band gap of the material, refines the equilibrium crystal structure and, most notably, improves the value of the average voltages, delivering all these quantities in better agreement with available experimental data. For Li x MnPO 4 , the inclusion of the inter-site coupling leads also to a qualitative improvement on the results of simpler approximations. In fact, this material fea-tures a more pronounced hybridization between the transition metal ions and their nearest neighbor oxygens and a Hubbard corrective functional with onsite only interactions (i.e. DFT+U) is not capable to capture electronic localization (e.g., on the Mn 2+ ions at x = 0.5) and overcorrects important quantities such as the average voltage. The inclusion of the inter-site interaction V leads to a more refined description of hybridized states that captures charge disproportionation at intermediate Li content (i.e., a clear distinction of Mn ions in 2+ and 3+ with occupations separately similar to those of lithiated and delithiated materials), refines the equilibrium crystal structure and the agreement with the lattice parameters measured in experiments (albeit not uniformly for all compositions), and improves the prediction of the average voltage vs Li/Li + . The use of the extended Hubbard functional also allows to capture a significant reorganization of the internal structure of the crystal upon changing Li configuration at intermediate compositions (probably a consequence of the Jahn-Teller activity of Mn 3+ ions) that suggests a stronger binding than in the Fe olivine between Li + and incoming electrons and higher kinetic barriers for Li ions to overcome during their diffusion. To further test the predictivity of the extended DFT+U+V functional we have also performed calculations on the mixed Fe-Mn olivine phosphate Li x Mn y Fe 1-y PO 4 (see Ref. From a methodological point of view the accuracy and predictivity that the extended DFT+U+V functional achieves with a consistent calculation of the Hubbard parameters is quite remarkable, especially in comparison with the very abundant literature where the simpler on-site only DFT+U is used with a semiempirical tuning of the interaction parameters on the properties of interest. Notwithstanding the fact that the semiempirical evaluation of interaction parameters is impossible without reference (e.g., experimental results to fit) and is far less viable with more advanced functionals (e.g., including several kinds of interactions) or when multiple Hubbard species (or oxidation states) are present, it should be also kept in mind that within DFT+U it is often impossible to identify a single set of Hubbard parameters able to improve the prediction of all the properties of a system Table Fe 2+ (x = 1) Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ (x = 0.5) Fe 3+ (x = 0) F. E. (meV/f.u.) Voltage (V) DFT+U dp +V 6.14 ?? of the main paper it is evident that the difference with the DFT+U+V DOS is merely quantitative with DFT+U+V 1×2×2 resulting in a smaller band gap (3.6 eV), actually closer to the experimental value (≈ 3.7 eV). This observation is actually important from a methodological point of view: while converging (e.g., with the size of the supercell) the value of the effective electronic interaction parameters used in the corrective functional is obviously important to capture quantities that are related to various features of the KS spectrum, other properties that can be computed from total energy differences seem more robust with respect to the value of the effective interactions and show a faster convergence with size. However, this is only true for DFT+U+V, probably due to a sort of compensation between the variation of V and that of U . Table Regarding the results of calculations based on DFPT it is easy to realize that there is a quite significant discrepancy with those in Table ?? of the main paper for DFT+U. However, for DFT+U+V the converged values for U and V agree quite nicely with those reported in Table ??, both for x = 0 and x = 1. This agreement is actually of better quality than the comparison with DFT+U+V 1×2×2 , to which DFT+U+V DF P T is in principle equivalent. This observation further confirm the difficulty in controlling the numerical convergence of finite difference calculations performed in big supercell and the advantages of the DFPT implementation. While these considerations on the numerical values of the Hubbard parameters are practically useful, it is important to remark that i) they contain the effects of structural optimization, which is part of the self-consistent procedure; ii) a more meaningful and important comparison is to be developed on the results obtained from calculations performed within the various functionals. This analysis will be expanded in the reminder of this section. Table These results are to be compared with those in Table ?? of the main paper. As in the case of LFPO, it is worth noting that, in spite of the differences between the values of U 's and V 's computed in the single or 1×2×2 supercell, the equilibrium lattice parameters predicted in the two cases are practically coincident for all three Li concentrations. With DFT+U+V 1×2×2 however the angles between the unit cell vectors of Li 0.5 MnPO 4 are slightly closer to 90 • than with DFT+U+V. The addition of a finite Hubbard U on the p state of oxygen through DFT+U dp +V contracts the lattice parameter for x = 1 (resulting in an agreement with experimental data of the same quality of DFT+U+V) but predicts a lattice for the x = 0 crystal significantly expanded with respect to the experimental structure. With Hubbard interactions evaluated from DFPT DFT+U+V predicts a crystal structure in very close agreement with the corresponding ones in Table ?? of the main paper and with results from DFT+U+V 1×2×2 . As for DFT+U, instead, the predicted equilibrium structure is in better agreement with experiments for x = 0 and x = 1, but determine a significant expansion of the lattice for x = 0.5. Table Mn 2+ (x = 1) Mn 2+ /Mn 3+ (x = 0.5) Mn 3+ (x = 0) F. E. (meV/f.u.) Voltage (V) DFT+U dp From the comparison with the results shown in Table ?? of the main paper it is easy to notice that the use of a Hubbard U on oxygen p states deteriorates the agreement of the predicted average voltage with respect to the experimental value. Conversely, in spite of the significant difference in the computed values of U and V , DFT+U+V 1×2×2 predicts an average voltage vs Li/Li + that is only slightly larger than the DFT+U+V result (4.26 V instead of 4.15 V), still representing a good approximation of the experimental value. Consistently with better equilibrium structure for x = 0 and x = 1, DFT+U DF P T improves the predicted average voltage with respect to the corresponding result of Table ?? in the main paper. However no progress is recorded in capturing charge disproportionation for the x = 0.5 composition. Actually, the significant increase in the (positive) formation energy for this material suggests that the self-consistent procedure has probably incurred in a local minimum, with a significantly expanded structure. DFT+U+V DF P T predicts atomic occupations in agreement with previous DFT+U+V and DFT+U+V 1×2×2 results; the average voltage it gives, 4.21 V, is actually in better agreement with DFT+U+V and experimental results than DFT+U+V 1×2×2 . Figure S.2 shows the projected density of states of MnPO 4 obtained within DFT+U+V 1×2×2 . From the comparison with the DOS shown in Fig. ?? of the main paper, it is evident that the difference between DFT+U+V and DFT+U+V 1×2×2 is, again, only quantitative and mostly lies on the size of the gap that is predicted to be of about 1.5 and 1.2 eV, respectively. As in the case of LFPO this change in the gap width is the result of the variation of the selfconsistent effective interactions and the consequent difference in the equilibrium crystal structure. However, it is important to note that the difference between the two DOS is quantitatively smaller than the difference between the Hubbard interaction parameters shown in Tables S.IV and ?? of the main paper. • to about 88 It is important to note that the values reported in Table From a comparison with the results of Table