Two-dimensional layered semiconductors have recently emerged as attractive building blocks for next-generation low-power non-volatile memories. challenges remain in the controllable sub-micron fabrication of bipolar resistively switching circuit components from these novel materials. Here we report on the scalable experimental realisation of lateral on-dielectric memtransistors from monolayer single-crystal molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) utilising a focused helium ion beam. Site-specific irradiation with the probe of a helium ion microscope (HIM) allows for the creation of charged defects in the MoS 2 lattice. The reversible drift of these locally seeded defects in the applied electric field modulates the resistance of the semiconducting channel, enabling versatile memristive functionality on the nanoscale. We find the device can reliably retain its resistance ratios and set biases for hundreds of switching cycles at sweep frequencies of up to 2.9 V s -1 with relatively low drain-source biases. We also demonstrate long term potentiation and depression with sharp habituation that promises application in future neuromorphic architectures. This work advances the down-scaling progress of memristive devices without sacrificing key performance parameters such as power consumption or its applicability for synaptic emulation. In the ever-evolving field of nanoelectronics, new circuit design paradigms are constantly sought-after to improve the performance of next-generation on-chip devices. To a large extent, it is the materials used in these devices that govern their properties and potential applications. Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials such as MoS 2 have recently emerged as strong candidates to usher in a new age of nanoscale memories Single-layer polycrystalline MoS 2 thin films have been demonstrated to operate as gatetunable, non-volatile and multi-terminal resistive switches; or so-called memtransistors Switching of resistance states in these devices occurs when biasing over defect-rich grain boundaries, introduced into the material during the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) process by restricting the sulfur supply. These memristive elements hold promise in mimicking neurosynaptic signalling by altering the physical state of the transistor channel through application of a large drain-source bias (> 20 V). Their unusual in-plane functionality and multi-input features integrate easily with Si-based processes; but require the implementation of a locationagnostic CVD growth process. Downscaling of this bottom-up process is ultimately limited by the dimensions of the resulting grain boundaries. The ability to locally modify the structure of transition metal dichalcogenides by scalable and industry-compatible top-down methods so that resistive switching is induced in these materials has remained a challenge. Herein, we report the first successful fabrication of a 2D memristive switch utilising a focused helium ion beam. The structure of both CVD-grown and mechanically-exfoliated semiconducting MoS 2 flakes is locally altered by focused ion probe irradiations at a critical dose of 1.6 pC μm -1 . When carried out in a bisecting geometry (parallel to electrodes) this modification of the field effect transistor (FET) channel results in the creation of bipolar resistive switches. We performed microscopic and spectroscopic analyses to determine the nature of the defective interface at the irradiation site. We provide evidence that the field-driven drift of defects, believed to be sulfur vacancies (V S ) sourced from the damaged region, is the mechanism by which the different resistance states of the device are realised. In addition, we demonstrate heterosynaptic conductance modulation in multi-terminal devices and sharp habituation during long-term potentiation neural training. We highlight the pertinence of our method in producing newgeneration neuromorphic circuit components, which should prove crucial for the integration of 2D materials into future memory devices. We employ a previously-published CVD method to grow large single-crystal triangles of monolayer MoS 2 , as described in the Methods section. Figure Their drift in the electric field modulates the carrier concentration in the MoS 2 channel, which ultimately governs the memristive behaviour of our device. Upon the creation of our synthetic fissure with the helium beam, significant hysteresis opens up in the output curve of the device as shown in Fig. Figure Application of the field effect through the back gate oxide allows for the tuning of the onset of switching, as well as the resistance ratio of the memtransistor. Figure We note that some devices start in LRS, exhibit multiple crossovers during the sweep and show negative differential resistance (Supplementary Section 2). However, the underlying mechanism of dopant drift, which we will discuss in detail in the spectroscopy section, remains consistent. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the helium beam in inducing resistive switching in layered materials, we repeated the experiments on mechanically-exfoliated bilayer MoS 2 devices and also observed similar gate-tunable memristive functionality (Supplementary Section 2); allowing our methodology to be extended to devices of larger layer thickness. We evaluate the switching parameters of a well-performing monolayer device when gated in the sub-threshold region (L = 8.5 μm, V g = 5 V, measured at ∼ 10 mbar) as a function of sweeping frequency, f s , in Fig. Figure We observe no significant shifts or broadening of the E and A 1 Raman peaks on the drainside, despite a large drop in intensity. The separation of the in-plane E (386 cm -1 ) and outof-plane A 1 (405 cm -1 ) first-order modes is ∼20 cm -1 , consistent with single-layer MoS 2 Based on our results, we propose that when switching the device into HRS, the defects on the drain-side are forced to migrate towards the drain electrode from the fissure. Their depletion from the channel attenuates B exciton intensity which is usually associated with defect concentration The electro-chemical metallisation process occurring at the MoS 2 /contact interface The success of two-dimensional materials in future neuromorphic architectures will largely depend on their ease of implementation with on-dielectric integrated circuits, as well as their ability to mimic synaptic processes with good accuracy. Training pulses which simulate neuronal input activity were used to demonstrate the neuromorphic applicability of our devices. Consecutive cycles of long term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) were recorded (Fig. As demonstrated recently by Sangwan et al. Figure The logic and switching applications of any memristive device will ultimately be limited by the frequency at which states can be accessed and read out. Functionalities such as pattern recognition rely on effective thresholding of output currents In summary, we have successfully demonstrated an experimental approach to locally creating gate-tunable memristive circuit elements in atomically-thin materials. The advantages of employing a helium ion microscope include high material selectivity for sputtering, remarkable nanoscale precision and scalability of fabrication. Additionally, the instrument is strongly compatible with established industrial lithographic processes. In contrast to growing polycrystalline films, our strategy allows for site-specific inclusion of memristive elements in large-area monolayer circuits, as well as post-metallization alterations. With stable neuromorphic functionality demonstrated, we advance the potential of two-dimensional semiconductors for inclusion in future revolutionary nanoelectronic devices. In Trinity College Dublin: Monolayer MoS 2 sheets were grown by proximate sulfurisation of MoO 3 precursors on marked 285 nm SiO 2 /Si chips inside a chemical vapour deposition furnace using a technique described previously in ref The vapour was flown through a microreactor containing MoO 3 film on a seed substrate. The film was sulfurised and deposited on target substrates facing the seed substrate for 20 minutes. The samples were then annealed in Ar for 20 minutes at 750 • C. Suitable MoS 2 triangles were identified using an Olympus optical microscope (50× lens objective). Electrode patterns were designed on Raith Nanopatterning software and defined by electron beam lithography (Zeiss Supra SEM ), utilising PMMA A3 resist exposed at a dose of 200 μC cm -2 followed by development for 45 seconds in MIBK:IPA (1:3). Metallization was carried out in an electron beam-evaporator (Temescal FC-2000 ) to deposit small-area Ti/Au (5/40 nm) pads, followed by lift-off in acetone overnight at room temperature. Bilayer samples were mechanically exfoliated from bulk MoS 2 (SPI Supplies) with adhesive tape and identified using optical contrast and AFM. In Peking University: Transported specimens grown in Trinity College were marked out using a Nikon optical microscope (100× lens objective). Electrode patterns were designed on Raith Nanopatterning software and defined by electron beam lithography (FEI Strata DB 235 SEM ), utilising PMMA A9 resist exposed at a dose of 340 μC cm -2 followed by development for 30 seconds in MIBK:IPA (1:3). Metallization was carried out in an electron beam-evaporator (Detech DE400 ) to deposit large-area Ti/Au (10/80 nm) pads, followed by lift-off in warm acetone. In Trinity College Dublin and Peking University: The fabricated devices were inserted into the Zeiss Nanofab helium ion microscope 24 hours before irradiation to allow for outgassing at a base pressure of ∼ 10 -7 mbar. The milling patterns were designed on the NanoPattern-ingVisualisationEngine software and consisted of a single-direction pixel-wide scan traced in a single sweep with no retracing. The delivered ion linear dose to induce memristive switching was ∼1.6 pC μm -1 at a beam current of 1.5 pA, aperture of 10 μm, with the probe size evaluated at < 3 nm using the GaussFit module in ImageJ software (determination of probe size in Supplementary Section 1). In Trinity College Dublin: The samples were tested in the vacuum chamber of a customised scanning electron microscope (Zeiss EVO), at a base pressure of ∼ 10 -5 mbar. Imina miBot piezoelectric tungsten probes were used to contact the EBL-deposited pads as source and drain terminals. The data were obtained using a semiconductor analyzer (Agilent B2912A) interfaced with Keysight software. The samples were back-gated with copper tape underneath the 285 nm SiO 2 /Si chip, and a third probe was used as the gate terminal. In Peking University: The samples were wire-bonded using aluminium leads to large-area Ti/Au pads, and globally back-gated through a silver paint-connected terminal underneath the highly-doped Si substrate. Endurance and potentiation measurements were carried out in an Oxford Instruments cryostat with no applied magnetic field, pressure of ≈ 10 mbar and temperature of 280 K. The data were obtained using a semiconductor analyzer (Agilent B2912A) interfaced with LabVIEW software. Spectroscopic mapping was done in a WITec Alpha 300R system in ambient conditions. The device was switched between resistance states ex-situ between each map acquisition, and the maps were acquired within minutes of switching states. The excitation wavelength was 532 nm, with a diffraction grating of 1800 grooves mm -1 and a 100× objective lens (NA = 0.95, spot size ∼ 0.3 μm). Mapping was carried out at low incident powers (< 100 μW) to avoid altering the sample with the laser, with the beam refocused manually every time between each scan to ensure accurate comparison. The 4 μm 2 areas scanned in 60 lines in Fig. The helium-treated lamella was prepared from a mechanically-exfoliated bilayer MoS 2 sam-ple (SPI Supplies), cleaved onto a 285 nm-SiO 2 /Si substrate with adhesive tape. Once irradiated in the HIM, the sample was transferred to a focused ion beam system (Zeiss Auriga), where a platinum layer was deposited to protect the flake. A gallium beam (30 keV) was used to cut the lamella for lift-out and welding to a TEM grid made of copper. The sample was then thinned to an electron-transparent width with a 900 eV argon beam (Fischione 1040 Nanomill). SEM images of the devices pre-and post-irradiation were taken in Zeiss Supra and Zeiss Ultra systems, with chamber pressures at ∼ 2 • 10 -6 mbar. TEM was performed in an FEI Titan 80-300 microscope operated at a chamber pressure of ∼ 4 • 10 -7 mbar. The beam energy used for imaging was 300 keV. Irradiated samples for plan-view imaging were transferred from the HIM to the TEM immediately after exposure. The carrier field-effect mobility, μ fe was extracted in the linear region of the transfer curve (V g = 0 V) using the expression: where L, W are the length and width of the conducting channel, V ds is the drain-source bias, C ox is the gate oxide capacitance evaluated at 13.9 nF cm -2 , I ds is the drain-source current evaluated at the gate bias, V g . This same formula was applied to evaluate the mobilities in Fig. 