Lead-magnesium niobate lead-titanate (PMN-PT) has been proven as an excellent material for sensing and actuating applications. The fabrication of advanced ultra-small PMN-PT-based devices relies on the availability of sophisticated procedures for the micro-machining of PMN-PT thin films or bulk substrates. Approaches reported up to date include chemical etching, excimer laser ablation and ion milling. To ensure an excellent device performance, a key mandatory feature for a micro-machining process is to preserve as far as possible the crystalline quality of the substrates; in other words, the fabrication method must induce a low density of cracks and other kind of defects. In this work, we demonstrate a relatively fast procedure for the fabrication of highquality PMN-PT micro-machined actuators employing green femtosecond laser pulses. The fabricated devices feature absence of extended cracks and well defined edges with relatively low roughness, which is advantageous for the further integration of nanomaterials onto the piezoelectric actuators. Piezoelectric materials offer interesting properties for micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) including sensing and actuating applications, as they provide wide dynamic ranges, low power consumption and low hysteresis values The latter introduces roughening of the edges on the scale of about 10 μm and consequently low definition in their shapes. The rest of the approaches are based on the use of lithography techniques involving the use of masks or relatively complicated processes that make the whole process slow; this is especially remarkable when relatively thick substrates (200 μm to 300 μm) have to be cut through; for these kind of substrates wet etching processes in particular achieve limited steepness of the side walls, which in turn limits the ability to fabricate devices with small gaps of high aspect ratio. Moreover, since PMN-PT substrates are brittle, simple and maskless fabrication procedures are desirable. Laser microfabrication with ultrashort pulses has been established in the last ten years as a reliable technique which allows precise material ablation with very small effects on the material surrounding the ablation zone 500 micron-thick PMN 0.71 -PT 0.29 crystals were purchased from TRS Technologies, State College, Pennsylvania, U.S.A (from now on referred to as TRS crystals). They were lapped down to the thickness of 300 μm and mechanically polished. For the ablation and cutting tests we used a femtosecond laser (Spirit R , Spectra-Physics) with a pulse energy of380 fs and a pulse repetition rate of 200 kHz, adjustable with the use of an acusto-optical pulse picker. The laser was operated at its second harmonic with a wavelength of 520 nm and was focused by a 100 mm f-theta telecentric objective onto the sample surface to a spot with a 7 μm radius. For x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, a PANalytical X'Pert Pro MRD diffractometer was used. The high resolution omega-2theta line-scans where performed with with an hybrid monochromator in the primary beam path and an Ge[220] analyser-crystal in combination with a Xenon proportional counter in the secondary beampath. For reciprocal space mapping the diffractometer was equipped with a 1D PIXcel detector in combi-nation with a Soller-slit in the secondary beam-path. For all measurements we used copper k-alpha radiation, 8048 eV, with a corresponding wavelength of 1.5406 Å. 3 Results and discussion We measured the ablation threshold for the PMN-PT crystals using the method of Liu In this method one plots the square of the radii of the ablation craters generated by laser pulses versus the logarithm of the pulse fluence; from these plots one obtains both beam radius and ablation thresholds with a linear fit. Liu plots for single-pulse ablation of PMN-PT are shown in Figure Figure The ablation rate per unit energy varies as a function of pulse energy, pulse spacing and repetition rate. The energy dependence is due to physical processes which are especially complicated for the case of dielectrics (see The pulse spacing and repetition rate dependencies, in general terms, result from a combination of heating and incubation effects. Placing pulses closer to each other both in time and space causes the sample to heat uniformly as each of the pulses releases some heat into the material and the dissipation is not fast enough to cool the material down before the arrival of the subsequent pulse (see for example the review of Finger et al. Incubation is the decrease in the ablation threshold of a material with the increase of the number of laser pulses that are applied to a given spot We studied ablation as a function of the pulse energy/pulse spacing/repetition parameters in the fol-lowing way. For each material, we ablated two grids of 0.5 mm-diameter circular pits using the ablation strategy illustrated in Figure We measured the depth of the pits using a profilometer (Dektak 8 Advanced Development Profiler); Figure where ∆V E is the volume ablated per unit energy, w 0 the Gaussian beam radius, δ the energy penetration depth and φ 0 and φ th the fluence at the center of the beam and the ablation threshold fluence respectively, and E is the pulse energy; one notices the sharp increase of the ablation efficiency next to the ablation threshold, the slower decrease for high pulse energy and the highest efficiency reached for an energy of approximately e 2 times the threshold for ablation. The parameters for both qualitative fits are φ th = 0.32 J cm -1 and δ = 0.14 μm; the fluence threshold is lower than the one measured with the method of Liu for single pulse ablation and the energy penetration depth results from nonlinear absorption as PMN-PT is transparent in the visible spectrum Flat hexagonal crystals (nanoplatelets) appear at the bottom of many of the ablated pits for all processing parameters; we show them in Figure The edges of the ablated pits (shown in Figure In conclusion, with green pulses of the duration of 380 fs and a beam radius of 6 μm it is possible to ablate approximately 2.5 mm 3 min -1 W -1 of PMN-PT without heat effects and with limited redeposition of ablated material on the surface; heating starts to affect ablation strongly with pulse spacing below 5 μm The cutting of crystals is realized by placing several rows of pulses next to each other (Figure Cracking in the ablation with ultrashort (ps) laser pulses has been studied by Sun and co-authors for the case of glass It is reasonable that in our experiments cracks should appear in cutting rather than surface ablation since cutting and ablation are realized with different scanning strategies; in the case of cutting one is placing several lines of pulses adjacent to each other, so that all of the pulses are close to the edge, while in the case of ablation, as illustrated in the previous section, laser scanning proceeds in random directions with respect to the edges so that usually just a few consecutive pulses are placed next to an edge. In our experiments, as we will discuss in the following paragraphs, we have seen that cracking appears at the relatively low repetition rate of 25 kHz if the pulse energy is too high. As an additional note, in the mechanism of cracking there may be other components in addition to cooling shocks: cracks have been observed in glass after three ps pulses delivered at the frequency of 1 Hz A qualitative explanation for the V-shape of the groove (as for example discussed in In order to investigate these issues we carried out a cutting experiment. On a PMN-PT crystal we placed five parallel lines of pulses, each approximately 3.5 mm long, at the distance of 5 μm from each other (as in the usual cutting procedure) and we varied the pulse energy for two different polarizations: perpendicular to the cutting lines (and so p-polarized with respect to the walls of the resulting groove) and parallel to the cutting line (and so s-polarized); the 5.5 μm beam radius was placed at the crystal surface. Since from our ablation experiments (Section 3.2) we determined that heating effects are limited for pulse spacings of 5 μm and laser repetition rates of 25 kHz and smaller, we fixed 5 μm pulse spacing and 25 kHz repetition rate as processing parameters for all cutting experiments. We executed 500 passes to be sure that in all cases we cut till saturation; with five cutting lines none of the grooves cut through the 300 μm-thick crystal so that for each parameter set it is possible to measure the maximum cutting depth. We measured the resulting cut depth and we examined the cut edge quality both at the optical and the scanning electron microscope. For the measurement of the cut depth, we embedded the processed crystal in resin and we sectioned them so that the measurements could be carried out with an optical microscope. For this data set and the following data set on surface cracks the uncertainty on the knowledge of the beam radius is larger than in the case of the ablation rate experiments; this could possibly lead to an underestimation of the cutting depths and of an overestimation of the maximum energy at which no cracks appear (as any imprecision in the placement of the focus can only lead to larger beam radii). A graph of the groove depths is shown in panel (c) of Figure In conclusion, a good compromise between processing speed and surface/edge quality is a pulse energy of 5.5 μJ with a beam waist of 7 μm, a repetition frequency of 25 kHz and the placement of the beam waist below the surface of a thick substrate; with these parameters one is able to ablate approximately 0.3 mm 3 min -1 of PMN-PT. With these parameters it is necessary to place the beam waist under the surface of the PMN-PT substrate in order to obtain crack-free edges. As a compensation for the reduced fluence at the surface, one is able to cut substrates of 300 μm (and over) of thickness without adjustment of the beam focus. In figure Ultrafast laser microfabrication is a flexible and rapid way to obtain devices from PMN-PT crystals. A good compromise between processing speed and surface/edge quality is a pulse energy of 5.5 μJ with a beam waist of 7 μm, a repetition frequency of 25 kHz and the placement of the beam waist below the surface of a thick substrate; with these parameters one is able to ablate approximately 0.3 mm 3 min -1 of PMN-PT and mm-sized devices with deep (300 μm) structures and gaps smaller than 50 μm can be obtained in under 30 minutes. The fabricated devices were tested after evaporation of gold electrodes by cycling 10 times voltage ramps from 0 V to 200 V. No visible degradation (evolution of cracks) was observed on the machined crystals after this process. Hence, such micro-machined crystals can be successfully employed for actuating applications as demonstrated in some of our recent works 