Metasurfaces have been investigated and its numerous exotic functionalities and the potentials to arbitrarily control of the electromagnetic fields have been extensively explored. However, only limited types of metasurface have finally entered into real products. Here, we introduce a concept of a metasurface-based smart table for wirelessly charging portable devices and report its first prototype. The proposed metasurface can efficiently transform evanescent fields into propagating waves which significantly improves the near field coupling to charge a receiving device arbitrarily placed on its surface wirelessly through magnetic resonance coupling. In this way, power transfer efficiency of 80% is experimentally obtained when the receiver is placed at any distances from the transmitter. The proposed concept enables a variety of important applications in the fields of consumer electronics, electric automobiles, implanted medical devices, etc. The further developed metasurface-based smart table may serve as an ultimate 2-dimensional platform and support charging multiple receivers. Arbitrary tailor, mold and manipulation of electromagnetic fields is the ultimate goal in electromagnetic research from radio-frequencies to optics. Recently, metasurfaces have attracted great interests due to its potentials to provide a profound control over electromagnetic fields. With an increasing demands for conveniently charging electronic devices, WPT is considered as a promising solution. Much effort has been made to develop different types of WPT systems, Unlike the bulk metamaterials, thin planar metasurfaces possess low intrinsic losses and at the same time provide a desired manipulation of the electromagnetic fields. The goal of this paper is to introduce a novel concept of a metasurface-based smart table for WPT applications. In our vision the smart table with the metasurface embedded or placed underneath the desktop allows powering multiple devices simultaneously, regardless of how they are located on the table and oriented relative to each other (see Fig. Recently, wire media, arrays of parallel metal wires are studied in microwave, terahertz and optical frequency regimes revealing unique electromagnetic properties. In our case, the resonant coupling is the coupling of near fields which are packages of evanescent waves. For a disk resonator with colossal permittivity operating at a magnetic dipole mode the electric field is mostly concentrated inside while the magnetic field is maximal near the surface of the disk. The WPT system under study consisted of a transmitter and a receiver placed above the metasurface as shown in Fig. A. Operational modes of WPT system Eigenmode analysis of a single dielectric resonator was conducted, which revealed that all the magnetic modes were identified at the frequencies above 230 MHz, i.e.magnetic dipole (MD), quadrupole (MQ) and octupole (MO) mode hold at 232 MHz, 296 MHz and 347 MHz, respectively, whereas all the electric modes were observed at the frequencies higher than 720 MHz, i.e. electric dipole (ED) and quadrupole (EQ) mode is at 725 MHz and 730 MHz, respectively. Such a wide range of magnetic and electric eigenmodes separation is resulted from the geometric parameters of the dielectric disk resonator. Therefore we mainly target to use the MD mode of the disk which can be excited by a current loop 34 being aware of the electric type of modes located far away from magnetic types. In the proposed WPT system the transmitting resonator was coupled to the metasurface and, via the metasurface, to another disk. Here the frequencies of all modes were shifted with respect to those of an individual disk and could hybridize if the coupling with the metasurface was too strong. For two cases of L = 65 cm and L = 120 cm, we performed numerical simulations of the whole WPT system using the frequency solver in CST Microwave Studio Suite varying d and keeping the same value s 2 which determined the coupling with the metasurface, see Fig. To clarify the nature of both resonances we analyzed the electromagnetic field distributions for the case L = 120 cm. The electric and magnetic field distributions across the metasurface and across the disk at two frequencies are shown in Fig. To finally verify the mode type we performed the multipole decomposition of the induced displacement currents inside the transmitting resonator of the WPT system. Four terms were taken into consideration, namely, electric dipole (ED), magnetic dipole (MD), electric quadrupole (EQ) and magnetic quadrupole (MQ) modes. Now let's characterize the WPT system in terms of the efficiency depending on the distance d. We performed numerical simulations to investigate the S-parameter spectra as a function of d ranging from 0 cm to 100 cm. The calculated WPT efficiency η as a function of distance d between the transmitter and the receiver is plotted in Fig. The well-known method to partially cure these minima of efficiency is to introduce matching networks. The measured S-parameters as a function of frequency for different d ranging from 0 to 100 cm are shown in Fig. One of the target applications of such the WPT system is an ubiquitous wireless charging. Thus safety issues related to human exposure under electromagnetic fields (EMF) and specific absorption rate (SAR) must be taken into consideration. Here we considered SAR -a more rigorous safety metric for a measure of how much power is absorbed by biologic tissues. If the proposed metasurface is used in a wireless charging system it can be embedded in a plastic or wooden desk. Thus we considered a typical scenario that a human arm was placed on top of the metasurface between the transmitter and the receiver. We investigated how much power can be absorbed by the human body by means of calculating the SAR. To perform the SAR analysis we used CST Microwave Studio and a CAD model of the front part of a human arm (see Fig. In this paper, we discussed two typical scenarios where metasurfaces could be applied for wireless power transfer system. Especially, we proposed a first design of an cost-effective metasurface-based smart table as an intermediate between WPT transmitter and receiver. Both numerical and experimental studies verified the efficient and distance-independent WPT (efficiency higher than 80%) for the case when the transmitting and receiving devices were both placed on the table. Though the metasurface operated like an effective transmission line our system was not similar to the well-known WPT systems with a capacitive coupling. The key difference was a uniquely efficient magnetic coupling of our transmitting/receiving device with proposed metasurface. This coupling was granted by the magnetic Mie resonance of a dielectric disk with colossal permittivity. This physical mechanism allowed us to successfully perform the resonant WPT along the metasurface. The only restriction of such WPT system was the misalignment between the transmitter and the receiver -the power channel was stretched along the metasurface, which was mainly due to the extreme anisotropy of the metasurface and can be improved by an isotropic metasurface design. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT