A non-local dynamic homogenization technique for the analysis of a viscoelastic heterogeneous material which displays a periodic microstructure is herein proposed. The asymptotic expansion of the micro-displacement field in the transformed Laplace domain allows obtaining, from the expression of the micro-scale field equations, a set of recursive differential problems defined over the periodic unit cell. Consequently, the cell problems are derived in terms of perturbation functions depending on the geometrical and physical-mechanical properties of the material and its microstructural heterogeneities. A down-scaling relation is formulated in a consistent form, which correlates the microscopic to the macroscopic transformed displacement field and its gradients through the perturbation functions. Average field equations of infinite order are determined by substituting the down-scale relation into the micro-field equation. Based on a variational approach, the macroscopic field equations of a non-local continuum is delivered and the local and non-local overall constitutive and inertial tensors of the homogenized continuum are determined. The problem of wave propagation in case of a bi-phase layered material with orthotropic phases and axis of orthotropy parallel to the direction of layers is investigated as an example. In such a case, the local and non-local overall constitutive and inertial tensors are determined analytically and the dispersion curves obtained from the non-local homogenized model are analysed. Over the last few years, the technological progress led to a fast development of composite materials. Such materials play a crucial role for various applications in civil, naval, aerospace and mechanical engineering, since they boast remarkable mechanical and physico-chemical properties such as high strength, corrosion and thermal resistance, enhanced durability, light weight and ease handling, Therefore, based on the premises above, the theory of homogenization may represent an excellent methodology to recognize and model the effects of the microscopic behaviour on the overall properties of materials. Such a theory allows replacing a heterogeneous material with an equivalent homogenous one, which can be modelled through either a first order (Cauchy) or a non-local continuum. Generally, three main classes of homogenization techniques are possible: the asymptotic techniques Let Ω be a three-dimensional viscoelastic heterogeneous material which displays a periodic microstructure. A generic point of the material is identified by the position vector x = x 1 e 1 + x 2 e 2 + x 3 e 3 related to a system of coordinates with origin at point O and orthogonal base {e 1 , e 2 , e 3 }. is A-periodic, the micro relaxation tensor G m (x, t) = G m ijhk e i ⊗ e j ⊗ e h ⊗ e k , which depends on time and accounts for the viscoelastic effects, and the material density ρ m (x) comply with the following conditions: The micro stress σ(x, t) constitutive relation, which models the viscoelastic elements of the heterogeneous material, is expressed in terms of the hereditary integral, where the superscript m refers to the microscale and ε(x, t) = ε ij e i ⊗ e j is the micro-strain tensor. Moreover t denotes the time coordinate and the superimposed dot indicates time derivative. The material undergoes small displacements and so the micro-strain tensor is defined as ε(x, t) = 1 2 (∇u(x, t) + ∇ T u(x, t)), where ∇u is the gradient of the micro-displacement u(x, t). In the time domain, the deformation response of the material under dynamic loading is expressed by the momentum balance equation: where u(x, t) is the micro-displacement field and b(x, t) are the body forces. In the derivation of the theory, the heterogeneous material is supposed to be subjected to a system of L-periodic body forces b(x, t), with zero mean values over L = [0, L] × [0, δL]. The structural (or macroscopic) length L is assumed to be much greater than the microstructural length ε, i.e. L>> ε, to allow the scales separation condition and so L is considered as an actual representative portion of the material. Let Q = [0, 1] × [0, δ] × [0, 1] be the nondimensional cell reproducing the periodic microstructure. Q is determined by rescaling the size of the periodic cell A for the characteristic length ε. Accordingly, two variables are introduced to differentiate the two scales, namely the macroscopic (or slow) one, x ∈ A, which measures the slow fluctuations, and the microscopic (or fast) variable, ξ = x ε ∈ Q, which measures the fast propagation of the signal. Thanks to cell Q, the properties (1) and ( (5) Bearing in mind the definition of the strain tensor ε, the minor simmetry of the relaxation tensor G m is applied to ε in the integral (3) and the substitution of Eq. (3) into Eq. ( Denoting with [[f ]] = f i (Σ)-f j (Σ) the jump of the function values f at the interface Σ between two different phases i and j in the periodic cell A, the following fully-bonded interface conditions hold where n represents the outward normal to the interface Σ. Since G m and ρ m are Q-periodic and the body forces are L-periodic, the micro-displacement depends on both the slow variable x and the fast one ξ and can be expressed as The two-sided Laplace transform of an arbitrary, real valued, time varying function, f ∈ R, is defined as, where, the Laplace argument, s, and the Laplace transform, f , are complex valued (i.e. f : C → C ). The derivative rule for the Laplace transform is provided by and the convolution rule of f 1 and f 2 is given as Equation ( or, in other terms: where û and ∇û represent the micro-displacement field and the gradient of the micro-displacement field converted in the Laplace domain. Moreover, Ĝm is the micro-relaxation tensor and b(x, s) are the body forces transformed in the Laplace domain. In addition, it is convenient to consider Ĉm x ε , s = s Ĝm x ε , s . The governing equation of the periodic viscoelastic material defined in the Laplace domain is Denoting with [[f ]] = f i (Σ) -f j (Σ) the jump of the function values f at the interface Σ between two phases i and j in the periodic cell A, the following continuity conditions hold for a perfectly bonded interface where n represents the outward normal to the interface Σ. The solution of Eq. ( In the equivalent homogenized material, by considering a reference system {O, e 1 , e 2 }, the macro-displacement transformed in the Laplace domain is denoted as Û (x) = Ûi e i , with respect to a point x, and the transformed displacement gradiend is defined as Based on the asymptotic approach developed in The Laplace transform (8) is applied to Eq. ( which is equivalent to the asymptotic expansion of the micro-displacement performed in the time domain. Let us consider the formula which introduces the macroscopic derivative ∂ ∂x k ûh and the microscopic derivative ûh,k in the transformed Laplace domain, and let us apply it to the asymptotic expansion (16), leading to: The asymptotic technique searches for the solution of Eq. ( Interface conditions ( The asymptotic field equation ( with interface conditions û(0) The solvabiliy condition of this differential problem, in the class of Q-periodic solutions û(0) h , implies that f The solution results to be û(0 where Û M h (x, s) is the transformed macroscopic displacement that does not depend on the microstructure. Bearing in mind the solution (23), the differential problem from (19) at the order since Û M h,k = 0. Its interface conditions are û(1) Similarly, the solvability condition in the class of Q-periodic functions ensures that where (•) = 1 |Q| Q (•)dξ and |Q| = δ. Moreover the Q-periodicity of the components Ĉm ijhk and the divergence theorem entail f (1) i (x) = 0 and the differential problem has the following solution where N (1,0) hpq1 is the perturbation function, which depends on the fast variable ξ. The perturbation functions are supposed to have zero mean over the unit cell Q and so N (1,0) hpq1 complies with the normalization condition Moreover, the perturbation functions exclusively depend on the geometry and on the mechanical properties of the microstructure. The differential problem at order ε 0 is with interface conditions û( Considering the solutions ( with interface conditions û( Again, solvability condition of differential problem (30) in the class of Q-periodic functions and the divergence theorem lead to and consequentely the solution of the differential problem at the order ε 0 is where is the perturbation function depending on the parameter s. In the Section 3, the solutions û(0) h , û(1) h , û(2) h , ... have been established. Such solutions are employed to formulate the cell problems, which are classified according to the even power of the parameter s. Cell problems related to s 0 The substitution of solution ( with interface conditions derived in terms of the perturbation function where δ hp and δ kq1 are the Kronecker delta functions. Once the perturbation function N (1,0) hpq1,k has been determined, and thanks to equation ( with interface conditions The solution of the cell problem ( (2,0) ipq1q2 . The cell problem at the order ε w with w ∈ Z and w ≥ 1 is and the corresponding interface conditions are where symbol P * (q) denotes all the possible permutations of the multi-index q = q 1 , q 2 , ..., q l that does not exhibit fixed indices (see Cell problems related to s 2 The substitution of solution (32) into Eq. ( with interface conditions: as well as the cell problem (35) related to the case s 0 . From the resolution of problem ( (2,2) ip is derived. The perturbation function ipq1 is the solution of the cell problem obtained at the order ε 1 with interface conditions Meanwhile, at the order ε 2 , the perturbation function ipq1q2 is solution of the cell problem whose interface conditions are Finally at the order ε w+2 , with w ∈ Z and w ≥ 1, the perturbation function equipped with the interface conditions In the present subsection, the cell problems related to power s 2n are devised and their corresponding perturbation functions are established. At the order ε (2n-2) , with n ∈ Z and n ≥ 2, the cell problem is with interface conditions and its solution is the perturbation function N (2n,2n) ip . Whereas at the order ε (2n-1) , the perturbation function is the solution of the cell problem with interface conditions: The cell problem evaluated for ε with interface conditions and its solution is the perturbation function N (2n+2,2n) ipq1q2 . Finally, the perturbation function is the solution of the cell problem for ε w+2n , whose interface conditions are In 5 Down-scaling relation, average field equation of infinite order and macroscopic problems The down-scaling relation referred to the transformed micro-displacement is expressed as an asymptotic expansion of powers of the microscopic length ε relying on the transformed macro-displacement Û M h (x, s), its gradients and the Q-periodic perturbation functions. Such functions are delivered by solving the cell problems that are listed in the Section (4). Therefore, the replacement of the solutions of the recursive differential problems ( In Eq. ( . Moreover, the perturbation function N (0,0) hp stands for the Kronecker delta δ hp . There is point in observing that the Q-periodic perturbation functions N (2j+l,2j) hpq are affected by the microstructural inhomogeneities of the material and this is emphasized by their dependency on the fast variable ξ = x ε . On the other hand, the transformed macro-displacement Û M h (x, s) is L-periodic and relies on the slow variable x and the time. The transformed macro-displacement field is supposed to be the mean value of the transformed micro-displacement field over the unit cell Q Eq. ( Replacing the down-scaling relation ( where the coefficients of the gradients of the transformed macro-displacement are the known terms of the corresponding cell problems. Therefore it results , with w ∈ Z, w ≥ 1, ñ ∈ Z and ñ ≥ 0. The average field equations of infinite order (56) are formally solved by performing an asymptotic expansion of the transformed macro-displacement Û M p (x) in power of ε, namely The substitution of Eq. ( which provides the following macroscopic recursive problems for the different orders of ε. Namely, at the order ε 0 it results at the order ε the problem is instead at the order ε 2 it reads A generic recursive problem, at odd order ε 2 w-1 , with w ∈ Z and w ≥ 2 is whereas a generic recursive problem at even order ε 2 w is n where n ∈ Z and n ≥ 2. There is no point in managing the averaged equation of infinite order (56). In addition, the ellipticity of the differential problem could be not guaranteed if Eq. ( 6 Asymptotic expansion of the energy and second order homogenization In this Section a finite order governing equation is provided by exploiting a variational-asymptotic procedure, see Let L(Λ) be the energy-like functional in the Laplace domain, which is expressed in terms of the energy-like density λm in the Laplace domain where the symbol : denotes the second order inner product. Specifically, the tranformed energy-like functional Λ and its corresponding energy-like density λm are influenced by the translation variable ζ ∈ Q. Such a variable is introduced because the actual "phase" of the microstructure is undetectable and a family of translated microstructures is taken into account. Therefore, the transformed micro-relaxation tensor Ĝm depends on the translation variable ζ and it may be written as Ĝm,ζ x, Let Λm be the average transformed energy-like functional at the microscale where the Fubini theorem is applied. The average transformed energy-like functional Λζ at the microscale does not rely on the translation variable ζ because the energy-like functional Λζ is averaged with regard to the translated realizations of the microstructure and so the transformed energy-like density at the micoscale satisfies Two methods are herein proposed to determine the governing field equation at the macroscale and the overall constitutive and inertial tensors. Approximation of the energy-like functional through truncation of its asymptotic expansion Let us consider the down-scaling relation related to the transformed micro-displacement û(x, ξ, s), i.e. ûh (x, ξ, s) = Ûh (x, s) + εN (1,0) Let us replace the down-scaling relation ( It is important to note that second-order gradients of the transformed macro-displacement are takent into account as well as the first-order gradient of the displacement (i.e., strain), by generalizing the standard continuum mechanics. The localization tensors, appearing in Eq. ( The localization tensors are periodic functions with regard to the fast coordinate ξ since the perturbation functions and their gradients are Q-periodic functions. Both B (2,0) hkpq1q2 and B (3,0) hkpq1q2q3 are symmetrized with respect to the indices q 1 , q 2 and q 1 , q 2 , q 3 , respectively (see where the Q-periodicity of the functions Ĝm hkij , N (1,0) ipq1q2 and the localization tensors B (1,0) hkpq1 is taken into account. The first variation δ ΛII m must vanish for all admissible δ Û M t and so the Euler-Lagrangian differential equation associated with the variational problem (84) in the Laplace domain is which is formulated in terms of the transformed macro-displacement and its gradients up to the fourth order. The components of the constitutive tensors in the Laplace domain related to the homogenized continuum are defined as Ĝtr1pq1 = Ĝm hkij B (1,0) iklpq . Such tensors are in accordance with the ones determined in Approximation of the energy-like functional through truncation of the downscaling relation An alternative approach is here presented to evaluate the overall constitutive and inertial tensors. To this purpose, the gradient referred to the down-scaling relation ( In addition, the transformed micro-displacement at the second order is formulated as where the perturbation functions are helpful to determine a consistent approximation of the gradient at the first order. Then the gradient approximation in Eq. ( In accordance with the procedure proposed earlier, the Euler-Lagrangian equation deriving from first variation of the transformed energy-like functional (103) in the Laplace domain is where the overall inertial tensors are ( By applying the inverse Laplace transform L -1 to Eq. ( where the superscript i = 1, 2 and the symbol * stands for the convolution and the time derivative can be moved from the constitutive tensor to the variable. The constitutive tensor components in the time domain are Jtpq1 -Jtq1p = L -1 (s( Ĵtpq1 -Ĵtq1p )), ( with i = {1, 2}, whereas in the time domain the inertial tensor components and the acceleration result to be In case of a locally homogeneous material, i.e. if the miscrostructure disappears, the perturbation functions iklpq are zero and the components of the localization tensors defined in ( (1,0) hkpq1 , which becomes B (1,0) hkpq1 = 1 2 δ hp δ kq1 + δ hq1 δ kp and so the equation of motion of a classical homogeneous continuum is retrieved. In this Subsection, the Laplace and the Fourier transforms are applied to Eq. ( where k is a bidimensional vector and so the field equation at the macroscale in the transformed space is rephrased as The vector k is written respect to n as k = kn (k = ||k|| and ||n|| = 1), therefore the Eq. ( In case of an orthotropic material the motion equation in the Laplace domain (104) along the direction e β (β = 1, 2) is rephased as with i = {1, 2} and α = 1, 2. The Fourier transform ( where Ǔ (k β , s) stands for the Fourier transform of the transformed macro-displacement Û (x, s). The Christoffel equation ( The dispersion function describes the longitudinal and the transverse oscillatory motion of the viscoelastic homogeneous continuum. The model proposed in Section 6 is herein applied to a domain made of two layered materials, which have thickness s 1 and s 2 , and subject to L-periodic body forces b(x). The domain displays orthotropic phases and the orthotropic axis is supposed to be parallel to the direction e 1 , see Fig. 1122 (e -t τr + 1), where 2222 . It can be noticed that the viscoelastic tensor can be deemed as a term of the Prony series The following dimensionless quantities are introduced where r ρ stands for the ratio between the densities, r E is the ratio between the Young's moduli related to phase 1 and phase 2, τ ς is the relaxation time and η is the ratio between the thicknesses of the layers s 1 and s 2 . The perturbation function N (2,2) 22 is analytically computed by solving the cell problem (39) supplied with the interface conditions (40) in Sec. 4, with respect to the phase 1 and the phase 2, and the structure of is reported in terms of the geometric and mechanical properties of the periodic domain in Eq. ( and its real part and its imaginary part are taken into account since s is a complex number. ) Ẽ2 ρ2 with respect to the imaginary part of s, Im(s), and ξ 2 . The imaginary part of is shown in Fig. are Q-periodic, they have vanishing mean values over the unit cell Q and they are smooth along the boundaries of Q, as expected. The Poisson ratios are assumed to be equal for both phases ν1 = ν2 = 0.2 and the dimensionless relaxation time is τ ς = 10. In addition, the dimensionless Young's modulus is r E = 10, the density is r ρ = 10 and the ratio between the thicknesses is η = 1. The transformed inertial tensor components Ĵ11 , Ĵ2 1111 and Î11 , referred to the wave propagation along the transversal direction e 1 , are taken into account. They are affected by the complex angular frequency s and their dimensionless components are written as and Î11 Ẽ2 ε 2 ρ2 . The Re(s)-axis is assumed to be negative and therefore the poles of the dimensionless components are visible in Figs. The second order transformed inertial tensor component ε 2 s2ρ2 is computed by means of Eq. ( and its imaginary part , due to the presence of the complex frequency s. is plotted with respect to the real part of s, Re(s), and the imaginary part of s, Im(s). The function assumes either positive or negative values and it is symmetric respect to zero. Eq. ( and its imaginary part Im( Î11) Ẽ2 and its imaginary part are plotted vs. the real and the imaginary parts of the complex frequency s. It is worth to noticing that the inertial tensor component Ĵ1 1111 stemming from the approach 1 is vanishing. 211211 and Ŝ2 211211 are plotted with respect to the magnitude of the complex angular frequency |s| and the non-dimensional Young's modulus r E . They are computed for the shear waves travelling along the layering direction e 1 . It can be observed that if 1 10 < r E < 1, the magnitudes of Ŝ1 A horizontal (or vertical) sample of length L = L 1 (= L 2 ) is taken into account since the body forces and the heterogeneous domain are periodic. The solution of the heterogeneous model is provided by a numerical procedure, accounting for the actual heterogeneous composition of the layered composite, and it is compared with the solution deriving from the homogenized model. The field equation ( where i = {1, 2} and the indices α and β are not summed. The shear problem takes place for α = β whereas the compressional problem for α = β. The transformed macro-displacement is determined from Eq. ( with i = 1, 2 and k = 1, 2, .. The dimensionless transformed macro-displacement is written as where Ẽ1 is the Young's modulus related to the phase 1. A FE method provides the macro-displacements Û M α , computed for each individual unit cell composing the sample of length L/ε = 11, with amplitute Υ α = 1 N/mm 3 , Ẽ1 = 10000 MPa, Ẽ2 = 1000 MPa, ν1 = ν2 = 0.2, τ ς = 5, η = 1 and r ρ = 10. The homogenized and the heterogeneous problems are supposed to be in a plane stress state. In Fig. The dispersion relation ( and k β ε. Eq. ( In , the values of the dimensionless parameters are set as τ ς = 2, η = 1 and r ρ = 10. The orange curve obtained for r E = 100 and the blue one for r E = 3 have a similar trend. By considering a lower dimensionless Young's modulus r E = 0.1, the green curve is recovered, which is strongly overwhelmed with respect to the previous ones. Fig. The paper proposed a variational-asymptotic homogenization model for viscoelastic materials having a periodic microstructure. Specifically, the field equations at the micro-scale have been derived and transposed into the Laplace domain to treat viscoelasticity, relying on the complex frequency and the micro-relaxation tensor. Next, the down-scaling relation and the up-scaling relation have been detailed. In particular, the down-scaling relation relates the transformed micro-displacement field to the transformed macro-displacement field and its gradients by means of the perturbation functions, which are the solutions of the cell problems defined over the unit cell Q. Perturbation functions are Q-periodic and have vanishing mean values over the unit cell. On the other hand, the up-scaling relation defines the transformed macro-displacement field as the mean value of the transformed micro-displacement field over the unit cell Q. By introducing the down-scaling relation into the field equations at the micro-scale of the viscoelastic material, the average field equations of infinite order have been determined. Their truncation at an arbitrary order could not ensure the ellipticity of the differential problem. To avoid such an issue, two methods, based on a variational-asymptotic approach, have been invoked. According to the first method, the down-scaling relation is replaced into the transformed energy-like functional, which is truncated at the second order. By imposing the first variation of the truncated energy-like functional equal to zero, the field equation at the macro-scale and the overall inertial and constitutive tensors have been determined. In the second method, the gradient related to the down-scaling relation has been approximated at the first order and the transformed micro-displacement has been truncated at second order. Both are introduced into the transformed energy-like functional and, from its first variation, the field equation at the macro-scale and the corresponding overall inertial and constitutive tensors have been derived. In both methods, the overall constitutive tensors depend on the localization functions, whereas the overall inertial tensors are expressed through the perturbation functions. In the limit case of an homogeneous material without heterogeneities, the perturbation functions consistently become identically equal to zero, the components of the localization tensors vanish and the equation of motion of the classical continuum has been retrieved. The proposed model has been applied to a bi-phase layered material with isotropic phases, subject to Lperiodic body forces. In such a case, some of the perturbation functions and some of the components of the overall inertial tensors have been computed and displayed to remark their dependence on the real part and on the imaginary part of the complex frequency. Moreover, the analytical solutions for the transformed macro-displacement field derived from the two homogenized models and subjected to harmonic volume forces have been compared with the reference numerical solution obtained from a finite element analysis of the heterogeneous model, for three different values of the complex frequency. A good agreement between the three models has been achieved, proving the validity of the proposed homogenized methods. Finally, a detailed parametric study of the dispersion function, derived from the generalized Christoffel equation, allowed determining the behaviour of the dispersion curves through the viscoelastic medium along two orthogonal axis, for both homogenized methods. An optimal matching between the dispersion curves derived from the two methods has been pointed out. The variational-asymptotic homogenization method herein described is helpful to detect the effective viscoelastic properties of many composite materials and it may be adopted for the manufacture and the design of more efficient and sophisticated devices, for a large spectra of applications. The recursive differential problems are established at order ε, ε 2 , ε 2 w-1 and ε 2 w, with w ∈ Z and w ≥ 2 and they are helpful to formulate the cell problems in section 4. Taking account of the solutions ( + Ĉm ijhq1 N (2,2) ,j with interface conditions û(3) The solvability condition of differential problem (130) in the class of Q-periodic functions and the divergence theorem yield to and consequentely the solution of the differential problem at order ε is Again, considering the solutions (32) and ( and consequentely the solution of the differential problem at order ε 2 is û(