Density functional theory (DFT) based calculations have been conducted to draw a broad picture of pressure induced band structure evolution in various phases of organic and inorganic halide perovskite materials. Under a wide range of pressure applied, distinct band structure behaviors including magnitude change of band gap, direct-indirect/indirect-direct band gap transitions and CBM/VBM shifts, have been observed between organic and inorganic perovskites among different phases. Through atomic and electronic structure calculations, band gap narrowing/widening has been rationalized through crystal orbitals coupling transformations; direct-indirect mutual transitions were explained based on structural symmetry evolution; different VBM/CBM shifts behaviors between organic and inorganic perovskites were analyzed focusing on orientation and polarity of molecules/atoms outside the octahedrals. These results provide a comprehensive guidance for further experimental investigations on pressure engineering of perovskite materials. Halide perovskites have emerged as promising materials for optoelectronic devices and solar cells. The power conversion efficiency of solar cells based on this family of materials has significantly increased in the past several years, from 3.8% Band gap of perovskite, the proxy for evaluating the ability to absorb light in solar spectrum, is able to be tunned in three ways: temperature induced phase transition (typically, Eg,cubic < Eg,tetragonal < Eg, orthorhombic Compared to others, pressure is a green and facile method that can successively alter band gap. In this work, for representativity, highly symmetric cubic CsPbBr3 and cubic CsSnBr3, less symmetric cubic MAPbBr3, cubic MASnBr3, orthorhombic CsPbBr3 and orthorhombic CsSnBr3 are selected and by applying the first-principles calculations, evolutions of band gap properties under a wide range of pressure are systematically investigated. Under a wide range of pressure applied, distinct band structure behaviors, from semiconductor developed to metilic by pressure is studied. The first-principles calculations have been performed using the plane-wave pseudopotential as implemented in the VASP code Therefore, MA orientation was set to be <111> direction in all of the calculation. Pressure was modeled with fixing volume while allowing all lattice constants and atomic positions to relax. , where E is the energy of the crystal and V is the cell volume. As has been documented, DFT-PBE shows an obvious underestimation on band gap calculation relative to experimental measurements. An advanced computationally expensive method, spin-orbital coupling GW quasiparticle correlation (soc-GW), has been proved to be accurate in band gap calculations It is because that it has been shown that compared with band structure calculated by DFT-PBE, soc-GW changes neither band edge orbital characters nor band gap position in k-space The six perovskite structures studied in this work with both calculated and reported lattice constants and band gap under ambient pressure are listed in Table Reported results Band gap value variation of all six crystals under pressure is computed and plotted in Figure (similar to CsSnBr3) are plotted in Figure In an electronic landscape, the phenomenon of band gap narrowing followed with band gap widening can be comprehensed as follow: for both organic perovskite and inorganic perovskite, only orbitals Pb (Sn) and Br contribute to CBM and VBM. VBM is antibonding organicization between Pb 6s and Br 4p orbitals. CBM state is governed by orbital interaction between Pb 6p and Br 4s orbitals. As can be identified in Figure In summary, with a wide range of pressure being applied, band structure evolution of organic and inorganic perovskites with different structural symmetry have been investigated and rationalized. Both the magnitude and direct-indirect nature of band gap can be tuned with the help of pressure, which implies a green and facile way for engineering optoelectronic materials. In addition, from a scientific view, pressure enhanced structural symmetry alternation is highly possible for triggering direct-indirect mutual transition of band gap and unidentical CBM/VBM behaviors in organic and inorganic perovskites may be subject to different molecular polarity outside octahedrals. It is believed that the whole picture formed in this work on perovskite under pressure effects provides useful implications for further design and property enhancement of perovskite materials.