Based on the first-principles electronic structure calculations and the symmetry analysis, we predict that the topological superconductivity may occur on the surface of the LnPd2Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) class of Heusler alloys. The calculated electronic band structure and topological invariant demonstrate that the LnPd2Sn family is topologically nontrivial. The further slab calculations show that the nontrivial topological surface states of LnPd2Sn exist within the bulk band gap and meanwhile they cross the Fermi level. Considering that the LnPd2Sn class of compounds were all found experimentally to be superconducting at low temperature, the surface topological superconductivity is likely to be generated via the proximity effect. Thus the LnPd2Sn class of compounds shall be a promising platform for exploring novel topological superconductivity and handling Majorana zero modes. Topological superconductors that hold Majorana zero modes (MZM) at open boundaries, vortex cores or other topological defects have attracted lots of interest in condensed matter physics in recent years. In contrast to the Majorana fermions which are propagating particles in high energy physics, MZM are bound states which give rise to degeneracy of the ground states and obey non-Abelian braiding statistics if they are adiabatically exchanged in space. Among all the possible mechanisms that host non-Abelian anyon excitations, topological superconductors are most promising to be realized experimentally and have great potential applications in faulttolerent topological quantum computations Compared with the heterostructure of TI/SC or the doped topological insulators, such a single-compound has to meet the following four strict requirements simultaneously: (i) The compound is a topological insulator defined on a curved Fermi surface; (ii) The compound is an s-wave superconductor; (iii) The nontrivial topological surface states of the compound are not overlapped with the bulk states; (iv) These nontrivial topological surface states cross the Fermi level. It turns out that such compounds are also very rare to date The Heusler alloys are very abundant in nature and own a variety of novel physical properties The electronic structures of LnPd 2 Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) were studied based on the first-principles electronic structure calculations. The projector augmented wave (PAW) method The nontrivial topology of the band structure is always accompanied by the nontrivial topological surface states, which is the most important phenomenon for the topological materials. We have thus studied the surface states of LuPd 2 Sn(001) surface. For this surface, the X z point in the bulk BZ is projected to the Γ point in the 2D BZ, while both the X x and X y points are projected to the M points [Fig. We have further studied the electronic states of LuPd 2 Sn. As shown in Fig. So far, we have demonstrated that LnPd 2 Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) are type-II Dirac semimetals and meanwhile can be also considered as topological insulators defined on a curved Fermi surface. Here we would like to emphasize that the nontrivial topological surface states of LnPd 2 Sn at the (001) surface cross the Fermi level and isolate from the bulk states. Moreover, LnPd 2 Sn are all superconducting at low temperatures As a new class of materials for topological superconductivity, LnPd 2 Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) have many advantages. Firstly, due to the cubic symmetry, the (100) and (010) surfaces of LnPd 2 Sn possess the same nontrivial topological surface states and possible topological superconductivity as the (001) surface, which can be observed by the ARPES experiment. Secondly, compared with the doped topological insulators or the TI/SC heterostructures, the LnPd 2 Sn class of single-compound materials avoid the disorder effect as well as the complex interface effect, but meanwhile very likely maintain the robustness of Majorana zero modes against the other bound states in vortex cores, namely thermal effects, by the enlarged minigaps due to the proximity-effect In summary, by using the symmetry analysis and the first-principles electronic structure calculations, we have systematically studied the topological properties of the LnPd 2 Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) class of Heusler alloys. Notably, the nontrivial topological surface states of LnPd 2 Sn are not overlapped with the bulk states and meanwhile they cross the Fermi level. In combination with the fact that the LnPd 2 Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) compounds are all superconducting at low temperatures, their bulk superconductivity may induce the superconductivity in the nontrivial topological surface states via the proximity effect. Furthermore, due to the cubic symmetry of these compounds, the equivalent (100), (010), and (001) surfaces may all hold topological superconductivity. Thus, the LnPd 2 Sn (Ln=Sc, Y, Lu) class of compounds may be a promising platform for studying the novel properties of the topological superconductor and handling Majorana zero modes in future experiments. b Ref. 20. c Ref. 21.