In this paper we analyze femtosecond laser processing of metals in liquids searching for optimal conditions for predictable ablation. Incident laser pulses are stretched or compressed, self-focused and scattered on bubbles and on surface waves in the liquid environment. Influence of these effects on the laser intensity distribution on the target surface is discussed and optimal processing parameters are suggested. Laser material processing in a liquid environment is potentially advantageous with respect to the commonly used laser ablation in air due to higher processing rates, more effective sample cooling and lower debris left on the surface Although liquid environment is obviously advantageous for some aspects of laser ablation, several unwelcome effects appear due to using water or any other liquid as the laser processing medium. Especially for ultrashort laser pulses, which intensity is high enough to trigger nonlinear optical processes in the liquid, the interaction between the latter and the laser light becomes very complex. For example, it was shown, that already for single pulses, the used liquid has a significant impact on the ablation efficiency Liquid environment is also used in the LIPSS (laser-induced periodic surface structures) formation experiments In this paper we analyze the interaction between ultrashort near-infrared laser pulses and liquids experimentally and suggest strategies to minimize these unwelcome effects in order to achieve predictable beam intensity distribution on the sample surface for laser processing. In usual experiments on laser processing in liquids, the incident laser beam is focused on the target surface immersed in water or any other liquid either from the top or from the side. The side geometry used in our experiments to study the self-focusing effect is shown in the figure In the experiments on bubble formation upon ablation of solid targets immersed in liquids (see section 3.2), the configuration is closer to the commonlyused laser ablation design: The laser beam impacts the target surface from the top, i.e., through the liquid-air interface. Tangerine femtosecond laser produced by Amplitude Systems with E p = 15 μJ pulses stretched to τ p = 1.5 ps and repetition rate 1 kHz was used in these experiments. The beam is focused on a polished copper sample, which is ablated; the position of the laser spot was moved by a Galvo-scanner SCANcube 7 designed by SCAN-LAB with the scanning speed of 180 μm/s. The position of the illumination source and the camera are the same as shown in Fig. A simplified picture of the focusing in liquids is that after the laser beam passes through the air-glass and glass-liquid interfaces it refracts according to the Snell's law and the focus position changes moving slightly further inside the liquid. However, for ultrashort laser pulses this effect is negligible comparing to self-focusing The onset of the filamentation immediately after the beam enters the medium makes high-power femtosecond lasers nearly useless for precise material processing in liquids. However, for a given pulse energy E p the filamentation onset point can be shifted deeper into the liquid by decreasing the parameter α, which can be achieved in three ways: (1) by pulse stretching; (2) by changing the focusing conditions; (3) by choosing a liquid with a smaller nonlinear refractive index. Stretching the pulses by deadjusting the compressor inside the femtosecond laser up to several picoseconds allows to shift the focus several millimeter deeper into the liquid, see figure It is interesting to compare the observed onset of filamentation (see data points in the figure Here R = 1 cm is the curvature radius of the wave front and w 0 ≈ 0.63 mm is the laser spot radius; both are estimated at the entrance plane (the interface between the air and the quevette) with the laser beam diameter D 0 = 1 cm and d = 7 cm. One can see that the experimental points have the same trend as the theoretical curve, but the filamentation in the experiments starts considerably earlier than predicted. We assume that this discrepancy can be assigned to the local distortion of the wave front curvature radius R, e.g., by scattering on inhomogeneities or by the onset of transverse instability of the beam, which can also be seen in the figure We notice that for usual femtosecond laser processing of metals, physical processes upon the laser-solid interaction do not change much as long as the pulse duration is below the electron-phonon coupling time, which is of the order of a few picoseconds Common theory of laser filamentation We tested this assumption by placing a thin cuvette of 2 mm width in the beam between the lens and the geometrical position of the focus in such a way that the focus is in the air behind the cuvette, see dashed line in figure One can see that from the figure Two following explanations of this effect can be suggested: 1. The self-trapping theory can be corrected by plasma defocusing 2. There is another theory Choosing a liquid with smaller linear and nonlinear refractive indexes, the critical power P c can be increased. For example the nonlinear refractive index for water is almost two times smaller than that for ethanol For pulses, with peak power above the filamentation threshold, the z f can be increased by decreasing the refractive index according to the equation (1). Moreover, if the assumption that the transversal beam instability increases the curvature of the wave front and R ∝ Λ m is correct, than R in the equation (1) should decrease stronger in the liquids with high refractive indexes, which also shifts the onset of filamentation closer to the liquid interface. Comparing the white light generation in water and in ethanol, see figure Influence of bubbles on the laser ablation in liquids was discussed in the literature These bubbles deteriorate the ablation in the following ways: (1) bubbles generated in the previous laser pulses scatter the following laser pulses; (2) the surface waves on the liquid induced by bubble collapse will additionally focus or defocus the incident laser pulses; (3) if the radius of the bubble is comparable with the thickness of the liquid layer, these bubbles can break the liquid surface. In this case the liquid can pin to the target surface, so that the following pulses ablate the target in air. This breakup of the liquid surface can only be prevented if the liquid thickness is much larger than the bubble radius. Statistics of the bubble sizes for water and for ethanol can be found in the figure On the one hand, larger bubbles in ethanol cover larger sample surface and increase the surface screening. On the other hand, these bubbles are removed far away from the focal point on the sample surface by the following laser pulses, see figure Summarizing, practically the self-focusing distance can be shifted deeper inside the liquid by stretching the pulses up to several picoseconds. As soon as the pulse duration is below the electron-phonon coupling time (which is several picoseconds for most of the metals), the physical processes and the ablation rate doesn't change much. We notice also, that the parameter α can be reduced by increasing P c ∝ λ 2 , which can be achieved by choosing a laser with longer wavelength. The optimal thickness of the liquid is defined by a compromise between two effects: on the one hand, it should be less than the self-focusing distance (to avoid self-focusing and supercontinuum generation); on the other hand, it should be larger than the radius of the bubbles generated upon ablation (to avoid surface waves and breakup of the liquid surface). For most of our experiments it corresponds to the liquid height of approximately 4 mm 