Time-and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (trARPES) is a powerful method to track the ultrafast dynamics of quasiparticles and electronic bands in energy and momentum space. We present a setup for trARPES with 22.3 eV extreme-ultraviolet (XUV) femtosecond pulses at 50-kHz repetition rate, which enables fast data acquisition and access to dynamics across momentum space with high sensitivity. The design and operation of the XUV beamline, pump-probe setup, and UHV endstation are described in detail. By characterizing the effect of space-charge broadening, we determine an ultimate source-limited energy resolution of 60 meV, with typically 80-100 meV obtained at 1-2×10 10 photons/s probe flux on the sample. The instrument capabilities are demonstrated via both equilibrium and time-resolved ARPES studies of transition-metal dichalcogenides. The 50-kHz repetition rate enables sensitive measurements of quasiparticles at low excitation fluences in semiconducting MoSe 2 , with an instrumental time resolution of 65 fs. Moreover, photo-induced phase transitions can be driven with the available pump fluence, as shown by charge density wave melting in 1T-TiSe 2 . The high repetition-rate setup thus provides a versatile platform for sensitive XUV trARPES, from quenching of electronic phases down to the perturbative limit. Angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) is a key method to determine the electronic structure of solids in energy and momentum space, yielding essential insights into e.g. superconducting, low-dimensional, and topological phases. Figure The amplified beam is first passed through a 4:5 lens telescope, reducing it to ≈4 mm width to minimize losses on subsequent optics. The pump beam is separated off with a 30% beam splitter, with the remaining 130 μJ used to generate the XUV harmonics. To enable efficient conversion despite limited pulse energies available at 50-kHz repetition rate, we utilize UV-driven HHG in the tight-focusing geometry. This cascaded scheme boosts the HHG efficiency by two orders-of-magnitude via atomic dipole scaling and improved phase-matching. For this, the near-IR pulses are loosely focused into a 0.5-mm thick β-barium borate (BBO) crystal to generate 390 nm pulses with ≈ 48 μJ pulse energy. After separating off the fundamental with dielectric mirrors, the UV is then focused tightly into Kr gas -resulting in the generation of a comb of XUV harmonics with up to 3 × 10 13 photons/s in the brightest, 7 th harmonic line. As detailed in Fig. The inset of Fig. Two 300 L/s turbopumps on the toroidal mirror and subsequent chamber provide for differential pumping with a pressure gradient of 3-4 orders-of-magnitude from the HHG chamber to the main ARPES chamber. The metal filters are mounted on windowed gate valves and provide an additional ≈4 orders-of-magnitude isolation each, which is essential to retain the 10 -11 Torr UHV conditions in the ARPES chamber while the light source is running. The pump beam is sent to the sample after reflection from a gold-coated mirror inside a small vacuum chamber. Its edge is positioned close to the XUV beam path, ensuring a near-collinear propagation of optical pump and XUV probe beams within ≈ 0.6 • . An f = 750 mm lens just outside the chamber is used to loosely focus the pump beam onto the sample to typically 1 mm spot diameter. Coarse beam steering occurs by rotating the mirror inside the beam-recombination chamber, while fine tuning of the pump-probe spatial overlap is achieved with a mirror directly before the chamber's entrance window. Before focusing, the pump intensity is variably adjusted with a half-wave plate and thin-film polarizer, while a second half-wave plate controls the polarization. Moreover, the pump pulses can be frequency-doubled in a BBO crystal for UV excitation. The pump-probe time delay ∆t is scanned up to 1.5 ns with a motorized delay stage. Temporal pump-probe overlap is initially found by sending the near-IR pump and residual UV driving beam (in absence of metal filters) out of the beamline after the beam-recombination chamber and monitoring the sum frequency signal generated in a 200-μm thick BBO crystal. Time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy is carried out with a state-of-the art ARPES endstation, the design of which is shown in Figs. Three smaller vacuum chambers are connected to the side of the main ARPES chamber, to provide for sample loading, storage and surface preparation (cf. Fig. As indicated in Fig. Importantly, the sample is grounded through an external connection with a pA-meter to track the photocurrent. This allows for normalization of the ARPES data to long-term drifts of the XUV flux, which is important when comparing datasets measured at different times and for gauging the level of space charge effects. The pulseto-pulse variations of the XUV pulse train can be monitored on the Si photodiode, as shown in Fig. Below the cryostat a metal assembly is mounted (Fig. In the following, we will discuss the energy resolution achievable with the XUV trARPES setup including the influence of detector resolution, high-harmonic width, and space charge. For this, the Fermi edge broadening was studied in photoemission from polycrystalline Au films evaporated in vacuum, with the surface normal facing the analyzer lens. To reduce thermal broadening, the samples were cooled with liquid nitrogen to T ≈82 K. Figure The resolution ∆E is determined by the combination of XUV source linewidth ∆E XUV , electron analyzer resolution ∆E DET , and space charge broadening ∆E SC , such that ∆E = ∆E Figure The space charge broadening ∆E SC and Fermi level shift ∆E F in Fig. Taking into account a velocity of 2.5 nm/fs for 17 eV electrons and nominally ≈ 30 fs XUV pulses, the emitted electron cloud has the shape of a flat disc whose thickness is four orders of magnitude smaller than its diameter. The average distance between the electrons is thus independent of the pulse duration and depends only on the XUV spot size, The measured 60 meV broadening is a remarkably small value for an HHG-based ARPES setup without a monochromator. Due to the 50-kHz repetition rate of the source, experiments with 80 meV resolution can be routinely performed with good photon flux at the sample (≈ 10 10 ph/s). For experiments where 200 meV broadening is acceptable, the flux can be further increased to ≈ 5 × 10 10 ph/s to speed up the measurement. Typical experimental data are discussed below. In the following, measurements with the 50-kHz XUV photoemission setup are presented which demonstrate its capability to map equilibrium band structures and track ultrafast dynamics with high fidelity up to the Brillouin zone edge. As model systems, we studied the layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) TiSe 2 and MoSe 2 which are representative, respectively, of chargedensity wave (CDW) and semiconducting compounds. The lamellar structure of TMDs with weak van der Waals interlayer bonding facilitates exfoliation and cleaving, which is not only essential to the fabrication of monoand few-layer TMD structures 56 but also yields straightforward access to high quality surfaces for photoemission. Figure Given its sensitivity, the setup can be used not only to measure individual energy-momentum slices but also to map the electronic structure along two dimensions in momentum space and up to the Brillouin zone edge. We performed such measurements on MoSe 2 , with Fig. Figure To gauge the capability for probing non-equilibrium quasiparticles at the Brillouin zone edge, we carried out trARPES measurements of MoSe 2 at low pump fluences. For this, near-IR pulses from the amplifier output were used to excite the sample near its A-exciton peak, which drives momentum-direct transitions coupling valence to conduction band states around the K point. Figure To demonstrate the capability for detecting photoinduced phase transitions, we measured the dynamics of 1T-TiSe 2 as a model CDW compound. It exhibits a phase transition from a metallic to a chargeordered phase below the transition temperature T CDW = 202 K. Figure With increasing time delay, strong changes of the electronic structure are evident in Fig. Figure In conclusion, we have presented the detailed design and operation of a setup for ultrafast time-resolved ARPES with XUV pulses at 50-kHz repetition rate, enabling sensitive measurements of ultrafast quasiparticle and band structure dynamics up to the Brillouin zone edge. The instrument combines an efficient 22.3 eV femtosecond source with a sophisticated XUV beamline and ARPES endstation along with optical pumping capabilities. The effect of space charge broadening on the energy resolution was characterized up to a flux of ≈ 5×10 10 ph/s on the sample. An ultimate resolution of 60 meV limited by the harmonic width was attained at ≈ 2 × 10 9 ph/s, while efficient ARPES with ≈80-100 meV resolution is enabled by a higher flux of ≈1-2×10 10 ph/s on the sample. To demonstrate the capabilities of the 50-kHz setup, both steady-state and time-resolved ARPES was carried out on the prototypical transition metal dichalcogenides TiSe 2 and MoSe 2 . Fast acquisition was shown to enable full band mapping in equilibrium. Transient ARPES signals were observed in MoSe 2 for absorbed pump fluences down to 8 μJ/cm 2 , validating the capability to detect signals as small as ≈ 10 -3 of the valence band intensity. The risetime of the photo-induced signals revealed a 65 fs instrumental time resolution. In turn, the setup provides sufficient pump fluences to drive photo-induced phase transitions, as confirmed by observing charge density wave melting in 1T-TiSe 2 . The 50-kHz XUV trARPES instrument thus enables studies of electronic dynamics up to the Brillouin zone edge with with high sensitivity and energy resolution, promising novel insights into both perturbative excitations and non-equilbrium phases in quantum materials.