Due to its high computational speed and accuracy compared to ab-initio quantum chemistry and forcefield modeling, the prediction of molecular properties using machine learning has received great attention in the fields of materials design and drug discovery. A main ingredient required for machine learning is a training dataset consisting of molecular features-for example fingerprint bits, chemical descriptors, etc. that adequately characterize the corresponding molecules. However, choosing features for any application is highly non-trivial. No "universal" method for feature selection exists. In this work, we propose a data fusion framework that uses Independent Vector Analysis to exploit underlying complementary information contained in different molecular featurization methods, bringing us a step closer to automated feature generation. Our approach takes an arbitrary number of individual feature vectors and automatically generates a single, compact (low dimensional) set of molecular features that can be used to enhance the prediction performance of regression models. At the same time our methodology retains the possibility of interpreting the generated features to discover relationships between molecular structures and properties. We demonstrate this on the QM7b dataset for the prediction of several properties such as atomization energy, polarizability, frontier orbital eigenvalues, ionization potential, electron affinity, and excitation energies. In addition, we show how our method helps improve the prediction of experimental binding affinities for a set of human BACE-1 inhibitors. To encourage more widespread use of IVA we have developed the PyIVA Python package, an open source code which is available for download on Github. Machine learning (ML) has recently been used for the prediction of molecular properties and studies have shown that it can provide accurate and computationally efficient solutions for this task Thus it is important to find answers to the question "how can disparate datasets, each associated with unique featurization methods, be integrated?" The question is motivated by the desire to create automated approaches where data generation techniques are integrable with ML models. Data fusion methods Blind source separation (BSS) techniques enable the joint analysis of datasets and extraction of summary factors with few assumptions placed on the data. This is generally achieved through the use of a generative model. One of the most widely used BSS techniques is independent component analysis (ICA) In this paper, we propose a novel data fusion framework that uses IVA to exploit underlying complementary information contained across multiple datasets. Namely, we show that information that has been generated by different molecular featurization methods can be fused to improve learning of the chemical relationships. Note here that achieving perfect regression error is not the the goal of this work. Instead, our goal is to determine how to generate feature vectors by combining datasets from multiple featurization methods to improve the learned response of the data-fused model over the performance of the individual feature vectors treated separately. Particularly noteworthy is that the proposed approach is parameter free, computationally attractive when compared with existing methods The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief background on the IVA method and the regression procedure. Section 3 provides the results of the regression procedure and associated discussions. The conclusions and future research directions are presented in Section 4. The BSS model is formulated as follows. Let X ∈ R d×N be the observation matrix where d denotes the dimension of the feature vector and N denotes the total number of molecules. The noiseless BSS generative model is given by where A ∈ R d×P is the mixing matrix, and S ∈ R P ×N is the matrix that contains the sources that need to be estimated and will be used as the new feature vector for the ML task. One of the most widely used methods for solving the BSS problem (1) is ICA and its basic assumption is that the source signals are statistically independent By rewriting (1) using random vector notation, we have where n is the sample index denoting the nth molecule, s(n) ∈ R P are the unknown sources that need to be estimated, and x(n) ∈ R d are the mixtures. Our interest is in dealing with overdetermined problems where d > P . This can be reduced to the case where d = P using a dimensionality reduction technique like principal component analysis (PCA). For the purpose of this work and for the rest of this paper we assume that the samples of each unknown source are independent and identically distributed and therefore, to simplify the notation we drop the sample index n. Although ICA has been shown to be very useful in many applications, it decomposes a single dataset at a time. For practical applications that involve more than one dataset one could perform ICA separately on each dataset and align the subsequent results. However, this approach could be considered suboptimal since performing ICA individually on each dataset will ignore any dependencies that exist among them. NOVEMBER 5, 2018 It is common for datasets that have been generated from different featurization methods to have some inherent dependence among them. IVA generalizes the ICA problem by allowing for full exploitation of this dependence leading to improved performance beyond what is achievable by applying ICA separately to each dataset. Additionally, IVA automatically aligns dependent sources across the datasets, thus bypassing the need for a second permutation correction algorithm. IVA is similar to ICA, except that now we have K datasets, x [k] , k = 1, ..., K where each dataset is a linear mixture of N statistically independent sources. Under the assumption that PCA preprocessing results in d = P , the noiseless IVA model is given by where P ] is the vector of latent sources for the kth dataset. In the IVA model, the components within each s [k] are assumed to be independent, while at the same time, dependence across corresponding components of s [k] is allowed. To mathematically formulate the dependence across components that IVA can take into account, we define the source component vector (SCV) by vertically concatenating the pth source from each of the K dataset as s p = [s [1] p , ..., s where s p is a K-dimensional random vector. The goal in IVA is to estimate K demixing matrices to yield source estimates y , such that each SCV is maximally independent of all other SCVs. It should be mentioned that dependence across datasets is not a necessary condition for IVA to work. In the case where this type of statistical property does not exist, IVA reduces to individual ICAs on each dataset. The IVA cost function can be defined in a similar manner as ICA. However, the optimization parameter is not just a single demixing matrix W as in the ICA case, but a set of demixing matrices W [1] , . . . , W [K] , which can be collected into a three dimensional array W ∈ R P ×P ×K . The IVA objective function is given by where H(y p ) denotes the differential entropy of the estimated pth SCV and the term H(x [1] , ..., x [K] ) is a constant parameter where it can be treated as a constant for optimization purposes. By definition, the term H(y p ) equals K k=1 H(y k p ) -I(y p ), where I(y p ) denotes the mutual information within the pth SCV. Therefore, it can be observed that minimization with respect to each demixing matrix W [k] of ( From (5) it can be observed that the probability density function or its approximation for each estimated SCV plays an important role on the estimation performance of the demixing matrices. One of the first IVA algorithms was formulated for solving the convolutive ICA problem in the frequency domain using multiple frequency bins The regression process consists of three stages. In the first stage, N molecules are randomly sub sampled in order to generate training and testing datasets, X k Train and X k Test respectively, for each k = 1, . . . , K. In the second stage, the mean from each dataset is removed and PCA is applied to each X k Train using an order P , implying that the signal subspace contains the components that have higher variance. Then for each k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, we generate Xk Train ∈ R P ×NTrain and by vertically concatenating each Xk Train we form a three dimensional array XTrain ∈ R P ×N ×K . IVA-L is performed on XTrain resulting in a set of demixing matrices, {W 1 , . . . , W K }, where In the third stage, we train the regression model using (Y Train ) . Here, the specific form of the regression function is unimportant. But to demonstrate a concrete example, we use kernel ridge regression (KRR) with a Gaussian kernel, which follows from previous work The scope of the present work is limited to the data from two sources: the QM7b dataset The QM7b dataset contains 7211 organic molecules made of up to 7 heavy atoms. These atoms include C, N, O, S, and Cl.The only other element present in the molecules is hydrogen. For each molecule several properties have been calculated at different levels of theory, including density functional theory and the many-body GW approach. The properties include the atomization energy, polarizability, HOMO and LUMO eigenvalues, and excitation energy. From the QM7b data, we generate three datasets using three different featurization methods: Coulomb matrices eigenspectra (CME) The BACE-1 inhibitor dataset is obtained from the moleculenet.ai website. The QM7b dataset study examines a) regression performance with respect to three fusing methods and the size of the datasets and b) interpretability properties of IVA. The relatively large size of the dataset and the number of chemical properties make QM7b desirable for this part of the study. The BACE-1 inhibitor dataset is used to demonstrate how different featurization methods complement each other and to contrast the effects of different combinations of featurizations on the performance of the regression model. The first three columns in Table The last three columns of Table We also explored the convergence behavior of the regression model as the number of molecules in the training dataset is increased. Plots of MAE as a function of training points N are called learning curves and typically follow a power law MAE= C * N α , where C is a constant and α is the power law exponent which we refer to as the rate of convergence. These results suggest that IVA supports small data problems well. However, when large data are available, a fusion approach becomes less beneficial due to the smaller convergence rate. The calculated rates are shown in Figure An important property of IVA is that it can also provide chemical or physical interpretations through the estimated mixing matrix. Once the demixing matrices, W [k] have been estimated using the approach in Section 2.2, we can estimate the mixing matrix by performing back-reconstruction. In order to describe this procedure remember that before IVA is performed, PCA is applied to each X k using a presumed order P . This provides the data reduction matrix F k where each F k is formed by the eigenvectors with the first P highest eigenvalues of the corresponding X k . An estimate of the mixing matrix A k is computed as Âk = (F k ) † (W k ) -1 , where (•) † denotes the pseudo-inverse of a matrix. Each row of the kth estimated demixing matrix therefore represents the weights for the estimated sources of the kth dataset. The values of the weights can reveal relationships between certain characteristics of a given set of molecules. The weights in the mixing matrix from the SOB features are shown in Figure We next evaluate the performance of the IVA approach as a function of the number of datasets that are fused. The specific targets of the calculation are the experimental binding affinities (IC50 values) for a set of 1,522 human β-secretase-1 (BACE-1) inhibitors. Figure In addition, Figure Different featurization methods provide different information about a molecule. Thus generating features by adopting a method that exploits the inherent dependence among those different featurization methods can benefit ML tasks. In this work, we have proposed a data fusion framework that uses joint BSS techniques to exploit the underlying complementary information contained in different featurization methods. The new framework is based on IVA, a method that effectively exploits the dependence among different featurization methods and provides feature vectors that effectively can train a regression model. The IVA method that has been used is parameter free and computationally efficient with lower complexity than existing state of the art (e.g., neural network methods). In addition, its simple [31] Currently only IVA with a multivariate Laplacian prior is implemented, but we hope our work will lead to more IVA methods being implemented in Python. The success of the proposed method raises several interesting questions that can be explored in future work. Depending on the nature of the data we can use or develop new algorithms that take different statistical properties into account such as sparsity 