Proton irradiation of both n-type and semi-insulating bulk samples of β-Ga2O3 leads to the formation of one paramagnetic defect with spin S=1/2, monoclinic point symmetry, a g-tensor with principal values of gb=2.0313, gc=2.0079, ga*= 2.0025 and quasi isotropic superhyperfine interaction of 13G with two equivalent Ga neigbours. Its high introduction rate indicates it to be a primary irradiation induced defect. At low temperature, photoexcitation transforms this defect into a different metastable S=1/2 center with principal g-values of gb=2.0064, gc=2.0464, ga*= 2.0024 and a reduced hyperfine interaction of 9G. This metastable defect is stable up to T=100K, when it switches back to the previous configuration. Density functional theory calculations of the Spin Hamiltonian parameters of various intrinsic defects are carried out using the Gauge Including Projector Augmented Wave method in order to determine the microscopic structure of these defects.Our results do not support the intuitive model of the isolated octahedral or tetrahedral gallium vacancy, VGa 2-, but favor the model of a gallium vacancy complex VGa-Gai-VGa. β-Ga2O3 is a wide bandgap (4.8eV) semiconductor, which has been studied in the past by electron spin resonance (EPR) due to its interesting shallow donor properties. These early measurements, which were performed on non-intentionally doped n-type single crystals, concerned dynamic nuclear polarization and bistability effects β-Ga2O3 has a monoclinic crystal structure with space group C2/m described by the three lattice vectors a,b,c and the angle β between a and c We investigated commercially purchased (Tamura) (010) oriented β-Ga2O3 bulk samples of 400μm thickness and 10x15mm 2 dimensions. The samples have been grown by the edge-defined film-fed (EFG) growth. Both non-intentionally doped n-type samples with a carrier concentration of 2x10 17 cm -3 and Fe doped semi-insulating samples have been studied. Before irradiation the n-type samples displayed at T=300K only the spin S=1/2 EPR spectra of a shallow donor and the semi-insulating one's the spin S=5/2 spectra of the Fe 3+ impurities on the tetrahedral and octahedral lattice sites. Both the initially n-type and the semi-insulating samples have been irradiated at room temperature with 12MV protons to a fluence of 10 16 cm -2 . SRIM simulations of the irradiation induced vacancy formation (Fig. The EPR measurements have been performed with a CW X-band spectrometer in the temperature range from T=4K to 300K. The samples were measured under thermal equilibrium conditions and under in-situ optical excitation with light sources in the visible or ultraviolet region. Absolute spin concentrations were determined with a calibrated spin standard sample (Al2O3:Cr) purchased from the National Bureau of Standards. The g-tensors and hyperfine interactions of the main intrinsic defects have been obtained by first principle calculations. For details of the calculation procedures see ref. After the proton irradiation (Fig. In figure In order to evaluate the spin concentration of the EPR1 center we have measured it together with the Al2O3: Cr spin standard sample and evaluated the spin concentration by a double integration of the EPR spectrum. We obtain a defect concentration of 10 18 cm -3 , which is of the same order of magnitude as expected from the SRIM modeling for a primary defect. We conclude thus that the EPR1 center is a primary defect and its annealing stage is above room temperature. After low temperature photoexcitation in the UV, the EPR1 spectrum is completely quenched and a new spin S=1/2 EPR spectrum (EPR2)(fig. In the Fe doped semi-insulating samples we observe after proton irradiation at thermal equilibrium the same EPR1 center in addition to the two spectra of Fe 3+ (octa) and Fe 3+ (tetra). Under UV photoexcitation at temperatures below T<100K the same transformation to the EPR2 center is observed. The EPR2 center is metastable at low temperature up to T=100K. The particular g-values of both centers EPR1 and EPR2 are characteristic for oxygen hole centers To interpret the photo-induced transformation from EPR1 to EPR 2 we have considered two models: (i) EPR2 is a metastable configuration of the EPR1 center, and the metastable state is separated from the ground state by a barrier of the order of 0.1eV; (ii) the optical excitation corresponds to a charge transfer from the defect EPR1 to a second different defect EPR2. As the spin Hamiltonian parameters are rather similar, the microscopic structure of the EPR1 and EPR2 centers must be equally very similar. To get further insight in the microscopic structure of the EPR1, EPR2 defects, we have calculated the Spin Hamiltonian parameters (g-tensor, SHF) for various defect models, including of course the simple models of a 2-charged gallium monovacancy at a tetrahedral or octahedral site (fig.9,10); they are the most obvious candidates for these two centers. Concerning the center EPR1: whereas the g-tensor anisotropy and the SHF interaction with two Ga neighbors is reproduced by both models VGa 2-(tetra), VGa 2-(octa), (table 