Recent observations of unusual ferroelectricity in thin films of HfO 2 and related materials have attracted broad interest to the materials and led to the emergence of a number of competing models for observed behaviors. Here we develop the electrochemical mechanism of observed ferroelectric-like behaviors, namely the collective phenomena of elastic and electric dipoles originated from oxygen vacancies formation in the vicinity of film surfaces, as well as from grain boundaries and other types of inhomogeneities inside the film. The ferroelectric phase is induced by the "electrochemical" coupling, that is the joint action of the omnipresent electrostriction and "chemical" pressure, which lead to the sign change of the positive coefficient α in the quadratic term αP 2 in the order-disorder type thermodynamic functional depending on polarization P. Negative coefficient α becomes the driving force of the transition to the long-range ordered ferroelectric phase with the spontaneous polarization P in the direction normal to the film surface. Using the above ideas, we estimated that the reversible ferroelectric polarization, as high as (0.05 -0.2) C/m 2 , can be induced by oxygen vacancies in HfO 2 films of thickness less than (20 -30) nm. Semi-quantitative agreement with available experimental data is demonstrated. Recent observations of ferroelectricity in HfO 2 thin films of and related solid solutions On the other hand the ferroelectricity in HfO 2 thin films has a crucial relevance for performance of ferroelectric memories A number of models for observed behaviors were proposed. Rabe et al Beyond ferroelectric and electroresistive studies, Venkatesan et al. Keeping in mind the important role of oxygen vacancies in the magnetization appearance in HfO 2 , TiO 2 and SnO 2 films, here we seek to explore whether oxygen vacancies, which are known to be elastic dipoles, can be responsible for ferroelectricity origin in HfO 2 films, allowing for the fact that the surface-induced piezoelectric effect can transform elastic dipoles into electric ones. The theoretical calculations have been performed in Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) phenomenological theory approach. LGD theory applicability is valid in the mean field approximation, known as zero approximation of the self-consistent field theory. Keeping in mind the existence of FE phase with long range order at T ≤ T C in thin films of binary oxides, it is obvious, that the mean field approximation is valid for a HfO 2 film at T ≤ 500 °C. To take into account the correlation effects and polarization inhomogeneity in the film one has to use the first approximation of selfconsistent field taking into account fluctuations of polarization. We will consider the orderdisorder ferroelectric phase transitions, since oxygen vacancies (acting as electric dipoles) are randomly distributed in the film. On the other hand the oxygen vacancies are considered as elastic dipoles coupled with the polarization via electrostriction and Vegard effects (see sections II.A and II.B). The dependences of polarization on the film thickness h, oxygen vacancies concentration N S and temperature T will be derived and analyzed in section II.C. The dynamics of polarization reversal and comparison of the calculated hysteresis loops of ferroelectric polarization and dielectric permittivity with experimental data Keeping in mind that the impurities can lead to the increase of oxygen vacancies concentration because of excess charges compensation, the proposed mechanism can be applied to any other undoped or doped binary oxides. Oxygen vacancies are typical defects in any oxide, and their concentration in a thin oxide film can be several orders of magnitude larger than in the bulk (see e.g. Ref. In particular, the equilibrium concentration of oxygen vacancies in the bulk of homogeneous HfO 2-δ material is small enough, much less than m 26 10 -3 , corresponding to the non stehiometry δ significantly smaller than 0.05. Notably that for high enough concentration of neutral/charged vacancies the possibility of the vacancy-ordered state appearance should be considered The vacancies accumulation is strongly coupled with elastic field concentration In particular, the vacancies can further induce the FE phase in oxides via Vegard effect contains the Vegard energy originated from the elastic dipoles induced by oxygen vacancies that couples with the elastic stress via electrostriction mechanism. Thus the main polarization-dependent contribution is , where P is the polarization induced by electric dipoles and is the electrostriction strain tensor. For detailed calculations of FE phase it is important to discuss the transformation of the oxygen vacancies under transition from nonpolar phase to polar one. These allows us to consider the electric polarization P as a long-range order parameter, and include the conventional form of Vegard effect contribution in the thermodynamic potential The phonon modes in HfO 2 were found to be independent on temperature in wide temperature range (20 -800) K where , and are the polarization, electrostriction and elastic, and surface contributions, respectively. The polarization , where is the concentration-independent value of elementary dipole moment. The constant value should be treated as an effective statistically averaged concentration of electric dipoles related (but not in a straightforward way) with the strongly inhomogeneous concentration of "frozen-in" or/and "dynamically" disordered oxygen vacancies sites. J is effective interaction constant (the mean field acting on the each dipole from its neighbours) that can be zero or negative ( ) for the considered case of induced (improper) ferroelectricity. J 0 ≤ J nl is effective nonlinearity coefficient, the gradient coefficient δ>0 is determined by the correlation between dipole moments and by the contribution of the spatial gradients induced by the surface as well as by the inhomogeneities inherent to the film. For the interaction beyond nearest neighbour dipoles, the quantity δ can be several orders larger than the squared distance between dipoles. up to the sixth order The LGD-expansion coefficients α, β and γ, renormalized by the pseudo-spin exchange, have the following form: ( ) i E is the electric field that is the sum of applied field and depolarization field originated from e.g. incomplete screening of polarization bound charge by imperfect electrodes (such as half-metallic TiN electrodes used in experiments The electrostrictive and elastic contributions to the free energy (1) are: In Equation ( The last term in Eq.( that is determined by electroneutral oxygen vacancies with concentration variation Since the main polarization-dependent part of the stress is defined by the electrostriction contribution, Eq.(4a) yields: Since the first term in Eq.( designates the small higher order terms. Notably the defects, vacancies and ions, or their complexes, tend to accumulate in the vicinity of any inhomogeneities, surfaces, interfaces and grain boundaries [see e.g. Fig. since the energy of vacancies formation at surfaces and around the inhomogeneities can be much smaller than in the homogeneous regions determine the polarization components. Variation of the surface energy along with the gradient terms in G PE and G Pσ determines the boundary conditions, 0 , 0 , and contributions of the surface-induced piezoelectric effect proportional to . The surface-induced piezoelectric effect exists in ultra-thin films It should be mentioned here that the surface energy did not include mismatch strains between the film and electrodes. The mismatch effect can lead to the appearance of the builtin electric field proportional to the product of surface-induced piezoelectric coefficient and mismatch strain (see Putting elastic fields (4) into the Gibbs potential Eq.( The renormalization (6a) steams from the electrostriction coupling with Vegard expansion and depolarization field. The parameter is an effective depolarization factor originated from the depolarization field directed normal to the film surface; and its value is determined by the electrode properties. Tensor is the electrostriction strain tensor, is the elastic stiffness. The intrinsic size effect determines the correlation between the dipole moments and polarization extrapolation length λ. Parameter ( ) The statistical averaging of expression (6a) gives a nonzero value for the diagonal component: Where is the film volume. The summation in Eq.( The value ( ) is high enough, exchange constant is small or zero, and the screening length Λ of the electrodes are very small nm (or zero in the limit of ideal electrodes). The transition temperature to FE phase can be defined from Eq.( Taking into account that , Eq.(10a) can be rewritten in the form: For the particular case h h d << , zero pseudo-spin exchange constant and ideally conducting electrodes with and so it is inversely proportional to the film thickness, ( ) , . Note that Eqs.( The value of the out-of-plane spontaneous polarization can be estimated as: For the case of the second order phase transition, parameters 0 = Λ and J=0 one gets from Eq.(11a) that The expression (11b) shows that the spontaneous polarization decreases as 26 2 -N S =5×10 25 3 -N S =10 25 4 -N S =5×10 24 5 -N S =10 24 Nishimura et al Polakowski and Muller shifted along E-axis (see loops in fig. For a semi-quantitative comparison of the hysteresis loop observed in experiments Hereinafter is the Khalatnikov coefficient. The "intrinsic" thermodynamic coercive field corresponding to the "bulk" analog of Eq.( , where the values of are given by Eqs.( Dielectric susceptibility can be calculated as a polarization derivative on electric field, , and obeys the time-dependent equation ) h = 10 nm T= 300 K 1 1 -N S =10 26 2 -N S =5×10 25 3 -N S =10 25 4 -N S =5×10 24 5 -N S =10 24 Applied field E/E C (rel. units) (a) decreases in more than 2 times with h increase from 10 nm to 30 nm and the remanent polarization changes from 0.25 C/m 2 for h=10 nm to 0.11 C/m 2 for h=30 nm [compare loops 1 -5 in Fig. -0.75 -0.5 -0. Notably, that polarization and dielectric susceptibility hysteresis loops shape, remanent polarization, coercive field, height and resolution of the dielectric susceptibility maxima, as well as the changes of these characteristic taking place with the film thickness increase are in qualitative agreement with experimental loops measured by Nishimura et al It follows from Eq.( where the polarization amplitude given by expression Hysteresis loops measured by Polakowski and Muller The thickness dependences of the maximal polarization in Eq.( For a single-domain scenario of the ferroelectric polarization reversal in thin films For the poly-domain switching the expression for the relative dielectric permittivity ( ) h T r , ε corresponding to the zero-field point E=0 at the C-E hysteresis loop has the form ( ) Appeared that the expressions (16a) for the coercive field Results presented in the subsection III. B allow us to conclude, that the developed theory describes semi-quantitatively the experimental results We proposed a model for the emergence of ferroelectric behavior in thin films of HfO 2 and related materials due to the electrochemical effects. Here, vacancies segregate at the interfaces described by surface concentration and decay length. The Vegard effect leads to the coupling between elastic dipoles and stresses, and further enables collective interactions that can give rise to ferroelectricity. Accumulation of electric dipoles in the vicinity of any inhomogeneities in the film, including both surfaces, lead to the appearance of long-range ordered ferroelectric polarization, while the elastic dipoles are the source of elastic longrange order in the structural phases, if there is a percolation. All the calculations were performed for the mixture of randomly distributed electric and elastic dipoles originated from oxygen vacancies being inherent defects in any oxide film (see section II.A). The proposed model opens the way for calculation of binary oxides multiferroic properties and their complex phase diagrams. In accordance with experimental results Next let us discuss the possibility of electret-like polarization in thin films of binary oxides, because it may be useful for some applications. The Vegard-type elastic stress can originate from electrostriction (electrochemical coupling) or from surface-induced piezoelectricity (piezo-chemical coupling). As a result, ferroelectricity or electret-like state, respectively, can appear. In the case of surface-induced piezo-chemical coupling the electretlike irreversible polarization could exist. However the reversible ferroelectric polarization exists in HfO 2 thin films in accordance with experiment, speaking in favor of the electrochemical coupling domination. We have shown that oxygen vacancies segregation at interfaces, surfaces and grain boundaries can play the decisive role in the origin of ferroelectric properties of ultra-thin HfO 2 films and its polarization hysteresis. Specifically, the "electrochemical" coupling, that is the joint action of the omnipresent electrostriction and Vegard stresses originated from oxygen vacancies as elastic dipoles in the vicinity of surface. All the calculations were performed in the assumption that oxygen vacancies, as elastic dipoles, can be partially transformed into electric dipoles due to the e.g. surfaceinduced piezoelectric effect. The electric dipoles are the sources of polarization coupled with elastic dipoles via the Vegard-type chemical stresses and electrostriction. Such electrochemical coupling leads to the sign change of the positive coefficient α in the term αP 2 in the order-disorder type thermodynamic functional. Negative coefficient α becomes the driving force of the transition to the long-range ordered phase with the spontaneous polarization P in the direction normal to the film surface. The proposed model allows describing the temperature and thickness dependences of spontaneous polarization, dielectric permittivity and hysteresis loops as a function of oxygen vacancies concentration. In particular, we estimated that the reversible ferroelectric polarization, as high as (0.05 -0.2) C/m 2 , can be induced by oxygen vacancies in HfO 2 films of thickness less than Allowing for the generality of proposed approach it can be applied to any binary oxide, both undoped and doped ones. Furthermore, the proposed approach will be applicable to other cases of dipolar impurities, e.g. due to the trapped charges at the interfaces, etc. 