We study the effect of periodic, spatially uniform temperature variation on mechanical properties and structural relaxation of amorphous alloys using molecular dynamics simulations. The disordered material is modeled via a non-additive binary mixture, which is annealed from the liquid to the glassy state with various cooling rates and then either aged at constant temperature or subjected to thermal treatment. We found that in comparison to aged samples, thermal cycling with respect to a reference temperature of approximately half the glass transition temperature leads to more relaxed states with lower levels of potential energy. The largest energy decrease was observed for rapidly quenched glasses cycled with the thermal amplitude slightly smaller than the reference temperature. Following the thermal treatment, the mechanical properties were probed via uniaxial tensile strain at the reference temperature and constant pressure. The numerical results indicate an inverse correlation between the levels of potential energy and values of the elastic modulus and yield stress as a function of the thermal amplitude. Due to their disordered structure, metallic glasses are known to possess high strength and elastic limit as well as high resistance to corrosion, which makes them potentially suitable for various structural and biomedical applications The influence of thermal expansion heterogeneity on rejuvenation of metallic glasses was predicted to be important at sufficiently large length scales as compared to scales accessible to atomistic simulations During the last decade, the dynamic response of amorphous materials to periodic shear deformation was extensively studied using atomistic simulations and experimental measurements In this paper, molecular dynamics simulations are performed to examine the effect of thermal cycling on potential energy states and mechanical properties of binary glasses. The thermal oscillations with relatively small period are imposed with respect to a reference temperature of about half the glass transition temperature. It will be shown that regardless of preparation history, the thermal treatment of one hundred cycles always leads to relaxed states in a wide range of thermal amplitudes. Subsequent tensile loading of aged and thermally cycled glasses reveals that the yield stress and the elastic modulus acquire maxima at the thermal amplitude that corresponds to the most relaxed states. The paper is structured as follows. The description of molecular dynamics simulations and thermomechanical processing protocols are provided in the next section. The analysis of the potential energy series, particle displacements, and mechanical properties are presented in section III. Brief conclusions are given in the last section. The metallic glass is represented by the Kob and Andersen (KA) binary mixture model, which was originally developed to study the amorphous metal alloy Ni 80 P 20 with the following parametrization ε AA = 1.0, ε AB = 1.5, ε BB = 0.5, σ AB = 0.8, σ BB = 0.88, and m A = m B B atoms, with the total number of atoms of 60000. In what follows, all physical quantities are reported in terms of the reduced LJ units of length, mass, energy, and time: σ = σ AA , m = m A , ε = ε AA , and τ = σ m/ε, respectively. The MD simulations were carried out using the LAMMPS parallel code with the time step t M D = 0.005 τ The simulations were performed in several stages. The system was first thoroughly equilibrated at the temperature of 0.7 ε/k B , which is above the glass transition of the KA model, T g ≈ 0.435 ε/k B As discussed in Sec. II, the binary mixture was initially equilibrated at the temperature of 0.7 ε/k B and zero pressure, and then annealed below the glass transition point to the temperature of 0.2 ε/k B with different cooling rates. The starting temperature of 0.7 ε/k B was chosen to be not far above the glass transition temperature T g ≈ 0.435 ε/k B in order to reduce the annealing time during slow cooling and to avoid significant deformation of the simulation domain from a cubic box, since all system dimensions were allowed to vary independently at constant pressure. After the glasses were annealed with the cooling rates It can be observed from Fig. nearly constant during the time interval 10 6 τ and relatively low, i.e., U -8.24 ε Following the annealing procedure with different cooling rates, 10 We also remind that the simulations were carried out at constant pressure (P = 0), thus allowing significant variation in volume during each cycle. Here, we emphasize the key differences in the choice of parameters from the previous MD study on thermally cycled binary glasses We next present the variation of the potential energy at the beginning and the end of thermal treatment in Figs. 4, 5, 6, and 7 for glasses initially annealed with the cooling rates 10 -2 ε/k B τ , 10 -3 ε/k B τ , 10 -4 ε/k B τ , and 10 -5 ε/k B τ , respectively. For reference, the black curves in each figure denote the data at the constant temperature T LJ = 0.2 ε/k B (the same data as in Fig. This discrepancy becomes especially evident in the enlarged view of the data during the last cycle shown in the insets to Figs. We next summarize the data for the potential energy after 100 thermal cycles in Fig. The analysis of atomic displacements during consecutive cycles revealed that the relaxation process proceeds via irreversible rearrangements of groups of atoms. We first examine the distribution of displacements during selected cycles for thermal cycling with the amplitude ∆T LJ = 0.10 ε/k B . The results are presented in Fig. However, after 100 thermal cycles, the distribution function becomes more narrow, indicating progressively more reversible particle dynamics. By contrast, as evident from Fig. We next discuss the distribution of atomic displacements at the beginning of the thermal treatment, i.e., during the second cycle, but consider instead the effect of the thermal amplitude. The probability distributions are plotted in Fig. A similar trend can be observed for the slowly cooled glass in Fig. After the thermal treatment, the samples were strained along the x direction with constant strain rate εxx = 10 -5 τ -1 at T LJ = 0.2 ε/k B and zero pressure. The resulting stressstrain response for different cooling rates is presented in Fig. The stress-strain curves reported in Fig. In summary, the response of amorphous alloys during the sequence of quenching, periodic thermal treatment, and tensile loading was investigated using molecular dynamics simulations. The amorphous material was represented via a binary mixture of atoms with highly non-additive cross interactions that prevents crystallization upon cooling. The thermal quenching was performed at constant pressure by cooling the binary mixture from the liquid state into the glassy region with different rates. The reference temperature was chosen to be approximately half the glass transition temperature, and the simulations were performed at zero pressure. After the thermal quench to different energy states, the glasses were either set to age at the reference temperature or subjected to one hundred thermal cycles of spatially uniform heating and cooling at constant pressure. It was found that thermal cycling leads to relaxed states with the potential energy levels lower than those in the aged samples for a given value of the cooling rate. The potential energy after one hundred cycles acquired a minimum at the thermal amplitude just below the reference temperature. The results of uniaxial tensile loading demonstrated than the stress overshoot and the elastic modulus only weakly depend on the cooling rate except for the lowest rate. Overall, the inverse correlation between the potential energy levels and mechanical properties for different thermal amplitudes agrees well with the results of the previous study FIG. 5: (Color online) The variation of the potential energy for the glass annealed with the cooling rate of 10 -3 ε/k B τ and subjected to thermal cycling with the amplitudes ∆T LJ = 0 (black), 0.05 ε/k B (red), 0.1 ε/k B (green), 0.15 ε/k B (blue), and 0.19 ε/k B (orange). The inset shows U at t ≈ 100 T . FIG. 6: (Color online) The potential energy per atom, U/ε, for glasses cycled with the amplitudes ∆T LJ = 0 (black), 0.05 ε/k B (red), 0.1 ε/k B (green), 0.15 ε/k B (blue), and 0.19 ε/k B (orange). The cooling rate is 10 -4 ε/k B τ . The same data are resolved near t ≈ 100 T and shown in the inset. FIG. 7: (Color online) The time dependence of the potential energy during thermal treatment with amplitudes ∆T LJ = 0 (black), 0.05 ε/k B (red), 0.1 ε/k B (green), 0.15 ε/k B (blue), and 0.19 ε/k B (orange). The sample was initially cooled with the rate 10 -5 ε/k B τ . The inset shows the same data in the vicinity of t ≈ 100 T .