We experimentally demonstrate the formation of salt aggregations with unexpectedly high concentration inside multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) soaked only in dilute salt solutions and even in solutions containing only traces of salts. This finding suggests the blocking of fluid across CNTs by the salt aggregations when CNTs are soaked in a dilute salt solution with the concentration of seawater or even lower, which may open new avenues for the development of novel CNT-based desalination techniques. The high salt accumulation of CNTs also provides a new CNT-based strategy for the collection/extraction of noble metal salts in solutions containing traces of noble metal salts. Theoretical analyses reveal that this high salt accumulation inside CNTs can be mainly attributed to the strong hydrated cation-π interactions of hydrated cations and π electrons in the aromatic rings of CNTs. It has been found that pure water can flow exceptionally fast through carbon nanotubes (CNTs) Here, we show experimentally that when soaking multi-walled CNTs (inner diameter of 5-15 nm) in dilute salt solutions, and even in solutions containing traces of salts, salt aggregations with unexpectedly high concentration are formed inside the CNTs. These findings indicate the high salt accumulation of CNTs, which is unexpected because from the conventional view, the concentrations of the salt solution inside and outside the CNTs are regarded as being comparable Elemental mappings of C, O, Na, and Cl in the aggregation are shown in Fig. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was applied to quantify the Na, Cl, and O contents in the aggregations. The Na/O ratios of the aggregations ranged from 0.09 to 1.53 (Fig. The salt accumulation inside the MWCNTs was observed for external solutions with a wide range of concentrations (0.017-0.25 M), which encompasses the concentrations of both normal saline solution and seawater. The EDS results indicate that the Na/O ratios in the aggregations ranged from 0.09 to 5 with average values of 0.5-1.8 (Fig. We also examined the Na/O ratios of the aggregations in MWCNTs with different inner diameters (2, 3 and 5 nm) after soaking in 0.034 M NaCl solution. As shown in Fig. EDS analysis of the salt aggregation inside a MWCNT at the same position was performed six times and revealed Na/O ratios of 0.46 ± 0.1, with only a slight fluctuation (± 0.1) (further details are provided in PS6 of SM The behaviors of the salt aggregations under high intensity electron beam irradiation further indicate that the aggregations include the aqueous solution. Conventionally, electron-beam irradiation is considered an effective method for heating aqueous phases in MWCNTs Why do the salt aggregations inside the CNTs have such a high concentration of salt only soaked in a dilute or even very dilute solution? This can be attributed to the hydrated cation-π interactions between the hydrated cations and the π electrons in the aromatic rings of the CNTs. We note that cation-π interactions have been shown to play crucial roles in the structures, dynamic processes, and functions of biological and materials systems We think that those effects should be carefully considered in the future in order to get a better quantitative explanation of the experimental observation. Similar accumulation behavior with high concentration was observed for other chlorine salt solutions (KCl, AuCl3, and PtCl4) (see PS11-13 in SM). Remarkably, even in the solution containing a trace of noble metal salt, the salt accumulation behavior in the CNTs was clearly observed. Fig. We have shown the high salt accumulation of CNTs in dilute and very dilute solutions and even in solutions containing only trace amounts of noble metal salts. We note that in lowconcentration salt solutions, salt adsorption has only been reported outside CNT membranes 