Removing a single-carbon vacancy introduces (quasi-)localized states for both  and  electrons in graphene. Interactions between the localized  dangling bond and quasilocalized  electrons of a single-carbon vacancy in graphene are predicted to control its magnetism. However, experimentally confirming this prediction through manipulating the interactions between the  and  electrons remains an outstanding challenge. Here we report the manipulation of magnetism of individual single-carbon vacancy in graphene by using a scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) tip. Our spin-polarized STM measurements, complemented by density functional theory calculations, indicate that interactions between the localized  and quasilocalized  electrons could split the  electrons into two states with opposite spins even when they are well above the Fermi level. Via the STM tip, we successfully manipulate both the magnitude and direction of magnetic moment of the  electrons with respect to that of the  electrons. Three different magnetic states of the single-carbon vacancy, exhibiting magnetic moments of about 1.6 B, 0.5 B, and 0 B respectively, are realized in our experiment. The miniaturization of fabricating data storage devices with functional building blocks down to the atomic size is a major driving force of nanotechnology, and an outstanding challenge is to control the magnetism at the atomic scale Therefore, such a system provides a unique platform to control the magnetism at the atomic scale. In this work, we experimentally studied how the interactions between the  dangling bond and the quasilocalized  electrons control the magnetism of the singlecarbon vacancy in graphene. Via a scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) tip, we could tune the interactions between the localized  electrons and the quasilocalized  electron around the single-carbon vacancies and realized three different magnetic states of the single-carbon vacancies in graphene. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed the nature of these magnetic states and quantum phase transitions between the three coupling regimes. In our experiment, the single-carbon vacancies were generated in the synthesis process of graphene in a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method (see Methods and Fig. Figure Both the V2 and V states are half occupied because of the electrostatic Coulomb repulsion U, i.e., when an electron occupies the state, a second electron with opposite spin must overcome an extra energy U. The strength of U, which depends on the spatial localization of the states, determines the spin splitting. The spatial extension of the V state is much larger than that of the V2 state, therefore, the V2 state has a much larger spin splitting than that of the V state (Fig. The spin-polarized STM measurements, which can directly reflect the spatial distribution of spin-up and spin-down electrons As schematically shown in Fig. The interaction between the localized  and  states, which depends on the local configuration of graphene, determines the magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene Similar features are obtained in tens of the as-grown single-carbon vacancies in graphene by using different STM tips in our experiment. By decreasing the distance between the STM tip and the graphene to about 0.5 nm and scanning the studied monovacancy for about 30 minutes (see Fig To further understand our experimental result, we carried out DFT calculations on the magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene as a function of its out-ofplane lattice deformation. Our calculations reveal three different magnetic states of the single-carbon vacancy, which are classified as ferromagnetic (FM), quenched antiferromagnetic (QAFM), and nonmagnetic (NM) phases, as shown in Fig. Figures For the FM phase, the monovacancy exhibits about 1.6 B local magnetic moments with 1 B from the localized  electron and about 0.6 B from the quasilocalized  electron. The low energy DOS shows two peaks with the spin-up (spin-down) state in the left (right), which is predominantly located on the A (B) sublattice. This agrees quite well with our experimental results obtained in the as-grown monovacancy (Figure Our STM measurements, complemented by first-principles calculations, show that the single-carbon vacancy in graphene can exhibit three different magnetic phases depending on the coupling between the localized σ orbital and electrons. This allows for a consistent interpretation of all current data about the magnetism of the singlecarbon vacancy. Previously, distinct tunnelling spectra of single-carbon vacancies in graphene are reported In our experiment, we found that about 1/4 of the as-grown monovacancy can be tuned from the FM state to the QAFM state and about 80% of them can be further tuned from the QAFM state to the NM state. However, it is not possible to directly change the defects from FM state into the NM state. Our experiment also demonstrated that both the QAFM and the NM states are quite stable: they cannot relax to the FM state during our experiment and they also cannot be tuned to the FM state by using the STM tip. The substrate may help to stabilize the out-of-plane deformation around the singlecarbon vacancy when it was introduced by the STM tip. In summary, we demonstrated that the magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy is determined by interactions between the localized σ orbital and electrons. Via an STM tip, we successfully tuned the interactions between the localized σ orbital and electrons and realized three different magnetic states of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene. Our theoretical calculations further revealed the nature of the three magnetic states. The realizing tunable magnetism at atomic scale may have potential application in graphene-based spintronics. 