Nodal-line metals and semimetals, as interesting topological states of matter, have been mostly studied in nonmagnetic materials. Here, based on first-principles calculations and symmetry analysis, we predict that fully spin-polarized Weyl loops can be realized in the half metal state for the three-dimensional material Li3(FeO3)2. We show that this material has a ferromagnetic ground state, and it is a half metal with only a single spin channel present near the Fermi level. The spinup bands form two separate Weyl loops close to the Fermi level, which arise from band inversions and are protected by the glide mirror symmetry. One loop is of type-I, whereas the other loop is of hybrid type. Corresponding to these two loops in the bulk, on the (100) surface, there exist two fully spin-polarized drumheads of surface states within the surface projections of the loops. The effects of the electron correlation and the spin-orbit coupling, as well as the possible hourglass Weyl chains in the nonmagnetic state have been discussed. The realization of fully spin-polarized Weyl-loop fermions in the bulk and drumhead fermions on the surface for a half metal may generate promising applications in spintronics. Topological metals and semimetals have been attracting extensive attention in recent research For a three-dimensional (3D) crystalline material, besides the 0D nodal points, the band crossing may also form 1D nodal lines The previous study on nodal lines are mostly in nonmagnetic materials, whereas the examples with magnetic nodal lines are rather limited, such as MnF 3 In this work, by first-principles calculations, we reveal the 3D material Li 3 (FeO 3 ) 2 as a Weyl-loop half metal with fully spin-polarized topological features. We show that the material has a ferromagnetic ground state, and it is a half metal: only spin-up bands are present around the Fermi level, whereas the spin-down bands have an energy gap ∼ 1.35 eV. Remarkably, the crossing between the spin-up bands form two separate doubly degenerate Weyl loops close to the Fermi level. One Weyl loop centered around the R point in the k x = π plane is a type-I loop, while the other centered around the Γ point in the k x = 0 plane is a hybrid loop. Such pattern of magnetic Weyl loops has not been reported before. Corresponding to these two loops, there exist fully spin-polarized topological drumhead surface states in two separate regions on the (100) surface. The robustness of the band features against spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and correlation effects are discussed. In addition, we show that by substituting Fe with Te, the material can become a metal with Weyl chains dictated by nonsymmorphic symmetries. Our work reveals a new magnetic topological state with fully spin-polarized Weyl loops and drumhead surface states, which may have promising applications in spintronics. The first-principles calculations are based on the density-functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The crystal lattice structure for Li 3 (FeO 3 ) 2 is shown in Fig. The Wyckoff coordinates are given in Table Before studying electronic structure, it is important to determine the magnetic ground state for the material. The 3d element Fe in Li 3 (FeO 3 ) 2 carries a nonzero magnetic moment. These moments spontaneously order in the ground state. To facilitate the study of magnetic configurations, here we focus on the framework consisting of only the Fe atoms. Figures Our first-principles calculations show that the lowest energy occurs for the FM [111] configuration, i.e., when the magnetic moments are aligned in the [111] direc-tion (pointing from one Fe atom to another equivalent Fe atom). The comparison of the total energies for these states are shown in Table After identifying the magnetic ground state, we then concentrate on the electronic band structure. Figure One observes that the material is a half metal, with one channel (spin up) being metallic and another channel (spin down) being insulating. From the projected density of states (PDOS) as displayed in Fig. Before proceeding, it is important to note that without SOC, the spin and the orbital degrees of freedom are independent and can be regarded as different subspaces. The spin orientation does not affect the orbital part of the wave function. With a chosen spin polarization axis, the two spin channels are decoupled, and hence in terms of symmetry properties, the bands for each spin species can be effectively regarded as for a spinless system. Thus, regarding the states of one spin, such as the spin-up bands here, all the crystalline symmetries are preserved For example, consider the degeneracy along the U -X where we have used T 2 = 1 for the spinless case. Consequently, (T Mx ) 2 = -1 for any k point on U -Z. This anti-unitary operator thus generates a Kramers-like double degeneracy on on U -Z. Similar analysis applies for the other four paths Z-T , T -Y , Y -S, and S-X, showing that all the bands are doubly degenerate along these paths. Now, let's turn to investigate the band crossing points, as labeled by 1 to 4 in Fig. In the following, we show that the two loops are protected by the Mx symmetry and are caused by band inversion. Let's consider L 2 in the k x = π plane. Here, we take a path which connects R to some arbitrary point P on U -X. According to the previous discussion, each state at P has a double degeneracy, and the degenerate partners have opposite Mx eigenvalues ±g x , which are labeled as (+, -) in Fig. As we have mentioned, a nodal loop can be classified as type-I, type-II, or hybrid type The most important feature of the Weyl loops here is that they are fully spin polarized. The nodal loops occur in the ferromagnetic state. More importantly, they belong to a single spin channel, due to the crossing between spin-up bands. Therefore, the low-energy nodalloop fermions are fully spin polarized, which will be useful for spintronics applications. It is known that nodal loops in the bulk typically generates drumhead type surface states within the projected area of the loop in the surface BZ To address these issues, we have calculated the surface spectrum for the (100) surface, on which the two Weyl loops can have finite projected areas. Figure We have demonstrated that Li 3 (FeO 3 ) 2 is a half metal with two fully spin polarized Weyl loops near the Fermi level. In the calculation, we have set the Hubbard U = 4 eV, a typical value for Fe 3d orbitals. How robust is our result against the variation in U ? To check this, we have tested U values up to 6 eV. We find that the key band features such as the half metal character and the Weyl loops are robust against the variation in U . For instance, Figure We have mentioned that the SOC effect is negligible for Li 3 (FeO 3 ) 2 , which consists of only the light elements. To verify this, we show the DFT band structure with SOC in Fig. In conclusion, we reveal that Li 3 (FeO 3 ) 2 is a Weyl-loop half metal. We show that the material has a ferromagnetic ground state. It is metallic in one spin channel, yet insulating in the other spin channel. The low-energy bands form doubly degenerate lines along several high symmetry paths, and form two separate Weyl loops close to the Fermi level. The Weyl loops are in a single spin channel, hence they are fully spin polarized. We show that they lead to two drumheads of surface states on the (100) surface, which are also fully spin polarized. Such ferromagnetic Weyl loops and drumhead surface states may have great potential in spintronics applications. where E = -1 comes from the anti-commutativity between two spin rotations, i.e., {σ x , σ y } = 0. For paths Γ-Z and S-R, k y -k x = 0, ET1 10 = -1, so Mx and My anti-commute. Similar to the arguments after Eq. ( where we have used T 2 = -1. Thus, ( Mx T ) 2 = -1 on U -Z, indicating a Kramers-like double degeneracy. Similar analysis applies for the other three paths Z-T , X-S, and S-Y . Next, we turn to the hourglass dispersion. Consider the X-U line, which is invariant under My . Hence, the Bloch states there can be chosen as eigenstates of My with eigenvalues g y = ±e -ikz/2 . (A3) The glide eigenvalues are ±i at U and ±1 at X. Because U and X are both time reversal invariant momenta, a Kramers pair has eigenvalues (+i, -i) at U , yet it has (+1, +1) or (-1, -1) at X. This means that the pairs must switch partners when going from X to U , and the switching leads to the hourglass type dispersion, as shown in Fig. Since the whole k y = 0 plane is invariant under My , the above argument holds for any in-plane path connecting X and U . In addition, as mentioned above, bands along Γ-Z and Z-U are all doubly degenerated, so any path connecting X to an arbitrary point P located on Γ-Z or Z-U should also has the hourglass dispersion. The neck point of the hourglass then traces out a Weyl loop surrounding X, as shown in Fig. Total energy Etot per unit cell (in eV, relative to that of the FM [111] ground state), as well as magnetic moment M (in μB) per Fe atom, obtained for several magnetic configurations as illustrated in Fig. 2. The values are calculated by GGA+SOC method with U = 4.0 eV. Paramagnetic state has Etot = 6.660 eV and M = 0. FM [111] FM x FM y FM z NAFM SAFM ZAFM 2π 0 (a) ky k z T