In this paper, blood and tissues samples from one normal and one thalassaemic lab-mice were studied using 57 Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy at 78K for the first time. In contrast to human patients, these laboratory mice did not receive any medical treatment, thus the iron components present in the samples are not altered. The measured Mössbauer spectra of the blood, liver and spleen samples of the thalassaemic mouse were found to be different in the shape and iron content as compared to the corresponding spectra of the normal mouse. This result demonstrates the further exploitation of the thalassaemic mouse model to study thalassaemia in more details by means of Mössbauer spectroscopy. Beta-thalassaemia (Mediterranean anaemia) is a form of inherited autosomal recessive blood disorder characterized by reduced or absent β-globin chain synthesis. This anomaly prevents the production of normal levels of adult haemoglobin and also leads to the generation of unstable α-globin chain aggregates, which in turn limit the effective production of Red Blood Cells (RBCs) leading to mild or severe anaemia. Haemoglobin is a highly specialized metalloprotein which is responsible to transport oxygen from the lungs to the tissues. It is found in abundance in the RBCs. Each RBC contains about 300 million molecules of haemoglobin and it is formed by two pairs of identical subunits, the globin chains Even with the most modern treatments, patients face life threatening complications, bone deformities, poor growth, hepatosplenomegaly and cardiovascular illness which reduce their life expectancy. Chelating agents, such as desferrioxamine and deferiprone, are used to remove the excess iron from the body. Accurate, preferably non-invasive, measurements of iron complexes and iron stores in the body are crucial for the evaluation and management of chelation therapy. 57 Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy A complete Mössbauer spectroscopy equipment provided by The velocity was calibrated using the four inner peaks of a 99.85% in purity α-Fe foil (Goodfellow Cambridge Limited) with a thickness of 8 μm, at room temperature (RT, 298K). The isomer shift (δ) value of the α-Fe foil relative to the 57 Co/Rh source at RT was found to be -0.110 mm/s, consistent with the source manufactured specifications (chemical shift of the source relative to α-Fe is 0.108 mm/s) and the corresponding literature Custom-made holders for these bio-samples were fabricated though the thermo-forming method using copper molds and polypropylene (PP) sheets of 0.75 mm in thickness. Cylindrical holders of different size in diameter (10 mm and 7 mm) have been used for the blood, liver and spleen samples, to better fit the corresponding sample volume within the holder. The volumes of the holders were 1, 0.5 and 0.5 ml for the blood, liver and spleen, respectively. A 2-mm-thick collimator made of copper was attached to each holder. The absence of atoms such as oxygen, nitrogen and chlorine in the polypropylene molecule (C 3 H 6 ) n compared to other thermoplastics results in high transparency at low-energy of X-and γ-rays. Table Blood samples and wet tissues of liver and spleen samples from one normal (C57BL/6J) and one thalassaemic mice were investigated in this study. The thalassaemic mouse model Figures Figures Mössbauer spectra of blood, liver and spleen samples from a normal and a thalassaemic lab-mouse were acquired at 78K. The MS spectrum of the normal blood sample was well-fitted with two sub-doublets of the same area, representing the α-and β-subunits of oxy-haemoglobin. The decreased absorption effect observed in the spectrum of the thalassaemic sample is due to the reduced haemoglobin in the sample which indicates an extreme anaemia, as it is expected from a thalassaemia major patient without any treatment Table 