In this work, we report the results of ab initio calculations of thermochemical properties of several compounds in the Fe-Nd, B-Nd and B-Fe-Nd systems. We have performed DFT+U calculations to compute the enthalpy of formation of the compounds NdB 6 , NdB 4 , Nd 2 B 5 , Nd 2 Fe 17 and Nd 5 Fe 2 B 6 . It was found that the values obtained with an effective Hubbard U correction have better agreement with the experimental data. We have also computed the vibrational contribution to the heat capacity (C p ) of the compounds as a function of temperature was computed using the quasiharmonic approximation. For most of the compounds these properties have not been experimentally determined until now. Electronic contribution to the heat capacity has been calculated as well from electronic structure calculations. A part of the results in this work has been applied to the reoptimization of the binary Nd-B phase diagram. Ab initio calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) have gained much popularity mainly because of the reliable results that can be obtained through these computations. Amongst many properties that can be computed by this method, the thermochemical properties such as enthalpy of formation, enthalpy of mixing, heat capacity, etc. are of particular interest. They serve as important input in the Gibbs energy modelling in the context of the CALPHAD (acronym for CALculation of PHAse Diagrams) approach, especially when the corresponding experimental data are not available. This greatly improves the quality of the generated Gibbs energy functions. With the advancements in high-performance computing, it is now possible to carry out these calculations for systems with a large number of atoms. In this work, we report the results of ab initio calculations of thermochemical properties of the compounds NdB 6 , NdB 4 , Nd 2 B 5 , Nd 2 Fe 17 and Nd 5 Fe 2 B 6 . The rare-earth and transition metal compounds with localized 3d/4 f orbitals constitute what is known as the "strongly correlated" systems. Compounds of this class contain localized electronic orbitals that introduce significant on-site Coulomb repulsion. A shortcoming of DFT is the failure of the conventional exchange-correlation functionals (LDA/GGA) in describing the quantum mechanical nature of the strongly correlated systems. For instance, the DFT calculations using LDA/GGA functionals identify Mott insulators as metals. On the other hand, Mott insulators are well described by the Hubbard or Anderson models based on the tight-binding approach. To the best of our knowledge, ab initio calculations to compute the finite temperature thermodynamic properties of these compounds have not been reported so far. Li et al. The thermodynamic modelling of Nd-Fe-B system by van Ende et al. The ordered compounds studied in this work are parts of the stable phases classically defined within the Nd-Fe-B ternary system. Existence of several ordered compounds are conclu-sively established within previous works, such as the 4 compounds in the binary Nd-B system (NdB 6 , NdB 4 , Nd 2 B 5 , and NdB 66 ), while others, such as Nd 5 Fe 17 , were more recently discovered. Several among these phases possess incommensurate crystal structures, which unfortunately necessitates a large unit cell and is impractical for first-principles calculation with the available computational resources. For example, the aforementioned Nd 5 Fe 17 phase possess an incommensurate crystal structure which requires a quite large primitive cell ( 150 atoms per unit cell). Computational cost limitations play a key part in determining the scope of this study, with such compounds and others with similarly complicated or long-range ordered crystal structures (NdB 66 , Nd 1.1 Fe 4 B 4 ) excluded from our investigation. This is a key factor in this study as we are aiming for not only the formation enthalpy, but also the finite temperature heat capacity by phonon calculations, which already requires significant computational cost to begin with. Metastable compounds such as the ternary Nd 2 Fe 23 B 3 The calculations were done on k-points selected using the Monkhorst-Pack scheme. Calculations were performed using GGA+U with selfconsistently determined values for U eff . These were obtained for every inequivalent atomic sites occupied by the Nd and Fe. The Nd or Fe atoms occupying each inequivalent site were perturbed separately and U eff obtained for the corresponding Hubbard site. The magnitude of U eff is related to the atom-like nature of electrons occupying the Hubbard sites. The enthalpy of formation for different compounds were calculated with respect to (α-Nd), (α-Fe) and (α-B) using the following equation. In order to compute the vibrational contribution to C p of the compounds, phonon frequencies were computed using the quasiharmonic approximation (QHA), as implemented in the phonopy There are two formulations of heat capacity (C p ) as implemented in phonopy. where ν denotes band index and q denotes the q-points. The Gibbs energy is used in order to derive properties at constant pressure. It may be calculated as the minimum of cell volume V, as seen in Equation which requires the computation of the Helmholtz free energy at multiple volumes. This is applied over a volume range of -5% to +5% of the equilibrium volume, with 1% increments (a total of 11 points). C p can then be calculated from the second derivative of Gibss free energy with respect to temperature: The result of Equation ( A different derivation may produce a smoother result in the Cptemperature polyfit.dat file within phonopy, as described in Equation ( where S denotes the entropy, again taken at minimum with respect to volume V at temperature T . While the vibrational contribution to heat capacity is the most significant factor, inclusion of the electronic contribution to heat capacity is also important for metallic compounds, especially for the high T region. The electronic contribution for metallic compounds is often approximated from the electron gas model: where D(E F ) is the density of states at the Fermi level. The density of states are calculated by so-called non-SCF (nonself consistent field) calculations making use of the ground state charge density obtained from the previous single point or SCF calculations, with a much finer k-points grid. The kpoint grids used in these calculations are set at 3 times the density of the SCF calculations. It is common practice among CALPHAD researchers to develop thermodynamic functions valid up to T = 3000 K for a complete database. Heat capacity obtained by phonon calculation reflects only the contribution of lattice (vibrational) effects, which accounts for most of the heat capacity of materials. Electronic contribution, meanwhile, is significant for metallic compounds in the high T region. Other contributions, such as magnetic contributions, are considered relatively insignificant for the compounds in this study. This is due to the mathematical nature of each contribution, especially pertaining to the temperature ranges considered for CALPHAD purposes. The thermodynamic functions for unaries within CALPHAD are valid only above room temperature, which necessarily limits the investigation to values of T ≥ 300 K. Lattice contributions scale with temperature by a cubic T 3 term, which explains how it accounts for most of the heat capacity up to the Debye temperature, and the electronic contributions scale linearly with T for metallic systems which makes it significant for higher temperatures, while magnetic contributions, responsible for a T 3/2 term, play a key part in the low temperature behavior of C p . In first principles calculations, materials are treated at their respective ground states. This includes the magnetic ordering at 0 K, which is reflected in the energetics: the ground state magnetic ordering will produce the lowest total energy in the calculation. This also means that any changes in the magnetic ordering at finite temperatures (as is the norm for magnetic materials) is not reflected in the phonon calculation results. The most striking example of this phenomenon is the small peaks in C p that is often seen in materials which undergo changes in magnetic ordering at some finite temperature (Neel, Curie, etc.), which is an often seen phenomenon in magnetic materials. These peaks, which signify different magnetic phases, are most commonly observed in low T regions where contributions from magnetic moments are most significant. They are completely missed, therefore, in heat capacity predictions which take into account only lattice vibration and electronic contributions. The choice of magnetic ordering at ground state in phonon calculation serves to more accurately determine the optimal geometry, which is essential in the harmonic approximation. Within the harmonic approximation Both bulk Nd and NdB 6 were modeled with antiferromagnetic ordering at 0 K, along the [111] plane for cubic NdB 6 . NdB 4 , meanwhile, possesses complex multipolar ordering which undergoes several transitions at low T and an antiferromagnetic quadrupolar (AFQ) ground state. Magnetic contribution scales with T 3/2 and provides significant contribution at low T and at magnetic phase transitions. Apart from these cases, a phonon contribution far out- weighs both magnetic and electronic contributions up to the Debye temperature, and is expected to dominate for temperature regime above 300 K. Therefore, the results of phonon calculation in this work is predicted to be most relevant for the temperature range in question. For visualization of crystal structures, the XCRYSDEN code A. Elements The ground state crystal structure of Nd (α-Nd) has the P6 3 /mmc symmetry. Nd atoms are arranged in a double hexagonal close-packed (dhcp) arrangement with two distinct symmetry-irreducible positions with an antiferromagnetic ordering. In order to account for the antiferromagnetic ordering in the structure, the initial magnetic moments for the two positions are specified as antiparallel to one another. The crystal structure is shown in Figure The ground state crystal structure of Fe (α-Fe) belongs to the Im 3m space group. The crystal structure is shown in Figure From geometry optimization using GGA, we obtained an There is uncertainty regarding the ground state structure of boron, whether it is α-B or β-B. Both α-B and β-B belong to the space group R 3m. While α-B was found to be energetically more stable in an earlier work by Shang et al. NdB 6 possesses with a cubic crystal structure with Pm 3m symmetry (Figure As a part of our initial calculations, the enthalpy of formation of NdB 6 was calculated using several methods. One of the calculations was done with GGA-PBE exchange-correlation functional without any correction. The other calculations involve Hubbard U corrections and with inclusion of the J term (GGA+U +J). The last calculation was performed with the effective U parameter (GGA+U eff ). This approach was done in order to establish the reliability of the effective Hubbard correction, in comparison to the non-corrected GGA and stricter Hubbard corrections. GGA+U + J calculation was performed with uniform correction parameters. The U value was taken as 4.8 eV and the J value as 0.6 eV, both taken from a cRPA (constrained random phase approximation) calculation by Nilsson et al.. The smaller primitive cell of NdB 6 allows for a larger, 2 × 2 × 2 supercell to be used in the phonon calculations. We would expect the best result for this supercell relative to the other compounds within the scope of this work run with less multiplied supercells. In addition to the required C p data, we have also obtained the NdB 6 phonon dispersion (Figure The calculated C p of NdB 6 in this work is in good agreement with the measurements of Reiffers et al., with the exception in the very low temperature region T < 20 K (see Figure We see in Figure In order to pursue more accurate pictures for the heat capacity at higher temperatures, we also performed calculations with much finer parameters from the previously obtained ground state charge density in order to pursue a fine picture of the density of states (DOS), specifically at the Fermi level. From Equation (6), the electronic contribution is added to the lattice contribution in Equation ( The crystal structure of NdB 4 has the P4/mbm symmetry. It can regarded as a structure obtained from a distorted cubic NdB 6 lattice. The structure has B atom pairs between distorted cubic sublattices of Nd atoms and B octahedras. Details concerning its crystal structure are given in Table Phonon calculations were performed using a 1 × 1 × 2 su- Novikov et al. Crystal structure of Nd 2 B 5 has a C2/c symmetry with a monoclinic unit cell, similar to Gd 2 B 5 . Initial lattice parameters and atomic positions in our calculations are taken from the work of Roger et al. The calculated C p for Nd 2 B 5 is shown in Figure Unlike Nd 5 Fe 2 B 6 , only treating Nd as Hubbard sites (GGA+U eff , Nd) results in an overestimated value of enthalpy of formation. This implies that the bonds formed within the structure is sufficiently delocalized such that the introduction of Hubbard U correction does not properly reflect the electronic state. This suggests that the 4 f electrons in Nd participate in the bonding within Nd 2 Fe 17 sufficiently to lose its atomic-like nature. The source of this behavior is attributed to the abundance of coordinated Fe atoms around the Nd atoms. In this compound, Nd atoms are present in small amounts and always surrounded by 6 Fe atoms, a unique situation compared to other compounds investigated in this study. This might have led to a hybridization between the 4 f electron in Nd with one of the 3d levels in a coordinated Fe atom. Such a mechanism would explain how the loss of atomic-like nature of the 4 f orbitals and why the Hubbard U correction does not reflect an accurate electronic structure. This is a likely explanation, especially given that Nd 4 f electrons do slightly contribute to bonding in metallic Nd With this in mind, we calculated the enthalpy of formation of Nd 2 Fe 17 by regular GGA, and adding the effective Hubbard U correction only for ground state Nd. Instead of the uniform treatment of Hubbard correction for all phases involved in the calculation (GGA+U eff ) or uniformly using regular GGA (GGA) results, only ground state Nd is calculated with the Hubbard correction. This resulted in a slightly negative enthalpy of formation, as shown in Table The calculated enthalpy of formation is listed in Table Ab initio calculation results obtained were used as data for the optimization of the binary Nd-B phase diagram. As a good starting point, we utilized the results of the assessment of Chen et al. Several issues emerged during our re-optimization, most notably due to the Schottky-like anomaly present in the C p data for binary Nd-B compounds, seen in Figures Nevertheless, the existence of this anomaly in the C p data proved to inhibit the fitting of a C p function for NdB 6 and NdB 4 for the full range of 0 < T < 3000 K. This, and the fact that Gibbs energy functions for unary compounds (Nd and B) are unavailable for T < 300 K, led us to optimize the phase diagram only in the T > 300 K range, as seen in Figure The summary of this work can be found in the following Table The choice of Hubbard sites is another point we can draw from our work. We observe the inclusion of Fe as Hubbard sites results in large deviations from the actual measured value in experiments performed (Tables Phonon calculations were performed in order to obtain lattice vibrations contribution to C p . It was seen that the results achieve good agreement with low temperature measurements except for magnetic ordering in T < 20 K. The C p data obtained for Nd-B binary compounds show a Schottkylike anomaly in the low T region of around T = 50 K, which is due to the sudden spike in the phonon density of states in the same temperature energy region. This anomaly interfered with the fitting of calculated C p data to the usual functions regularly used in other materials, and as such the integration of this data required a different approach laid out in Section IV. Our calculated results for enthalpies of formation and C p data from NdB 6 and the enthalpy of formation for NdB 4 are subsequently used for a re-optimization of Gibbs energy models from a previous work by Chen et al.. underestimated lattice constant of around 2.8253 Å. This result is comparable to recent ab initio calculations of ground state Fe, which shows a slight underestimation. from the work of McCarthy and Tompson