Halide perovskite semiconductors and solar cells respond to electric fields in a way that varies across time and length scales. We discuss the microscopic processes that give rise to the macroscopic polarization of these materials, ranging from the optical and vibrational response to the transport of ions and electrons. The strong frequency dependence of the dielectric permittivity can be understood by separating the static dielectric constant into its constituents, including the orientional polarization due to rotating dipoles, which connects theory with experimental observations. The controversial issue of ferroelectricity is addressed, where we highlight recent progress in materials and domain characterization, but emphasize the challenge associated with isolating spontaneous lattice polarization from other processes such as charged defect formation and transport. We conclude that CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 exhibits many features characteristic of a ferroelastic electret, where a spontaneous lattice strain is coupled to long-lived metastable polarization states. Semiconducting halide perovskite materials have attracted intense research interest over the past five years due to the potential for inexpensive solution processing, and desirable optoelectronic properties for photovoltaic (PV) and light emission applications. Thin-film devices based upon the hybrid organicinorganic perovskite (CH 3 NH 3 ) + PbI 3 -(MAPbI 3 ) were the first to utilize a halide perovskite as the PV absorber layer. A dielectric is defined as a medium which cannot completely screen a static, external, macroscopic electric field from its interior due to physical constraints on charge rearrangement. where, (ω) is the dielectric permittivity, v (sometimes written 0 ), is the vacuum permittivity or, equally, the permittivity of free space, and we have introduced the auxillary vector field, D = v E 0 . The dielectric permittivity is a complex function ( (ω) = 1 (ω)+i 2 (ω)) of the frequency of the applied field (ω) that quantifies the linear dielectric response of a material to a constant applied field. In complex materials, such as the halide perovskites, multiple dielectric mechanisms (physical processes which manifest dielectric polarization) are present. where r = / v is the relative permittivity and we have dropped the frequency dependency for ease of notation. The optical dielectric response, optic , is due to the (femtosecond) response of the electron density. The ionic contribution, ion , is due to the (picosecond) response of lattice vibrations (phonon modes), and is proportional to the polarity of the chemical bonds and the softness of the vibrations. The dielectric polarization of a solid is often defined as the sum of the induced dipole of a polarizable unit, divided by the volume of the unit. The quantity of interest in the modern theory is the change in polarization, ∆P . It is common in the literature to assume the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in order to separate the change in polarization associated with the response of electrons and ions: 61 ∆P = ∆P el + ∆P ion . ( Using DFT one can represent the electronic charge density in terms of the eigenfunctions of the Kohn-Sham (KS) Hamiltonian (the KS orbitals), φ λ n . The change in electronic polarization, ∆P el , that is induced upon an adiabatic transformation (φ k,m ) may then be written: 62 where the partial derivative, P el (λ), is taken with respect to λ -a variable of the KS Hamiltonian which parameterizes the transformation, and which is chosen to take the value of zero and one at the initial and final state, respectively. If λ is taken to be time, for example, then the change in polarization may be cogitated as the integrated polarization current. The derivative is often stated in terms of first-order density functional perturbation theory (DFPT): 63 where m e and q e are the electron mass and bare charge, respectively, ε n is the Kohn-Sham eigenvalue and f n is the occupation number of state n, V KS (λ) is the derivative of the Kohn-Sham potential with respect to λ, and c.c. refers to charge conjugate terms. The modern theory assumes that the transition from state n → m occurs at null electric field, such that periodic boundary conditions are valid for any value of λ. In this regime the KS orbitals take the Bloch form, φ k+G,n , and Eq. 5 may be recast into a form in which conduction states do not explicitly appear: The right hand side of Eq. 6 is closely related to the Berry phase of band n. Here a and b are lattice directions and δ ab is the Kronecker-delta. We have introduced the tensorial form of the dielectric response, ab optic , as although in the preceding discussion we contemplated the high-symmetry (isotropic) case, a second-rank tensor is required for a general description of all crystal symmetries. By removing the restriction of static nuclei, one can calculate the dielectric response including lattice vibrations. To do so, it is necessary to introduce the Borneffective charge (BEC) tensor: 69 which is defined as the linear proportionality coefficient relating the polarization induced in lattice direction, a, to a displacement, r, of the sublattice, s, in the lattice direction, b. The asterisk is introduced to state explicitly that it is an effective charge. When combined with knowledge of the phonon eigenmodes, ω 0 (which one can calculate with DFT using finite-displacements or within perturbation theory), the ionic (vibrational) contribution to the dielectric response may be calculated, using: 70,71 Here, the summation is over N phonon modes, and U i are the eigendisplacements of the interatomic force constant matrix, C = δ 2 E/(δr sa δr s b ), (asterisk denotes the complex conjugate). Finally, the change in polarization manifest by lattice displacements can be calculated by: 61 which takes a similar form to Eq. 4. The modern theory is commonly used in first-principles calculations of crystalline solids. The dielectric polarization of a crystal cannot be reliably measured as an intrinsic, bulk property. Generally, one experimentally measures the change in polarization between two polarization states from hysteresis loops that are generated upon switching the direction of polarization currents. The majority of studies investigating polarization phenomena today examine its derivatives, however, such as pyro-/piezo-electric coefficients. In the context of solar cells, measurements of the relative permittivity are frequently reported due to its significance in calculations of physical constants (e.g. absorption coefficient) that impact device performance. The complete device-relevant dielectric response occurs over a large frequency range (Hz-PHz), requiring multiple complementary experimental techniques (on inevitably different devices) to fully characterize. Ellipsometry is an optical technique employed to investigate the electronic dielectric response of crystalline samples. where ρ is the reflectivity. The complex refractive index, (ñ = n + ik), can subsequently be calculated using the general Fresnel equations, seen below, and mapped to the real and imaginary components of the optical dielectric response via the Maxwell relation, optic = n 2 . 80,81 here θ 0 and θ 1 correspond to the angle of incidence and reflectance, respectively, and ñ0 and ñ1 are the refractive index of the incident media and of the dielectric, respectively. In conventional semiconductors and insulators, good agreement is found between calculation and measurement of optical dielectric constants. For example, DFPT calculations of optic = 13.6 for Si correspond well with a measurement of optic = 13.8 from ellipsometry. The angular frequency of vibrational modes are thus identified as troughs in transmittance spectra. The oscillation of neighbouring atoms of opposite charge may be in-phase (acoustic phonons) or opposite-in-phase (optical phonons). Therefore, optical phonon modes induce polarization fields which contribute toward the macroscopic dielectric response, whereas acoustic phonon modes do not. If the optical dielectric response is known, the angular frequency of optical phonon modes may be related to the ionic dielectric response via the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation: Here the subscripts LO and TO refer to longitudinal optical (oscillation in the direction of motion) and transverse optical (oscillation perpendicular to the direction of motion) phonon modes, respectively. In order to determine both LO and TO phonon modes, it is necessary to perform measurements at both normal and oblique incidence. Here is the dielectric relaxation time, and Extensions of the model have been proposed in order to account for the finite width of the relaxation time distribution, and non-linearity in the high-frequency regime present in devices. Optical absorption involves the photoexcitation of electrons from valence to conduction bands; creating either bound electron-hole pairs (excitons) or free carriers. As such, the optical dielectric response is dominated by the optical band gap and other low energy band-edge states. For MAPbI 3 , it has been deduced that the valence and conduction bands are composed of hybridized I 5p orbitals and Pb 6p orbitals, respectively. These calculations compare well with the 'best practice' experimental value, optic = 5.5; produced from ellipsometry measurements on single crystals. [105] underestimate the electronic response (5.0 ≤ 5.5) due to the classical Lorentz dipole fitting model which is employed. To support this statement, when additional Debye components are included in a later study which employed similar methods, a value closer to the consensus is calculated (5.5). .9 eV). These calculations compare well with the 'best practice' experimental value of ion = 16.5, determined from impedance measurements performed on powder samples. [121] measure a systematic decrease of ion for the sequence MAPb(I) 3 → (Br) 3 → (Cl) 3 . The authors attribute this behavior to the blue-shift of vibrations associated with the decrease in mass of the halide; an argument supported by Sendner et al. [119] supports this claim. Pb 2+ is highly polarisable due to its lone pair (6s 2 ) electrons, and is therefore expected to dominate the ionic dielectric response. Orientational polarization emerges from the stimulated reorientation of localized dipoles in the bulk of a dielectric. The theoretical description was developed within the context of polar liquids and gases, but the same phase physics can be applied to crystalline materials that contain a dipolar species with rotational degrees of freedom. where N is the dipole number density, z is the number of nearest-dipolar neighbours, γ is the angular separation of neighboring dipoles, v is the vacuum permittivity, and k b is the Boltzmann constant. T is sometimes defined as an effective temperature (T = T -T C , where T C is the Curie temperature) to account for dipole-dipole interactions. Unlike the 'dynamic' dielectric mechanisms previously introduced, the orientational component is not expected to impact electron transport. Beyond the bulk polarization processes previously discussed, understanding of the dielectric response due to the distribution and transport of charged species (molecules, ions, electrons, and holes) is essential to describe and characterize the operational behavior of PV devices. As the name suggests, space-charges are formed by spatial inhomogeneity in the charge distribution which create electrostatic potential gradients. The nature of the space charge formed in a device will depend on the processing history and state of a device (e.g. applied voltage). Here ∆Φ is the Laplacian of the electrostatic potential, and c is the concentration of charge carriers with charge q e . The space charge is an integral part in drift-diffusion simulations of operating devices. The inherent complexity of real devices -including interfacial inhomogeneity, high defect densities, and phonon scattering -limits the predictive power of Eq. 16. Evidence for space charge polarization instead arrives from observation of Jonscher's law ( 2 ∝ ω -1 ) in lowfrequency dielectric spectra (ω < 100 kHz). where P 0 = Cexp -Ea/k b T is the ensemble average transition probability at thermal equilibrium, C is a prefactor containing an attempt frequency, r is the spatial separation, and E a is the transition activation energy. When treated as a classical process, the associated dielectric contribution can be approximated via the Clausius-Mossotti relation, where the sum is over M charged species. However, for systems which feature both space-charge and hopping polarization, it is difficult to analytically separate individual contributions. Consequently, there remains uncertainty regarding the spatial distribution of mobile ions in halide perovskites and the pathways which they migrate through (bulk and surface transport or grain boundaries). Similar hopping processes may also occur for electron transport. Although electrons and holes exist in the form of diffuse large polarons in the bulk materials, A. Are halide perovskites ferroelectric? In analogy to ferromagnets, ferroelectric materials exhibit a spontaneous and reversible polarization below a characteristic Curie temperature. Some of the highest performing ferroelectric materials -as defined by the magnitude of the spontaneous polarization, the Curie temperature, and the coercive electric field -are oxide perovskites. It has been deduced that the CH 3 NH 3 + dipoles have a fixed, anti-aligned orientation in the low-temperature orthorhombic phase of MAPbI 3 due to strong hydrogen bonding between the amine group and iodine ions. Following the growing evidence which suggests that polar domains are neither long lived or stable, we suggest that the polar behavior of tetragonal MAPbI 3 exhibits many features common to an electret with a combination of lattice, defect, and surface polarization. An electret is defined as a dielectric that contains a mixture of surface or bulk charge, which may be due to real charges or dipoles, and under the effect of an applied voltage decays slowly over time. Beyond hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites that contain polar cations, similar behavior is observed in inorganic halide perovskites (such as CsPbBr 3 and CsPbI 3 ) due to fluctuating rather than permanent electric dipoles. A ferroelastic material exhibits a spontaneous and reversible strain following a stress-induced phase transition. The formation of domains occurs in order to minimize the total strain within the material, as established for BaTiO 3 . 176,177 The most convincing evidence for ferroic behavior in MAPbI 3 thin films comes from observation of domain structures in piezoforce microscopy (PFM) amplitude and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, shown in Figure 'Ferroelastic fingerprints' were revealed by early PFM measurements on these materials. Similar twin domains have also been observed in the tetragonal phase of (FA 0.85 MA 0.15 )Pb(Br 0.85 I 0.15 ) 3 , and Cs 0.05 (FA 0.85 MA 0.15 ) 0.95 Pb(Br 0.85 I 0.15 ) 3 thin film samples. The nature of a ferroelastic state may be directly probed by the measurement of elastic hysteresis cycles. For example, a number of vertical PFM (v-PFM) measurements show lamellar domain contrast between highand low-response piezoelectric regions -as seen in Figures 3(a & c) -which suggest the existence of multiple response mechanisms. Hybrid halide perovskites -and organic-inorganic crystals in general -are examples of complex dielectric materials that feature a range of polarization mechanisms. These include the perturbation of the electron clouds around atomic centers, the displacement and rotation of ions and molecules, as well as the transport of charged species (ions and electrons). Based on a survey of the literature for CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 we recommend values of optic = 5.5 for high-frequency processes, ionic = 16.5 for the ionic contribution, which yields a bulk dynamic dielectric response, of r = 22.0. A rigorous description of even a homogeneous bulk material is challenging and requires a combination of theoretical (statistical mechanical) and experimental techniques. In his 1949 monograph Theory of Dielectrics, Fröhlich noted: "That this application is far from trivial is shown by some of the controversies in the literature". This is certainly true for the halide perovskites. However, from an assessment of the current literature, we conclude that the intrinsic bulk dielectric response is dominated by the displacement of ions as described the phonon modes of the crystal. The ferroic properties of MAPbI 3 and related materials have attracted significant attention over the past five years. It is difficult to separate lattice polarization from charge transport and surface effects. We highlight the growing evidence supporting the assignment of room-temperature domain structures as ferroelastic, arising from the cubic-to-tetragonal phase transition that occurs during the standard annealing process of thin-films. Such domains can be associated with trapped charged defects and charge carriers. We conclude that halide perovskites can be classified as ferroelastic electrets, which raises many exciting possibilities for engineering their polarization states and lifetimes. A significant amount of work remains in physical characterization of these materials and the development of quantitative models to describe the full range of physical processes at play in operating photovoltaic devices. 107 