Real-time monitoring is essential for understanding and eventually precise controlling of the growth of two dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides (2D TMDCs). However, it is very challenging to carry out such kind of studies on chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Here, we report the first real time in-situ study on the CVD growth of the 2D TMDCs. More specifically, CVD growth of molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) monolayer on sapphire substrates has been monitored in-situ using differential transmittance spectroscopy (DTS). The growth of the MoS 2 monolayer can be precisely followed by looking at the evolution of the characteristic optical features. Consequently, a strong correlation between the growth rate of MoS 2 monolayer and the temperature distribution in the CVD reactor has been revealed. Our result demonstrates the great potential of the real time insitu optical spectroscopy for the realization of the precisely controlled growth of 2D semiconductor materials. The two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D TMDCs) have drawn wide attention because of their fascinating physical and chemical properties In particular, CVD is considered as an attractive and very promising approach for large-scale synthesis of 2D TMDCs Because typical CVD used for the synthesis of 2D TMDCs involving gases with pressure in the range between atmosphere and hundredth of mbar, the characterization methods based on electron beam are not applicable and the in-situ real time study becomes very challenging. On the other hand, each kind of 2D TMDCs possess specific optical properties which are characteristic of their chemical composition, crystalline structure and number of layers In this case, the normalized differences between the transmittance through the bare substrate and the one after a given deposition time are resolved. By monitoring the DTS during growth, the evolution of the optical properties associated to the MoS 2 layer can be revealed spectroscopically. Actually, for the van der Waals epitaxy of MoS 2 on the transparent sapphire substrate, the DT spectrum can be directly associated to the absorption of the adlayer. Consequently, the growth can be monitored in-situ in real time and the detailed information associated to the kinetics can be deduced from the DT spectra. Following the CVD process described in the Experimental section, MoS 2 monolayer has been deposited, simultaneously, on not only the surface at the front side (face to the Ar flow direction) but also the one at the back side of the sapphire substrate. This conclusion is based on a thorough exsitu characterization after CVD growth using differential reflectance spectroscopy (DRS), Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescent spectroscopy (PL), optical microscopy (OM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Actually, from the first glance at the substrate after CVD (see Fig. The relaxation of the transitions A and B gives strong PL emission which are plotted in Fig. In order to check the homogeneity, all the measurements have been performed at several different spots over the substrate surfaces and the results are rather identical. Consequently, homogeneous MoS 2 monolayer has been synthesized on both front and back sides of the substrate. However, a closer inspection reveals some detailed difference between the morphology at front and back surfaces regarding the surface coverage and the grain size. The grains grow on the back surface have already coalesced forming a rather compact monolayer. In contrast, the grains on the front surface are still rather separated. Furthermore, it appears that grain size is relatively large on the front surface. These observations indicate a difference between the front and back side of the substrate regarding the growth kinetics. We attribute the observed distinction tentatively to the possible deviation of the effective deposition rate on each side of the substrate. Actually, the deposition rate could be enhanced on the back surface due to the interruption of the gas flow by the substrate which may introduce a local turbulence and in turn a higher deposition rate. Next, let's have a look at the evolution of the optical properties during the growth. Fig. The characteristic increments of the DT spectrum during each section can be recognized from the ∆(∆T /T ) spectra plotted in the central column of Fig. In order to understand the observed evolution of the DT spectroscopy, let's have a closer inspection at its correlation with the temperature at the positions of sulfur source, MoO 3 source and the substrate (see Fig. where k(T sub ) represents the effective reaction rate coefficient between MoO The setup of the CVD reactor including the optical spectrometer applied for the in-situ measurement is sketched in Fig. During deposition, the substrates were inclined with their surface normal 45 degree off the axis of the quartz tube of the furnace (see Fig. ∆T where T 0 and T t denote the transmittance spectra of the bare substrate before the CVD process and the one after a time t, respectively. The obtained DTS signal ∆T T (t) represents the change of the optical transmittance relative to the bare substrate surfaces as a function of time t. Because the sapphire substrate is transparent in the wavelength range studied here, the DT spectra measured are directly associated with the absorption of the thin films deposited on the substrate. This fact makes the DTS a sensitive method for in-situ monitoring the growth of MoS 2 monolayer in real time in the current study. 