We study the mechanisms of the spin Hall effect (SHE) and anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in 3d ferromagnetic metals (Fe, Co, permalloy (Ni81Fe19; Py), and Ni) by varying their resistivities and temperature. At low temperatures where the phonon scattering is negligible, the skew scattering coefficients of the SHE and AHE in Py are related to its spin polarization. However, this simple relation breaks down for Py at higher temperatures as well as for the other ferromagnetic metals at any temperature. We find that, in general, the relation between the SHE and AHE is more complex, with the temperature dependence of the SHE being much stronger than that of AHE. The spin Hall effect (SHE) and its inverse (ISHE) enable us to interconvert spin and charge currents in the transverse direction and are widely recognized as essential methods to generate and detect spin currents in spintronic devices 1-3 . Since the original predictions of the SHE It was experimentally verified that not only the ISHE In this work, we present a detailed investigation of the relation between the SHE and the AHE in four different 3d FMs, i.e., Fe, Co, permalloy (Ni 81 Fe 19 ; Py), and Ni. By changing the residual resistivity of the FM at low temperatures, the skew scattering contribution (one of the extrinsic mechanisms) To perform the SHE measurements in the 3d FMs, we adopted the spin absorption method in the lateral spin valve structure By using the spin transport model proposed by Takahashi and Maekawa 44 , the spin Hall resistivity -ρ SHE xy can be estimated as follows: where x is the shunting factor and ĪS is the effective spin current absorbed into the FM middle wire. When ĪS is converted into charge current in the middle wire, a part of the charge current is shunted by the Cu bridge on the middle FM wire. The shunting factor x has been calculated with a finite elements method using Spin-Flow 3D where θ AHE is the anomalous Hall angle and t is the thickness of the Hall bar. By plotting -ρ SHE xy and -ρ AHE xy , obtained with Eqs. (1) and (2), as a function of ρ xx , the detailed mechanisms can be addressed as shown in previous works where H refers to the SHE or AHE, ρ xx,0 is the residual resistivity at low temperature (in the present case, at 10 K), ρ xx,T (= ρ xx -ρ xx,0 ) is the resistivity induced by phonons and α H ss is the skew scattering angle due to impurities or grain boundaries. As detailed in Ref. 46, the side-jump terms due to static (impurities or grain boundaries) and dynamic (phonons) scattering sources as well as the intrinsic contribution originating from the band structure In order to determine α H ss and β H 0 , the SHE and AHE of Py have to be measured in a wide ρ xx,0 range. For this purpose, we changed the thickness of the Py wire (from 5 to 30 nm) and also the deposition rate (from 0.04 nm/s to 0.08 nm/s), as already demonstrated in our previous work for Pt and β AHE 0 are in good agreement with previous reports Interestingly, the ratio of the AHE and SHE in Py for the skew scattering contribution, α AHE ss /α SHE ss = 0.32, is a reasonable value for the spin polarization p of Py This can be understood intuitively as follows. In FMs, incident spin-up and spin-down electrons are deflected to the transverse opposite directions, as illustrated in Fig. In fact, this simple picture can be applied for diffusive scattering systems such as Py. As we detail in Ref. 42, Eq. ( However, such a simple picture does not work for the other 3d FMs. The electronic states can be quite anisotropic because of the complicated band structure of 3d FMs. Those states should show distinct effective spin-orbit couplings for spin-up and spin-down electrons. Thus, the above specific assumption can break down. We show θ SHE and θ AHE at T = 10 K for the 3d FMs in Figs. So far, we have focused on the low temperature parts of the SHE and AHE. To address the effect of dynamic disorders, we next discuss the temperature dependences of the SHE and AHE in Figs. Much larger β SHE 1 values than β AHE 1 ones would originate from the stronger temperature dependence of the SHE in 3d FMs. At the moment, we do not have a conclusive picture for the origin of this dependence. In general, the spin transport can be mediated not only by conduction electrons but also by magnons in FMs In conclusion, we experimentally investigated the relation between the SHE and AHE in four 3d FMs [Fe, Co, Py (Ni 81 Fe 19 ), and Ni]. In a typical ferromagnetic alloy, Py, the skew scattering contribution of the AHE is related to that of the SHE via the spin polarization of Py, as can be understood intuitively. However, this relation does not hold for other mechanisms. This fact is highlighted by the temperature dependence of the SHE and AHE. For all the 3d FMs, one of the intrinsic mechanism terms β SHE 1 is much larger than β AHE 1 . Asymmetric spindependent scatterings in the spin-flip processes induced by the electron-magnon interactions would be a possible explanation for the strong temperature dependence of the SHE in contrast to the AHE or even the SHE in nonmagnetic metals. dS, respectively. Here vi(k) are the Fermi velocities, λi(k) is the mean free path, sz(k) is the spin polarization and we integrate over the Fermi surface (FS). In the limit of diffusive transport with an isotropic spin polarization sz(k) = p, we can take p in front of the integral and we find ρ AHE k(k ′ ) is the wave function before (after) the scattering with the wave number k(k ′ ) and spin-up + (spin-down -), and T is a matrix in spin space including spin-orbit coupling and magnetism. By defining P -+ kk ′ in an equivalent way and integrating k and k ′ , we find that on average it holds τ -1 +-= τ -1 -+ , with τ -1 = dk dk ′ P kk ′ , even in the magnetic case. 62 Y. Cheng, K. Chen, and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 96, 024449 (2017).