Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductivity 1 . Breaking inversion symmetry can lead to mixed-parity Cooper pairing and unconventional superconducting properties 1-5 . Two-dimensional (2D) NbSe 2 has emerged as a new non-centrosymmetric superconductor with the unique out-of-plane or Ising spinorbit coupling (SOC) 6-9 . Here, we report the observation of an unusual continuous paramagnetic-limited superconductor-normal metal transition in 2D NbSe 2 . Using tunneling spectroscopy under high in-plane magnetic fields, we observe a continuous closing of the superconducting gap at the upper critical field at low temperatures, in stark contrast to the abrupt first-order transition observed in BCS thin film superconductors 10-12 . The paramagnetic-limited continuous transition arises from a large spin susceptibility of the superconducting phase due to the Ising SOC. The result is further supported by self-consistent mean-field calculations based on the ab initio band structure of 2D NbSe 2 . Our findings establish 2D NbSe 2 as a promising platform for exploring novel spin-dependent superconducting phenomena and device concepts 1 , such as equal-spin Andreev reflection 13 and topological superconductivity In conventional BCS superconductors, Cooper pairs are even-parity singlet 17 , which yields nearly zero spin susceptibility at low temperatures. The paramagneticlimited superconductor-normal metal transition is thus an abrupt first-order transition at the upper critical field Single-layer NbSe 2 consists of a layer of Nb atoms sandwiched between two layers of Se atoms in a trigonal prismatic structure Figure The basic characterization of 2D NbSe 2 superconductors by four-point resistance measurements is shown in Fig. We now investigate the superconducting gap as a function of temperature and inplane field by tunneling spectroscopy. The differential tunneling conductance spectra under zero magnetic fields are shown in Fig. The behavior of the superconducting gap in an in-plane magnetic field is illustrated in Fig. The observed continuous paramagnetic-limited superconductor-normal metal transition in 2D NbSe 2 is rather unique. Table To understand our experimental observations, we consider the free energies of the normal and superconducting states in the zero-temperature limit when all real quasiparticle excitations are frozen. Including only the spin paramagnetic effect, the free energy can be expressed as F ! = -χ ∥! H ∥ ! /2 for the normal state, and for the superconducting state (ref. On the other hand, in 2D NbSe 2 with Ising spins pinned by the strong intralayer SOC field ) and a Zeeman splitting of ≪ gμ ! H ∥ . This energy is ~ 0.1 meV even at H ∥ = 30 T, which explains the negligible Zeeman splitting observed in the quasiparticle peaks. The Ising SOC also endows the in-plane spin susceptibility a van Vleck character. The van Vleck spin susceptibility is originated from virtual transitions involving states over an energy scale much larger than the superconducting gap ∆ ! Finally, we perform quantitative calculations of the superconducting gap as a function of in-plane magnetic field in trilayer NbSe 2 to validate the above physical picture. The results have been obtained by solving the self-consistent mean-field equation based on the ab initio band structure of trilayer NbSe 2 and on the assumption of an isotropic s-wave pairing potential In conclusion, we have observed an unusual continuous paramagnetic-limited superconductor-normal metal transition in 2D NbSe 2 at low temperature by tunneling spectroscopy. Our results have provided strong evidence for significant spin susceptibility of 2D NbSe 2 in the zero temperature limit, which is originated from the antisymmetric Ising SOC. The findings together with the developed junction devices have paved the path for probing exotic superconducting phenomena such as equal-spin Andreev reflection, proximity phenomena and topological superconductivity The normal metal-insulator-superconductor (NIS) junctions employed in this experiment were fabricated using the dry transfer method Both four-point resistance and differential conductance have been measured. In the differential conductance measurements, the junction was biased through one of the split electrodes with a small ac bias current, superimposed on a dc bias current (the amplitude of the ac voltage was kept below 50 μV and the dc voltage was varied from -5 mV to 5 mV). Both the ac and dc voltage drop at the junction were measured through the other electrode of the split pair using a lock-in amplifier and a voltage preamplifier, respectively (See Supplementary Sect. 1 for the measurement schematic). The differential conductance G was obtained as the ratio of the ac current to the ac voltage. The dc voltage dependence of G is the differential tunneling conductance spectrum reported in the main text. Initial screening of the devices up to 9 Tesla was performed using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). Measurements under high magnetic fields were performed using the 45 T hybrid magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in a The in-plane orbital-limited upper critical field can be estimated following 