Spin-torque nano-oscillators can emulate neurons at the nanoscale. Recent works show that the non-linearity of their oscillation amplitude can be leveraged to achieve waveform classification for an input signal encoded in the amplitude of the input voltage. Here we show that the frequency and the phase of the oscillator can also be used to recognize waveforms. For this purpose, we phase-lock the oscillator to the input waveform, which carries information in its modulated frequency. In this way we considerably decrease amplitude, phase and frequency noise. We show that this method allows classifying sine and square waveforms with an accuracy above 99% when decoding the output from the oscillator amplitude, phase or frequency. We find that recognition rates are directly related to the noise and non-linearity of each variable. These results prove that spin-torque nano-oscillators offer an interesting platform to implement different computing schemes leveraging their rich dynamical features. Spin-torque nano-oscillators are promising for neuromorphic computing We first explain in detail our computing strategy and describe the experimental set-up used to implement it. We then show experimentally that sine and square waveforms can be classified by exploiting the frequency, phase or amplitude of the oscillations. We highlight the correlation between recognition rates and the non-linearity of these dynamical variables as a function of the input signal to classify. Our work shows that it is possible to take full advantage of magnetization dynamics by computing through all the dynamical variables describing a spin-torque nano-oscillator. In addition, since the input waveform and the oscillator output are sinusoidal waveforms with close frequencies, our scheme should allow chain-connecting the oscillators to build large neural networks. Spin-torque nano-oscillators Spin-torque nano-oscillators have the ability to synchronize their voltage oscillations to external microwave signals at frequencies close to their natural frequency We apply a perpendicular magnetic field H = 2000 Oe to the oscillator and inject a direct current I dc = 5 mA, which induces voltage oscillations of amplitude |V | = 13 mV at a frequency of 232.1 MHz. We choose these field and current bias parameters in order to have a large locking range which is important for the frequency encoding and to minimize the linewidth and maximize the out-put signal. We use an Arbitrary Waveform Generator (AWG) to generate microwave signals that we inject into a strip line patterned 350 nm above the oscillator. This signal induces a microwave magnetic field on the oscillator, as well as a microwave current in the oscillator due to capacitive coupling with the strip line. In order to synchronize the oscillator, amplitudes of ≈ 350 mV of the injected signal need to be applied, such that the total voltage detected by the oscilloscope is dominated by a residual capacitive microwave tone rather then the oscillator voltage. We compensate for this residual tone by adding the output voltage in a power combiner to an exactly opposed microwave signal waveform (subtraction signal in Figure In order to characterize the synchronization of the spin-torque oscillator with an external source, we send 5 μs long waveforms modulated at different frequencies in a 20 MHz range within the natural frequency of the oscillator. We apply the Hilbert transform An oscillator can only achieve good performance at neuromorphic computing if it transforms the input sig- nal in a non-linear manner The input data encoding procedure is shown in Figure Half of this data is used for training and the other half for testing the performance. Each waveform is discretized into 8 points [see Figure Time multiplexing is achieved by preprocessing the input data as illustrated in Figure where N = 25 is the number of neurons, W i is the weight matrix element corresponding to the i th neuron, f NL is the non-linear function implemented by the nanodevice and x i is the input of the i th neuron, that is the corresponding microwave frequency. The weight matrix is calculated on a computer in order to match the target y = 0 or 1 respectively for sines or squares. For a target vector Y containing targets y for all the training examples, the weight matrix is calculated as W = Y F † , where F † is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of the matrix F containing outputs f NL (x i ) of all neurons and for all training examples Changing the center frequency has a double impact on output variables, that is the presence of noise, and the non-linear dependence on the input frequency. Noise is minimized in the middle of the locking range but the output in this regime is a linear function of the input [see Figure 2], which results in a disability of the neural network to learn the task. Indeed, as can be seen in Figure We find the best performance for the center frequency on the edge of the locking range, with some of the fre- quencies used for encoding laying in the highly non-linear frequency pulling regime. The best recognition rates are obtained when neuron outputs are decoded from the phase of the oscillations (99.75%, Figure As a conclusion, we have shown that spin-torque nanooscillators synchronized to microwave signals can emulate artificial neural networks. The frequency, phase and amplitude of the voltage emitted by the oscillator are all non-linear functions of the frequency of the input microwave signal and can be used as outputs of the network. Working with synchronized neurons has the advantage of decreasing the frequency and phase noise, which will be of particular importance when scaling down the size of nano-pillars. In addition, frequency encoding is a simple way to use the output of an oscillator to drive the input of another, thus paving the path towards neural networks composed of chain-connected spin-torque nanooscillators. This work was supported by the European Research Council ERC under Grant bioSPINspired 682955 and the French ministry of defense (DGA).