Nanometer-sharp metallic tips are known to be excellent electron emitters. They are used in highest-resolution electron microscopes in cold field emission mode to generate the most coherent electron beam in continuous-wave operation. For time-resolved operation, sharp metal needle tips have recently been triggered with femtosecond laser pulses. We show here that electrons emitted with near-infrared femtosecond laser pulses at laser oscillator repetition rates show the same spatial coherence properties as electrons in cold field emission mode in cw operation. From electron interference fringes, obtained with the help of a carbon nanotube biprism beam splitter, we deduce a virtual source size of less than (0.65 ± 0.06) nm for both operation modes, a factor of ten smaller than the geometrical source size. These results bear promise for ultrafast electron diffraction, ultrafast electron microscopy and other techniques relying on highly coherent and ultrafast electron beams. The ability of electrons to interfere, given by their coherence properties, enables matter wave experiments with electrons, such as diffraction, interference or electron holography, as well as highest resolution microscopy A quantitative approach to determine the spatial coherence of an electron source is on the basis of spatial interference patterns formed after an electron beamsplitter. From the interference image, one can deduce a figure of merit well suited for the spatial coherence of a source, which is known as the effective source size (Fig. The van Cittert-Zernike theorem relates the far-field interference fringe pattern with the effective source size with the distance l between biprism and screen, the de Broglie wavelength λ dB = 12.3 • |U tip | -1 √ V Å and the lateral width of the far-field interference pattern ξ ⊥ . U tip is the acceleration voltage. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) work as excellent beamsplitters in the form of a nano-scale biprism for electrons In this work we present our results on quantitative measurements of the spatial coherence of electrons emitted by few-cycle laser pulses from a Ti:Sapphire oscillator with a central wavelength at 780 nm. The laser pulses with a duration of 6.1 fs (FWHM of the intensity envelope) and a repetition rate of f rep = 80 MHz are obtained from a commercial laser oscillator (Venteon). They are focused on the tungsten tip with an off-axis parabolic mirror with a focal length of 15 mm (Fig. The interaction of femtosecond laser pulses and tungsten tips in the given parameter range has been investigated extremely well. For this parameter range, we know from previous work that multiphoton photoemission (MPP) is expected, which is a pertubative and prompt process In order to show that MPP takes place, we measure the laser power dependence of the electron beam current j n . An n-th order MPP-emission process scales with the laser intensity I as j n ∼ I n Tungsten nanotips are electrochemically etched from a tungsten wire grown in the [310]-direction, the direction with the lowest work function of φ [310] = 4.35 eV The nanobiprism beamsplitter consists of a singlewalled CNT spanning across a hole on a supporting membrane. The CNTs are grown by chemical vapor deposition (for more information about the growth process, see supplementary information of We observe typical interference patterns using multiphoton-photoemitted electrons as shown in Fig. The bias voltage applied to the tip of U tip = -43 V lowers the potential barrier due to the Schottky effect by ∼ 1.1 eV to φ eff ≈ 3.2 eV, depending on the surfacedependent field reduction factor To gain a more quantitative insight, we generate line profiles obtained from the datasets of Fig. This shows remarkably that both emission processes, although physically different, show the same effective source size. Hence the spatial coherence properties of the DC electron beam and that of the ultrafast pulsed beam are very similar. In both cases we see that r eff is roughly a factor of 10 smaller than the geometric source size of r geo = 6.8 nm implying that the emitted electrons are (partially) coherent For distances between the tip and the CNT below a few microns the electron wavefunction is split up at the position of the CNT and shows equidistantly spaced interference fringes on a MCP screen, similar to the original electrostatic biprism experiment We also consider effects of a finite longitudinal coherence length as a possible limitation of the measured interference pattern. Finite longitudinal coherence is caused by a finite energy width ∆E of the emitted electrons. With a known ∆E we can calculate the expected num-ber of visible fringes. Electrons emitted from roomtemperature tungsten needles in DC-field emission display an energy width of ∆E = 0.3 eV (full width at half maximum, FWHM) or below The interference data was taken with an incident current at the MCP of 4.2 pA in MPP emission, which equals on average 0.35 electrons per pulse at a laser repetition rate of 80 MHz. Hence we can neglect effects arising from Coulomb repulsion for average currents of around one electron per pulse or above In conclusion, we found the electrons emitted in a multiphoton-photoemission process to be as coherent as DC-field emitted electrons. Both result in an effective source size of (0.65 ± 0.06) nm. Nonlinearly photoemitted ultrafast electron beams with supreme spatiotemporal properties are ideally suited for various applications in ultrafast electron-based imaging methods.