We examine the collective behavior of two-dimensional nonlinear superconducting metamaterials using a non-contact spatially resolved imaging technique. The metamaterial is made up of sub-wavelength nonlinear microwave oscillators in a strongly coupled 27×27 planar array of radio-frequency Superconducting QUantum Interference Devices (rf-SQUIDs). By using low-temperature laser scanning microscopy we image microwave currents in the driven SQUIDs while in non-radiating dark modes and identify the clustering and uniformity of like-oscillating meta-atoms. We follow the rearrangement of coherent patterns due to meta-atom resonant frequency tuning as a function of external dc and rf magnetic flux bias. We find that the rf current distribution across the SQUID array at zero dc flux and small rf flux reveals a low degree of coherence. By contrast, the spatial coherence improves dramatically upon increasing of rf flux amplitude, in agreement with simulation. Planar arrays of deep sub-wavelength dimension superconducting (SC) resonators have recently gained increasing attention due to their potential use as nonlinear metamaterials, i.e., engineered media whose electromagnetic response can differ dramatically from natural materials. Arrays of coupled SC resonators can be used for controllable routing and manipulating electromagnetic wave propagation in the range from radio-frequency (rf) 1,2 through the THz 3,4 domain. Demonstrated effects include electromagnetically Recent experiments on rf-SQUID-based meta-atoms have lived up to most if not all of the theoretical expectations. Schematic representation of the LSM setup used for 2D visualization of microwave photo-response of the rf-SQUID metamaterial. LNA is the low-noise cryogenic amplifier while RT is a room temperature rf amplifier. The red line denotes the scanned laser beam while the green circles show the dc magnetic flux coils. Drawing is not to scale. The inset illustrates the LSM optical reflectivity image in a 500×250 μm 2 area of the array perimentally and theoretically in terms of the collective globally-averaged transmission properties. The phenomenon of incoherence in large populations of interacting SQUIDs is the subject of intense theoretical and numerical research, The investigated SC metamaterial consists of 27×27 rf-SQUID meta-atoms equidistantly arranged in a square array with a lattice constant of 83 μm as shown in Fig. The spatially-resolved technique of Laser Scanning Microscopy (LSM) has been employed in the past to image rf current densities and local sources of nonlinearity through a controlled thermal perturbation of super-conducting microwave circuits. Thermal perturbation of a dc nano-SQUID has been used before to image local dissipation, In this work, the rf-SQUIDs are stimulated by a low input rf power P IN = -60 dBm, corresponding to rf flux amplitude Φ rf ≈10 -4 Φ 0 . Under these conditions the dominant effect of the laser beam perturbation is a change of the temperature dependent tunneling critical current I c of the probed JJ, resulting in the (oscillating at f M ) modification of its Josephson inductance L JJ (T, Φ app ) = Φ0 2πIc cos δ , where δ is the gauge-invariant phase difference on the junction and Φ app =Φ dc +Φ rf sin(2πf t). This causes, in turn, a periodic modulation of the resonant frequency f 0 of the rf-SQUID: that also oscillates under laser modulated heating. Here L geo is the geometric inductance of the rf-SQUID loop and C is the shunt capacitance of the JJ such that f geo =1/2π L geo C is the geometric resonance of the SQUID loop in the absence of a Josephson effect, and assuming that the electrodynamics of the SQUID is described by the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model. In the regime of weak linear perturbation (Φ rf Φ 0 ; δT T c ), and excluding nonlocal and nonequilibrium effects (see Ref. where P IN is the input rf power, and PR X can be positive or negative, depending on Φ app and f . The second origin for PR is due to the change in quality factor Q. As the local temperature rises under the laser illumination, the dissipation increases from the quasiparticle current flowing via the tunneling resistance R N of the JJ, decreasing the which has a uniform sign as a function of frequency or flux. With the LSM, we first have the opportunity to probe the global tuning properties of the rf-SQUID metamaterial through a measurement of the local PR from a single SQUID in the middle of the array as the globally applied Φ dc /Φ 0 is varied over several periods. The Additionally, despite observing a similar degree of tuning capability in all of the locally probed rf-SQUIDs in the array, we measured that their individual resonances are widely distributed over the full flux range. In other words, there is a significant spread of natural resonances when a small rf driving flux (10 -4 Φ 0 in this case) is applied to the rf-SQUIDs (See Supp. Mat. S5). We now address the smeared out LSM PR of a single rf-SQUID in the array close to zero dc flux as shown between 17 and 20 GHz in Fig. In Fig. A pattern with strong spatial coherence involving a majority of the rf-SQUIDs is formed by applying a stronger rf driving field at P IN = -40 dBm (Φ rf ≈10 -3 Φ 0 ) as shown in Fig. The observed coherent states are clearly different from the dome-like structure in Fig. The naïve expectation is that nΦ 0 flux quantization in the array will lead to repetition of the same spatial pattern at any n of additional DC flux bias. Figures In summary, we have visualized the microscopic dark-mode states of a large nonlinear metamaterial structure using the LSM technique. The spatial variation of rf-SQUID excitation can now be elucidated while tuning driving frequency as well as dc and rf flux amplitudes. Our experiments show that the degree of coherence of the SQUID excitations is strongly enhanced for larger rf flux amplitude and is diminished by defects and inhomogeneous DC flux. See Supp. Mat. for the referenced discussion. In the present work, we investigate a superconducting metamaterial consisting of 27×27 magnetic meta-atoms composed of rf-SQUIDs. These SQUID-based unit cells (see inset in Fig. Nominally identical SQUIDs, each being designed as a superconducting Nb loop that is interrupted by a single Josephson tunnel junction (JJ), were manufactured using the HYPRES process utilizing 0.3 μA/μm 2 Nb/AlO x /Nb trilayer fabrication. The individual JJ occupies a circular area with a radius r JJ of about 2 μm while the superconducting loop is composed of two Nb films (135 and 300 nm thick) that are galvanically connected through a Nb via. As has been discussed in Ref., The technique of low-temperature Laser Scanning Microscopy (LSM) has been used by us to image the in-chip position of precisely those meta-atoms that become resonating under different fixed values of dc and rf flux drive. The LSM uses the principle of point-by-point XY scanning of the superconducting planar structure by a sharply focused laser beam. Fig. Referring to Fig. The absorbed portion of the laser irradiation acts as a local source of heat at every point of the optical raster in the plane of the studied metamaterial. The induced perturbation is low enough not to change significantly the rf current distribution, while keeping LSM photoresponse detectable by lock-in. Note that one can ignore the nonequilibrium effects of direct Cooper pair breaking in the JJs since the long period (∼ μs) of modulation of the laser intensity compared to the short (< ns) relaxation time of nonequilibrium quasi-particles. Secondly, the effective cooling below T c of the SQUIDs has been achieved in the vacuum environment of the optical cryostat. It was organized by gluing the array to a quartz rod by low-temperature (Apiezon N) vacuum grease providing reliable thermal contact with the Cu waveguide. Thirdly, the substrate was exactly positioned in a homogenous rf field in such a way that the orientation of the dominant magnetic component was orthogonal to the XY plane of the SQUIDs inside the waveguide. Additionally, a set of superconducting Helmholtz coils outside the waveguide create a homogenous dc magnetic flux through the array. Finally, the entire structure was surrounded by mu-metal magnetic shield and the temperature was stabilized in the range between 4.5 and 10 K with an accuracy of 1 mK. Both the mu-metal and Cu waveguide have coaxial through holes to allow entry of the laser beam into the waveguide (Fig. S4. LSM response of individual rf-SQUIDs: precise adjustment of the resonance to the desired frequency Fig. It is clear that analyzing the entire set of LSM PR(Φ dc /Φ 0 , f, x 0 , y 0 ) data requires a large investment of time to collect detailed information from all of 27×27 = 729 rf-SQUIDs. The problem is solved much faster if the dc flux line cuts of Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. In many aspects, the LSM PR of a single rf SQUID-based oscillator can be approximated in the frame of a phenomenological linearized model (see Equations 2 and 3 in the main text) which was used to describe rf response of the classical superconducting split-ring resonator. The difference in modeling PR from a rf-SQUID structure compared to that of a split-ring resonator is that the lumped capacitance of the split-ring resonator is replaced by a single Josephson junction of the SQUID structure. In the latter case the limits of linear response are not well defined due to permanent tuning of SQUID resonance under modification of Josephson inductance by a variable rf drive. In the case of high-quality JJs with a sufficiency homogenous tunneling conductivity, σ n (x, y) = 1/R, the bolometric modulation of Josephson inductance underneath the laser probe δL JJ (x 0 , y 0 , δT ) = d Φ 0 2πI c cos φ 0 /dT δT (S1) can be associated with local variations of the pair tunneling current density 47 δI s (x, y) = δI jj s (x, y) + δI φ s (x, y), (S2) where (x, y) is the location of the laser beam focus on the sample surface; δI jj s and δI φ s are, respectively, the change of the pair tunneling current due to the local change of the maximum pair tunneling current density and the local phase difference. At small perturbation (δJ S /J S 1) to the JJ from the laser beam, the local heating of laser probe onto the JJ varies the pair tunneling current and produces the LSM PR JJ ∝ (∂J c /∂T ) sin φ as a result of localized reduction of J c underneath the thermal spot that oscillates in temperature synchronously with the laser modulation. Fig. The main idea of the proposed experiment is to combine the usual recording of rf power dependence with continuous magnetic sweeping of the Josephson phase difference, allowing us to explore any desired resonant frequency of the SQUID. This universality is indicated in Fig. The data of Fig. 