Topological protection 1 offers unprecedented opportunities for wave manipulation and energy transport in various fields of physics, including elasticity 2-5 , acoustics Interfaces between distinct topological phases of matter support exotic localized wave modes that allow defect-immune, lossless energy transport While chiral modes require the breaking of time-reversal symmetry, helical and valley modes involve solely passive components and arise from the breaking of geometrical symmetries in lattices whose reciprocal space is characterized by singularities such as double Dirac cones We consider an elastic plate patterned with a periodic array of through-the-thickness circular and triangular holes 4 , as shown in Fig. The Dirac cones arise as a result of the D 3h symmetry of the structure, i.e. consisting of C 3 (three fold rotational) symmetry, σ h symmetry (or reflection symmetry about the midplane of the plate), and σ v symmetry (or inversion symmetry about a plane normal to the mid-plane of the plate and along the lattice vectors). Starting from this configuration, geometric perturbations are introduced so to break the σ h and σ v symmetries, and produce nontrivial bandgaps that respectively support helical and valley modes in a common frequency range. Specifically, we break the σ h symmetry by replacing the through holes with blind holes of height h, as shown in Fig. Next, we break the σ v while preserving C 3 and σ h symmetries, by considering holes in each unit cell of different radii, namely r and R. This leads to two distinct phases, denoted as V r and V R (Fig. Based on these assumptions, we can infer that an interface between structures supporting helical and valley modes will still support a single hybrid edge mode, named helical-valley (HV) mode hereafter, with either positive (Ψ + ), as in the case of I(H + , V R ) (Fig. The existence of the above mentioned hybrid HV edge modes is verified through the computation of the band structure of finite strips including a total of 20 × 1 unit cells, with periodicity conditions imposed along the a 1 direction and free boundaries along a 2 (see Methods for details on computations). Results are reported in Figs. A domain wall formed according to each of the three interfaces considered, i.e. I(H + , H -), I(H + , V R ) and I(H -, V r ), separates two phases in the middle of the strip. Let us consider the two edge waves that initially propagate along the I(H + , H -) interface and subsequently encounter two I(H, V ) interfaces, each supporting a single HV mode with distinct polarization. At the y-junction, each wave follows the interface that matches its polarization, thus causing the two wave modes to split. This is possible under the condition that the frequencies for the 3 edge states match. To ensure this, the bandgaps of the H and V lattices are designed to occur in a common range of frequencies highlighted by the gray rectangles in Figs. 1e,f which is achieved by properly selecting the geometric perturbations that produce the distinct topological phases. Specifically, the results for the H phase (Fig. To confirm the splitting of the topologically protected helical waves, we designed and fabricated a waveguide made of 35 (in the a 1 direction) × 25 (in the a 2 direction) unit cells hosting the three different domains H + (green boundary), H -(blue boundary) and V (red boundary), as shown in Fig. ) and I(H -, V r ). Such an arrangement is chosen to illustrate the ability of the waveguide to split the two helical waves (Φ + and Φ -) at the y-shaped junction. The plate is made of aluminum and the unit cell lattice parameter is a = 20.5 mm. First, numerical simulations are conducted to evaluate the distinct propagation patterns followed by the edge modes along the interfaces, depending on the selective mode excitation. A Finite Element (FE) model for the finite plate shown in Fig. The splitting of these modes is then demonstrated experimentally testing the plate (Fig. To fully unveil the distinct nature of the Ψ + and Ψ -modes, two fine scans are conducted over the two 2 × 2 unit cell areas shown in red in Fig. Finally, the 2D wavefield recorded over the region highlighted by the blue dots, and labeled as "2D scan region" in Fig. The results of this analysis shown in the 2D-FT amplitude contours of Fig. In conclusion, for the first time we proposed and experimentally tested a platform that supports multiple classes of topological modes. In the proposed configuration, implemented on a patterned plate, topologically non-trivial gaps are obtained by creating interfaces between material phases that selectively break spatial inversion symmetries. Through engineering of the nontrivial gaps, the considered system is capable of splitting purely topological protected helical edge waves into heterogeneous helical-valley modes on the basis of the initial polarization. The results presented herein, both numerical and experimental, provide fundamental insights in the behavior of topologically protected edge modes in elastic systems, and suggest new avenues for topologically protected wave transmission that may be extended to other physical domains, such as acoustics, and photonics. The findings of this study have direct implications for applications where selective waveguiding, or the isolation and control of vibrations are ultimate goals, as in civil, mechanical and aerospace engineering structures. Also, the wave mode selective capabilities of the considered interfaces and y-junction may be of significance for the transmission of information through elastic or acoustic waves as, for example, in the case of surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices. Valley Phononic Crystal (V) c) 