Two-dimensional (2D) tin(II) monosulfide (SnS) with strong structural anisotropy has been proven to be a phosphorene analogue. However, difficulty in isolating very thin layer of SnS pose challenges in practical utilization. Here, we prepare ultrathin SnS via liquid phase exfoliation. With transmission electron microscopy, we identify the buckled structure of 2D SnS. We employ temperature dependent Raman spectroscopy to elucidate electron-phonon interactions, which reveals a linear phonon shifts. The active Raman modes of ultrathin SnS exhibit higher sensitivity to temperature than other 2D materials. Moreover, we demonstrate strong light-matter interaction in ultrathin SnS using Z-scan and ultrafast spectroscopy. Rich exciton-exciton and coherent exciton-photon interactions arising from many-particle excited effects in ultrathin SnS eventually enhances the nonlinear optical properties. Our findings highlight the prospects for the synthesis of ultrathin anisotropic SnS towards the betterment of thermoelectric and photonic devices. Successful isolation of 2D materials beyond graphene such as boron nitride (BN), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and phosphorene opens up a new horizon in material research The unique optical properties that arise with strong light-matter interaction at their 2D quantum limit can provide a plethora of opportunities for future energy conversion and photonic applications 2D SnS, a member of emerging layered metal monochalcogenide (MX, M = Ge, Sn etc.; X = chalcogen) family has recently been recognized as an analog of phosphorene In a system of reduced dimensionality Recently, Nardeep et al. . In layered WS 2 , annihilation rate was found to be faster in monolayer than in bi-or tri-layer due to reduced many-body interaction and phonon-assisted annihilation of indirect excitons Wang et al. observed much better saturable response in MoS 2 than graphene In this study, we report for the first time the preparation of ultrathin SnS nanosheets via liquid phase exfoliation. Cryogenic Raman spectroscopy, pump-probe spectroscopy and Z-scan techniques were employed to investigate the electron-phonon and exciton-exciton interactions in layered SnS sheets. A linear behavior of phonon energy shift with temperature is observed for ultrathin SnS. Our femtosecond transient absorption studies reveal strong quasiparticle interaction in ultrathin SnS leading to EEA, which in turn enhances nonlinear optical response by making them potential candidates for photonic applications. We conducted liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) of ultrathin buckled layer (Fig. Group IV layered monochalcogenide, SnS has a crystal structure that belongs to the orthorhombic crystal system with D 2h symmetry (Pnma) Unlike previous studies, four active Raman modes (at similar wave numbers) have been appeared in ultrathin SnS sheets All the phonon modes of exfoliated SnS vary linearly with temperature (Fig. where, ω 0 is the frequency of the vibration at the absolute zero of temperature and χ is the firstorder temperature coefficient (TC) of a Raman mode. Values of first order TCs for each modes of layered SnS were obtained by fitting experimental data (Fig. Nonetheless, phonon linewidth in ultrathin (Fig. where, Γ 0 is the background contribution, A is anharmonic coefficient, and n(ω, T) is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. In our investigation of NLO properties of layered SnS, we used femtosecond laser based Z-scan technique (Fig. ................ ( α NL is NLO absorption coefficient, I 0 is on-axis peak intensity, Z 0 is the diffraction length of the beam, L eff = (1-e -α 0 L ) α 0 L , effective path length, α 0 is linear absorption coefficient and L is the sample path length. The value of α NL is found to be -0.5 ×10 -3 cm/GW. The value of saturable intensity was obtained by fitting the transmittance data (Fig. We employed ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy to study the kinetics of excitons and their interactions. Fig. We first focus our attention to find the origin of the TA band at 550 nm at low excitation where N and N s are exciton density and saturation exciton density, respectively. The fitting of experimental data (see Supplementary Fig. where k is the annihilation rate. The solution of the differential equation ( Here, N 0 and C are the initial and residual exciton populations, respectively. The TA data at different excitation intensities are fitted well with equation (7) (Fig. So far our discussion was limited to the origin of the TA band at 550 nm. We discern that this band is almost evanesced at higher excitation intensities followed by a concomitant rise of another band at 680 nm. Although, the low energy TA band appears late, the decay dynamics of both the band is same (Fig. for both the transitions, but the TA band at 680 nm may develop from different initial state. At high laser fluence, Auger process could lead to the formation of trion, which lives longer than biexciton We successfully conduct liquid phase exfoliation of SnS to obtain ultrathin (~ 1.10 nm) nanosheets. Such layered SnS exhibits a linear phonon dynamics (or phonon shift). Raman modes of 2D SnS are much more sensitivity to temperature than other layered materials. Furthermore, ultrathin SnS possesses strong nonlinear optical behavior leading to saturable absorption. The strong Coulomb interactions give rise to EEA (rate ~ 4.34 × 10 -4 cm 2 /s) resulting in a fast decay of the exciton population. However, at higher exciton density, Auger process leads to the formation of hot exciton, which is converted to biexciton by absorbing another photon of low energy. High nonlinear absorption coefficient and low saturable intensity of ultrathin SnS nanosheets due to strong many-body interactions make them suitable for ultrafast Q-switching. This work sheds light on the nature of the phonon dynamics and nonlinear optical phenomena in anisotropic 2D SnS for futuristic energy conversion and photonic applications. Tin (II) sulfide granular (>99.99%) trace metals basis was purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification. HPLC grade acetone was received from Merck. Tin (II) sulfide from Spectrochrome Instruments, India) for 20 h under 100 W power and 40 kHz frequency. Room temperature was maintained throughout the sonication process. After ultrasonication, a dark brown solution was obtained. To isolate SnS sheets, dispersed solutions were centrifuged (Tarson Product Pvt. Ltd.) at 8000 rpm for 15 min. The suspensions were then pipetted to obtain layered SnS sheets, which were used for further experiments. The UV-vis extinction spectra were recorded using Shimadzu UV-2450 spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, USA). All measurements were carried out with dispersion of exfoliated SnS nanosheets in solvent using a quartz cuvette (path length of 10 mm). Tapping mode AFM images were acquired in an instrument from Dimension Icon with ScanAsyst, Bruker, USA. The samples were prepared by dropcasting dispersion of layered SnS on cleaned Si substrate. The samples prepared from SnS nanosheets dispersed in acetone were dried at 100°C for 20 min. The annealing (solvent evaporation) was performed inside a glove box (Lab Star, MBraun, Germany) with O 2 and H 2 O levels <0.5 ppm. The annealed sample was placed on the AFM stage to scan. Pertinent scanning parameters were as follows: scan rate for all measurements -(0.678 Hz for Fig. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) analysis of the samples was performed by a TECNAI G2 200 kV (FEI, Electron Optics) electron microscope with 200 kV input voltage. Exfoliated SnS samples were dropcasted onto 300 square mesh cupper grids (from ICON) covered with a carbon film. The dropcasted grids were dried inside the glove box (O 2 <0.5 ppm and H 2 O<0.5 ppm) at room temperature. Further, precautions were taken to avoid dust particles. Raman spectroscopic measurements were carried out in the backscattering geometry using a confocal microRaman spectrometer (LABRAM HR Evolution, Horiba JobinYvon SAS) coupled with a Peltier cooled CCD and spectrometer. An unpolarized laser source of wavelength 532 nm was used to excite the samples. The incident laser beam was focused using a 50X long-working distance objective with a numerical aperture, NA = 0.05 and 1800 g/mm grating on the sample. The incident laser power density was 3.21 mW/μm 2 . For low temperature Raman spectroscopy measurements, the samples were placed inside a continuous flow liquid nitrogen cryostat (Linkam Scientific) with a stability of 0.1 K. The samples were prepared by dropcasting dispersion of SnS sheets on cleaned Si substrates and drying them inside the glove box (O 2 <0.5 ppm and H 2 O<0.5 ppm) at room temperature. The collected spectra were fitted with Lorentzian functions in OriginPro8.5. The Z-scan setup is consist of a Ti:sapphire regenerative amplifier (Spitfire ace, Spectra Physics) Ultrafast transient absorption (TA) was measured using a pump-probe set up, which is analogous to one reported by us All TA kinetic traces were fitted using MATLAB and Origin software. respectively. Here, each TA kinetics is divided by its DA value at 6 ps for clear understanding of the difference at early time. b, Peak TA signal as a function of injected exciton density. c, TA kinetics at 550 nm for various pump intensities: 92× 10 14 photons/cm 2 (black), 28× 10 14 photons/cm 2 (green), 15× 10 14 photons/cm 2 (blue) and 5× 10 14 photons/cm 2 (pink). Solid lines are fitting of the signal after 10 ps using a single exponential function having decay time t. d, Plot of t vs pump fluence. Straight line (parallel to x-axis) nature of this plot suggests that the decay kinetics after 10 ps is independent of incident photon density. absorber (see Supplementary Table