Designing platforms to control phase-coherence and interference of electron waves is a cornerstone for future quantum electronics, computing or sensing. Nanoporous graphene (NPG) consisting of linked graphene nanoribbons has recently been fabricated using molecular precursors and bottom-up assembly [Moreno et al, Science 360, 199 (2018)] opening an avenue for controlling the electronic current in a two-dimensional material. By simulating electron transport in real-sized NPG samples we predict that electron waves injected from the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) behave similarly to photons in coupled waveguides, displaying a Talbot interference pattern. We link the origins of this effect to the band structure of the NPG and further demonstrate how this pattern may be mapped out by a second STM probe. We enable atomistic parameter-free calculations beyond the 100 nm scale by developing a new multi-scale method where first-principles density functional theory regions are seamlessly embedded into a large-scale tight-binding. Introduction Controlling electron waves by harnessing phase-coherence and interference effects is a cornerstone for future nano-electronics Nanoporous graphene (NPG) holds great potential for distributing and controlling currents at the nanoscale Visualizing current flow in NPG represents the most direct route to tackle these questions in an experiment. Several techniques based on superconducting interferometry In this article we theoretically investigate to what extent one can inject currents along individual GNR channels in gated NPG-based devices contacted chemically to a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) probe. We develop a multi-scale method based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Non-Equilibrium Green's functions (NEGF), enabling current calculations with devices longer than 100 nm, relevant for experiments. This is accomplished by linking a perturbed contact region described by DFT to an unperturbed large-scale region described by an effective tight-binding (TB) model parametrized from DFT. We find that the inter-GNR coupling disrupts the longitudinal electron confinement into individual channels, giving rise to the Talbot effect, a fascinating interference phenomenon predicted to occur in discrete optical wave-guide systems Multi-scale method We carry out transport calculations based on NEGF where S and H are the model overlap and Hamiltonian and Σ i , called self-energies, connect the device to semiinfinite regions along x (electrodes). A self-energy allows to seamlessly connect different regions, be it infinite bulk or localized perturbations. We exploit this to embed one or more DFT-precision regions inside much larger TB models, needed to reach experimental relevant dimensions and observe interference. The central idea of this multi-scale approach is to construct the self-energy connecting p z orbitals of the outermost unperturbed DFT atoms (shaded frame in Fig. DFT calculations The positions of the outermost tip atom and the nearby ∼ 20 C atoms in the three-probe device are optimized until forces are less than 0.01 eV/Å. We consider two different positions of the tip, namely on top of a C atom in the middle of a ribbon or at a bridge between two C atoms linking two ribbons (see inset to Fig. Multi-scale calculations We visualize the electron flow near the contact through the injected density of states[34] and bond-currents from the tip, We observe similar results for injection into a bridge site, although the interference in this case is more blurred, since the injected currents start out by propagation in the two bridged ribbons (see Supporting Information). The Talbot effect The Talbot interference generally refers to repeated self-imaging of a diffraction grating where κ c represents the inter-channel coupling coefficient. The coefficient κ c can be regarded as a figure-of-merit for the degree of 1D confinement in the elements of the array: the lower the value of κ c , the lower the spread into the weakly coupled adjacent channels. In the particular case when only a single channel is initially excited, i.e. ψ n=0 = ψ 0 , the solutions for Eq. ( where J n is the Bessel function of the n th order. We find that the square modulus of Eq. ( Dual-probe multi-scale calculations The latest developments in STM have enabled measurements with up to four tips Conclusions and outlook In conclusion, we have explored how electrons injected by a STM probe in chemical contact to gated NPG-based devices behave in near and far field. By performing multi-scale parameterfree calculations of large-scale TB models of NPG with DFT-precision regions we found a clear signature of phase-coherence of electron waves, manifested in the far field as a Talbot interference effect. The origin of this phenomenon is the cross-talk between longitudinal 1D channels (GNRs) making up the NPG. Using proof-ofprinciple multi-probe calculations we have shown this interference effect may be observed in a dual-probe STM experiment. Further investigations could potentially shed light on the important impact of defects, substrate or pore functionalization on the current flow. Importantly, chemical design of the inter-ribbon bridges allows fine-tuning of the coupling strength κ c to improve 1D transport confinement. The Talbot effect in elastic, phase-coherent transport may be used to gain insights into the phase-breaking length in these structures due to various scattering mechanisms such as electron-phonon coupling. Finally, since topologically non-trivial states were found at the edges of chiral GNRs Below we provide Supporting Information on: i) Computational details; ii) DFT potential and charge distributions in gated NPG+tip systems; iii) transmission and near-field bond-currents from tip to DFT-modeled NPG; iv) multiscale method applied to NPG+tip systems; v) transmission and far-field bond-currents from DFT-precision tip to TB-modeled NPG; vi) bond-current maps from dual-probe calculations. The DFT electronic structure and optimized geometry for the NPG unit cell, with alternate A -B and B -A bridge environment as in Moreno et al. We run zero-bias DFT-NEGF calculations with Tran-Siesta for a three-probe device where the model tip, semi-infinite along the out-of-plane direction z, is placed ∼ 2Å above the NPG, in atomic contact with it above a "ribbon" or "bridge" site. We use a 2 × 7 NPG supercell (1449 atoms, 6.5 × 5.5 nm 2 ), periodic along the transverse direction x and with two semi-infinite electrodes (top and bottom) along the longitudinal direction y. Contrary to the device setup reported in For the large TB+NEGF we generate NPG supercells containing up to 356.160 atoms and covering areas up to 100×120 nm 2 . No periodic boundary conditions are used (i.e. TBtrans k-points grid includes only Γ). Injectced currents are drained into semi-infinite electrodes along y and absorbed along x using complex absorbing potentials (CAP) We visualize current flow in the devices plotting 2D bond-current maps, summing all bond-currents values flowing out of each atom (only positive-valued bond currents are considered). The color map is scaled in proportion to the current magnitude, so that areas with low to zero current appear in blue. Color range is normalized to the maximum value of current in the device and is often adjusted to enhance contrast. NPG+tip systems The electrostatic potential and charge distribution in the NPG are affected by application of a gate voltage as illustrated in Fig. Carbon p z levels are doped locally in the mesh when the gold STM tip is in contact with the NPG, as shown in Fig. In order to visualize the current flow in the 2D mesh we calculate bond-currents among the NPG atoms while injecting electrons with various energies from the tip, as illustrated in Fig. Multi-scale method applied to NPG+tip systems Below we just highlight a few additional aspects of the multi-scale DFT+TB method applied in the context of this work. The main idea of the approach is to transfer relevant information about electron transport between two different models by constructing a special self-energy term which connects them. The typical protocol applied to study NPG+tip systems, relying on the versatility of sisl, is: i) setup a DFT model of the contact between NPG and a STM tip; ii) compute the self-energy which connects all C p z orbitals in the outermost unperturbed area of the DFT cell to all the other orbitals in it; iii) construct a large TB model by projecting a pristine DFT Hamiltonian onto the C p z orbitals; iv) incorporate the self-energy locally into this TB model as an extra electrode. One important requirement is that the DFT cell containing NPG and tip is large enough to have an unperturbed potential in its outermost regions, which is where the self-energy needs to be projected. Another important requirement is that the TB model is as compatible as possible to the DFT model. This is accomplished by defining the TB parameters directly as the elements in the DFT Hamiltonian and overlap associated to the main orbitals governing transport in the energy range of interest. For the NPG case, analysis of the various orbital contributions to the DFT bandstructure reveals that longitudinal bands are predominantly dominated by carbons p z orbitals (Fig. Analysis of the bands velocity vectors (Fig. We benchmark the applicability of the multi-scale method by inserting the DFT precision injection region inside a geometry which has the same size and boundary conditions of the DFT setup (open along the longitudinal direction and periodic along the transverse) (Fig. We introduce the DFT injection region into a larger 65 nm × 80 nm TB model of a device with 2 bulk NPG electrodes (Fig. We find that the interference pattern maximum divergence angle varies slightly with energy (Fig. 