A fast and accurate predictive tool for polymer properties is demanding and will pave the way to iterative inverse design. In this work, we apply graph convolutional neural networks (GCNN) to predict the dielectric constant and energy bandgap of polymers. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculated properties as the ground truth, GCNN can achieve remarkable agreement with DFT results. Moreover, we show that GCNN outperforms other machine learning algorithms. Our work proves that GCNN relies only on morphological data of polymers and removes the requirement for complicated hand-crafted descriptors, while still offering accuracy in fast predictions. Polymers are materials with tunable structures and chemical functionality that influence their physical and chemical properties. Describing the polymer in its most basic form typically constitutes identifying the atoms that make up the material as well as their arrangement with respect to each other, determined by the type of bonding that holds the material together. For inorganic crystals, where long range order is necessary, the material can be described as a lattice and a basis, where the lattice reflects the symmetry of the crystal structure, while the basis is the repeating unit. Polymers, on the other hand, are largely amorphous. This is because they do not exhibit such long range order as they do not conform to any lattice unless specifically phase controlled. However, certain polymeric properties are intrinsic to the monomer unit and translate well to actual applications. This is especially true for ground state properties such as the dielectric constant and the polymer bandgap. The dielectric constant is a reflection of the electronic polarizability of the polymer and is a consequence of the bonding nature between the constituent atoms. Typically, the bandgap depends upon the strength of the bonding. Therefore, one would expect that knowing the atoms that constitute the monomer as well as how they bond with each other -resulting in a fingerprint morphological character -is sufficient information to predict these properties. Such information is uniquely contained in a polymer's Crystallographic Information File (CIF), which can then be converted to a two-dimensional (2D) graph and used as an input into a convolutional neural network to predict the above-mentioned properties. In addition to morphological character intrinsic to the polymer, typically, environmental considerations are also important. Their physio-chemical environment is a complex multi-variable parameter space; intra and inter chain effects due to multi-valency and chain coiling affects functional properties, but is expected to be less influential for ground state properties. More complex descriptors that have been used in complementary approaches involve a combination of detailed atomic and morphological information along with environmental interactions. To investigate the accuracy of GCNN on predicting physical properties of polymers, we use the publicly available dataset at the Polymergenome Project. 3 Experimental Setup To build a regression model, the input of GCNN includes CIF files recording the structure of the polymers, the target properties for each polymer and a JSON file that stores the initialization vector for each atom. A polymer graph can be represented by nodes and edges using the atomic feature vector v i and the bonding feature vector u (i;j) k , respectively. The database is randomly divided into training, validation and test sets with the ratio of 6:2:2. The network parameters are optimized via Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), and the optimum hyperparameters are determined by the lowest mean absolute error (MAE) in the validation set using the DFT result as the ground truth. We ran two experiments to demonstrate that GCNN can obtain comparable accuracy to DFT for polymers. Here we focus on the bandgap (E g ) and the dielectric constant (ε). These two properties are important in order to screen polymer materials regardless of specific applications. The DFT results of E g and ε are used as the ground truth. They are obtained with hybrid electron exchangecorrelation functionals and density functional perturbation theory, respectively. Besides GCNN, where we only use the cif and the atomic .json files as inputs, we also use other Machine Learning (ML) methods to establish a regression model for the polymer structure-property relationship. The feature extraction of the polymer dataset is implemented with the Matminer package. Given the strength of the GCNN predictions, it is good to note that the present approach has two limitations. The first is that the ground truth is based on simulations rather than experimental data, which is a result of the difficulty of performing high-throughput experiments and hence sparse experimental data. The second is that the present technique only allows for the prediction of bulk polymeric properties as opposed to polymer-solvent interactions and composites. While the first limitation is due to lack of data availability, the second could be addressed by investigating feature importance using the GCNN to allow for interpretability. We seek inspiration from a recent work on developing a methodology of vectorizing individual molecular descriptors via multidimensional correlation to account for such complexities, thereby enabling the discovery of novel functional molecules. We applied several machine learning algorithms to predict dielectric constant and bandgap from a large dataset of crystallography data of polymers. Our models included graph convolution neural network, random forest, kernel regression, gradient boosting and conventional neural network, where the lowest mean absolute error for both properties were reported for GCNN. These results indicate that GCNN offers an effective approach for fast and accurate prediction of polymer properties starting from the atomic and morphological character of polymer. This conceptual advance allows us to move into the realm of faster predictions, relying on a smaller amount of metadata, and paves the way for inverse design, where polymers can be designed with a final property in mind.