Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials provide a wide range of basic building blocks with unique properties, making them ideal for heterogeneous integration with a mature chip platform for advances in optical communication technology. Control and understanding of the precise value of the optical index of these materials, however, is challenging, due to the small lateral flake dimension. Here we demonstrate a semiempirical method to determine the index of a 2D material (nMoTe2 of 4.36+0.011i) near telecommunicationrelevant wavelength by integrating few layers of MoTe2 onto a micro-ring resonator. The placement, control, and optical-property understanding of 2D materials with integrated photonics paves a way for further studies of active 2D material-based optoelectronics and circuits. The ever-increased demand for high performance computing requires efficient on-chip interconnects In order to obtain an understanding of phase modulation in heterogeneous integrated systems, it is important to understand the interaction between TMDCs and a MRR. Unlike other larger-bandgap TMDCs (for example, MoS2, WS2 MoSe2, WSe2), the optical bandgap of few layered MoTe2 (~0.9 eV) is smaller than the bandgap of Si (~1.1 eV), allows a facile integration with Si photonic platform. Here, the aim is to improve the waveguide bus-to-ring coupling efficiency by shifting the phase through introducing a few-layered of MoTe2 flakes on top of the resonator (Fig. The performance of a ring resonator is determined by two coefficients: the self-coupling coefficient (r), which specifies the fraction of the light transmitted on each pass through the coupler; and the round-trip transmission coefficient (a), which specifies the fraction of the light transmitted per pass around the ring. For the critical coupling condition, i.e. when the coupled power is equal to the power loss in the ring 1-a2=k2 or a=r, (k=cross coupling coefficient), the transmission at resonance becomes zero. At this point, the difference (|a-r|) is found to be minimum at ~10% of coverage (Fig. where, φ is the round-trip phase shift, a is round-trip transmission coefficient related to the power attenuation coefficients by, where l = TMDC coverage length, ⍺Si and ⍺TMDC-Si are the linear propagation losses for Si waveguide and TMDC-transferred portion of the Si waveguide in the ring, respectively. We find the propagation loss for Si and TMDC-Si to be 0.008 dB/μm and 0.4 dB/μm (Fig. Inserting these values into (2), we find the round-trip transmission coefficients (a) to be tuned as a function of TMDCs coverage (Fig. , therefore, the critical-coverage (a=r) anticipates zero-output transmittance. Hence, for a given MRR (fixed k2), the critical coverage value could be determined provided lossless coupling (r2+k2=1) (Fig. where, R is the radius of the ring and l is the MoTe2 coverage length. Using (3), it is straightforward to find neff, after TMDCs transfer. Once, neff is known, we can find the effective index of the heterogeneous optical mode (SOI plus TMDC) through Eigenmode analysis for a device geometry and provide experimentally measured thickness values of the flake (~35 nm). By sweeping the value of the TMDC (nTMDCs range = [3.5, 5]), material index in cross-sectional Eigenmode analysis of the waveguide structure in the MoTe2 transferred section of the ring (Fig. The technology outlook for heterogeneous integrating 2D materials with photonic integrated circuits is to develop next generation optoelectronic components such as modulators and photodetectors. These universal building blocks can be assembled in circuits for i) data links and interconnects including hybrid-technology options In conclusion, we have studied the interaction between few layers of MoTe2 and Si MRR for the first time. We observed tunability of the coupling strength i.e. the ring resonator can be tuned from the over-coupled to the under-coupled regime while passing through the critically-coupled point. We further demonstrated a semi-empirical approach to determine the index of miniscule (~500 nm) TMDCs material flakes using the sensitivity of the ring resonator. These findings along with the developed methodology for placing MRRs into critical coupling for active device functionality and determining the refractive index of 2D materials could be useful tools in future heterogeneous integrated photonic and optoelectronic devices. This developed technique could also be used to determine the optical refractive index of monolayer 2D materials, which is challenging with traditional techniques due to lateral TMDCs flake size, and atomic thickness of these materials.