Metallic nanohole arrays have shown their potential as sensing tools. Important research supported by sophisticated laboratory experiments have been recently carried out, that may help to develop practical devices to be implemented in the real life. To get this goal, the gap between industry and technology at the nanoscale level must be overcome. One of the major drawbacks is the quality inspection of the manufactured nanostructured surfaces to ensure a reliable sensing. In this paper we introduce an optical method, based on the Extraordinary Optical Transmission phenomenon, for an inspection of such surfaces at industrial level. Unlike usual techniques like SEM, our method gives at the same time, a quick map of the surface homogeneity together with its local plasmonic performance. Our results show that this method is reproducible and reliable as to give a "seal of identification" and quality guarantee of the manufactured surface as basic element of a sensing device. Nanotechnology has revolutionized science during last decades unveiling new phenomena. In particular, when incident light goes through a periodic array of subwavelength apertures in a thin metallic film, resonance peaks are clearly observed in the transmission spectra. At their corresponding wavelengths, the intensity of the transmitted light is effectively larger than that predicted by conventional diffraction theory Nanohole arrays in metallic films have been vastly investigated for the development of biosensors devoted to medical diagnosis and to the detection of environmental pollutants. Its resonant behavior often leads to large field enhancement which is advantageous in other applications such as Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) The incorporation of this kind of nanostructured films, henceforth called sensing chips, in biochemical sensing devices has several advantages: it allows a minimally invasive label-free sensing, the films may be easily included in size-reduced multiplexing microfluidic devices, and it is compatible with simple optical set-ups based on the detection of light transmitted through the perpendicular direction of the films surface However, it is difficult to translate these sensor devices to the technological industry, because it needs a rigorous quality-control of the sensing chips through accurate, fast and low-cost techniques. Since the lack of homogeneity in some of the nano-features may lead to undesirable optical responses There are three different methods for the mass production of nanohole films: 1) replication, 2) self-assembly and 3) direct pattern projection Current characterization techniques used for the nanohole film quality-control are restricted to the inspection of very small areas, usually much smaller than the sensing chip (few squared micrometers at most). The inspection of larger areas is not easily affordable, because it implies high costs and long operation times. For instance, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) The spectral analysis of the light transmitted through the nanohole arrays in metallic films is a simple and fast way to characterize their EOT properties, preserving their collective nature; specifically, through the identification of the wavelengths at which the maximum light transmission occurs. The nanohole arrays characterization done by independent measurements of the transmission spectra in small regions along the whole metallic film is ideal for the identification of inhomogeneities within a sensing chip. Unlike the first experimental report on EOT phenomenon measurements, based on the use of a spectrophotometer for the measurement of an average spectrum resulting from the whole contribution of the sensing surface The development of microspectrographic devices dates from 1940 There are just few reports on the study of nanohole patterned surfaces by means of microspectrographic methods. The first one dates from 1999 Later, in 2007, it was also reported the periodic modulation of transmitted intensity through subwavelength hole arrays surrounded by surface resonant cavities A more recent work reports an innovative label-free optofluidic biosensor for single-cell cytokine secretion analysis based on nanohole arrays Bearing in mind the previous considerations, the development of an optical inspection tool which bridges the lab-industry gap is highly desirable. Here, we describe the adaptation of an optical microscope to perform scanning spectrographic microscopy in large areas of the sensing chip surfaces. We suggest its use to check the homogeneity of the spectral response along all the nanohole patterned surfaces. It would require less time and costs than those required by other approaches. The proposed method has an additional feature, it allows to work with nanohole patterned surfaces already embedded in microfluidic cartridges, because its operation is based on the optical far-field regime. Thus, the sensing chips can be calibrated insitu, avoiding any damage introduced during a chip encapsulation process and enabling their later use for the detection of the specific position of biochemical events or for the detection of biological specimens by means of transmitted light spectral shifts. Furthermore, it can be used to compare signals coming from different channels in a multiplexed system and consequently, to identify the detected specimen. We consider that this method could speed up the quality-control of the nanohole patterned surfaces, bridging the gap between lab and technological devices. In particular, the mass production of these nanopatterned surfaces and their use in biosensing devices could be benefited from our proposed inspection technique. This manuscript is organized as follows. First, a Materials and Experimental section where it is described: (A) the features of the nanohole patterned surfaces used in this work, (B) the optical set-up, (C) the set-up illumination features, and (D) the set-up reliability. Then, a Results section where it is discussed: (A) the reproducibility of the set-up measurements and (B) the set-up performance in comparison to SEM. Finally, the main conclusions are reported. The performance of our device was tested using nanopatterned surfaces made by Nanoimprint Lithography, according to a previously reported process The nanopatterned surfaces are 50 nm thick gold films (99.999%) deposited on a glass slide coated with a 3 nm Ti film. Ti works as an adhesive between gold and glass. The nanostructures are square periodic arrays of circular nanoholes. The period of the square array is 500 nm and the average diameter of the nanoholes is 230 nm which are standard parameters to give a sensitivity of the order of 400 nm/RIU for a wavelength of 750nm for the maximum transmitted intensity at the plasmon resonance The set-up for the inspection of the nanopatterned surfaces is a scanning spectrographic microscope. This device is able to measure the transmission spectrum of the nanopatterned surfaces in regions as small as few squared m. The diameter enclosing such regions is going to be denoted by D from now on. Besides, the device is also able to scan the nanopatterned surface, measuring the spectra of regions of diameter D, at a rate of 16 m 2 /second. The results can be visualized as maps of the nanopatterned surface, where D x D m 2 pixels are associated to the maximum spectral wavelength in the restricted regions where the spectra were measured. The experimental set-up is depicted in figure In this set-up, the pupil from the microscope built-in field stop is modified by means of the incorporation of a tailored pinhole (denoted as field pinhole from now on), placed at a distance z above the field stop. The condenser lens is shifted to a new position placed at a distance z' above its built-in position in such a way that the new distances from the nanohole patterned surface to the condensing lens and to the field pinhole produces a 0.1 lateral magnification. Therefore, if the light passes through a circular field pinhole of diameter D', it is focused on the nanopatterned surface in the form of a D=D'/10 diameter circular spot. The light transmitted through the nanopatterned surface is collected by the objective lens and, by means of the collecting lens, it is focused on the entrance of the optical fiber to be transmitted to the spectrograph where its spectrum is acquired. Figure For a biosensing purpose, changes in the local effective refractive index in the illuminated volume close to the nanopatterned surface, depend on the optical properties and volume of any "imperfection" (biological or simply due to the manufacturing process) with respect to an ideal sensing chip. Thus, a reduced illuminated area increases the fill factor due to that "imperfection", modifying the effective refractive index of the volume close to the sensing surface. The inset shows the pinhole and condensing lens positions in the microscope. This set-up is intended to measure the transmission spectra of the light passing through circular regions of diameter D of the nanopatterned sensing surface. In order to check the performance of our method, the value of D was fixed to 20m. This was chosen looking at the sensor capability for sensing micron-sized biological objects randomly distributed on its surface, like for instance some of those contained in a liquid biopsy (leukocytes, possible cancer cells, etc). As it is shown in figure We determined the set-up temporal stability in order to know the maximum error associated to its measurements. The temporal stability was determined by means of the measurement and analysis of the spectra of the light passing always through the same region of the sensing chip, which was continuously illuminated along 300 minutes. The figure It is important to note that these results were acquired along a period of time larger than the typical one required for a usual scanning of a 260 x 260 m 2 square nanopatterned surface. The origin of the data fluctuations along the operation of the set-up may reside in a mixture of the following factors inherent to the set-up design: component mechanical stability, spectral and intensity stability in the illuminating source of light, and temporal stability in the spectrograph CCD. Statistical analysis of the measurements on nanohole patterned surfaces were carried out to know the optical set-up performance. Besides, the application of the optical setup to find imperfections and impurities on sensing chips was compared with the capabilities of optical microscopy and SEM for the same purpose. Ten independent microspectrographic scannings were carried out on a sensing chip immersed in water, by means of the microfluidic system described in section 2. The sensing chip looked mostly homogeneous under the optical microscope and almost free of imperfections after a SEM inspection, as it is shown in figure Just for the sake of clarity, the maps in figure The map in figure On the other hand, a map of the standard deviation associated to each one of the values shown in the spectroscopic map of figure The auxiliary map and its values are shown in figures 6c and 6d. It is noteworthy the high reproducibility of the measurements. The maximum standard deviation is just 0.45 nm, which is not a larger value than the maximum range associated to the set-up temporal stability. Analogously, the optical sensitivity along the whole sensing chip was determined too. Scannings over the whole sensing chip were carried out with the chip immersed in several media, each one with a different refractive index. Five independent scannings were done for each one of the media. These were sucrose/water solutions at: 0, 20, 40 and 60 wt%, whose respective refractive indexes are 1.3333, 1.3620, 1.3907 and 1.4178. The optical sensitivity was calculated in nm/RIU units by least mean squares fittings of the maximum spectral wavelengths for each scanning position as function of the medium refractive index. The figures 6e and 6f show the optical sensitivity values along the sensing chip while the figures 6g and 6h give an idea of their uncertainties in terms of their corresponding standard deviations. Even if the nanohole patterned surface looks homogeneous under the optical microscope, the optical set-up is able to detect different optical sensitivities along the EOT surface. As much as we know this is the first time that a scanning map of optical sensitivities is reported for an EOT surface; it is usually reported the average optical sensitivity of the whole nanopatterned surface. Maps of the optical responses of EOT surfaces are of paramount importance to perform the quality-control of their fabrication and to have a background reference of those surfaces when used as sensors of discrete moieties inhomogeneously distributed inside a test fluid medium. It is possible to see, from figures 6g and 6h, that most of the standard deviations have similar values, it is due to the optical set-up measurements reproducibility. Due to the intrinsic limitations in the fabrication of EOT surfaces by any nanofabrication technique, these are not always mostly homogeneous. Sometimes, the imperfections are clearly visible under the optical microscope, but there are many situations where imperfections are only detected through SEM. However, in both cases, just the detection of the imperfections is not enough to know their effect on the EOT phenomenon. Due to the collective nature of this phenomenon, sometimes not all the imperfections destroy the effect locally. Our set-up is able to detect imperfections as well as to determine their effect on the plasmonic performance in regions of the nanopatterned surface where the illumination spot is restricted. The set-up is able to detect large inhomogeneities in the sensing chips, as much as an optical microscope may do, but it also points out such of them which really destroy the EOT phenomenon. This feature highlights the set-up as an attractive alternative for the quality control of the sensing chips. For example, in an analogous way to what was described in the previous section, several spectrographic scannings were carried out on a nanohole patterned surface with randomly distributed imperfections. First, the sensing chip was scanned in water to determine its homogeneity, then the optical sensitivies along the sensing chip was determined. In the first case, after ten independent scannings, the optical set-up was able to detect the large surface inhomogeneities through maps based on the mean maximum spectral wavelength values. Their corresponding standard deviations are directly related to the reproducibility of the measurements. In figure In figures 7 and 8, it is shown the correspondence between the spatial positions of the large imperfections and their effect on the optical response, which is clearly different to the optical response of the homogeneous regions. In both figures it is also evident that not all the imperfections modify the optical response in the same way. This is due to the collective nature of the EOT phenomenon; actually, the particular results shown in the figures correspond to the illumination of around 10 3 nanoholes for each pixel in the map. The inspection of nanohole patterned surfaces with imperfections so small that they are not resolved by optical microscopy is usually carried out by SEM. The optical microscopy has not enough spatial resolution to resolve nanometric motives because diffraction limitations, but the SEM high spatial resolution is ideal to perform detailed inspections of the quality and homogeneity of the nanoholes distributed in small areas, however, its associated high costs, large operation times and limitations to scan large surfaces makes it unavailable for practical purposes. The scanning spectrographic microscopy fills the gap between the optical microscopy and SEM, it is useful for the inspection of homogeneity in large EOT surfaces, even if they are already embedded in transparent microfluidic cartridges. The scanning spectrographic microscopy set-up allows to control the quality of the nanostructures through the acquisition and analysis of the transmission spectra coming from regions restricted to 20 m in diameter. After a scanning along the whole surface, the homogeneity of the optical response due to the nanoholes may be determined through the analysis of the collected spectra. With this technique, the operation time and costs associated to the inspection of surfaces as large as few cm 2 in area are much lower than those associated to the use of SEM. In comparison to the optical microscopy, this technique provides information about the nanopatterned surfaces beyond the diffraction limited optical microscopy resolution, because the transmission spectra measured by this technique are related to the quality of the nanoholes, whose sizes are shorter than the optical wavelength. Figure In Fig. In a similar way, the fabrication defects are detected too. In figure Figure In figure Figure In this paper, we have introduced an optical technique for physical inspection of metallic thin films with nanohole arrays, intended to be implemented at industrial level. It is based on the detection of the wavelength spectral variations of the maxima positions of the light transmitted by micron-sized illuminated areas, taking advantage of the Extraordinary Optical Transmission phenomenon. As compared with usual techniques like SEM or other related electronic microscopy techniques, our proposed method is fast and accurate enough as to give a full surface homogeneity map of the nanopatterned surface in a short time. Electronic microscopy techniques can give geometry details of very small areas, but they are not able to show how these behave from a plasmonic point of view. Our results have been validated with periodic nanohole patterned surfaces manufactured by NIL techniques. They show that the proposed technique is reproducible and reliable as to give a seal of identification of the manufactured surface (a chessboard-like map) which can be used as a background for its further application as a sensing device, especially when micron-sized biological material (i.e. cells) are distributed non-homogeneously on its surface. This method is easily industrializable and can be extended to the inspection of either periodic or non-periodic nanostructured surfaces. Elkartek Program 2017 (μ4F, KK-2017/00089), United States International Technology Center-Atlantic (award # W911NF-17-2-0023) Authors want to express their gratitude to SODERCAN (Sociedad para el Desarrollo de Cantabria) and Vicerrectorado de Investigación of the University of Cantabria. A.I.B. wants to thank the University of Cantabria for her FPU grant.