We present a comprehensive study on metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy growth of N-polar and Alpolar AlN on 4H-SiC with 4 • miscut using constant growth parameters. At a high temperature of 1165 • C, N-polar AlN layers had high crystalline quality whereas the Al-polar AlN surfaces had a high density of etch pits. For N-polar AlN, the V/III ratio below 1000 forms hexagonal hillocks, while the V/III ratio over 1000 yields step bunching without the hillocks. 1-μm-thick m-thick N-polar AlN layer grown in optimal conditions exhibited FWHMs of 307, 330 and 337 arcsec for (002), ( III-nitride (III-N) alloys are currently used in a plethora of electronic and light emitting applications, such as, high-electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). In III-Ns, AlN is a promising material for high-power and high-temperature applications because of its high critical electric field and high thermal conductivity. AlN is grown on sapphire, Si, silicon carbide (SiC), and native substrates SiC substrates are suitable for commercial high crystalline-quality AlN growth because of the small lattice mismatch of 1% between AlN and SiC in addition to a sufficiently large wafer size. AlN is typically grown by metal-organic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). MOVPE is preferred for commercial scale fabrication of AlN. The AlN layers grown on SiC by MOVPE have exhibited small X-ray rocking curve (XRC) full width half maximums (FWHMs) of 76 and 360 arcsec measured for (002) and (102) reflections, respectively Wurtzite III-N has two types of polar planes, metal-polar (001) and N-polar (001). N-polar III-Ns have several benefits for device applications due to the polarization induced electric field. For example, in N-polar GaN/AlGaN HEMTs the top GaN layers offer low contact resistances and the AlGaN back barrier provides low buffer-leak current However, high-quality N-polar III-N growth is difficult because of higher binding energies, different diffusion pathways of adatoms and anisotropic lateral growth rate of surface steps, compared to metal-polar III-N growth In this report, we present a comprehensive study on the MOVPE growth for both N-polar and Alpolar AlN on 4H-SiC with a miscut of 4 • . The growth rate was kept at a constant low value by altering the precursor mass flows when either the V/III-ratio or temperature was varied to separate these effects on surface morphology and crystalline quality. The layer crystalline quality was evaluated using high-resolution x-ray diffraction (HR-XRD) measurements. The surface roughness was determined with atomic force microscopy (AFM). Defect selective etching was applied to confirm the sample polarity. 200-nm-thick N-and Al-polar AlN layers were grown on C-and Si-face of 4H-SiC substrates, respectively, by MOVPE. The SiC substrates had an intentional miscut of 4 • towards < 110 >. The MOVPE reactor had a close-coupled showerhead configuration. Trimethylaluminium (TMAl) and ammonia (NH 3 )were used as precursors for aluminum and nitrogen, respectively. Hydrogen was used as the carrier gas. The SiC surfaces were cleaned in-situ for 20 min at 1180 • C in a hydrogen ambient prior to AlN growth. The nominal substrate surface temperature was between 1070 • C and 1165 • C during AlN growth. The temperature was estimated using an emissivity corrected in-situ pyrometer. The growth pressure was 50 mbar. The AlN layers were grown in a single step. Three-axis HR-XRD measurements (Philips X'Pert Pro) were performed to assess the crystalline quality of the grown AlN layers. Rocking curve scans around the symmetrical (002) and various skew-symmetrical reflections were recorded. The setup consisted of an X-ray mirror, a 4 × Ge (220) monochromator and an analyzer crystal. X-ray wavelength of the copper K α1 emission line was used. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) (NT-MDT NTEGRA Aura) was used to measure the surface roughness of the grown AlN layers. Defect selective etching was applied to investigate the sample polarity Common growth parameters for Al-polar AlN on Si-face SiC were used initially. N-polar and Alpolar AlN layers were grown at substrate surface temperature of 1070 • C with a growth rate of 0.5 μm-thick m/h. Both N-polar and Al-polar AlN layers exhibited the same growth rate for the same growth conditions. Figure To study the N-polar and Al-polar AlN growth characteristics, a series of growths over a wide V/IIIratio range from 100 to 27000 were performed. A low growth rate of 0.1 μm-thick m/h and a high substratesurface temperature of 1150 • C, both of which enable the enhancement of the migration length of adatoms, were selected to suppress the formation of hexagonal hillocks. The growth parameters were adjusted towards values reported for N-polar AlN growth because Al-polar AlN has a wider growth window for good crystalline quality Figure The V/III-ratio has a significant impact on the dominating growth mode of N-polar AlN as seen from Figures The dependence of surface kinetics on vapor supersaturation has been used to explain the surface morphology of Al-polar AlN For Al-polar AlN growth, a high density of pits (5.0 × 10 10 /cm 2 ) was observed on the sample surface grown at the low V/III-ratio of 100 (Figure Defect selective etching was applied to confirm the sample polarity. The Al-polar and N-polar AlN layers grown at a nominal substrate surface temperature of 1150 • C with a V/III-ratio of 1000 and 27000 were etched with a molten eutectic mixture of KOH-NaOH with 10% of MgO (E+M) powder. Figure Wet etching is an accurate method for determining III-N layer polarity due to the vastly different etch rates of N-polar and Al-polar surfaces Figure Based on Figure To investigate the effect of growth temperature on N-polar and Al-polar AlN growth, both N-polar and Al-polar AlN layers were grown simultaneously using a V/III-ratio of 1000 and nominal substrate surface temperatures between 1080 • C and 1165 • C. The growth rate of both N-polar and Alpolar AlN layers was maintained at 0.1 μm-thick m/h throughout the series by altering the precursor mass flows. N-polar AlN surfaces are independent of the growth temperature, while Al-polar AlN surfaces have a high density of pits as the growth temperature increases, e.g., 5.0 × 10 10 /cm 2 at 1150 • C. Figure A 1-μm-thick m-thick N-polar AlN layer was grown in order to confirm the stability of the step flow growth mode and to allow more accurate crystalline quality analysis. Figure Figure where β hkl , β tilt , β twist and χ are the measured width of a diffraction peak with Miller indices (hkl), peak broadening due to crystalline tilt, peak broadening due to crystalline twist and measurement inclination angle for the diffraction peak with Miller indices (hkl), respectively. Equation 1 can be converted to be a function of sin 2 χ for linear fitting: Typically the reflection having the higher inclination angle is considered to be a better figure of merit for III-N overall crystalline quality due to the higher density of edge dislocations. The reported XRC FWHMs of N-polar AlN layers grown on SiC by MOVPE are 468 and 684 arcsec for (002) and (102) reflections, respectively The obtained peak broadening components can be used to estimate the screw and edge dislocation densities, assuming randomly distributed dislocations, using the following expressions N-and Al-polar AlN layers were grown on C-and Si-surfaces of 4H-SiC substrates with an intentional miscut of 4 • towards < 110 > by MOVPE. A low growth rate of 0.1 μm-thick m/h was effective for N-polar AlN to improve the crystalline quality and to suppress hexagonal hillocks. At a high temperature of 1165 • C, N-polar AlN layers had high crystalline quality but showed a step bunching surface morphology, whereas the Al-polar AlN surfaces had a high density of etch pits. For N-polar AlN, the V/III ratio below 1000 forms hexagonal hillocks, while the V/III ratio over 1000 yields step bunching without the hillocks. 1-μm-thick m-thick N-polar AlN layer grown in optimal conditions exhibited FWHMs of 307, 330 and 337 arcsec for (002), ( 