Recently, we showed that the self-field transport critical current, I c (sf), of a superconducting wire can be defined in a more fundamental way than the conventional (and arbitrary) electric field criterion, E c = 1 μV/cm. We defined I c (sf) as the threshold current, I c,B , at which the perpendicular component of the local magnetic flux density, B ⊥ , measured at any point on the surface of a high-temperature superconducting tape abruptly crosses over from a non-linear to a linear dependence with increasing transport current. This effect results from the current distribution across the tape width progressively transitioning from non-uniform to uniform. The completion of this progressive transition was found to be singular. It coincides with the first discernible onset of dissipation and immediately precedes the formation of a measureable electric field. Here, we show that the same I c,B definition of critical currents applies in the presence of an external applied magnetic field, B a . In all experimental data presented here I c,B is found to be significantly (10-30%) lower than I c,E determined by the common electric field criterion of E c = 1 μV/cm, and E c to be up to 50 times lower at I c,B than at I c,E . Dissipation-free electric current transport is one of the most fascinating and practically important properties of superconductors. The fundamental origins of the limitations to these dissipation-free currents, including conditions in which an external magnetic field, B a , is applied, are of central interest in both pure and applied superconductivity. The conventional approach to describing dissipation-free currents in superconductors is based on the concept of a critical current, I c , which is commonly defined as the current at which the electric field, E, along the conductor resulting from the onset of dissipation reaches a certain measurable value, E c 1 , usually defined to be 1 μV/cm 2,3 . We will designate critical currents defined in this way by I c,E . There have been several proposals to define the critical current based on other criteria, for instance, a resistive criterion or a power dissipation per unit volume criterion 4 . The complexity of the problem was discussed in detail in many reports Despite the fact that these various definitions of I c satisfy the requirements of many practical applications of superconductors, they do not however reflect the true nature of the limits to dissipation-free current flow in superconductors for which the resulting electric field E, as well as the resistance and power dissipation should be zero. In attempting to resolve this problem, recently from x = -a to x = +a. We observed a distinct threshold value of the transport current at which dissipation sets in. More importantly, at this threshold current, I c,B , three simultaneous processes occur: 1. An abrupt transition from a non-linear to a linear dependence of B ⊥ (I), as observed at all locations, x, on the superconductor surface. 2. A crossover from a non-uniform to a uniform current distribution across the tape width The observed non-linear behaviour arises from current redistribution across the tape width as the critical state progresses from the edges towards the centre; and the abrupt transition to linear behaviour occurs when the entire conductor divergently reaches the critical state, as characterised by a uniform current. It is tempting to infer that, because B ⊥ (I, x) suddenly becomes linear in I at all points across the surface then this implies a transformation of the whole tape at I c,B . However, B ⊥ (I, x) reflects the local current density integrated across the entire width. Just below I c,B much of the tape is already in the critical state and it is simply the last singular transition to the critical state near the centre that causes a discontinuity in B ⊥ (I, x) at all points x across the surface. Nonetheless the critical state is thermodynamically determined and thus I c has a thermodynamic origin Others have used Hall probes to measure the field distribution across HTS conductors. For example, Tallouli and coworkers Our focus is to describe the spatial evolution of the critical state and demonstrate the fundamental thermodynamic origins of the onset of dissipation in practical conductors. We show that our definition of self-field critical currents as I c,B (sf) is naturally extended to in-field critical currents, I c,B (B). We also show that the hysteretic evolution of the current and field distribution can be accurately calculated using the equations of Norris Two distinct experiments were performed on commercial REBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (REBCO) coated conductor tapes (second-generation, 2 G, wire). In both experiments the applied field is normal to the tape surface i.e. parallel to the crystallographic c-axis. The first experiment, carried out using a 1.5-Tesla-scale laboratory magnet/cryostat, studied tapes manufactured by SuNAM Co., Ltd. (SAN04200-161031-01) having a width of 2a = 4 mm and a GdBCO layer thickness of 2b = 1.9 μm. Angular in-field critical current data, I c,E (T, B, θ) for this wire is also available A cryogenic Hall-effect sensor array (MULTI-7U) obtained from Arepoc s.r.o. (Slovakia) was used to measure the perpendicular component of the local surface magnetic flux density, B ⊥ , at various points across the width of the sample as shown schematically in Fig. For practical wires and cables transport current data are often presented in the form of I-E curves where E 0 is an instrumental offset and k is a linear term used to accommodate incomplete current transfer in short samples. In the second experiment using a different apparatus we measured the field distribution across the width of 10 mm wide GdBCO coated-conductor tapes manufactured by Fujikura Ltd. (FYSC-S10 10-0025-02). The samples were immersed in a bath of liquid nitrogen (i.e. at 77 K) and a Helmholtz coil was used to apply a field up to B a = 80 mT (data not reported below). The voltage taps for measuring critical current were positioned along the tapes approximately 12 cm apart, with a Hall sensor array placed half way between the two voltage taps, spanning the width of the conductor. Each sample length of superconducting tape used was 15 to 20 cm long between the current supply leads. Voltage measurements were acquired on an Agilent 34420 A nanovoltmeter using a 100 μV range, and the transport current was supplied by an Agilent 6680 A constant-current power supply. V-I characteristics were measured up to 600 A and the critical current was, again, determined according to the usual 1 μV/cm electric-field criterion. In these experiments the Hall sensor array is a seven-element linear array (THV-MOD) also manufactured by Arepoc s.r.o. (Slovakia) operating with an excitation current of 4 mA. The manufacturer's field and temperature sensitivity calibrations were used for each individual sensor. A seven-channel preamplifier with a DC gain of 1300 was used to amplify the Hall voltage signals, and the data was captured with a National Instruments c-DAQ acquisition system with an integration time of 0.5 s, run under a LabVIEW platform. The absolute accuracy of each sensor was verified using an N38 Nd-Fe-B magnet and a calibrated Hall probe (Group 3, type LPT-141), and found to be accurate to better than 2%. The sensitivity of the system is ≤0.02 mT, and each sensor has a specified linearity better than 0.2% up to 1 T. In Figs 3, 6 and 9, below, the errors in the B ⊥ data points are smaller than the size of the data points and thus have been omitted. The Hall sensors each have an active area of 0.05 mm 2 , are linearly positioned 1.5 mm apart and lie approximately 0.5 mm above the superconductor. The sensor array was positioned both centred on the tape and off-centre so as to scan the tape edges where the field profile changes most rapidly. We found that centred and off-centre measurements overlaid each other quite precisely. As superconductors are highly hysteretic magnetic materials Here we report our experimental findings associated with hysteretic flux trapping under conditions of transport current flow. We also present calculations for these effects and show that all results under self-field are essentially well understood and accurately described by these calculations. Self-field conditions. Self-field measurements -SuNAM. In Figs 2 and 3 we present experimental results for SuNAM 2 G wire for which the Hall sensor array was centred at the position d = -0.5 mm. In this position all six Hall sensors are located inside the tape width, with sensor 1 located at a distance of 0.25 mm from the left edge of the wire. In Section 3.1.2 we locate the sensor positions more accurately using the fact that B ⊥ (x) is an odd function of x. Electric potential taps (which were used to measure the induced electric field) were soldered to the wire at a separation of 48 mm along the tape. The conventionally defined critical current for this sample was found to be I c,E = 279 A with an n-value of 35. The wire was first zero-field and zero-current cooled and then subjected to a transport current ramp rising from 0 to 288 A, after which the current was decreased back to 0 A. We refer to this final state as I = 0 + . Three important experimental findings can be immediately reported: The shaded region shows the extent of the conductor width. Solid (dashed) calculated curves are for sensors located at 0.35 mm (0.9 mm) above the superconducting film. Evidently the agreement is best for y 1 = 0.9 mm which we then use in the calculations for B ⊥ (I) shown in Fig. where κ = λ/ξ = 95 for YBCO Note that the reduced error in λ relative to the (small) error in J c arises from the cube root that results from inverting Eq. ( Self-field calculations -SuNAM. We use the approach detailed in Brandt and Indenbom The x-dependent distribution of B ⊥ (I), being an odd function of x, allows us to accurately locate the x-position of the sensor array relative to the film centre. In this way we found that the array was an additional 0.04 mm to the right and the sensor positions listed in the legend of Fig. It is interesting to note that these calculations show that this non-linear B ⊥ (I) behaviour prior to the onset of dissipation is purely a consequence of the rectangular cross-sectional geometry of the superconducting film. This leads to the prediction that such a transition will not be observed in cylindrical symmetry. Instead, for a uniform sample, the critical state is reached simultaneously around the entire circumference and from Ampere's law the surface azimuthal field will always remain linear in I whether or not the sample is in the superconducting, critical, mixed or normal states. Self-field measurements and calculations -Fujikura. For an ideal tape conductor, where the superconducting film has a rectangular cross-section, the only adjustable parameter in our calculations is the coordinate, y 1 , of the plane of the Hall sensors relative to the superconducting film. In this section the calculations are made using Eq. (2.11) of Brandt and Indenbom Figure Despite these small differences all the overall generic features as they evolve with current are present including, most notably, the change of sign in B ⊥ at x 1 = -6 mm when the current has been reduced back to 0 + (see panel (a) red curve and data point). This is a consequence of the screening currents associated with trapped flux together with the fact that the total transport current sums to zero. Thus there remains a positive current across the centre and counterbalancing negative currents at the two edges which give rise to the small negative B ⊥ there. The measurements and calculations also show that there is very little residual field after raising the current to 300 A then returning to I = 0 + , even though this current is a full two thirds of I c,B . This very non-linear response of the residual field arises from the fact that in panel 6(a), where the current has been raised to I c,B , on reducing I to 0 + we find positive current remains across much of the cross section and only at the edges is the current reduced to negative I c,B . In contrast, in panel (c) the saturation region extends only a certain distance in from the edges and then, on reducing the transport current to 0 + , the positive and negative screening currents (which sum to zero) are confined more to the edges and substantially cancel in the calculation of B ⊥ . Note that when I 0 = 500 A, the saturated critical state extends all the way to the central axis of the tape, i.e. the current distribution is uniform across the width of the tape. When I 0 = 400 A it extends in some 20% of the total width from either edge, and when I 0 = 300 A, the critical region extends in only 10% from either side. In general, the uniform critical region extends inwards a distance d given by ( 14 Eq. 2.5): One should also note that the edge quality on one side may be better or poorer than the other side. There is evidence of such performance asymmetry (though slight) in Fig. Figure Bearing in mind that the measurement sensitivity is far better than 0.5 mT the dominant cause of deviations in the systematic measurements presented as a function of x 1 -coordinate is the conductor itself -the inevitable variations in local J c that one seeks to minimise but which our measurements are especially sensitive to. As noted, these conductors are of excellent uniform performance but our measurements are capable of exposing rather small modulations in current density. We now explore this question in a little more detail. Figure In-field conditions. In-field measurements -SuNAM. To demonstrate the flux trapping/magnetic hysteresis effect under the conditions where an external magnetic field, B a , is applied perpendicularly to the tape, we measured the same SuNAM 2 G wire sample reported in Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2. The specimen was zero-field cooled and then an external magnetic field of B a = 100 mT was applied (Fig. We may use the equations developed by Zeldov et al. Here the effective applied field, B a *, is enhanced by the susceptibility of the Hastelloy substrate This is shown in Fig. In-field measurements -current hysteresis and dissipation onset. In Fig. Several key features are evident: 1. Although the B ⊥ (I) curves for the sensors differ markedly between runs for I < I c,B , there is an abrupt transition from non-linear to linear B ⊥ (I) at I c,B = 166 A, from which point the curves coincide and are no longer hysteretic. As noted, this value was used in the calculations summarized above in Fig. We note that in Fig. We have measured, analyzed and calculated the surface perpendicular magnetic flux density generated by transport currents in second generation HTS wires, both with and without an externally applied magnetic field. We confirmed that our previous self-field I c,B definition of critical current is also applicable in-field. In all cases we observe that there is a distinct threshold value for transport current at which dissipation sets in. At this threshold current, I c,B , at least three simultaneous processes occur: 1. an abrupt transition from a non-linear to a linear perpendicular field, B ⊥ (I), observed at all points on the superconductor surface; 2. an abrupt onset of a non-zero electric field; and 3. the transport current becomes uniformly distributed across the tape width. At I c,B the entire conductor is in the critical state, the current density is uniform across the tape and any further increase in current inevitably results in (i) the onset of dissipation and (ii) a linear response in any continuing B ⊥ versus I. We stress that as such the critical current in a uniform conductor is not initiated by the nucleation of localised dissipation hotspots in weak-linked or high current density sites. Because of this we propose to designate I c,B as the true, fundamental critical current -one which is free from arbitrary criterion-based definitions such as customized electric field, resistance or power dissipation criteria. In the absence of an externally applied field, the linear response of B ⊥ (I) extrapolates back to zero at I = 0 but in an applied perpendicular field, B a , the linear response extrapolates back to B = μ 0 (1 + χ v )H a where χ v is the volume magnetic susceptibility of the substrate. We found that the sharp features of B ⊥ (x 1 ) both at the edges and, in an external field, at the centre of the conductor were somewhat broadened and this was found to be consistent with the inferred physical separation between the active region of the Hall sensor array and the superconductor surface. Finally, we stress that the detailed microscopic origins of the above-noted critical state and the associated value of I c,B , whether driven by depinning, depairing, or limited by quantum rules remain to be fully established. ScIENTIFIc REPoRTS | (2018) 8:14463 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32811-6