Locking of a laser frequency to an atomic or molecular resonance line is a key technique in applications of laser spectroscopy and atomic metrology. Modulation transfer spectroscopy (MTS) provides an accurate and stable laser locking method which has been widely used. Normally, the frequency of the MTS signal would drift due to Zeeman shift of the atomic levels and rigorous shielding of stray magnetic field around the vapor cell is required for the accuracy and stability of laser locking. Here on the contrary, by applying a transverse bias magnetic field, we report for the first time observation of a magnetic-enhanced MTS signal on the transition of 87 Rb D2-line Fg = 1 → Fe = 0 (close to the repump transition of Fg = 1 → Fe = 2), with signal to noise ratio larger than 100:1. The error signal is immune to the external magnetic fluctuation. Compared to the ordinary MTS scheme, it provides a robust and accurate laser locking approach with more stable long-term performance. This technique can be conveniently applied in areas of laser frequency stabilization, laser manipulation of atoms and precision measurement. Laser frequency stabilization is critical in applications of precision spectroscopy and atom physics The MTS is usually a nonlinear four-wave mixing (FWM) phenomenon However, in the ordinary MTS scheme, stray magnetic field would induce unwanted energy shift of the Zeeman sub-levels and fluctuation of atom state distribution. The reference atom line is unstable. The MTS signal would also be distorted and weakened, which would affect the stability and accuracy of the laser locking. So, the atom vapor cell needs elaborately μ-metal magnet-shielding. In this work, we report the experimental observation of a magnetic-enhanced MTS signal on the transition of 87 Rb D 2 line F g = 1 → F e = 0, when a bias magnetic field with several Gauss is applied across the vapor cell. The bias field significantly improves the signal amplitude for the F g = 1 → F e = 0 transition, and makes it comparable with that of the F g = 2 → F e = 3 transition. The signals from the other closely hyperfine levels are also effectively suppressed. The signal to noise ratio, that comparison between the peak-to-peak signal amplitude and the fluctuation noise after laser lock, reaches 100 : 1 or more. On the contrary, in the ordinary MTS scheme, the signal on this transition is utterly overwhelmed in the background noise. Due to the magnetic-insensitive states of m Fg,e = 0 in our scheme, the resonant point has little drift and immune from the magnetic fluctuations. Stray magnetic shielding around the vapor cell is not harsh. The laser can be easily locked on the enhanced MTS signal and reach a promising long-term frequency stability. This transition is close to the repump transition of F g = 1 → F e = 2, providing a flexible setup choice in lots of experiment research, especially for laser cooling and Raman spectroscopy. In this paper, we present our experiment results on the magnetic-enhanced MTS spectroscopy and laser locking method. Theoretical description of this method is presented and various influences of these signals are analyzed. The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II outlines physical mechanism of the MTS process, particularly considering Zeeman splitting of the atomic energy levels. In Section III, we describe the experimental setup. Then, we illustrate the main experiment results in Section IV and detailed investigation of various parameters of the magnetic-enhanced MTS in Section V. Finally, we draw our conclusion. As shown in Fig. where ω = ω 0 +∆, ∆ is the frequency detuning from the line center ω 0 , β is the modulation index (the ratio of the modulation depth to the modulation frequency), and J n is the nth-order Bessel function. The modulation is transferred to the probe beam by the FWM effect, where the phase conjugated sidebands of the probe beam are generated. The strongest signal is always observed for the cycling transition where atoms cannot relax into any other states where C is a parameter that depends on the properties of the atomic transition, Γ is the natural linewidth of the excited state, φ is the relative phase with respect to the modulation applied to the pump beam, and In Fig. In deep modulation regime (β > 1), multiple sidebands are involved in the modulation transfer process, and the signal gradient and the peak-to-peak amplitude could be enhanced The maximum signal amplitude is obtained at tan(φ) = Y /X, that mixing the absorption and dispersion components In the above discussion, we simply focus on a two-level system. Energy levels are complicated for real atoms, and the FWM process would involve more than two levels. The parameter C in Eqs. ( Considering Zeeman sub-levels of the 87 Rb D 2 line transition F g = 1 → F e = 0, it's a tripod-type energy structure. In Figs. Particularly, when Ω = (2n+1) δ and n ∈ Z, two-photon resonance between the adjacent magnetic substates is satisfied for combinations of certain counter-propagating beams, e.g. the 1st-order sidebands of the pump beam and the probe beam if n = 0. It will enhance the FWM process in the Lambda-type energy structure. The generated sidebands of the signal field become maximal under this condition. When Ω = 2nδ, two-photon resonance between |g 1 and |g 3 induces dark dressed state again, and the MTS signal becomes weak. A dip of the signal amplitude occurs. This is experimentally identified in Section V. Competition between these optical coherence processes is complicated especially for large modulation index β. Considering the specific MTS scheme, we can draw a conclusion that, the enhancement of the MTS signal depends on the satisfaction of the two photon resonance between the probe beam and the components of modulated pump beams. Besides optical coherence connecting the ground and excited states, there also exists Zeeman coherence among the ground sub-levels. Larmor precession induces re-distribution of the atomic magnetic states. The applied magnetic field is several Gauss in our experiment, and the precession frequency is of orders of magnitude smaller compared with the optical pumping effect. Physical mechanisms of the magnetic-enhanced MTS discussed above still work. Yet, for other polarization configurations besides that shown in Figs. Experiment setup for the magnetic-enhanced MTS is illustrated in Fig. The probe beam and the accompanying sidebands are reflected by a beam splitter (BS) and focused on a photodiode detector (PD, Thorlabs PDA10A-EC). For orthogonal polarizations, the beam splitter can be replaced by a PBS. Reflection of the pump field on the BS is dumped by a beam trap. The photoelectric signal on the detector PD is amplified with a preamplifier (Mini-circuits ZFL-500+) and mixed with a signal from the channel Ch2 in a phase detector (Mini-circuits ZFPD-1+). The signal from Ch1 and Ch2 has the same frequency. The relative phase φ between them is adjustable. By tuning φ, a dispersive error signal can be demodulated out of the phase detector and displayed on the oscilloscope. When the phase φ is adjusted to a proper value, the maximum peak-to-peak amplitude and zero-crossing gradient of a dispersive like error signal for the D 2 -line transition F g = 1 → F e = 0 are obtained and recorded. For laser frequency locking, the error signal from the phase detector is delivered to a PID (proportion-integration-differentiation) controller and fed back to the laser diode. In the experiment, the light gray part of the setup in Fig. In Fig. When changing polarization of the pump beam parallel with the probe beam, the MTS signal for the crossover transition of F g = 1 → F e = 0 & 1 (MTS-c, blue dotted line) becomes obvious. Still, the signal amplitude is small compared with ours. It should be noted that the MTS signal for this parallel configuration is not a strict fourwave mixing process as discussed in Section II, but an incoherent process mediated by spontaneous emission We also present a frequency modulation spectroscopy around the transition of F g = 1 → F e (FMS, brown dashed-dotted line) in Fig. Laser frequency locking using this method cannot last for a long time and easily jumps to lock on unwanted frequency points. Obviously, the magnetic-enhanced MTS signal for the transition of F g = 1 → F e = 0 shows considerable peak-topeak amplitude with steep slope across the zero point, which is suitable for robust laser frequency stabilization. In this subsection, We investigate the laser frequency stability using our method, compared with the ordinary MTS and FMS methods. Error signal fluctuation after laser lock. In Fig. In Fig. Linewidth and long-term stability. In the case with laser lock, the probe laser of our magnetic-enhanced MTS scheme is linear (V) polarized which induces the transition between the Zeeman sub-levels m Fg = 0 and m Fe = 0. Both of them are magnetic insensitive, which have zero 1st-order Zeeman shift. Considering the laser linewidth, the magnetic-induced frequency shift of the locking point is negligible. A promising long-term stability is expected. Here, two sets of identically frequency locked lasers with the frequency offset of 300 MHz are applied to measure the laser linewidth and the long-term stability. No μ-metal magnet-shielding exists around the vapor cell. Three laser locking methods are carried out here, as discussed in Fig. That's because frequency drift of the latter is serious and unsuitable for practical laser frequency stabilization. Figure In Figs. 5(b) and 5(c), we show the beat frequency variation for 10 hours and the Allan variance of it. A frequency counter (Agilent 53220) is used to measure the beat frequency with a gate time of 0.5 s. When laser locking with the magnetic-enhanced MTS, the variation of the beat frequency has a standard deviation of 27 kHz and a peak-to-peak drift of 162 kHz. Assuming the frequency fluctuations are uncorrelated, standard deviation of the laser spectroscopy is 19 kHz over 10 h. The Allan deviation of the beat frequency indicates that the short-term stability is about 2.6 kHz with an averaging time of 1 s and the long-term stability is about 6.4 kHz with an averaging time of 20 min. For comparison, the beat notes are also measured when both spectroscopies work as the ordinary MTS (MTS In this section, we will show detail study of the magnetic-enhanced MTS, including various experiment parameters. Main factors that influence the magneticenhanced MTS signal include the bias magnetic strength, the light polarization configuration, and the modulation depth and frequency. B e a t f r e q u e n c y v a r i a t i o n ( k H z ) A v e r a g i n g t i m e ( s e c ) ( b ) Z e e m a n s p l i t t i n g ( M H z ) Considering Zeeman sub-levels of the atoms, different polarization configuration of the pump and probe beams covers different energy structure. This has been discussed in Section II. In Fig. As shown in Fig. In Figs. Here we can see more clearly that the dips appear at around δ = Ω/2. The peak-to-peak amplitude is increasing for large modulation frequency. When the bias magnetic field increases from zero, the MTS signal is initially enhanced, and reaches the maximum at the point δ = Ω/4. The signal amplitude decreases for strong mag- netic field as sub-Doppler resonance is not satisfied. In Fig. Except the peak-to-peak amplitude, the zero-crossing gradient is also a key factor in laser locking. We will discuss it in this subsection. Optimum laser frequency stabilization is obtained when the MTS signal slope at the line center is a maximum and the background fluctuation noise is small. In Fig. According to Fig. In conclusion, we have experimentally investigated the magnetic-enhanced modulation transfer spectrum of 87 Rb D 2 line. By applying a bias magnetic field perpendicular to the propagating direction of the probe and pump beams, the magnetic-enhanced MTS signal on the transition of F g = 1 → F e = 0 is obtained. Both the slope and amplitude of the signal are significantly improved by optimal choice of the modulation parameters, like the polarization combination of the pump and probe lasers, the modulation depth, and the modulation frequency, etc. The signal to noise ratio of the magnetic-enhanced MTS signal can be larger than 100 : 1. The locking point is immune to the magnetic fluctuation, and reduces the requirement of the magnetic shielding. Laser locking directly on this transition is achieved for the first time. It provides a robust and accurate laser frequency lock with excellent performance of long-term stability. In theory, physical mechanism of this method is also carefully analyzed. Our magnetic-enhanced MTS method may also work for other atoms or molecules, especially when no Zeeman splitting of the excited state (F e = 0) occurs, e.g. the Sodium atom. This technique provides an alternative choice for laser frequency stabilization and could be widely applied in the field of laser spectroscopy, laser cooling and trapping, and precision measurement with atoms and lasers.