Na, K and Ca-ion battery electrode materials with appropriate electrochemical properties are desirable candidates for replacing lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) because of their natural richness and low cost. Recently, MoO 2 has been reported as the anode material in LIBs, but so far not received attention in Na and other ion batteries. In this paper, the behaviors of Na, K, and Ca on MoO 2 are investigated by first-principles calculations. These metal atoms strongly absorb on the hexagonal center of MoO 2 and the adsorption results in semiconducting-metallic transition. The low diffusion barrier, 0.13, 0.08, 0.22 eV for Na, K, Ca, respectively, leads to an ultrahigh diffusivity. Importantly, the maximum metal-storage phases of MoO 2 monolayer correspond to Na 4 MoO 2 , K 2.5 MoO 2 and Ca 3 MoO 2 , with considerable theoretical specific capacities of 837, 523 and 1256 mAh g -1 . The electrode materials exhibit moderate average voltage of 0.30, 0.75, 0.35 V, respectively. Our findings suggest that MoO 2 monolayer can be utilized as a promising anode material with high capacities and high rate performance for next generation ion batteries. With the tremendous and rapid development of portable electronic devices and electric vehicles, rechargeable batteries with large capacity, high rate capability and good cycle performance have attracted great attention both in basic research and industry applications. The battery-performance characteristic strongly depends on the electrochemical properties of electrode materials. Great challenge of advanced metal-ion batteries is to find better electrode substrates. Currently, a wide range of compounds have been proposed for SIB anodes, and much progress has been made . The commercially used anode material in LIBs, graphite, is not suitable for Na-ion batteries for the low capacity and poor rate capability. DFT calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The exchange-correction interaction were treated within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the form of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. where x is the total number of adsorbed metal atoms in the primitive cell and A is total energies of the metal ion adsorbed on the system, pristine MoO 2 monolayer, and the energy per atom in the bulk metal, respectively. The average voltage of A x MoO 2 (A = Na, K, and Ca) in the range of x 1 ≤ x ≤ x 2 is given as According to the Faraday equation, the maximum specific capacity, C A , is obtained by Where x max represents maximum number of A in the primitive cell, F is the Faraday constant with the value of 26806 mAh mol -1 , and M is the mass of MoO 2 in g mol -1 . binding. By using Bader charge analysis, the absorbed Na, K and Ca atoms act as electron donor, and transfer 0.9, 0.93 and 1.61 e to the underlying MoO 2 , respectively. The spin-dependent GGA plus Hubbard U (GGA+U) method was employed as a test. Comparing the E ads and DOS with the results obtained from the common GGA method, the difference is negligible, implying the weak onsite Coulomb repulsion between the 4d electrons of molybdenum. Moreover, the systems with/without metals absorption show non-magnetic behavior. Another factor that plays a central role in the performance of electrode materials is the diffusion rate of ions, which contributes directly to the charging/discharging loading rates accessible by a battery. We investigate the diffusion pathways and energy barriers of Na, K and Ca on MoO to be an effective anode electrode for Na-ion batteries. The value of the barrier is comparable with other 2D materials such as MoS 2 (0.11 eV), x in the A x MoO 2 system. With the increase of x, the OCVs decrease gradually because the distances between adjacent metal atoms become shorter and their repulsive interaction is enhanced. Once the OCV is zero, no more atom can be adsorbed, and the maximum x in A x MoO 2 is obtained. Encouragingly, the large initial OCVs of 1.27, 1.79, and 1.16 V for Na, K, and Ca systems, respectively, indicate the potential application of MoO 2 in ion-batteries. For the Na x MoO 2 system, the electrode potential varies in the range of 1.27-0.09 V. The V ave , 0.30 V, is in the desirable voltage range for a sodium anode of 0.0-1.0 V. At x = 4, the corresponding maximum specific capacity of MoO 2 for SIBs is 837 mAh g -1 , which is larger than that of existing SIB anode materials (including hard carbon, When evaluating cycling stability, the degree of structural deformation would cause substantial loss of capacity in several cycles. After the absorption of maximum Na, K, and Ca, the thickness of MoO application. H site is the most stable configuration with the largest adsorption energy of -1.46, -2.01, -1.16 eV for Na, K and Ca, respectively. We note that a single Na atom adsorbed on the MoO 2 monolayer is more stable, when compared with other 2D materials, such as boron-doped graphene (-0.79 eV)