Radiometric dating with 39 Ar covers a unique timespan and offers key advances in interpreting environmental archives of the last millennium. Although this tracer has been acknowledged for decades, studies so far have been limited by the low abundance and radioactivity, thus requiring huge sample sizes. Atom Trap Trace Analysis, an application of techniques from quantum physics such as laser cooling and trapping, allows to reduce the sample volume by several orders of magnitude, compared to conventional techniques. Here we show that the adaptation of this method to 39 Ar is now available for glaciological applications, by demonstrating the first Argon Trap Trace Analysis (ArTTA) dating of alpine glacier ice samples. Ice blocks as small as a few kilograms are sufficient and have been obtained at two artificial glacier caves. Importantly, both sites offer direct access to the stratigraphy at the glacier base and validation against existing age constraints. The ice blocks obtained at Chli Titlis glacier in 3030 m asl (Swiss Alps) have been dated by state-of-the-art microradiocarbon analysis in a previous study. The unique finding of a bark fragment and a larch needle within the ice of Schaufelferner glacier in 2870 m asl (Stubai Alps, Austria) allows for conventional radiocarbon dating. At both sites, results of 39 Ar dating match the existing age information based on radiocarbon dating and visual stratigraphy. With our results, we establish Argon Trap Trace Analysis as the key to decipher so far untapped glacier archives of the last millennium. Non-polar glaciers are dynamic archives of environmental change, covering altitudes where other climate records are sparse. We find a unique situation in the European Alps comprising the densest network of long instrumental climate observations and anthropogenic emission sources in immediate vicinity of glaciers and other climate archives. Only few glaciers of the highest summit regions, typically above 4000 m asl, archive snow and thus past climate signals on a quasi-continuous basis. Glaciers at summit locations of lower altitudes are more abundant, but have only recently been investigated for their potential as climate archives According to the age range accessible by their halflives, 3 H and 210 Pb are established tools to constrain the age of glacier ice within the last 100 years A powerful tracer lies within the air bubbles enclosed in glacier ice: the rare isotope 39 Ar. It is a unique tracer with a half-life of 269 years A much larger number of atoms is required for classical analysis by low level decay counting implying the need for significantly larger sample sizes in the order of tons The adaptation of this method to 39 Ar, which we refer to as Argon Trap Trace Analysis (ArTTA), and its application to environmental studies has been demonstrated with large groundwater For the purpose of this study we selected two glacier sites (see Figure The visual stratigraphy of the ice at both sites shows abundant bubble-rich layers of white appearance, with occasional transparent, nearly bubble-free layers originating from refrozen meltwater. At Chli Titlis and Schaufelferner, ice flow velocities inside the caves (i.e. near bedrock) are close to zero meaning that the sampling locations have remained nearly unchanged from the beginning of the samplings in 2014 CE up to 2018 CE. At Chli Titlis cave, ice temperatures are below zero throughout the year aided by artificial cooling. At Schaufelferner cave initial englacial temperature measurements also revealed ice frozen to bedrock. Continuous temperature monitoring is currently underway to further investigate the spatial distribution of seasonal variability of englacial temperatures. The glacier surface above both Chli Titlis and Schaufelferner glacier caves is subject to rapid shrinking and seasonally covered by sheets to minimize summer ice melt. The clear evidence of prolonged negative mass balance means that the unique paleo-climate information of these sites may not be preserved much longer. Both sites have been the subject of previous glaciological investigations, but differ primarily by being located within the nearly stagnant summit region (Chli Titlis) vs. a site having undergone substantial ice flow (Schaufelferner). Accordingly, our sampling strategy was guided by the idea to obtain two samples (i) of neighboring layers significantly different in age (Chli Titlis) and (ii) within a single layer of the same age (Schaufelferner). At Chli Titlis, ice blocks of approximately 4 kg were cut out by chain saw. The outermost layer exposed to the tunnel was removed prior to collecting sample blocks to avoid contamination due to cracks or melt water. Microradiocarbon dating revealed a strong vertical age gradient (see Figure At Schaufelferner, the ice in the cave has flowed downwards from the top yielding tilted layering without folding. A unique feature of this site is the rare finding of two macroscopic particles of organic origin, a bark and a larch needle, inside the ice (Figure In order to ensure reliable performance of the ArTTA setup for the necessarily small sample sizes, artificial sam- ples of known concentration have been prepared and analyzed. The results are shown in Figure The glacier ice samples were analyzed by ArTTA, Table I provides an overview of all important parameters and measurement results (see Table The two adjacent ice blocks 17-1 and 17-2 from Schaufelferner were prepared for ArTTA following two different approaches, yielding samples A and B. (see inset Figure Regarding the actual dating results of the ArTTA analyses, we performed a comparison with age constraints by 14 C, carefully taking into account (i) the different 14 C sample types (macroscopic vs. microscopic) and (ii) relative age information provided by the visible stratigraphy in the two caves. The two ice blocks of Chli Titlis are dated at the far old end of the time span accessible to 39 Ar dating. 2018 CE. Constraints on the age by 14 C dating exist only for block 1-2, where we obtain 1246 -1378 years before 2018 CE (see Figure At Schaufelferner glacier cave, the 39 Ar results of samples A and B are consistent and reveal a layer age of 193 +53 -55 and 198 +60 -64 years before 2018 CE, respectively. For comparison with existing age constraints, it is important to note that the bark particle and larch needle were dated by conventional macroscopic 14 C analysis. This means that reservoir effects related to the various microscopic 14 C fractions are negligible (cf. discussion of Chli Titlis above). The uncertainty in radiocarbon dating is caused by ambiguities in calibration of 14 C ages within the respective time period. Using OxCal v4.3.2 Based on our results we find no evidence of contamination related to our sampling method by chain saw. Thus sampling is comparatively simple allowing to obtain blocks of convenient size of ∼ 5 kg. The results of Chli Titlis and Schaufelferner are the first demonstration of conclusive 39 Ar dating of glacier ice with samples containing less than 2 mL STP argon. In concert with evidence provided by the visual stratigraphy, the comparison with 14 C age constraints corroborates the ArTTA age dating method, both for its mid-(Schaufelferner) and far-end (Chli Titlis) age range. At Chli Titlis, the 39 Ar dating results show an age range and a vertical age gra- dient that reproduce and extend earlier findings obtained from 14 C. For Schaufelferner, the most likely age ranges assigned by 14 C dating of macroscopic organic objects are determined systematically older than the 39 Ar dates, but stay within a range that can be explained based on glaciological considerations. Furthermore, both 39 Ar and 14 C ages indicate that the ice at Schaufelferner is likely a remnant of the 1850 glacier maximum. The 39 Ar dating tool provides a more reliable age constraint in this case, considering the ambiguity associated with the 14 C age calibration. Thus, the ice in the Schaufelferner cave originates from the Little Ice Age glacier advance. Since glaciers at other non-polar mountain ranges, e.g. Central Asia, Himalaya or Andes, are not much different from the Alps regarding their glaciological characteristics, e.g. size, accumulation and englacial temperature, the impact of this study goes beyond the Alpine realm. However, the European Alps can provide a unique combination of (i) glaciers featuring expected age ranges suitable for 39 Ar, (ii) access to kg-size ice samples at low cost through excellent infrastructure and (iii) availability of multi-proxy reconstructions of Holocene climate. With the introduction of the ArTTA ice dating technique, we can retrieve so far untapped paleoclimate records and validate them in the nexus of European archives. The scientific main potential of 39 Ar dating of glacier ice is the interpretation of the ice layers formed during the last millennium, in order to reveal the past history of summit glacier growth in the Alps. This history comprises a fundamental gap in knowledge in the context of the highly complex climate patterns during the core period of the Little Ice Age. Even the analysis of ice dynamics during the last centuries can be done with 39 Ar by sampling along the central flow line of a glacier. Past ice dynamics can be considered an important, but fairly unknown parameter governing the reaction of glaciers to climate change. Accordingly, developing the full potential of dating by 39 Ar will be key to opening up new avenues in paleo-climatic research. As current warming conditions pose an immediate threat to losing this precious information, the novel dating tool of 39 Ar is arriving just-in-time in modern glaciological research. It also generates a broader impact in the field of Holocene climate science. In this sense, the 39 Ar dating technology for glacier ice has the potential to yield a major scientific advance comparable to the introduction of radiocarbon or surface exposure dating. The ice blocks were transported from the glaciers to a -20 • C cold storage at Heidelberg University. Prior to the extraction, they were cleaned by cutting off melted layers. Ice blocks of up to 8 kg were then put into a 12.6 L stainless steel container which was evacuated with a turbo molecular pump. The ice was melted and the gas was extracted by freezing it through a water trap onto a liquid nitrogen cooled activated charcoal trap. ArTTA is highly selective and thus immune to impurities due to other elements. Still, a high argon purity and yield was desired to maximize the counting efficiency and minimize the sample amount. For this purpose, a specific argon purification system had been designed. The gas composition was analyzed with a quadrupole mass spectrometer before the gas was transferred to a 900 • C titanium sponge getter. With that, all gases were removed except for noble gases and hydrogen. At a second titanium sponge getter at room temperature the hydrogen was adsorbed and the remaining gas fraction, consisting of > 99 % argon, was captured on a charcoal trap and transported to the ArTTA setup. With this system, an ice sample was processed within 4 hours with an argon recovery rate of > 98 %. A simplified scheme of the ArTTA apparatus is shown in Figure The flux into the small detection region is increased by two transversal laser cooling stages. The first stage collects the divergent atoms from the effusive source and collimates them to a beam, whereas the second stage compresses the beam. Subsequently, the longitudinal velocity is reduced from thermal velocities to a few meters per second by a Zeeman slower. Single 39 Ar atoms are finally captured and detected in a magneto-optical trap, thus guaranteeing perfect selectivity by millions of resonant photon scattering processes in a spatially confined region. To reduce the off-resonant scattering of the huge isotopic background of abundant 40 Ar in the detection region, this isotope is selectively de-excited from the metastable state to the ground-state by an additional quench laser. The fluorescence of this process provides a direct signal for flux monitoring. Several turbo-molecular pumps realize the necessary ultra-high vacuum in the apparatus. Their collected gas is cleaned with a non-evaporative getter by removing any non-noble gas contributions. The restored gas is compressed into the buffer volume again thus enabling full recycling of the sample. With this procedure the required sample size is as low as 0.5 mL STP. The sample size of the current ArTTA setup is limited by out-gassing of embedded argon enriched in 39 Ar. The contribution due to this contamination is dependent on sample size, actual concentration and measurement time. Around 10 pmAr is expected for a volume of 2 mL STP in a 20 h measurement. ArTTA is currently capable of analyzing one sample per day with relative accuracy dependent on the actual concentration. A full measurement cycle starts with ∼ 20 h of sample measurement. This is directly followed by ∼ 2 h of referencing to an artificial sample with 10× enriched 39 Ar compared to modern concentration. The apparatus is flushed with a krypton discharge while refilling the liquid nitrogen reservoir to remove any frozen content on the source and reduce cross sample contamination. Each sample is framed by at least two reference measurements and it is this temporal local referencing which makes the measurement robust against long-term drifts (see In order to infer the sample concentration from the number of atoms detected, careful estimate of the background is necessary. The contribution due to embedded argon enriched in 39 Ar can be determined by background measurements with 39 Ar-free samples with sample concentration c sample , sample volume V sample and 39 Ar out-gassing rate a out . By integration over time, the detected total atom number N tot is given by with λ 0 describing the count rate of a sample with modern concentration. This parameter is inferred from measurements of reference samples with 10× modern 39 Ar concentration. The model is used in a Bayesian analysis to obtain the probability density function for the sample concentration. The reported concentrations are the extracted most probable values and the uncertainties correspond to the 1σ confidence interval containing 68.3 % of measurements (see Notably, the contribution to the detected atoms due to the background is increasing quadratically in time which limits the integration time and thus the accuracy of the inferred concentration. In order to obtain the accuracy of our apparatus, we perform numerical simulations of the current measurement routine by using the experimentally determined parameters λ 0 and 39 Ar out-gassing rate a out . For each given concentration, the references, background as well as a total number of counted atoms have been generated numerically in 10, 000 Monte-Carlo simulations and analyzed in the same way as measured data. The most probable values of the inferred concentrations are shown in Figure This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation), the FWF project Cold Ice (P29256-N36, sampling) and the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement 694561). We further thank the operators of Titlis and Stubai ski resorts for their help in logistics. . Results of Argon Trap Trace Analysis of glacier ice samples Sample Name Concentration [pmAr] Argon Age [a] Counted Atoms Est. Background Time [h] Size [mL STP] Weight [kg] Titlis 1-1 25.7 +9.2 FIG. 2. a)