We investigate the relaxation and conduction mechanism of Ba0.90Sr0.10TiO3 (BST) ceramic, synthesized by the solid state reaction method. The dielectric and relaxation properties are analyzed in the temperature range of 380-450°C with alternative current in the frequency range of 20Hz-1MHz. Variation of dielectric constant, , with temperature shows a normal ferroelectric transition at Tc=95°C with a weak degree of diffuseness. The modified Cole-Cole equation is used to describe all contributions to the relaxation mechanism. The frequency exponent m(,T) deduced from experimental data of the dielectric loss () as process are observed: non-overlapping small-polaron tunneling (NSPT) at low frequencies and overlapping large polaron tunneling (OLPT) at high frequencies. The analysis of Nyquist plots reveals also the presence of two contributions, who which the activation energies have been calculated. ) shows a temperature and frequency dependence. Two conduction Ferroelectric materials with perovskite structures have received much attention due to their remarkable functional properties, such as piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, electro-optic effects, useful for microelectronic devices The microstructure and dielectric properties of BST both in bulk and in thin films forms have been reported by several authors Considering that the solid defects play a decisive role in all of these applications, it is very important to gain a fundamental understanding of the conductive mechanism. Various kinds of defects, for instance, are oftenly suggested as being responsible for the dielectric relaxations at high temperature range. In the present work, we focused on the relaxation processes and conduction mechanism of Ba0.90Sr0.10TiO3 (BST) ceramic, synthesized by the solid state reaction method. The modified Cole-Cole equation is used to describe all contributions to the relaxation mechanism in BST and the activation energies are calculated for these contributions. In addition, using frequency and temperature dependence of the exponent m, we discuss the conduction mechanism and analyzed the experimental data. The combined effect on the complex impedance spectroscopy and modulus formalism has been employed to explore the electrical response of grain and grain boundaries. Ba0.9Sr0.1TiO3 (BST) ceramic was synthesized by conventional solid-state reaction method. The starting raw materials were BaCO3, SrCO3 and TiO2 powders, which were weighed based on stochiometric composition of Ba0.9Sr0.1TiO3. The weighed powders were mixed with ethanol in an agate mortar for 2h and then dried and calcined for 12 h at 1150°C. After calcination, 5wt % of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) was added to the calcined powder as binder and the pellets having 1-2 mm thickness and 13 mm diameter were pressed using the uniaxial hydraulic press. The pressed pellets were burned out up to 700°C to remove PVA and then sintered at 1325°C. The permittivity was measured with an impedance meter HP 4284A connected to computer, in the frequency range from 20Hz to 1MHz. The powders calcinated were characterized by Xray diffraction (XRD). The lattice parameters were calculated and refined by the Full-prof program. One of the most important aspects in the dielectric response of ferroelectric materials is the dielectric relaxation phenomenon. The first empirical expression for the dielectric constant  was given by Cole-Cole where s  and   are the static and high frequency limits of dielectric permittivity, respectively,  is the Cole-Cole parameter (0<<1) represent the degree of the disorder, and  is the most probable relaxation time. This equation ignores the effect of the conductivity. However, the conductivity in ferroelectric cannot be neglected specially in low frequency and high temperature ranges. According to the Maxwell equation, the current density is given by and where  is the electric conductivity for free charges. To take into account the possible interaction of free charges with the lattice,  must be replaced by the complex conductivity, [10] in the complex dielectric permittivity, expressed as the frequency exponent s is introduced to take into account the disorder effect in the conductivity. From Eqs. (1) and (4), the real and the imaginary permittivity parts are  using Eq. ( According to Guintini's theory  at a given frequency is expressed as where A depends only on temperature and m is the frequency exponent which represent the disorder effect in the conductivity. The ac conductivity can be calculated using the "universal dielectric response" (UDR) where B is pre-exponential factor and s is the frequency exponent was calculated from imaginary part of the dielectric constant by Using Eqs. ( The parameters m and s that according to Eqs. ( ( ) may change considerably as function of frequency. The complex electric modulus ) ( *  M was calculated using the following expression We identify the dominant conducting mechanism in a given range of frequency by comparing the behavior of m with the modulus M as a function of frequency and temperature. Structural properties of BST were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns analysis. Fig. showing purely tetragonal single phase crystal related to the tetragonal BaTiO3. The analysis of the spectrum by the refinement program Full-Prof showed that our material crystallizes in tetragonal perovskite structure at room temperature with space group P4mm. The lattice parameters obtained are a=b=3.98 Å and c=4.01 Å. These values are close to a=b=3.97 Å and c=3.99 Å reported for BST (Insert Fig. The real and imaginary parts of dielectric constant, were determined using the following expressions where d is the sample thickness, A the area of the electrode, C the capacity and  tg the dielectric loss. The temperature dependence of both ' and tg in the frequency range 500Hz-500KHz are shown in Fig. where ' m  is the dielectric permittivity maximum, Tm temperature of the real part dielectric maximum, γ indicates the character of the paraelectric-ferroelectric phase transition and  is the peak broadening, which defines the diffuseness degree of the ferroelectric-paraelectric phase transition. Fig. (Insert Fig. We have demonstrated in Fig. here 0  is the pre-exponential factor. We obtained (Insert Fig. The frequency dependence of ' and " for various temperatures are represented in Fig. We observe that both ' and " decrease with frequency for all temperatures and increase with temperature. Good fitting of ' and " is obtained using Eqs. ( (Insert Fig. We can distinguish two domains. The low frequency domain, where the contribution to " is governed by the free charges carries (giving by σ1) and the contribution to ' is governed by the charge carrier localized at defect sites and interfaces (giving by σ2). At high frequency domain, the two contributions become insignificant due to the high frequency of the field which reduces the contribution of the charge carriers. The parameters used in the calculation of " are listed in Table Using the Eq. ( is shown in Fig. In order to analyze the dynamic electrical conduction at low and high frequencies, we plot in Fig. (Insert Fig. The correlation between M and "  (Fig. We conclude that the crossover from NSPT, where polarons are localized, to OLPT, where polarons are delocalized, can be due to the effect of the increasing of the ac electrical conductivity with the increasing of the frequency. In order to determine the contributions (grain, grain boundaries and electrodes), we use the impedance spectroscopy. Fig. . These relaxation times obey to Arrhenius law with the activation energies 1.53 eV and 1.47 eV for grain and grain boundary, respectively as shown in Fig. (Insert Fig. We have also adopted the modulus formalism to study the relaxation mechanisms in BST. Fig. The temperature dependence of the most probable relaxation time and modulus formalism shows that all dynamic processes may be attributed to the same type of charge carriers. Table Table Table 