A curious behavior of electron correlation energy is explored. Namely, the correlation energy is the energy that tends to drive the system toward that of the uniform electron gas. As such, the energy assumes its maximum value when a gradient of density is zero. As the gradient increases, the energy is diminished by a gradient suppressing factor, designed to attenuate the energy from its maximum value similar to the shape of a bell curve. Based on this behavior, we constructed a very simple mathematical formula that predicted the correlation energy of atoms and molecules. Combined with our proposed exchange energy functional, we calculated the correlation energies, the total energies, and the ionization energies of test atoms and molecules; and despite the unique simplicities, the functionals' accuracies are in the top tier performance, competitive to the B3LYP, BLYP, PBE, TPSS, and M11. Therefore, we propose that, as guided by the simplicities and supported by the accuracies, the correlation energy is the energy that locally tends to drive the system toward the uniform electron gas. The term "correlation energy" was introduced by Wigner Over the past decades, much has been understood regarding the behavior of exchange and correlation energies in density functional theory, especially their asymptotic limits which were used to construct successful functionals such as Becke-88, and PBE. Since the original idea was conceived in the 1920s by Thomas and Fermi The equivalently notable success is the non-empirical PBE exchange and correlation functionals Continuous advances are also being made in the high temperature conditions However, in addition to the asymptotic limits, the behavior in the intermediate region should be as equally important. As such, two functionals obeying similar limits could give different predictions if they behave differently in the region connecting those limits. In this study, we explore alternative ideas that lead to simple and accurate correlation functional. Tests on atoms and molecules are presented. We further discuss how the functional is related to the conditions obeyed by the PBE functional. To gain an initial insight into how electron correlation affects electron density, we first consider an exactly solvable model where there is no need to approximate the solution neither through a series of perturbations, nor a set of predefined basis functions. Shown in figure where the two electrons are bound to the origin by a harmonic potential V(r) = density that drives the system closer to homogeneity. The change of gradient in figure Is it possible that the tendency to drive the system toward homogeneity is also a characteristic of electron correlation in general, applicable to all atoms and molecules? In this work, we entertain such hypothesis from which a mathematical correlation functional can be derived. The accuracy of the functional will then hint our understanding of the electron correlation energy, and how it affects the density of electrons in general. We hypothesize that the correlation energy is the energy that tends to drive the system toward the uniform electron gas. The hypothesis leads to a very simple expression as follows. Here, ρ is the total electron density; and ε c is the correlation energy when the density is perfectly uniform, which we use the Chachiyo's formula . The term is the gradient suppressing factor, designed to attenuate the energy from its maximum value as a gradient parameter The derivation of Eq. ( It was exactly the shape of a bell curve, monotonically decaying as t increased. It was also consistent with the slowly varying density limit in which Ma and Brueckner where the factor ( However, the t 2 dependence in the initial form S(t) = e -bt 2 was not appropriate when the gradient became larger. As pointed out by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof when they constructed the highly successful non-empirical PBE In this work, we reconciled the two domains by using ln(1 + t 2 ) instead. That way, it converged to t 2 when t was small, and approached ln t 2 when t was large. Therefore, we arrived at the Final Form: which promptly led to the correlation functional in Eq. (1). In the presence of a spin polarization ζ = ρ α -ρ β ρ , the uniform electron gas correlation energy ε c could be written as an interpolation between two extreme cases: the paramagnetic and the ferromagnetic. ε c (r s , ζ) = ε c 0 + (ε c 1 -ε c 0 )f(ζ) In the original paper initially developed for the exchange energy In 1991 Wang and Perdew Therefore, in this work we propose using as a weighting function when taking into account of a spin polarization in a system. To produce the results as shown in the following section one also needs an exchange energy contribution which we used our previously proposed exchange functional Here, ε x is the Dirac exchange energy Owing to the accuracy of the energy functional in Eq. ( Qualitatively, it is well known that the correlation energy plays a pivotal role in chemical bonding. This can easily be explained if one subscribes to the idea that the correlation energy favors uniform electron distribution. In the bonding region, the electron density hangs in balance between the two attractive nuclei; so the density becomes mostly uniform in this middle ground. Hence, the correlation energy approaches the maximum value and is expected to contribute appreciably in the bonding region. Quantitatively, it has been noticed We now discuss the results in figure The correlation functional in this work follows the three conditions used in the PBE correlation. The difference is in the way we mathematically construct our functional. PBE uses the function H(r s , t) to add to the uniform electron gas correlation energy, while we propose a function S(r s , t) that multiplies to it instead. The mathematical forms are also different. Figure The tendency toward slowly varying electron gas, however, is not the only preferential behavior due to electron correlation. Because the strength of uniform electron gas correlation energy ε c (r s ) increases as a function of electron density; the system also prefers higher density. Since the total number of electrons is conserved via normalization, accumulating higher density in one region implies lower density in the adjacent areas, promoting higher gradient of electron density. Therefore, the tendency toward higher density may sometimes compete with the tendency toward homogeneity. Most recently, it is shown Finally, we would like to emphasize that the simple behavior of the correlation energy in this work is not an oversimplification, but rather an accurate description of nature, as evident from the results in figure 2(b), Table See supplementary material for additional methods for spin polarized cases, computational details, supplementary figures, and computer source codes. Unless explicitly stated, atomic units were used throughout this work. Knowing the spin up ρ α (r ⃗) and the spin down ρ β (r ⃗) electron density, we calculated the correlation energy using the expression in Eq. ( Here, ρ = ρ α + ρ β was the total density; t = ( . The effect of spin polarization was taken into account by computing each spin separately as follows. The integration for the exchange and correlation energy were computed numerically using quadrature method with 75 radial points and 302 Labedev angular points per atom. ∫ f(r ⃗)d 3 For the correlation, Here, v c0 α and v c0 β were the correlation potentials for the uniform electron gas for the spin-up and the spin-down respectively. The terms S = (1 + t 2 ) h ε c ⁄ , t = ( Finally, the correlation potentials of the uniform electron gas were as follow. Having completely defined the potential, we proceeded to solve the Kohn-Sham equation in Eq. (S9) and Eq. (S10) via the basis function expansion method. Many sets of basis functions were available publicly. We downloaded it from the EMSL Basis Set Exchange database. 5 These are four supplementary figures showing the errors of the calculated correlation, total, and ionization energies as presented in Fig. - Zero point energies and relativistic corrections have been subtracted from the experimental atomization values 9 . The calculated values are obtained by subtracting the total energies of constituent atoms from the total energy of the molecule. The geometries were downloaded from http://www.cse.anl.gov, which was the archive for the MP/6-31G* G2 set. "Q" and "M" stand for molecular charge and spin multiplicity. These are 3 subroutines for computing the exchange and correlation energy as implemented in the Siam Quantum program. Below is the subroutine for computing the correlation energy for non-uniform electron density. It calls a function "getDFT_cChachiyo" which evaluates the uniform electron gas correlation energy. The solution has already been studied by Kais et al. 10 To reproduce their results and plot the graphs in figure With 800 radial grid points, our subroutine was sufficient to reproduce the plot of FIG. We also tested the subroutine's accuracy by comparing its results to the known property of hydrogen atom as shown below. On the left was the test for the Coulomb integral, which was needed to compute Eq. (10) of their paper. We used trapezoid integration method which gave only 0.05 mHartree error compared to the known analytical value for hydrogen atom. was fed into our subroutine, it calculated the wave functional ψ(r) whose squared absolute could be readily compared to the known electron density of hydrogen. The error was only 2x10 -5 au. Assuming the errors discussed above were of the same order of magnitude when applying the code to the Hooke atom, it was sufficiently accurate to draw conclusive statement from the figure Specifically, we transformed the Eq. ( was rewritten into the 1-dimentional (radial) finite difference form where "h" is the step size of a uniform radial grid points. Explicitly writing the Eq. (S19) for a few grid points, one began to see a useful pattern. i=0 @ r = h On the first line for r=h, note how the coefficient of ψ -1 was zero. With our index notation, i=0 meant r=h, then i=(-1) was at the origin r=0. The fact that ψ -1 's coefficient was zero meant that the wave function at the origin was decoupled (only for this numerical scheme) from the rest of the grid points. Therefore, for this method, we did not need to include ψ at the origin into the calculation. Our The function "SCFConv" ran the calculation iteratively until the eigen energy no longer changed (0.001 mHartree threshold). Note how it took the wave function from the previous cycle, computed the Coulomb potential, and fed it back into the next iteration. In this work, we used 800 grid points, which took 8 cycles to complete. We then used the Hartree-Fock wave function to compute the electron density and the graphs in figure VJ  ( ) 2(b), Table Errors of Calculated Correlation Energies (mHartree)