Four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM) of local atomic diffraction patterns is emerging as a powerful technique for probing intricate details of atomic structure and atomic electric fields. However, efficient processing and interpretation of large volumes of data remain challenging, especially for two-dimensional or light materials because the diffraction signal recorded on the pixelated arrays is weak. Here we employ data-driven manifold leaning approaches for straightforward visualization and exploration analysis of 4D-STEM datasets, distilling real-space neighboring effects on atomically resolved deflection patterns from single-layer graphene, with single dopant atoms, as recorded on a pixelated detector. These extracted patterns relate to both individual atom sites and sublattice structures, effectively discriminating single dopant anomalies via multi-mode views. We believe manifold learning analysis will accelerate physics discoveries coupled between data-rich imaging mechanisms and materials such as ferroelectric, topological spin and van der Waals heterostructures. Over the past decade, Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) has seen a growing trend towards full capture of the information stream including amongst many others, threedimensional (3D) electron tomography Despite the above progress, a vast fraction of the information contained in the Ronchigram is currently left unutilized, due to the lack of understanding of how physical parameters such as instrumentation settings and material structures affect the deflection patterns (inhomogeneous electron intensity distribution recorded on the pixelated detector), necessitating a data-driven analytical framework without excessive prior domain knowledge. Here we investigate the deflection patterns and the associated real-space distributions over atomic structures via lowdimensional manifold learning of the Ronchgiram datasets. It is often the case that the underlying structure of the dataset as a whole can be described in terms of a much smaller number of latent features than the high dimensional set of measurements. The low-dimensional physical parameter space is translated onto a high dimensional response space by means of the imaging mechanisms. Aside from possible discontinuities due to material structure transitions and non-linear imaging transfer functions, points in close proximity in the physical parameter space will generally be in close proximity in the response space, forming a complex non-linear manifold. The non-linearity often renders linear dimension reduction methods Denote the collected Ronchigram datasets over a scanned area as X = {X1, X2, ......, Xn}⊆R p , where n is the total number of scanned pixel locations and p is the image size of an individual Ronchigram. We use the recently developed uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP Remarkably, although the proposed manifold learning framework is purely data-driven without any prior bias regarding the material structure and instrumental modality, it reveals the real-space neighboring effects on deflection patterns in the Ronchigram sampled over singlelayer graphene with single dopant atoms. These deflection patterns relate to both individual atomic site and the sublattice structure and can be used to effectively discriminate dopant anomalies via multiple-mode views. For the experimental datasets of size (64*64, 180*180), the computation took less than 10 minutes on a single workstation (Intel Xenon E5-1650V3, 32GB DDR3 RAM) to get the findings analyzed in this paper. Figure In this paper we focus on two specific example datasets, one synthetic dataset where the groundtruth input (the sample atomic positions and scattering factors) are known exactly, and an experimental dataset with several unknown parameters. The simulated data is a (37, 64, 120, 140) synthetic dataset over 37 x 64 probe positions with the individual Ronchigram of size of 120 X 140 pixels. The experiment consists of 64 x 64 probe positions with 180 x 180 Ronchigram pixels giving a (64, 64, 180, 180) experimental dataset. In this work, we only consider the Euclidean distance as the distance metric. UMAP requires the tuning parameters of local neighborhood size and the effective minimum distance between embedded points, which we set to be 50 and 0 respectively for all manifold learning cases including the Graph-Bootstrapping procedure. We leave all the other tuning parameters of UMAP as default. For the clean synthetic dataset, UMAP projects the graphene Ronchigram dataset into the shape of a hexagon in Figure Figure The primary tuning parameter of HDBSCAN is the minimum cluster size k. We follow a similar procedure in Ref HDBSCAN clustering is performed on bootstrapped UMAP manifold. Figure Figure To check the above finding quantitatively, one can calculate the similarity loadings by calculating pairwise distances between the mean Ronchigram of the cluster and every individual Ronchigram. Figure Figure Figure Finally, trying to see the relative patterns in experimental Ronchigrams, we subtracted the mean of all Ronchigrams from the mean Ronchigram of each cluster in Figure Over the past 10 years, several groups have made significant contributions towards visualization of electromagnetic fields via segmented and pixelated detectors. However, at the present time, a vast fraction of the information contained in the Ronchigram is still not fully exploited and there remains a lack in knowledge of how physical parameters affect the electron distribution on pixelated detectors. Here we utilize the data-driven manifold learning methodology, to spatially map the local inhomogeneities captured in the Ronchigram datasets and to do so without requiring a priori model or placing any constraints on the data. This machine learning method could provide a fast screening tool for domain experts to digest the Ronchigram patterns at large scale and build knowledge libraries of various effects made on Ronchigram. To illustrate the above point, Figure We have shown that manifold learning is a highly efficient method to process and visualize large scale 4D-STEM datasets of atomically-resolved diffraction patterns. As we highlight in both the synthetic and experimental data analysis, even though diffraction pattern is very weak due to the monolayer structure of graphene, we can distill hidden information from Ronchigrams. Instead of the radial symmetry centered at each atom site, manifold learning analysis separates the Ronchigrams based on local symmetry dependent on the sublattices, indicating the real-space neighboring effects on deflection patterns. We propose that manifold learning and other related techniques will be extremely promising routes for analyzing the wealth of multidimensional data emerging from a new generation of electron microscopes, to denoise, interpolate, and explore the data that will be of interest to many fields such as ferroelectric, topological spin and van der Waals heterostructures. In particular, this approach may open a pathway for low dose imaging and effective algorithms for atomic manipulations Simulation of Ronchigrams was carried out using the quantum excitation of phonons option in the STEM package Experimental 4D imaging was acquired using a Nion UltraSTEM 100 microscope operated at the 60 kV accelerating voltage and the 30 mrad convergence angle. The pixel dwell time was 20 ms. CVD-grown graphene samples were transferred from Cu foil to TEM grids and cleaned via a wet transfer method and baking in an ArO2 environment as described elsewhere 