The theory of orbital magnetization is reconsidered by defining additional quantities that incorporate a non-Hermitian effect due to anomalous operators that break the domain of definition of the Hermitian Hamiltonian. As a result, boundary contributions to the observable are rigorously and analytically taken into account. In this framework, we extend the standard velocity operator definition in order to incorporate an anomaly of the position operator that is inherent in band theory, which results in an explicit boundary velocity contribution. Using the extended velocity, we define the electrons' intrinsic orbital circulation and we argue that this is the main quantity that captures the orbital magnetization phenomenon. As evidence of this assertion, we demonstrate the explicit relation between the nth band electrons' collective intrinsic circulation and the approximated, evaluated with respect to Wannier states, local and itinerant circulation contributions that are frequently used in the modern theory of orbital magnetization. A quantum mechanical formalism for the orbital magnetization of extended and periodic topological solids (insulators or metals) is re-developed without any Wannier-localization approximation or heuristic extension [Caresoli, Thonhauser, Vanderbilt and Resta, Phys. Rev. B 74, 024408 (2006)]. It is rigorously shown that, as a result of the non-Hermitian effect, an emerging covariant derivative enters the one-band (adiabatically deformed) approximation k-space expression for the orbital magnetization. In the corresponding many-band (unrestricted) k-space formula, the non-Hermitian effect contributes an additional boundary quantity which is expected to give locally (in momentum space) giant contributions whenever band crossings occur along with Hall voltage due to imbalance of electron accumulation at the opposite boundaries of the material. Boundary effects are ubiquitous in condensed matter systems. However, how these effects influence bulk quantities such as the bulk orbital magnetization M seems to be still unclear In general, anomalous operators act on states that belong within a given Hilbert space, where the Hamiltonian is assumed Hermitian and the system is closed, and they produce states that are outside this given Hilbert space; this leads to emergent non-Hermiticity in the Hamiltonian which is precisely the above mentioned boundary residue. One of the most common examples of such an anomalous operator (that leaves a boundary residue in the Ehrenfest theorem) is the position operator r whenever periodic boundary conditions at the ends of the system are adopted for the wavefunctions. In Solid State Physics one usually bypasses this kind of anomaly as in Ref.17 by redefining a proper (periodic) operator for the electrons' position that does not leave any boundary residue and by working with its expectation value. In this work we deal with this problem in a direct way, that is we maintain the standard electrons' expectation value r as defined within the Schrödinger picture (despite the fact that the electrons' position expectation value r becomes undefined within the Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit, its displacement ∆ r after a finite time interval is always a well-defined quantity as shown in Appendix A) and simply extend the standard velocity operator by adding to it an extra operator term that takes into account the non-Hermitian effect of the Hamiltonian operator. The expectation value of the added operator term is determined entirely from the boundaries of the system and it rigorously gives a boundary velocity contribution for the electron (although formalized in a bulk framework). Therefore, having in mind the evolution of the quantum state under consideration as well as the position operator expectation value within the Schrödinger picture, we are led to define the velocity operator in an extended form as, v ext = v + v b where v is the standard velocity operator as given in the literature (which can be viewed as a bulk property) and v b is the added boundary operator term that takes into account the non-Hermitian effect. In this fashion, the extended velocity operator expectation value v ext is always equal to the rate of change of the electrons' position expectation value v ext = d dt r irrespectively of the system's size or the boundary conditions to be imposed on the wavefunction; it should be noted that the latter equality is not guaranteed if the boundary velocity operator is not taken into account, and this has been the source of paradoxes The above boundary velocity v b expectation value, can be used as a probe with respect to transport properties that are carried by the system's boundaries. However, although the boundary velocity expectation value v b is well defined and not zero within Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit, the expectation value of certain observable operators involved in orbital magnetization calculations in the literature, can be undefined, e.g. the position operator expectation value r and the circulation operator expectation value r × v . Such subtle behaviors, as well as relevant consequences with respect to the modern theory of orbital magnetization, are presented in Sec.II C and summarized in Table Orbital magnetization is the quantity to be crucially affected by the above non-Hermitian effect and it is this observable that is the focus of our treatment. Before we start, let us note that, although in conventional materials the orbital magnetization is only of the order of a few per cent of the total magnetization, in materials with topologically nontrivial band structures the electrons' collective orbital magnetization can be larger than spin magnetization which has been confirmed in experiments Nowadays, the so-called modern theory of orbital magnetization M has been argued to have come to a mature stage Furthermore, it has been argued that bulk behavior of observables in crystalline materials is ensured when computing within PBCs. In spite of this belief, and contrary to what has been stated in the literature In the spirit of re-examining the orbital magnetization formula within a quantum mechanical theoretical framework that takes into account boundary effects and at the same time relaxes the Wannier-localization approximation, we were motivated to define a circulation operator that contains the extended velocity operator in the form 1 2 (r × v extv ext × r), in order to analytically determine the orbital magnetization of a system of effectively noninteracting electrons (i.e. in a density functional theory framework). Although this circulation operator takes into account boundary contributions as a consequence of the extended velocity operator v ext , its expectation value is still problematic in the Bloch representation within PBCs and it becomes undefined for extended systems in the thermodynamic limit (see Appendix A). In spite of the undefined expectation value of the latter circulation operator in periodic and extended systems, and to our surprise, we found out that it can always be decomposed into two distinct parts, namely, an intrinsic one that has a definite value and an extrinsic one that carries the undefined value. The intrinsic one has an intensive and bulk behavior that properly counts the local and circulating probability micro-currents embodied in the (generally) extended wavefunction's structure with boundary contributions being explicitly taken into account due to the non-Hermitian effect. Specifically, the expectation value of the intrinsic orbital circulation is found to have the following properties: (i) it does not depend on the system's size and has a finite value within PBCs in the Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit, (ii) it carries information about the electrons' orbital circulating probability microcurrents which are encoded as structured wavefunction in real space (for free electrons and plane waves it becomes zero), (iii) its value does not depend on the position origin (as long as the shift of the origin can be attributed to a unitary transformation of the wavefunction) and (iv) it takes into account boundary contributions as a consequence of the non-Hemitian effect. Although we do not use any Wannier states in this work, we nevertheless demonstrate how an explicit relation between the electrons' nth band collective intrinsic circulation (evaluated with respect to Bloch eigenstates) and a starting point formula of the modern theory of orbital magnetization (namely, the electrons' collective circulation evaluated with respect to Wannier states) can be established. This is accomplished by using the standard velocity, the newly defined boundary velocity and the intrinsic circulation and by assuming that each Bloch eigenstate satisfies the periodic gauge. In this respect, we expand each Bloch eigenstate into the basis of localized bulk Wannier states and localized surface orbitals, and as a result the nth band electrons' collective intrinsic circulation (initially evaluated with respect to Bloch eigenstates) acquires two distinct contributions which are the same as the ones given in Ref. 22, that is, the collective local circulation contribution (LC) plus the collective itinerant circulation contribution (IC), the latter being, in our formulation, explicitly attributed to the new boundary velocity. It is important to re-emphasize that, using the relation between the boundary and the standard velocity, the IC can be recast in a form that can be evaluated as a bulk property. In this framework we propose that the intrinsic circulation is the proper quantity that encodes the electrons' intrinsic orbital behavior in periodic (or moderately disordered) and extended systems, without the need of any approximation, and as such it must be employed in a rigorous quantum mechanical theoretical framework for calculating the orbital magnetization. In the fashion described above, we exploit the intrinsic orbital circulation in order to model the orbital magnetization of non-interacting electrons and as such we use it to derive two quantum mechanical formulas, one as an r-space and another one as a "reciprocal" k-space formula, both being relaxed from any Wannier-localization approximation. The r-space formula is derived for an extended system within PBCs over the terminated boundaries, giving therefore the bulk orbital magnetization. In the derivation of the k-space expression we relax the PBCs constraint, and as a consequence, certain interesting features emerge. Namely, a covariant derivative appears in the one-band (adiabatically deformed) approximation formula for the orbital magnetization as an emerging operator, and survives due to the non-Hermitian effect that is attributed to the anomalous momentum gradient operator ∂ k that enters the static (off-diagonal) Hellmann-Feynman theorem that we derive in Appendix C. In the many-band (unrestricted) formula the non-Hermitian effect contributes an additional boundary quantity which explicitly depends on the offdiagonal matrix elements of the boundary velocity operator v b as well as on a new boundary momentum gradient operator k b (defined in Eq. ( The theoretical method that we propose can be employed either for calculating the built-in orbital magnetization of solids in the absence of external fields We have organized the paper as follows. In Sec. II we define the electrons' boundary velocity and then the extended velocity operators, as well as the electrons' intrinsic and extrinsic orbital circulations with the aid of the extended velocity operator. In Sec. III using the electrons' intrinsic circulation we derive two quantum expressions for the bulk orbital magnetization of noninteracting electrons, one as an r-space and the other as a "reciprocal" k-space formula. We summarize and conclude in Sec. IV. Some details concerning analytical manipulations and derivations are given in three Appendices. By taking into account the evolution of the state under consideration, and by demanding that the velocity operator expectation value must always be equal with the rate of change of the electrons' expectation value d dt r , it is necessary to define the velocity operator in an extended theoretical framework as, where, is the standard velocity operator and is the boundary velocity operator. The introduction of this new operator v b is rather naturally motivated by Ref.13-14 and its expectation value is not zero only whenever the position operator becomes anomalous due to the non-Hermitian effect, in which case there are paradoxes first noted in Ref. 15. For closed systems Ψ(t)|Ψ(t) = 1, the Hamiltonian is Hermitian H(r, t) + = H(r, t) with respect to the states that belong within the domain of its definition and these states form the given Hilbert space. The non-Hermitian effect emerges whenever the state rΨ(r, t) does not belong within the given Hilbert space, that is H(r, t) + (rΨ(r, t)) = H(r, t) (rΨ(r, t)), which is a characteristic property of all wavefunctions Ψ(r, t) that satisfy PBCs over the system boundaries. Although the expectation value of the boundary velocity operator Eq. (3) given by In this respect, by working in position representation, for real scalar and vector potentials and after a straightforward integration by parts, the expectation value of Eq. ( with S being the terminated boundary surface of the system where the boundary conditions are imposed, and is the standard local probability current density (for a spinless electron). The general form of Eq. ( (where N is the total number of the unit cells enclosed within the volume V of the system), then, Eq. ( ) where H k is given by H k = e -ik.r H(r, t)e ik.r . In deriving Eq. ( By then exploiting the symmetry of the integrands and performing integration by parts, Eq. ( that is valid for periodic systems. The first term of Eq. ( By adding Eq. ( The boundary velocity operator can also be useful in the study of materials with strong spin-orbit coupling interaction if a modification of its expectation value form is made, that is, by taking into account the spin dependence of the standard velocity operator (as an outcome of the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation) that enters the local probability current density J pr (r, t) = Real[Ψ(r, t) † v Ψ(r, t)] which now must be evaluated with respect to spinors. With the aid of Eq. ( and the equality v ext = d dt r holds irrespectively of the position operator behavior (hence irrespective of the boundary conditions). By the definition as given in Eq. ( A simple and intuitive criterion to demonstrate the necessity of introducing the extended velocity operator is as follows: Consider a stationary and extended plane wave state of a free electron of mass m with well defined momentum hk in a finite volume V. The system is assumed to be closed, that is the electrons' wavefunction is normalized to unity at every instant t within the volume V , Ψ(t)|Ψ(t) = 1. In this fashion, the electrons' displacement ∆ r must always be smaller than (or equal to) the systems' size. Using the standard velocity definition v = i h [H(r, t), r] the elctrons' displacement acquires the value ∆ r = hk m t which will eventually lead the electron out of the system. This paradox is bypassed within the extended velocity operator definition, as it turns out that the boundary velocity contributes an equal magnitude and opposite sign than the bulk electrons' velocity v resulting in zero displacement ∆ r = 0 at every instant t for the assumed stationary state. In fact, the extended velocity operator guarantees that every stationary state (irrespectively of the static potentials) will always produce zero displacement for the electron, that is d dt r = v ext = v + v b = 0, as expected from the trivial fact that the position operator expectation value is a static quantity with respect to any stationary state. In this fashion, we can develop a simple and direct method to link boundary effects with bulk properties as a form of a bulk-boundary correspondence in a general sense for every stationary state, namely v n =v b n where n indexes the Hamiltonian eigenstate; this is an example, therefore, of a bulk formulation that properly takes into account boundary currents that are rigorously related to the bulk band structure. There are two important features of the extended velocity operator v ext that can be deduced from its offdiagonal matrix elements with respect to the (generally time-dependent) Hamiltonian instantaneous eigenstates |n(t) . These are derived by direct application of Eq. ( ψ n = ψ n (r, t) = r|n(t) are the Hamiltonian's instantaneous eigenfunctions and v is the velocity operator given by Eq. ( The two important features then follow. First, the off-diagonal position matrix elements in Eq. ( Generalizing the results of this subsection we point out that, whenever one defines an operator in an extended way O ext so that its expectation value O ext is equal with the rate of change of the expectation value of a given Hermitian operator G, that is O ext = d dt G , the definition of O ext can be consistently given by the Ehrenfest theorem, as long as a corresponding boundary operator O b is taken into account. The expectation value of the boundary operator O b is extremely sensitive to the boundary conditions of the wavefunction and takes a nonzero value only whenever the given Hermitian operator G (entering the theorem) becomes anomalous due to the non-Hermitian effect. Specifically, by working in position representation, due to symmetry of the integrand, after a straightforward integration by parts, the expectation value O b is always cast in the form of a boundary integral (assuming real scalar and vector potentials) of a generalized current J G flux as where the generalized current density J G is given by The wavefunction Ψ(r, t) entering Eq. ( In order to define the electrons' intrinsic and extrinsic orbital circulation for an extended and periodic system, we first choose to define a Hermitian circulation operator as namely the electrons' orbital circulation operator that employs the extended velocity operator; it is therefore designed to take into account the inherited anomaly of the position operator when computing circulating currents in periodic systems. The circulation operator always behaves as a Hermitian operator C + = C irrespectively of the wavefunctions' boundary conditions as evidenced from Eq. ( in the latter form of C the 1 2 r × v b term is an anti-Hermitian operator that has imaginary expectation value which exactly cancels any remnant imaginary part of the r×v term expectation value. Direct calculation gives the orbital circulation operator C expectation value form, which is found to be where the quantum state under consideration |Ψ(t) is normalized within the volume V of the system. In spite of the cautious definition of the circulation operator in order to take into account the possible anomaly of the position operator for periodic systems, it is shown in Appendix A that its expectation value C with respect to a Bloch eigenstate does not quite lead to any theoretical progress as it becomes undefined for an extended system in the thermodynamic limit. Motivated, however, by classical mechanics, either by rigid body dynamics or by continuous medium (hydrodynamical) theories, we find out that the expectation value of the circulation operator C can always be decomposed into two distinct parts. Namely, an intrinsic circulation part C intr that always has an intensive and bulk behavior (with well defined value within Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit) and an extrinsic circulation part C extr that has an extensive and position origindependent behavior (with undefined value within Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit). The definitions of the intrinsic and extrinsic circulations are given by (16) and respectively, where V is the volume of the system and r = ̊V r |Ψ(r, t)| 2 dV is the position operator expectation value that takes an undefined value within Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit (as shown in Appendix A). The intrinsic circulation C intr has no ambiguity and is a position origin-independent quantity whenever the shift of the position origin causes a U(1) transformation for the scalar wavefunction (assuming a spinless electron). The origin-independence is a consequence of the combined transformation (under a shift of the position origin) of the operator ((rr ) × v) and the U(1) transformation of the wavefunction that compensate each other. For spinfull electrons the velocity operator acquires spin-dependence and, as long as the shift of the position origin can be described by an SU(2) transformation of the spinor wavefunction, the intrinsic circulation remains a position origin-independent quantity without any ambiguity. The electrons' intrinsic orbital circulation as given by Eq. ( Assuming an extended Bloch eigenstate Ψ n (r, t, k) that obeys PBCs over the boundaries of the system (and is normalized within its volume V ), and in spite of the position operator (undefined) expectation value r that explicitly enters Eq. ( with u n (r, k) the cell periodic eigenstates, where all space integrals have been truncated (due to symmetry of the integrands) and evaluated within a unit cell of volume V cell , the local probability current density being determined with respect to a Bloch eigenstate. It is evident from Eq. ( where N is the total number of the unit cells enclosed within the volume V of the system. Summarizing, and with Eq. ( A physically and intuitively important feature of the intrinsic orbital circulation is that it is a quantity that properly counts the circulating probability microcurrents embodied in the wavefunction's structure. In order to clarify this feature in a simple manner let as consider two spinless and free electron motions in 3D space: one electron with well defined linear momentum vector hk and another one with partially well defined linear momentum vector, e.g. only its z component hk z e z (with k x and k y being undetermined). We assume that each electron is in an extended state motion that is normalized within a volume V . The free electron motion with well defined linear momentum vector hk, hence with a plane wave form for the wavefunction, has a local probability current density that is a homogeneous vectorial quantity proportional to hk/m. On the contrary, the free electron motion with partially well defined linear momentum hk z e z has a local probability current density that is an inhomogeneous vectorial quantity with a constant z component proportional to hk z /m. Using Eq. ( Considering such a structured wavefunction, its phase is indeterminate on the dislocation lines (in 3D space) where the modulus of the wavefunction takes a zero value. The intrinsic orbital circulation of the electron as given by Eq. ( Structured wavefunctions appear naturally in motions under external potentials, e.g. in atomic orbitals with nonzero mechanical angular momentum or in Landau states in a magnetic field. In this respect, we generally expect that the ionic environment will in principle produce structured and extended cell periodic electronic wavefunctions u n (r, k), with the dislocation lines being periodically ordered in the bulk owing to the periodicity of u n (r, k), while spiraling probability micro-currents around those lines can be taken into account by Eq. ( The extrinsic orbital circulation C extr = Im[ i r × v ] is an extensive quantity that counts the circulation of the global probability current v with respect to a specific position origin. It does not carry any tractable information about the structure of the wavefunction or the circulating probability micro-currents (due to being a position origin dependent quantity), and has an undefined value within Bloch representation in the thermodynamic limit (owing to the position operator expectation value being undefined). The scope of this subsection is ultimately to facilitate a comparison of our results (derived in later sections) with the literature, and more specifically (i) to point out the behavior of operators (with respect to their expectation values and position origin dependence) that are commonly used in the modern theory of orbital magnetization, and (ii) to show some subtle consequences that emerge due to implicit Hermiticity assumptions that were silently made during calculations in recent theoretical works The expectation value of the position operator with respect to a Bloch eigenstate ψ n (k)| r |ψ n (k) turns out to be an undefined value in the thermodynamic limit, as shown by Eq. (A3) derived in Appendix A. On the other hand, the corresponding off-diagonal matrix elements ψ n (k)| r |ψ m (k) given by Eq. (A5) (also derived in Appendix A) remain well defined quantities. In this respect we also note that the matrix elements of the operator ( r -ψ n (k)| r |ψ n (k) ), evaluated with respect to any Bloch state, have a well defined value in the thermodynamic limit. This can be shown by taking the expectation value with respect to ), which by using the 3D analogue of Eq. (A14), shows that the undefined terms cancel each other and, as a result, the expectation has a well defined value. The same pattern, that is, the undefined terms canceling each other, is what makes the intrinsic circulation ] have a well defined value in the thermodynamic limit. On the other hand, the real part of the circulation operator expectation value , is an undefined quantity as shown by Eq. (A12). For what follows it is worth pointing out that, in all the above mentioned calculations, no constraint is assumed with respect to the boundary velocity expectation value. By then using the Bloch form of the considered state as well as v = i h [H(r), r] and r × r = 0, the circulation operator takes the where which has far reaching consequences. Firstly, the latter operator is now transformed into a well defined quantity due to taking the form where we have used As a result of this spectral resolution, the (undefined) diagonal matrix elements of the position operator are excluded from their circulation operator formula. The subtle consequence of the above two calculations, is that one unintentionally assumes that the state r |φ n belongs within the domain of H(r), that is, certain boundary conditions for φ n (r) are assumed which guarantee that the wavefunction rφ n (r) also belongs within the domain of definition of the Hamiltonian, and as a result the non-Hermitian boundary velocity Eq. ( C m |φ m is the one that enforces the state r |φ n to belong within the domain of the Hamiltonian and the boundary velocity expectation value to become zero. This is evident when one (i) takes the inner product of r |φ n with i h φ n | H(r) + -H(r) , (ii) uses Eq. ( In this framework, the method of calculation used by To demonstrate at a glance the various subtleties hidden in the literature, in Table At this point it is useful to make a connection between the one electron's intrinsic circulation as given by Eq. ( and have zero Chern invariant) and they began their calculation with a collective circulation computed with respect to these Wannier functions, turning at the end of their calculation to the Bloch eigenstates. In the present work we follow an opposite route, that is we start our calculation from the one electron's intrinsic circulation Eq. ( In order to establish the connection with Ref. 22 method we assume that the Bloch eigenstates Ψ n (r, t, k) entering Eq. ( where N is the number of primitive cells of the system, |n, R I is the nth band Wannier function in the bulk cell R and |n, R S is the nth surface localized orbital on the surface cell R S . By then taking into account that the expectation value of the boundary velocity we calculate the nth band collective electrons' intrinsic circulation given by takes the form Assuming then that the crystal has inversion symmetry in the bulk n, -R R can be taken as zero, the nth band electrons' collective intrinsic circulation takes the approximate form where the first term on the right hand side of Eq. ( In this section we use the electrons' intrinsic orbital circulation presented in Sec. II in order to derive quantum mechanical formulas for the orbital magnetization of non-interacting electrons by accounting for the circulating probability micro-currents. The formulas that we derive are applicable either to conventional or to topological crystalline materials, under periodic or realistic boundary conditions for the electrons' wavefunctions, while any localization assumptions are absent. In a system of non-interacting electrons we can define the (single-eigenstate) orbital magnetization M n (k) per electron as where m n (k) is the electrons' orbital magnetic moment, Ψ n (r, t, k) is a Bloch eigenstate, V is the volume of the system, c is the speed of light and e < 0 is the electron charge. In the derivation of the r-space formula we do not take into account the realistic boundary contributions to the orbital magnetization due to the realistic wavefunctions' boundary conditions; rather we provide a formula that has a bulk character. Namely, we calculate the orbital magnetization within PBCs which are imposed on the wavefunction over a "terminated" boundary surface of the (3D) material in the thermodynamic limit. Using Eq. ( , where μ is the Fermi energy and f n (k, μ) is the occupation function, the bulk orbital magnetization of spinless and noninteracting electrons is given by where all expectation value position-integrals are truncated (due to symmetry) and carried out within a primitive cell of volume V cell as shown in Appendix A. The orbital magnetization r-space formula is the first major result in this work and the integrand of Eq. ( We re-emphasize that, although the position operator that enters Eq. ( As evidenced from Eq. ( which is inherited in the local probability current density J pr(n) (r, k) = Real[Ψ n (r, k) + vΨ n (r, k)] that enters Eq. (26). Therefore, in materials with strong spin-orbit interaction where the spin degree of freedom is essential, the orbital magnetization is directly influenced (apart from the wavefunctions) by the crystal force field that interacts with the electron. In this subsection we derive an orbital magnetization formula that is valid for general boundary conditions for the electrons' wavefunction. Boundary contributions are explicitly taken into account as a consequence of the emergent non-Hermitian effect. In order to derive the k-space formula we assume that, each electrons' motion is described from a (generally) extended and stationary form eigenstate (normalized within the volume of the material) in the form and no Wannierlocalization approximation is involved. The bulk values of each (position representation) wavefunction u n (r, k) are assumed to be periodic (with respect to any direct lattice vector translation R), while we relax this property near the boundaries of the material in order to take into account the realistic boundary contributions. We derive below a k-space orbital magnetic formula m n (k) for each electron, starting from (cf. Eqs ( . By taking into account the above Bloch type eigenstate for each electron, the standard velocity operator as given by Eq. ( where H k (r, k) = e -ik.r H(r)e ik.r . In view of Eq. ( It is now helpful to see the origin of the electron's orbital magnetic moment Eq. ( of the Hellmann-Feynman theorem, a fact first noticed in Ref. 16. Specifically, by taking the inner product of Eq. ( where the second term on the right side of Eq. ( We then express the action of the operator rr n on the eigenstate |u n (k) as a k-derivative formula, and then substitute the result in Eq. ( Accordingly, the expectation value of the position operator r with respect to the eigenstate |u n (k) takes the form is the Abelian Berry connection. By acting with Eq. ( The first two terms on the right hand side of Eq. ( where is the one-band covariant derivative (of the n th band) In this fashion, Eq. ( We then expand the state |∂ k Ψ n (k) of Eq. ( . By then taking into account that the operator (rr n ) is by definition Hermitian (without the need of any specific boundary conditions to be imposed) owing to the position representation that we are working in (r + = r) and to the reality of the position operator expectation value r n , we let it act on the left to the eigenstate u n (k)| in Eq. ( which, by using the identity ( Now, some further analysis is in order concerning the off-diagonal elements in Eq. ( As rigor-ously shown in Appendix C, by deriving an off-diagonal Hellmann-Feynman theorem that takes into account non-Hermitian corrections, the off-diagonal matrix elements Ψ n (k)|∂ k Ψ m (k) are found to be emergent non-Hermitian boundary quantities, that are given by where the matrix elements of the non-Hermitian term S nm (k) are always transformed after an integration by parts (due to symmetry of the integrands) into a boundary quantity that is given by where S nm (k) is defined as By then using the considered Bloch eigenstate |Ψ m (k) = e ik.r e iΛ(k) |u m (k) in the non-Hermitian boundary term expression S nm (k), we transform the non-Hermitian boundary term and express it in a form that is evaluated only by the use of the cell periodic eigenstates. Straightforward calculation shows that where, are the off-diagonal matrix elements of the boundary velocity operator v b defined as while are the off-diagonal matrix elements of the boundary momentum gradient "operator" defined as where the Hamiltonian H k (r, k) is the standard H k (r, k) = e -ik.r H(r)e ik.r and u m = u m (r, k) are the cell-periodic eigenfunctions. In position representation and after an integration by parts, both the above off-diagonal matrix elements are always transformed (due to symmetry of the integrands) to boundary quantities given by (which comes out from Eq. ( respectively, where u m = u m (r, k) are cell-periodic in the bulk. We note that Eq. ( respectively. On the other hand, for extended states that satisfy PBSs over the material boundaries We also point out that the matrix elements thus also their sum S nm (k), can equally be computed as bulk quantities whenever the integrations by parts are not performed. Using Eq. ( It is worth noticing that, due to the off-diagonal Hellmann-Feynman theorem Eq. (C6), the combination of the off-diagonal matrix elements is the non-Abelian Berry connection, turns out to be a boundary-dependent quantity that emerges due to the non-Hermitian effect and is given by which can be viewed as a new result in the Berry phase literature showing the role of the non-Hermitian effect on Berry curvatures. By using Eq. ( Due to the self rotation of the wave packet around its center of mass, they found that the electron acquires an intrinsic orbital magnetic moment given by m ) where they have use the convention e > 0. If we assume that the electron's state is a bulk state, as well as that the electron completely avoids the boundaries of the system where it is enclosed, hence the wavefunction u n (r, k) and all of its derivatives are zero over the boundaries, then, all non-Hermitian boundary terms become zero. In this respect, letting S nm (k) = 0 in Eq. ( where we have used ( Furthermore, by using the one-band covariant derivative Eq. ( in the above equation, is also a non-Hermitian boundary term, which by assumption is also zero (due to the wavefunction u n (r, k) and of its derivatives being zero over the boundaries). In this respect, for the assumed bulk states, defined as the ones that the electron completely avoids the boundaries, the electron's magnetic moment is given by which is a form that has the same structure as the real part of semi-classical electron's orbital magnetic moment Re It is evident that, the semi-classical electron's orbital magnetic moment m n (k c ) does not explicitly take into account contributions from the realistic boundaries of a material, and as a consequence, the electrons' magnetization formulas that are derived by semi-classical means do not take into account such boundary contributions. We expect that our more general result Eq. ( Moreover, our own result for the electron's orbital magnetic moment formula Eq. (49) satisfies the two basic invariant properties, namely it is invariant with respect to gauge transformations of the form u n (k) → e if n (k) u n (k) and with respect to a shift of the zero of the Hamiltonian H k (r, k) → H k (r, k) + ǫ; we expect therefore that the many body orbital magnetization formula that we derive further below will share the same invariant properties. Also, as will be explicitly shown in the next subsection, a boundary contribution that is encoded by the one-band covariant derivative is hidden within the first term of the right hand side of our Eq. ( Finally, let us in what follows use our Eq. (49) (or Eq. ( In the one-band formula we assume that each combination of the off-diagonal matrix elements which is a good approximation for conventional insulators with large band gap and negligible boundary contributions as evidenced from Eq. (40) and Eq. ( k) must be satisfied, which in the simplest scenario is fulfilled whenever the electrons completely avoid the boundaries of the material and at the same time no band-crossings exist in the Brillouin zone. In a different point of view, the assumption of zero value for the off-diagonal matrix elements, namely, (A nm (k) -u n (k)| r |u m (k) ) = 0 (cf. Eq. ( The latter equality is satisfied whenever each one of the off-diagonal amplitudes Substituting Ψ m (r, k) = e ik.r u m (r, k) in the latter adiabatically deformed restriction we find the former assumption of zero value for each one of the off-diagonal matrix elements In this respect and within the one-band (adiabatically deformed) approximation, the many-body electron orbital magnetization (Eq. ( which satisfies the two basic invariant properties, namely, it is gauge invariant and invariant with respect to a shift of the zero of the Hamiltonian. Although we have apparently dropped out any boundary contributions of the orbital magnetization by approximating the off-diagonal matrix elements S nm (k) values as zero, there still exists an explicit boundary contribution within Eq. (52) which is attributed to the one-band covariant derivative. Specifically, if we use the definition of the one-band covariant derivative as given by Eq. (35) we can recast the integrand of Eq. (52) in the following form The second term on the right hand side of Eq. ( where u n = u n (r, k) are the cell-periodic eigenfunc-tions. If we further assume within a stricter approximation that the position operator r the momentum gradient operator ∂ k separately normal operators, that is the expectation value of the boundary momentum gradient operator , we can replace the covariant derivative entering Eq. ( , that must be used in Eq. (B12) and subsequently in Eq. (B14) leading to Eq. (37). In the many-band formula we don't a priori make any assumption with respect to the behavior of the position operator r and the momentum gradient operator k , thus no restrictions for the wavefunctions' boundary conditions are made; the goal is to derive a general formula applicable to non-interacting electrons within topological materials, insulators or semimetals. In this respect, and because of Eq. ( which is valid for arbitrary boundary conditions on the wavefunctions u m (r, k). Orbital magnetization manyband formula Eq. ( The energy differences in the denominator of the second term on the right hand side of Eq. ( In order to verify the need of the presence of a Hall voltage, we will show that within PBSs for the wavefunctions (thus with no electron accumulation occurring) no gigantic local contribution of the orbital magnetization is possible even if the material is topological. Within PBCs the momentum gradient operator ∂ k does not break the domain of definition of the Hamiltonian, that is the wavefunctions u n (r, k) and ∂ k u n (r, k) both satisfy periodic boundary conditions in r-space. Indeed, the latter periodicity of ∂ k u n (r, k) can be deduced from the periodicity u n (r + L, k) = u n (r, k), where L is the length of the material, by differentiating both sides with respect to the momentum k (which is treated as an independent parameter in the assumed thermodynamic limit) that gives ∂ k u n (r + L, k) = ∂ k u n (r, k). In this fashion, each one of the matrix elements u n (k)| k b |u m (k) is zero due to symmetry, and any emergence of the non-Hermitian effect owing to the momentum gradient operator ∂ k anomaly is prohibited. We point out that the absence of this non-Hermitian effect is invariant with respect to twisted boundary conditions of the form u n (r + L, k) = e if (L, k) u n (r, k) as long as the system is closed. By recasting the as well as by taking into account the non-Hermitian boundary term as given by Eq. ( then, under periodic boundary conditions the boundary momentum gradient "operator" k b matrix elements given by Eq. ( where we have also replaced the one-band covariant derivative with the normal one accordance with Eq. (53) and Eq. (54). It is now clear from Eq. (57) that, whenever a Hall voltage is zero owing to periodic boundary conditions, the orbital magnetization cannot acquire local gigantic values, even if the material is topological with non-trivial band structure crossings, while whenever imbalance of electron charge is formed, local gigantic orbital magnetization contributions near the band crossings are generically expected to occur. It is also interesting to point out that, whenever the material's realistic boundary conditions are periodic, by expanding the cell periodic functions in a Fourier series over all reciprocal lattice vectors G, namely, u n (r, k) = G C n (k, G)e -iG•r , it is evident that ∂ k u n (r, k) is periodic in space (as well as u n (r, k) and the Hamiltonian H k (r, k)). By then using the normalization convention Ψ n (t, k)|Ψ n (t, k) = u n (k)|u n (k) cell = 1, that is, assume a Bloch state in the form ) and exploiting the symmetry of the integrands, the orbital magnetization formula it truncates into the form where all space integrals are performed within one primitive cell, and the off-diagonal matrix elements of the boundary velocity are given by in accordance with Eq. ( (i) Orbital magnetization formula Eq. ( (ii) In Ref. 2 they use the standard circulation operator together with the spectral resolution of the Hamiltonian, and as a result of this spectral resolution, the (undefined) diagonal matrix elements of the position operator are excluded from the circulation operator formula; one can therefore evaluate the standard circulation operator expectation value (even in the thermodynamic limit within PBCs), hence one can calculate the orbital magnetization. Due to the spectral resolution within the circulation operator, the assumed orbitals must satisfy therefore, the orbitals that are taken into account indeed describe bound bulk states. Then, Ref. 2 extracted their result from the semi-classical orbital magnetization formula given in Ref. 24, and they stated that the remaining part gives the boundary contribution of the orbital magnetization. The theoretical method that they use rests on the argument that the semi-classical orbital magnetization formula given in Ref. 24 correctly gives the total (bulk and boundary) orbital magnetization of non interacting electrons. We argue that this may not be entirely true due to the approximations that are made during the derivation of the Ref. 24 orbital magnetization formula. First, as we have shown in the derivation of Eq. (51), the structure of the semi-classical electron's orbital magnetic moment can be attained by the unrestricted quantum formula Eq. (49) whenever the electron's state is a localized bulk state, that is, when the electron completely avoids the boundaries of the system where it is enclosed. Therefore, the orbital magnetization that is evaluated only by taking into account the electron's semi-classical orbital magnetic moment, does not account for magnetization contributions coming from all possible states, i.e. does not take into account topologically non trivial extended states. On the other hand, the semi-classical orbital magnetization formula given in Ref. 24, namely as the derivative of the electrons' total energy with respect to the magnetic field (at zero magnetic field), besides the contribution coming from the electrons' intrinsic orbital moment, it also acquires two extra terms that come up due to the modified density of states. One is attributed to the explicit magnetic field dependence of the density of states and the other is due to the resulting change in the Fermi volume. The two extra terms cannot carry any topologically non trivial information, on one hand due to the localized wavepacket employed, and on the other hand due to the explicit assumption ∇ k •Ω n (k) = 0, where Ω n (k) is the Berry curvature, that was made in Ref. 24 for deriving the modified density of states (hence Berry type of monopoles, crucial for the non trivial topology, were ignored). In this framework, these two extra terms most probably represent corrections to the semi-classical orbital magnetization formula and do not carry any topologically non trivial information. We argue therefore that, although the method followed in Ref. 2 is reasonable, the findings do not represent the orbital magnetization of topologically non trivial surface states, but they instead provide trivial corrections to the orbital magnetization for non localized states. This discussion here is given so that our results Eq. (55) or Eq. ( We have reconsidered the modern theory of orbital magnetization through careful definition of additional quantities that rigorously and analytically take into account the boundary contributions to the observable. These contributions are shown to originate from non-Hermitian effects that emerge whenever the position operator r and the momentum gradient operator ∂ k (that enter the Ehrenfest and the Hellmann-Feynman theorems respectively) become anomalous, in the sense that they break the domain of definition of the Hamiltonian operator. In this theoretical framework, we have first extended the standard velocity operator definition in order to incorporate the anomaly of the position operator that is inherited in band theory, which results to an explicit boundary velocity contribution. Using the extended velocity, we have defined the electrons' intrinsic orbital circulation within Bloch representation which we have shown that is an intensive and well defined quantity of periodic solids that properly counts the circulating micro-currents embodied in the wavefunctions' bulk and boundary structure. Using the defined electrons' intrinsic circulation, we have made a rigorous connection between the nth band electrons' collective intrinsic circulation and the local (LC) and itinerant circulation (IC) contributions, that are used within Wannier-localization and periodic gauge approximation in the modern theory of orbital magnetization We have rigorously shown that, in the one-band approximation k-space formula, a one-band covariant derivative enters the magnetization formula as an emerging operator due to the non-Hermitian effect that is attributed to the anomaly of the momentum gradient operator ∂ k ; the one-band covariant derivative can be replaced by the normal derivative only whenever PBCs are satisfied. In the many-band and unrestricted k-space formula of the orbital magnetization, the non-Hermitian effect has been shown to contribute an additional boundary term that originates from the anomalies of the position operator r and the momentum gradient operator k . This additional boundary term, is expected to give local gigantic orbital magnetization contributions in the vicinity of band crossings in topological materials (insulators or semimetals) whenever band crossings exist along with Hall voltage due to imbalance of electron accumulation at the opposite boundaries of the materials. These local gigantic orbital magnetization contributions are encoded by the emerging non-Hermitian effect of the momentum gradient operator ∂ k that becomes anomalous whenever PBCs for the electrons' wavefunctions are broken. On the contrary, whenever Hall voltage is zero and the electrons' wavefunctions satisfy PBCs, the momentum gradient operator ∂ k has a well defined behavior and, as a consequence, gigantic boundary contributions are not possible. By making a comparison between our derived formula and the one that had heuristically been given (in order to model the orbital magnetization of Chern insulators and metals) in Ref. 23, we have shown the (previously unnoticed) property that, within periodic boundary conditions, the orbital magnetization has explicit boundary contributions encoded by the off-diagonal matrix elements of the boundary velocity operator (which are not zero due to the emerging non-Hermitian effect of the position operator that becomes anomalous within PBCs). Finally, we point out that, all boundary contributions that emerge due to non-Hermitian effects can equally be calculated as bulk properties whenever the integrations by parts are not performed. In the following all calculations are performed for one electron states within Bloch representation. For simplicity and without loss of generality we assume 1D configuration (while the generalization to 3D is straightforward). We assume a closed system Ψ(t)|Ψ(t) = 1 of length L x with PBSs for the wavefunction over the edges. We calculate the electrons position expectation value Ψ(t)| x |Ψ(t) with respect to a Bloch eigenstate cell is calculated within one primitive cell and a normalization constant is assumed to be absorbed in the cell periodic state |u n (k) . The electrons' position expectation value is a quantity that is position origindependent and is given by where the lower limit of the space integration is the starting point of the 1D system that coincides with the position-origin. Using the periodicity of the cell periodic states u n (x, k) we "transfer" all (N x -1) primitives cells in the position of the 1 st primitive cell (adjacent to the position origin), which gives where the cell subscript denotes that the space integrals are evaluated within the primitive cell located at the systems edge. Using the normalization condition Eq. (A2) takes the form (A3) Performing analogous calculation as that in Eq. (A2), we evaluate the off-diagonal matrix elements of the position operator for n = m which gives where using we finally find that the off-diagonal matrix elements are given by Therefore, in the system's infinite length limit L x → ∞, the number of primitive cells enclosed within the system also becomes infinite N x → ∞, and as a result, the electrons' position expectation value Eq. (A3) takes an undefined value (due to the first term of the right hand side), in contrast to the off-diagonal position matrix elements Eq. (A5) which they return a well defined value. We assume a position periodic and closed system of length L x . We will calculate the electrons' displacement after a finite time interval T in the limit of infinite length L x → ∞ and show that is a well-defined quantity. We assume that the electron is in an extended and time-dependent Bloch type state at every instant, that is, Using similar reasoning as in Eq. (A3) we find that the electrons' displacement is given by where the undefined terms α x N x 2 canceled each one another. In this fashion, Eq.(A6) takes the form where, by using the extended velocity operator v ext defined in Eq. ( (A8) We calculate the electrons' circulation operator expectation value C given by Eq. ( PBSs over the edges. For simplicity we assume a 2D system while the generalization to 3D is straightforward. The system has length L x = N x α x in the x direction and L y = N y α y in the normal y direction, where N = N x N y is the total number of primitive cells within the system and α x α y is the area of the primitive cell. The Bloch eigenstate is normalized within the area L x L y , therefore a normalization constant is assumed to be absorbed within the cell periodic states, where all space integrals are taken within one primitive cell adjacent to a system's edge and located at the po-where we have used where the time-dependence has been eliminated as expected. In the position representation and by using Eq. (B7), the action of the position operator on the eigenstate |u n (k) can be transformed to a k-derivative identity given by Accordingly, the expectation value of the position operator r with respect to the eigenstate |u n (k) takes with the aid of Eq. (B8) the form as well as by taking into account Eq. ( v |Ψ n (t, k) = -1 h e ik.r e iΘ n (t, k) (H k (r, k) -E n (k)) |∂ k u n (k) + 1 h ∂ k E n (k) |Ψ n (t, k) . (B6)