Spin current is a central theme in spintronics, and its generation is a keen issue. The spin-polarized current injection from the ferromagnet, spin battery, and spin Hall effect have been used to generate spin current, but Ohmic currents in the normal state are involved in all of these methods. On the other hand, the spin and spin current manipulation by the supercurrent in superconductors is a promising route for dissipationless spintronics. Here we show theoretically that, in two-dimensional superconductors with Rashba spin-orbit interaction, the generation of dissipationless bulk spin current by charge supercurrent becomes highly efficient, exceeding that in normal states in the dilute limit, i.e. when the chemical potential is close to the band edge, although the spin density becomes small there. This result manifests the possibility of creating new spintronic devices with long-range coherence. In spintronics, spin current plays an essential role to transfer the information associated with the spin degrees of freedom. Therefore the generation of spin current is an important issue, and several methods have been proposed and experimentally verified On the other hand, superconducting spintronics is an emerging field attracting recent interest The superconducting magnetoelectric effect Here, we study spin density and spin current produced by a superconducting current in a two-dimensional superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit interaction for wide parameter regions. We investigate in detail the properties of spin current in this system and find that the spin current generation efficiency is comparable to or even larger than that of normal state when normalized with the charge current density. The spin current we discuss here corresponds to the noncoherent part in the classification by Leurs et al. A two-dimensional superconductor (SC) with Rashba spin-orbit interaction (SOI) can be described by the following Hamiltonian, where α is the Rashba SOI strength, ∆ is the SC order parameter and σ = xσ x + ŷσ y + ẑσ z is a spatial vector of Pauli matrices. The constants m and are the electron mass and the Planck constant respectively. Summation over implicit indexes is assumed. Without superconductivity, the normal-state band structure is schematically shown in FIG. The superconductivity order parameter considered here is spin-singlet s-wave. In systems with Rashba spinorbit interaction and superconductivity, s-wave may be mixed with p-wave and a general theory should include all of them. It has been shown that the actual amplitudes of the two different pairing potential depend on the form of the interaction Although we do not assume any spin-triplet order parameters in the Hamiltonian, the anomalous Green's function F σσ (ω, k) = (ψ s +d•σ)iσ y , which carries the full information about the Cooper pairs, has both spin-singlet part ψ s and spin-triplet components d when spin-orbit interaction is present To investigate the spin and charge properties, it is convenient to introduce an SU(2) gauge field W ν σ ν Apparently, the Rashba term in Ĥ0 breaks SU(2) symmetry. It is actually equivalent to a constant gauge field (neglecting a numeric constant ) W = ( W x y σ x , W y x σ y , 0), with W x y = -W y x = 2mα/ When a uniform supercurrent is flowing (say along xdirection), the SC order parameter acquires a constant phase gradient, i.e. ∆ = ∆ 0 exp[2iq x x]. Or, by a gauge transformation, it is equivalent to a constant vector potential A x = q x /e, which is effective only for SCs. Before showing the results, it is helpful to discuss the symmetry properties of the involved physical quantities. The spin current (spin density) is odd (even) under spatial inversion but even (odd) under time-reversal operation, while charge current, or q x , is odd under both of them. Consequently, the lowest order of the spin current is x and that of spin density is M ν ∼ q x . Both of them must be odd functions of α. At zero temperature, the free energy F is just the ground state energy. For arbitrary Rashba SOI strength and chemical potential, the spin polarization is along ydirection and the density is (derivation in the Methods x change as we increase ∆. In all the results of this paper, we have set the electron charge e = 1 and the Planck constant = 1. where we have defined the Rashba splitting energy E R = mα 2 /2. This is a generalized SC Edelstein effect In FIG. The ∆-dependence of the function g is shown in the inset of FIG. ( Due to the form of the Rashba SOI, and as indicated by the direction of the spin density obtained above, the only non-vanishing spin current induced by the supercurrent in x-direction is J y . In the limit where the chemical potential is high and the order parameter is small, i.e. μ E R ∆, the spin current density is (derivation in the Methods section) and all other spin current components vanish. This expression is independent of μ and ∆, similar to the spin density discussed previously. When -E R < μ < 0 and ∆ is small, the spin current density can be written as Combined with Eqs. For general parameters, the spin current of the SC is calculated numerically and shown in FIG. When the chemical potential is below the band edge, i.e. μ < -E R , the normal electronic state has no Fermi surface and SC cannot happen in the weak coupling limit of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. Assuming that the SC exists, it must be in BEC regime where electrons are tightly bond and the critical temperature is determined by the Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) temperature x. Both the spin density and spin current show power-law decay as μ decreases. Note that the discontinuity at ∆ → 0 does not appear when μ < -E R . To relate our calculation to experiments, it is useful to convert the wave vector q x to the supercurrent density j x . To calculate j x , we note that (charge) current operator in a Rashba system is Ĵx = e d 2 k[ m (k x + q x ) -ασ y ] ss c † s,k c s ,k . At T = 0, the usual paramagnetic term vanishes while the diamagnetic term remains. The last term proportional to α contributes a supercurrent of eαM y / . So the zero temperature supercurrent density can be written as The quantity n e is the electron density. Eq.( Since j x ∼ q x , we define two coefficients where j y 0 = (jx/e)(My/ne) denotes a direction product of the particle current (jx/e) and the spin polarization per particle (My/ne). ne denotes the electron density and e is the electron charge. The same color corresponds to the same value of ∆. The insets are the log-log plot of η emphasizing the regime with negative μ. When μ goes below zero, both γ and η increase. Interestingly, if ∆ is small compared to Rashba splitting, γ stays constant for μ < 0 until it reaches the band edge, below which it decreases again. For spin current, the ratio η keep increasing before μ reaches the band edge. Below that, η decreases very slowly. That means the efficiency of spin current generation in the BEC regime is very high. As shown above, the functional behaviors of the spin density and spin current are similar in some parameter regions but very different in others. To further clarify the mechanism of the spin-current generation, we investigate its relation to the spin polarization. When spin polarization is induced by supercurrent, we may intuitively expect a spin current which is just the particle current times the spin polarization of each particle. Using Eq.(9-11) and Eq.( In normal dissipative Rashba systems, spin density Although a dissipative normal system seems actually better at generating spin current than its SC counterpart for most of the parameter space, we should note that, in the normal state, the spin current, as well as the charge current, is generated by an electric field and suffers from dissipation and heating, making it impossible to maintain long-range coherence. On the other hand, the spin current in the SC state has very low dissipation (if any) because it is purely due to the flow of a supercurrent. In other words, it is the property of the Cooper pair condensate and long-range coherence is guaranteed, making it a spin supercurrent It should be emphasized that the spin current in a coherent system does not necessarily correspond to the coherent spin current as defined by Leurs et al. We have shown that a supercurrent in an superconductor with Rashba SOI can induce spin density and spin current. Let's take the interface between a LaAlO 3 and a SrTiO 3 as an example and estimate the realistic magnitude of these effects. The critical current density (2D) is ∼ 10 -3 A/cm, effective mass m * = 1.5m e and the super-fluid density n s ∼ 10 13 cm -2 Another important issue is the effect of finite temperature which affects the results through both the Fermi distribution of the quasi-particles and change of ∆. In the following, we assume that the function ∆(T ) is determined by the BCS theory. FIG. One may also note that this system is a paradigm for the study of topological superconductors. In fact, an out-of-plane Zeeman field can drive it into a topological phase with Majorana edge modes if μ ∼ 0. Then the following questions become interesting: (1) What is the spin current contributed by the edge modes, if any? (2) How are topological phase transitions affected by the supercurrent? In fact, the second question has recently been discussed but in a quasi-one-dimensional system where it is found that a supercurrent shifts the topological phase transitions To conclude, we have studied the spin and spin current generation by the supercurrent in two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit interaction. The spin degrees of freedom are partially activated due to the noncentrosymmetry even when on-site pairing between up and down spins is considered. When the chemical potential is below the band crossing point and approaching to the Band edge, i.e., in dilute electron density limit, the large enhancement of the spin supercurrent generation occurs although the spin density is small. The efficiency of the spin supercurrent does not decrease so much even when the chemical potential is below the band edge, i.e., in the BEC limit of the superconductivity. Furthermore, the carrier density can be controlled there by gating, and the chemical potential dependence can be studied experimentally. These studies will pave a route toward the dissipationless superconducting spintronics, where the transfer of spin information without the energy loss is possible through the long range quantum coherence of the system. The Hamiltonian with SU(2) gauge symmetry of free electrons in magnetic field is where A is the U(1) gauge potential of electromagnetic field and W ν is the SU(2) gauge potential. The constant μ B denotes the Bohr magneton and σ ν=1,2,3 are Pauli matrices. The coefficient ḡ is a coupling constant to be assigned later. Rashba SOI corresponds to the existence of the following SU(2) gauge field Note that we have introduced the speed of light c and the Levi-Civita symbol ijν . The Hamiltonian with this gauge field can be rewritten as The second term describes the Rashba SOI. So, the Rashba SOI will be included by assuming a constant SU(2) gauge field Wν and the SU(2) gauge symmetric Hamiltonian with certain Rashba strength becomes The last two terms are just constant energy shift due to the electric field of the Rashba SOI, which we ignore hereafter. Then we have In order for the non-Abelian gauge field W ν to couple with the spin, we set ḡ = /2. We calculate the spin density induced by the supercurrent, or by the vector potential A = ( q x /e)x in Eq.( with which is composed of terms linear and quadratic in A respectively, a term proportional to non-Abelian gauge field W ν , a term bilinear in A and W ν , and the term due to the field B. As mentioned previously, the spin density M y is linear in q x (or A x ) to the lowest order. Consequently, we should calculate the contribution to the free energy by Ĥ up to the second order. At zero temperature, the free energy is simply the ground state energy. The subscript h labels the hole bands, i.e. E h± (k) < 0. Here we ignored the energy due to Cooper pairs, assuming that the order parameter is not affected by the perturbation term. The unperturbed energy spectrum of the system is 2m -μ ± α k are the energy spectrum of the normal Rashba bands. The lowest order term of the spin density is from the bilinear term ∼ q x B i . Then, the perturbation correction to the free energy is The spin density is After substituting the expressions of ξ ± into the above integral and defining k ± = k ± mα/ , it becomes = q x 16π αm (2 - = mαq x 4π g(d, u), with u = μ/E R + 1 and d = ∆/E R . Similar to the spin density derivation, we use perturbation theory to obtain the correction to the free energy δF J . The difference here is that we need to go to the third order perturbation due to the fact that the spin current is quadratic in q x . After lengthy but straightforward calculation, the free energy correction is The general form of the function F -is complicated. However, in the limit ∆ → 0, it becomes By change of integral variable from k to k -to x similar to the previous calculation, the integral can be written as + πα The spin current density is + πα We have defined two wave vectors k 2 and k 1 which denotes the Fermi wave number of the outer and inner Fermi surfaces respectively. When μ is large, the integral of the second term is negligible and the first and third terms lead to Eq.( 