An optical equivalent of the field-programmable gate array (FPGA) is of great interest to large-scale photonic integrated circuits. Previous programmable photonic devices relying on the weak, volatile thermo-optic or electro-optic effect usually suffer from a large footprint and high energy consumption. Phase change materials (PCMs) offer a promising solution due to the large non-volatile change in the refractive index upon phase transition. However, the large optical loss in PCMs poses a serious problem. Here, by exploiting an asymmetric directional coupler design, we demonstrate non-volatile PCM-clad silicon photonic 1 × 2 and 2 × 2 switches with a low insertion loss of ~1 dB and a compact coupling length of ~30 μm while maintaining a small crosstalk less than -10 dB over a bandwidth of 30 nm. The reported optical switches will function as the building blocks of the meshes in the optical FPGAs for applications such as optical interconnects, neuromorphic Tremendous progress has been made in photonic integrated circuits (PICs) over the last two decades, revealing their potential to create photonic systems with small footprints, low power consumption, high-speed operation, and low-cost packaging. With PICs going fabless, Resonator-based switches can help improve the modulation strength To overcome these fundamental limitations, phase-change materials (PCMs) have been proposed to provide strong modulation and nonvolatility for on-chip tunable optical devices Here, we demonstrate compact (~30 μm), low-loss (~1dB), and broadband (over 30 nm with CT < -10 dB) 1 × 2 and 2 × 2 switches using the PCM, Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST), based on the previously built non-volatile programmable GST-on-silicon platform Figure To determine the widths of the waveguides (ws, wc) appropriately, we analyze the effective indices of the eigenmodes supported in the silicon SW and the GST-on-silicon HW (see Supporting Information). The simulations are performed using the frequency-domain finite-element method (COMSOL Multiphysics). The width of the silicon SW (ws) is chosen as 450 nm to ensure single-mode operation. The width of the GST (wp) is set to be 100 nm smaller than the core width of the HW (wc), which can be easily achieved within the alignment precision of the electron-beam lithography (EBL). wc is optimally chosen as 420 nm so that the phase-matching condition could be satisfied for aGST. Therefore, the input TE-polarized light will be evanescently coupled to the cross port completely with an appropriate coupling length. Considering the trade-off between the coupling length (Lc) and the insertion loss in the crystalline state (ILcGST) (see Supporting Information), the gap (g) between the two waveguides is chosen to be 150 nm while ensuring reliable fabrication of the coupling region. The coupling length given by Lc = λ0/2(naGST1 -naGST2) is thus calculated as compact as ~24 μm, where naGST1 and naGST2 are respectively the effective indices of the first order (even) and second order (odd) supermodes in the two-waveguide system, λ0 = 1550 nm is the wavelength. The devices were fabricated (see Supporting Information) using an SOI wafer with a 220-nm-thick silicon layer on top of a 3-μm-thick buried oxide layer. The pattern was defined via EBL and transferred to the top silicon layer by inductively coupled plasma etching. Deposition of 20-nm GST and 11-nm indium tin oxide (ITO to avoid GST oxidation) on the HWs was completed using a second EBL step followed by the sputtering and lift-off process. Figure When the GST is in the amorphous state, the device functions as a three-waveguide DC and the complete power transfer could be achieved when the phase-matching condition (i.e. the effective indices of the three supermodes are evenly spaced) is satisfied. Thus, the input light couples to the low-loss GST-on-silicon HW and passes through the cross port [Figure By exploiting the high optical contrast of PCMs and asymmetric DC design, we demonstrated compact (~30 μm) non-volatile 1 × 2 and 2 × 2 switches with low-loss (~1 dB) and broadband (over 30 nm with CT < -10 dB) operations on the silicon photonic platform. With emerging wide-bandgap PCMs The availability of such on-chip non-volatile switching technology paves the way for optical FPGAs and sheds light on their applications including optical interconnects, neuromorphic computing, quantum computing, and microwave photonics. Fabrication and optical characterization setup. The designed on-chip optical switches were fabricated using the SOI wafer with a 220-nm-thick silicon layer on top of a 3-μm-thick buried oxide layer. The pattern was defined by a JEOL JBX-6300FS 100kV EBL system using a positive tone ZEP-520A resist and transferred to the silicon layer by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etcher utilizing a gas mixture of SF6 and C4F8. Next, a positive electron beam resist, PMMA was spun on the sample and a second EBL exposure was used to define the window for the GST deposition on the HWs. Finally, 20-nm GST and 11-nm indium tin oxide (ITO) were deposited using a magnetron sputtering system followed by a lift-off process. The on-chip devices were characterized by an off-chip optical fiber setup. The focusing sub-wavelength grating couplers 