We present a theoretical study of the influence of the molecular geometry of the cation on the response of ionic liquid (IL) to confinement and mechanical strain. The so-called tailed model includes a large spherical anion and asymmetric cation consisting of a charged head and neutral tail. Despite its simplicity, this model recovers a wide range of structures seen in IL: simple cubic lattice for the small tails, liquid-like state for symmetric cation-tail dimers, and molecular layer structure for dimers with large tails. A common feature of all investigated model ILs is the formation of a fixed (stable) layer of cations along solid plates. We observe a single anionic layer for small gap widths, a double anionic layer for intermediate ones, and tail-to-tail layer formation for wide gaps. The normal force evolution with the gap size can be related to the layer formed inside the gap. The low hysteretic losses during the linear cyclic motion suggest the presence of strong slip inside the gap. In our model the specific friction is low and friction force decreases with the tail size. Ionic liquids (ILs) are two-component systems composed of large asymmetric and irregularly shaped organic cations and anions. The feature of irregularity is important as it is effectively preventing low-temperature ordering and crystallisation. Therefore, ILs are usually in the melted or glassy state. Physical properties of ILs like negligible vapour pressure, high-temperature stability, high ionic conductivity and also a great variety of ILs, and their mixtures highlight them as potentially relevant to lubrication Since 2001, when ionic liquids were first considered for lubrication applications An important observation about the structure of confined ILs is their arrangement into positively and negatively charged ionic layers and adsorption onto solid surfaces In this theoretical study, we apply a coarse grain Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation setup consisting of two solid plates and an IL placed between them. Our simulation setup also includes lateral reservoirs into which the IL can dynamically expand We outline the content of this paper: Model section describes the interactions taken into account and the MD simulation setup. The focus of Bulk Ionic Liquid section is first on obtaining the relaxed structure and then on calculating the viscosity coefficient of bulk ionic liquids. In the following Confined Ionic Liquid section we present and discuss the static and dynamic behaviour of confined ionic liquids. This section also presents the results of confined IL's friction behaviour. We presents the overview of contributions in Discussion section followed by the Conclusion. In order to be more concise, we refer just to cationic head as the cation. The cation and its tail are connected by a spring with length L = (σ C + σ T )/2. The size of the tail has been varied and (a) TM3, (b) TM5 and (c) TM9 ionic liquids have a tail diameter of 3, 5 and 9 Å, respectively. The molecular asymmetry is a feature of real ionic liquids and chosen parameters resemble [BMIM] + [PF 6 ] -IL properties, cf. Ref. In this study, we have applied a generic coarse grained IL model, introduced in Ref. In cation-tail dimers an elastic spring connects cations and neutral tails enabling the tail's freedom of moving independently from its cation, since their connection is not rigid, cf. Figure where i, j = 1, . . . , N are particle indices, and N is the total number of particles. Particles can be of different types α, β = A, C, T, P which refer to anions, cations, tails, and solid plate atoms, respectively. Interaction of tails (i.e., at least one of indices α, β = T) with all other atom types, including tails themselves, is implemented using a purely repulsive potential. The ionic liquid is electro-neutral, i.e., the number of cations and anions is the same. All MD simulations in this study were performed using the LAMMPS software In this study we have fixed the diameter of the cationic heads and anions to σ C = 5 Å and σ A = 10 Å, respectively. Such choice respects the asymmetry that exists in ILs and it is consistent with other models, as well as, for example [BMIM] + [PF 6 ] -ionic liquid, cf. Ref. Each cation-tail pair is connected via an elastic spring defined by the next two parameters: elastic constant K = 80 kcal/mol Å2 and equilibrium length of the spring L = (σ C + σ T ) /2. To account for the dielectric screening, the dielectric constant is set to ε r = 2 as in Refs. An initial configuration for bulk ionic liquid was obtained by a random placement of ions (N C = N A = 1000) into a cubic simulation box with periodic boundary conditions in all three directions. The simulation box volume was chosen to ensure that the resulting pressure after the relaxation of the IL structure is comparable to the one experienced by thin confined IL film studied in the following section of this paper. In the case of the present system the pressure is p ≈ 10 MPa, which corresponds to a normal force of 1 nN acting on a surface of 10 4 Å2 . Relaxation of the internal energy and pressure for the three TM ILs is presented in detail in the SI. Figure These results are in agreement with experimental observations of the relation between the length of alkyl chain and the structure of bulk IL We have calculated the viscosity using non-equilibrium (NEMD) simulations of the three TM IL systems in a box with periodic boundary conditions in all three directions under different shear rates. Since in bulk simulations the whole simulation box is sheared, the shape of the box changes. Therefore, we use the so-called SLLOD thermostat where η is the generalised viscosity coefficient and α is an exponent. In addition to the NEMD method of simulation box shearing, we have also calculated the zero shear rate viscosity η GK using the Green-Kubo (GK) relation for the three model ILs, as the integral of the stress tensor auto-correlation functions, see Ref. In Figure For the study of IL under confinement, we use the MD simulation setup of ILs under confinement shown in Figure Confinement induces layering in IL thin films For all three curves corresponding to the three TM ILs we We will briefly describe the segments of F z (d z ) curves, pointing out similarities and differences between the different IL models. In the initial segment, i.e., for small gaps d z < 13 Å, the normal force F z is practically the same for all three systems, meaning that it does not depend on the tail size. The steep rise of the normal force with compression in the range d z < 13 Å is a sign of very high resistance of the single anionic layer left in the gap to squeeze out. On the other hand, at large gap values (i.e., d z > 32 Å), the normal load F z in all three TM ILs is similar and small. We can conclude that at large gaps there is a low resistance of IL to the gap changes. Significant differences in the force-distance curves depending on the tail size exist only in the interval I, i.e., 13.8 Å≤ d z ≤ 19.8 Å. In the case of the TM3 model, the F z (d z ) characteristic has two local minima and maxima and one saddle point, in the TM5 model there are two local minima and maxima, and for the TM9 model, there is one local minimum and maximum. In Figure We focus on analysing the changes in the segment between the points A and D, i.e., the interval I. The normal force F z changes rapidly and non-monotonously with d z in the interval I, cf. Figure As we increase d z further, the number of anionic layers confined inside the gap remains unchanged and the normal load F z drops slowly. At the same time, the number of ions inside the gap steadily increases with the gap width. Nevertheless, this increase is not sufficient to keep the density of IL inside of the gap constant (cf. Figure As the interplate distance d z increases further, from point D to E, we notice additional cations in the middle of the gap and formation of a third cationic layer in all three systems. We can make an interesting observation: for all three models the tails in the middle of the confinement are grouped in three regions: with cations at z =34 Å, and in the middle between cationic and anionic layers, i.e., z =30, 38 Å, cf. in Figure We show the xy cross-section snapshots in Figure The top plate was moved between the two limiting points of the intervals . We have investigated the dynamic behaviour of the confined IL thin film during the cyclic movement of the top plate along the z axis, i.e., the interplate gap was periodically extended (extension half-cycle) and compressed (compression halfcycle). We have investigated our system at three velocities V z = {0.1, 1, 10} m/s, but we did not observe any velocity dependent differences in the system behaviour. The confined ionic liquid lubricant responds to the cyclic movement of the top plate with a hysteresis in normal force F z (d z ) shown in Figure We will now discuss in detail the response of the TM5 model to the cyclic motion of the top plate, in the interval I shown in Figure The normal force F z decreases down to a value close to zero during the extension half of the cycle I 1 →I 2 . The anioncation pairs are pulled into the gap from the lateral reservoirs as the gap is extended and at point I 2 an additional anionic layer is fully formed inside the gap. Actually, instead of the two fixed layers of cations which shared one anionic layer, we obtain two separate anionic layers. The total number of ions pulled in is about 60 atoms or 0.22 atoms/(nm 2 ns) at 1 m/s plate linear speed. In the first part of the compression half-cycle, I 2 →I 3 , the ions are compressed and the density and the normal force F z increase. Somewhat surprisingly, we observe that an equal number of ions flows out while the normal force increases, i.e., I 2 →I 3 and during its sharp drop I 3 →I 1 (cf. Figure In Figure The expansion-compression force inter-plate distance characteristic for the interval II in case of TM5 model is given in Figure At this point, we would like to quantify how do the processes arising during the dynamic cyclic movement of the top plate contribute to energy losses. We calculate the area covered during the extension-compression cycle (i.e., the area inside the F z (d z ) hysteresis). This area is equivalent to the work invested per average dynamic cycle, i.e., the hysteretic energy losses. We show the dependence of the energy losses on the tail size for both intervals I and II in Figure We have conducted static and dynamic characteristic analysis of the three generic IL models, focusing on the influence of their molecular structure on the anti-wear performance. In order to obtain a full picture, it is crucial to determine IL's friction behaviour under different shear conditions. In this section we apply a relative motion between the plates by moving the top plate along the x-axis (see Figure The dependence of the time-averaged frictional force F x on the interplate gap d z for the three IL models is shown in Figure The specific friction F x / F z is defined as the ratio of the time averaged frictional F x and normal F z force and it is different from the Coulombic friction coefficient μ = ∂ F x /∂ F z . Consistently with our previous results for model ionic liquids, we have observed a logarithmic dependence of specific friction on the lateral velocity, cf. Ref. Ionic liquids interact via long-ranged Coulombic forces and their models require high-performance computational resources. This opens a question of the minimal model needed to capture the properties of the molecular processes governing lubrication mechanisms and the macroscopic performance relevant for engineering applications. In this paper, we investigate a generic tailed-model (TM) of ionic liquids (ILs) which includes: an asymmetric cation consisting of a positively charged head and a neutral tail of variable size and a large spherical negatively charged anion. We observe that, though simple, this model results in striking differences of the equilibrium IL bulk structure governed by the tail size relative to cationic head: (i) simple cubic lattice for the small tail, (ii) liquid-like state for symmetric cation-tail dimer, and (iii) molecular layer structure for the large tail. We have investigated the influence of the molecular structure of cation dimer on the response of three ILs to confinement and mechanical strain using molecular dynamics simulations. Properties of three IL models are compared in and out of equilibrium. We have related the evolution of normal force with inter-plate distance to the changes in the number and structure of the confined IL layers. We find that density inside the gap has a secondary effect on the evolution of the normal force. We observe that symmetric molecule offsets intra-IL adhesion due to the ordering of IL. As a result, the thin layer of symmetric IL molecules exhibits non-negative normal force independent of the gap width. In analogy to the experimental observations, a tail-to-tail bilayer is formed for wide gaps in all three investigated model ILs. A mutual feature of all investigated model ILs is the formation of fixed (stable) layers of cations along the solid plates. The fixed layer formation is a result of strong LJ interaction between the plates and ions. A consequence of the fixed layer stability is a steep rise of the normal force at small interplate gaps. The steep rise of the normal force is an effect useful for preventing solid-solid contact and accompanying wear. The tails attached to the cations in the fixed layer migrate with increasing tail size. Small tails form the first layer next to the plates. For symmetric molecules the tails form a mixed layer with cations, while large tails form a mixed layer with anions. We have explored the dynamic behaviour of IL thin film under cyclic extension-compression movements of the top plate. Two intervals of the interplate distances are investigated: narrow gap interval, where the anionic layer is split into two, and a wide gap interval where tail-to-tail layer is formed. For the narrow gap interval, we observe a significant flow of ions during the cyclic motion of the top plate. A sharp decrease of the normal force at the final stage of compression is not only a consequence of the density change due to the flow, but also is a result of merging of two anionic layers that repel each-other by the electrostatic Coulomb forces into a single one. The mobility of ions in/out of the gap is driven by their interaction with plates, i.e., filling of the fixed layers. As a result, for the narrow gap, the number of ions that entered the gap is 50% smaller in the dynamic case than in the static case. This results in a smaller density inside the moving narrow gap. The difference between dynamic and static cases for the wide gap was even more striking. the number of ions that entered the gap is 80% smaller in the dynamic case than in the static case. Surprisingly in wide gap the the density is higher in dynamic case due to lack of mobility of ions. The invested work per average cycle increases with the tail size increase for all three IL models. As one could expect, the invested work is higher for the narrow gap where the number of confined ions/ionic layers changes during the cycle. Nevertheless, the low hysteretic losses suggest the presence of strong slip inside the gap facilitating in-and out-flow of ions in the gap. An increase of the tail size reduces friction force in our model. Depending on the tail size, friction force decreases with increasing gap for small tails and it increases for large tails. Understanding the interplay between the different processes taking place in thin lubricant films is important due to the conflicting demands imposed on how IL lubricant should behave in dynamic confinement. On the one hand, a high loadcarrying capability requires strong adsorption of the lubricant to the surface, while on the other hand fast self-healing and low friction require high mobility/low viscosity. Our results confirm that behaviour of ILs in confinement can be unrelated to their bulk behaviour and therefore it should be possible to achieve simultaneously, typically conflicting, low friction and good anti-wear performance. A search for optimal IL lubricants, either using synthesis and test methods or state-ofthe-art computer-aided molecular design methods 