Hexaaminobenzene (HAB)-derived two-dimensional metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) (Nature Energy 3(2018), 30-36) have most recently gained remarkable attentions as a novel class of two-dimensional (2D) materials, with outstanding performances for advanced energy storage systems. In the latest experimental advances, Ni-, Co-and Cu-HAB MOFs were synthesized in 2D forms, with high electrical conductivities and capacitances as well. Motivated by these experimental advances, we employed first-principles simulations to explore the mechanical, thermal stability and electronic properties of single-layer Ag-, Co-, Cr-, Cu-, Fe-, Mn-, Ni-, Pd-and Rh-HAB MOFs. Theoretical results reveal that Co-, Cr-, Fe-, Mn-, Ni-, Pd-and Rh-HAB nanosheets exhibit linear elasticity with considerable tensile strengths. Ab-initio molecular dynamics results confirm the high thermal stability of all studied nanomembranes. Co-and Fe-HAB monolayers show metallic behavior with low spinpolarization at the Fermi level. Single-layer Ag-, Cu-, Cr-, and Mn-HAB however yield perfect half-metallic behaviors, thus can be promising candidates for the spintronics. In contrast, Ni-, Pd-and Rh-HAB monolayers exhibit nonmagnetic metallic behavior. The insights provided by this investigation confirm the stability and highlight the outstanding physics of transition metal-HAB nanosheets, which are not only highly attractive for the energy storage systems, but may also serve for other advanced applications, like spintronics. Design and fabrication of advanced energy storage systems, with improved reliability and power density, and faster charging/discharging rates, are currently among the key factors for the success in highly competitive technologies, like; mobile electronics and electric vehicles. Such a continues demand drives the progress of new materials that can improve the efficiency of energy storage systems. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have recently gained remarkable attentions for a wide-range of applications, from post-silicon nanoelectronics, to advanced energy storage systems and structural components. The interests toward the 2D materials was raised, because of the great success of graphene Among the various families of 2D materials, nanomembranes with porous atomic lattices, like graphdiyne Spin polarized density functional theory calculations in this work were conducted using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) In Fig. for the uniaxial stress-strain responses of single-layer Co-, Rh-and Pd-HAB elongated along the zigzag and armchair directions are compared. As it is clear, all predicted uniaxial stressstrain curves clearly exhibit initial linear responses, corresponding to the linear elasticity and elastic modulus. Observation of linear elasticity confirms that despite of the porous atomic lattices of transition metal-HAB monolayers, from the early stages of loading their deformation are mainly achieved by the bond-elongation rather than structural deflection. Moreover, for the uniaxial loading along the armchair and zigzag directions, the stress-strain relations match very closely initially, thus suggesting the convincingly isotropic elastic responses along these monolayers. Within the elastic range and at initial strain levels, the strain along the traverse direction of loading (ɛ t ) with respect to the loading strain (ɛ l ) is constant and can be used to evaluate the Poisson's ratio, using:˗ɛ t /ɛ l 32 . Fig. Another important mechanical characteristics of a material are the ultimate tensile strength and its corresponding strain, which defines the stretchability of a material. According to our results, all studied monolayers were found to yield higher tensile strengths along the armchair direction than the zigzag direction. Nevertheless, stretchability of these monolayers are considerably close for different loading directions. In Table To better understand the failure mechanism of considered metal-HAB nanosheets, we consider the structures after the tensile strength point. In Fig. We found that for the all monolayers along the both loading directions, the failure always initiates by the breakage of metal-N bonds. This observation highlights that the elongation of metal-N bonds dominates the mechanical responses of metal-HAB monolayers. During the uniaxial loading, basically the bonds oriented along the loading direction stretch, whereas as a results of the sheet shrinkage along the width, the lengths of bonds oriented along the perpendicular direction of loading may contract or only slightly change. To investigate the thermal stability of these novel 2D systems, we conducted the AIMD calculations at 1000 K. The simulations were performed for 15 ps and top and side views of the studied nanomembranes are depicted in Fig. where N ↑ , N ↓ , N Ef ↑ and N Ef ↓ represent the total number of electrons of majority spin, total number of electrons of minority spin, the density of states of majority spin (spin up) and minority spin (spin down) at the Fermi level, respectively. Our results show that the Ag-, Cu-, Cr and Mn-HAB monolayers are half-metallic ferromagnetic systems with 100% spin polarization, because they act as a conductor to electrons of one spin orientation but as a semiconductor to those of the opposite orientation. In these half-metal systems, the valence band for one spin orientation is partially filled, while there is a gap in the density of states for the other spin orientation. We have also calculated entire system magnetic moment and partial magnetic moments of each magnetic atoms. The total magnetic moment per magnetic atoms is 0.32, 0.11, 2.69 and 2.86 μ B for the Ag-, Cu-, Cr and Mn-HAB monolayers, respectively. The spin-flip gap which is defined as the separation of the Fermi level from the minimum of the conduction band in minority spin was estimated to be 0.57, 0.00, 0.00 and 0.17 for Ag-, Cu-, Cr-and Mn-HAB nanosheets. This parameter is important for the electron injection in half metals. The Co-and Fe-HAB monolayers show metallic features for the both spin channels with 36% and 12.5% spin polarization. The total magnetic moment for these systems is 0.34 and 1.88 μ B . The high magnetic moment and spin polarization of these systems imply that they can be used in electronic devices, magnetic recording and spintronics. The Ni-, Pd-and Rh-HAB systems are nonmagnetic metals since there is no spin splitting between spin up and spin down of electronic states. In recent experimental advances, hexaaminobenzene (HAB)-derived two-dimensional metal-organic frameworks were synthesized, with excellent application prospects for advanced energy systems. Motivated by successful synthesis of Ni-, Co-and Cu-HAB nanosheets, in this short communication we also predicted Ag-, Cr-, Fe-, Mn-, Pd-and Rh-HAB nanosheets, with similar atomic lattices as those of experimentally realized nanomembranes. We then employed first-principles density functional theory calculations to obtain the energy minimized atomic lattices and investigate mechanical properties, thermal stability, and electronic responses of free-standing and single-layer Ag-, Co-, Cr-, Cu-, Fe-, Mn-, Ni-, Pd-and Rh-HAB. Mechanical/failure responses of aforementioned monolayers were analyzed by performing uniaxial tensile simulations. It was confirmed that despite of porous atomic lattices, Co-, Cr-, Fe-, Mn-, Ni-, Pd-and Rh-HAB nanosheets exhibit linear elasticity with considerable tensile strengths. Notably, despite of porous atomic lattices, elastic modulus and tensile strengths of aforementioned were found to be comparable or even higher than some other densely packed 2D materials. AIMD simulations highlight remarkable thermal stability of all studied monolayers, with the intact atomic lattices at the high temperature of 1000 K. Half-metallic properties for the Ag-, Cu-, Cr-, and Mn-HAB monolayers were predicted within the PBE approach. The corresponding total magnetic moment per magnetic atoms for aforementioned monolayers was predicted to be 0. 