Biological membranes allow permeation of water molecules but can reject even smallest ions. Behind these exquisite separation properties are protein channels with angstrom-scale constrictions (e.g., aquaporins). Despite recent progress in creating nanoscale pores and capillaries, they still remain distinctly larger than protein channels. We report capillaries made by effectively extracting one atomic plane from bulk crystals, which leaves a two-dimensional slit of a few Å in height. Water moves through these capillaries with little resistance whereas no permeation could be detected even for such small ions as Na + and Cl -. Only protons can diffuse through monolayer water inside the capillaries. The observations improve our understanding of molecular transport at the atomic scale and suggest further ways to replicate the impressive machinery of living cells. It has long been an aspirational goal to create artificial structures and devices with separation properties similar to those of biological membranes Our devices were fabricated using the van der Waals assembly described previously (A) Schematic of our fluidic devices. Top and bottom layers are either graphite or hBN crystals. The spacers are monolayer graphene. The trilayer assembly is supported by a free standing membrane with a rectangular opening. (B) There is space only for a monolayer of water inside such 2D cavities as molecular dynamics simulations show Top inset: Evaporation rates for three graphite/graphene/graphite devices with n = 1500. The shown rates are per 1 μm channel length. The detection limit of our gravimetry (10 -13 g s -1 ) is comparable to that of helium mass spectrometers and much better than that achieved by mass spectrometry for other gases and vapors using similar devices We first describe water permeation through our capillaries. The inset of Fig. Having established that water can flow through our 2D channels, we investigated their permeability with respect to ions. In these experiments, the devices separated two reservoirs filled with chloride solutions (inset of Fig. The fact that no ion currents could be detected for salt solutions indicates steric rejection of all hydrated ions from the one-atom-high channels. It was previously reported To corroborate the suggested proton transport scenario, we used the same ion measurement setup but different HCl concentrations in the two reservoirs. The concentration gradient drives both H + and Cl -in the same direction, from the high concentration (C h ) reservoir to the low concentration (C l ) one, and the sign of the electric current I at zero applied voltage V indicates whether majority carriers are H + or Cl where t H,Cl  [0,1] are the so-called transport numbers for H + and Cl -, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (2953 K in our experiments), and e is the elementary charge. For  = 3 and V 0  28 mV, the formula yields t H -t Cl  1, which can only be satisfied if t H ≈ 1 and t Cl ≈ 0. This means that only protons diffuse through our monolayer devices whereas Cl -ions are rejected, in agreement with the conclusions reached from the experiments of Fig. horizontal bar is the statistical error in determining V 0 using measurements for several monolayer devices. Inset: Square-like ice is one of the possible ices expected inside the 2D channels at room temperature, as found from molecular dynamics analyses It is instructive to estimate the diffusion constant d p of protons within monolayer water that fills the capillaries. It is given by d p = (kT/eFC p )  410 -6 cm 2 s -1 where C p is the proton concentration in HCl or Nafion, and F is the Faraday constant 18 . This value is more than an order of magnitude smaller than d p  910 -5 cm 2 s -1 for bulk water To conclude, our one-atom-high voids allow one monolayer of water inside but exclude all ionic species. This is in contrast to the behavior of twice larger slits (h  6.7 Å) which showed little effect on such small ions as Na + and Cl -(D H  7 Å). The extreme steric exclusion for h  3.4 Å is attributed to the fact that it is no longer possible for any ion to squeeze inside the slits by deforming their hydration shells. Protons are different in that they diffuse not as hydrated H + ions but follow the Grotthuss mechanism. The slow diffusion observed for protons in 2D water suggests that it forms a proton ordered ice, in agreement with molecular dynamics simulations. To make our 2D channels, we refined the procedures reported in the earlier work [16,17]. The starting point of the process was to make a free-standing silicon nitride (SiN) membrane using a commercial Si wafer covered with a 500 nm thick SiN layer. A rectangular hole of  3 μm × 190 μm in size was drilled through the membrane using photolithography and dry etching. This structure served as a mechanical support for the following van der Waals assembly (Fig. Cleaved graphite and hBN monocrystals often have rough edges with a gradually decreasing thickness. The thinning edges could sag inside the channels blocking their entries from the top side (Fig. The separation between two atomically-flat crystals of hBN or graphite, which are placed on top of each other without a crystallographic alignment, should in principle be larger than their interlayer spacing a (a  3.4 Å for both hBN and graphite) [S2-S5]. Moreover, if hBN and graphene crystallographic axes are carefully (within 2) aligned, graphene placed on top hBN can exhibit out-of-plane corrugations of 1 Å [S2-S5]. We avoided such 'moiré superlattice' effects by intentionally misaligning our crystals during their assembly [S6]. At larger angles, the distance between the stacked crystals is not expected to be notably different from the interlayer spacing. The increase should be no more than a fraction of Å, depending on alignment details [17,S7]. For brevity, this correction to h is ignored in the discussions of the main text where the 2D capillaries are referred to as having h  a. Nonetheless, the correction may be important to quantitative modelling of the experimental results in future. To corroborate that water filled our one-atom-high capillaries, we employed Raman spectroscopy. The devices used in these experiments were slightly modified with respect to those reported in the main text because SiN gave rise to a large background signal that obscured a feeble Raman signal from 2D water inside the channels. To this end, we used Si wafers with rectangular openings of  8 μm × 35 μm in size (Supplementary Fig. The resulting monolayer devices (Supplementary Fig. To measure water permeation through our one-atom-high capillaries, we employed high-precision gravimetry with a resolution of about 1 μg and carried out recording over several days [16]. Importantly, even this precision would not be sufficient if we would not increase the water flux in our latest experiments (Fig. In our previous study [1], it was found that water permeation is a nonmonotonic function of the channel height, h. The maximum flow was observed for 4-layer channels (spacers made using N = 4 layers of graphene). For the narrower slits with N = 2 and 3, the water flow rate Q decreased, which was attributed to an increase in the viscosity η of confined water [16,22]. Our monolayer (N = 1) channels reported in this work continued to exhibit the same trend such that Q decreased further, by one order in magnitude with respect to bilayer (N = 2) capillaries. This decrease is somewhat expected. Indeed, for long and wide channels with w/h >> 1, the liquid flow rate driven by pressure P is described by the Hagen-Poiseuille equation [16] ρ 1 where ρ is the water density and δ the slip length. The driving pressure P is due to the evaporating external meniscus and was estimated to be of the order of 1000 bar for our angstrom-scale capillaries [16]. No significant changes are expected to occur in the meniscus if h is below 1 nm and, in the first approximation, the pressure in eq. (S1) can be assumed constant. The same is also valid for the water density and the slip length [16,22]. The latter length was estimated to be  60 nm [16,S11]. This consideration implies that major changes in Q could only be due to h and η. Eq. (S1) yields the h 2 dependence, that is, 4 times decrease in Q is expected for monolayer capillaries with respect to the bilayer ones. The additional discrepancy (by a factor of  2) can be accounted for by increased structural order in 2D water, which results in its increased viscosity η [16,22,S12]. #4. Comparison of water flows through 2D channels and aquaporins Unlike any artificial capillaries reported previously, our 2D channels exhibit selectivity similar to that of aquaporins and completely exclude ions. Therefore, it is instructive to compare the water permeation capacity of the two systems. Aquaporins are protein channels in cell membranes with narrow constrictions from 2.8 Å to 10 Å in size. The narrowest ones match the effective size (2.8 Å) of individual water molecules and are also comparable to the height of our 2D channels, h  3.4 Å. However, the 2D channels are much wider (up to 500 times; w  130 nm) and longer (several microns as compared to 1 nm long aquaporins). Furthermore, the water flow through aquaporins is driven by typical pressures of 10 bar due to osmotic gradients across cell membranes [S13]. In the case of our 2D channels, the driving pressure P is much larger, of the order of 1000 bar [16]. As a rough estimate, we use eq. (S1) and our experimental data (inset of Fig. In these experiments, the Si chip with 2D channels was placed to separate two Teflon reservoirs filled with various ionic solutions as shown in the inset of Fig. 