Near a quantum-critical point in a metal a strong fermion-fermion interaction, mediated by a soft boson, destroys fermionic coherence and also gives rise to an attraction in one or more pairing channels. The two tendencies compete with each other, and in a class of large N models, where the tendency to incoherence is parametrically stronger, one would naively expect an incoherent (non-Fermi liquid) normal state behavior to persist down to T = 0. However, this is not the case for quantum-critical systems described by Eliashberg theory. In such systems, non-Fermi liquid part of the self-energy Σ(ω m ) is large for a generic Matsubara frequency ω m = πT (2m + 1), but vanishes for fermions with ω m = ±πT , while the pairing interaction between fermions with these two frequencies remains strong. It has been shown [Y. Wang et al PRL 117, 157001 (2016)] that this peculiarity gives rise to a non-zero T c , even at large N , when superconductivity is not expected from scaling analysis. We consider the system behavior below T c and contrast the conventional case, when ω m = ±πT are not special, and the case when the pairing is induced by fermions with ω m = ±πT . We obtain the solution of the non-linear gap equations in Matsubara frequencies and then convert to real frequency axis and obtain the spectral function A(ω) and the density of states N (ω). In a conventional BCS-type superconductor A(ω) and N (ω) are peaked at the gap value ∆(T ), and the peak position shifts to a smaller ω as temperature increases towards T c , i.e. the gap "closes in". We show that in a situation when superconductivity is induced by fermions with ω m = ±πT , the peak N (ω) remains at a finite frequency even at T = T c -0, the gap just "fills in". The spectral function A(ω) either shows almost the same "gap filling" behavior as the density of states, or its peak position shifts to zero frequency already at a finite ∆ ("emergent Fermi arc" behavior), depending on the strength of the thermal contribution. We compare our results with the data for the cuprates and argue that "gap filling" behavior holds in the antinodal region, while the "emergent Fermi arc" behavior holds in the nodal region. The pairing near a quantum-critical point (QCP) in a metal is a fascinating subject due to highly non-trivial interplay between superconductivity and non-Fermi liquid (NFL) behavior 1? ? -33 . In most cases, the dominant interaction between low-energy fermions near a QCP is mediated by critical fluctuations of the order parameter. In dimensions D ≤ 3, this interaction gives rise to a singular fermionic self-energy, and a coherent Fermi-liquid behavior get destroyed below a certain temperature T coh , either on the full Fermi surface In all known physical quantum-critical (QC) models of fermions, superconducting T c is finite In both cases, the functional form of equation for the (frequency dependent) pairing vertex in the attractive channel does not change, but the magnitude of the eigenvalue needed for superconductivity gets larger. The analysis of a large-N QC model at T = 0 shows This unusual behavior was argued in Ref. 21 We set γ = 0.9. The line T c (N ) by-passes N cr (the red dot). At large N , T c (N ) ∝ 1/N 1/γ . term (thermal contribution to Σ(ω m ) from zero bosonic Matsubara frequency), all other contributions cancel out. The thermal piece in Σ(ω m ) comes from scattering with zero frequency and finite momentum transfer and mimics the scattering by impurities. The same thermal scattering also contributes to the pairing vertex Φ(ω m ). For spin-singlet pairing, the two contributions cancel out in equation for the gap function ∆(ω m ) = Φ(ω m )/(1 + Σ(ω m )/ω m ) by Anderson's theorem In this communication we extend the analysis of superconductivity induced by first fermionic Matsubara frequencies to T < T c (N ). We argue that, although T c (N ) by-passes N = N cr , there is a crossover in the system behavior at T cross (N ) < T c (N ). The crossover line T cross (N ) originates at T = 0 for N = N cr and ends at T cross ≤ T c for the physical case N = 1. At T cross (N ) < T < T c (N ), superconductivity can be viewed as induced by fermions with ω m = ±πT , at smaller T < T cross (N ) fermions with all ω m contribute to superconductivity, and the ones with ω m = ±πT are no longer special. We show the schematic phase diagram in Fig. We analyze the evolution of the gap ∆(ω m ) below T c (N ) at N > N cr and N < N cr and then convert from Matsubara to real frequencies and analyze the behavior of ∆(ω), the spectral function at the Fermi surface A(ω), and the density of states (DOS) N (ω). We argue that the system behavior below T c (N ) is different for N > N cr and N < N cr (see the paths (a) and (b) in Fig. Along the Matsubara axis, we find that at large N > N cr , the pairing vertex Φ(ω m ) is smaller than Σ(ω m ) for all temperatures and all Matsubara frequencies, including ±πT . In fact, Σ(ω m ) with m = 0, -1 remains essentially the same as in the normal state, i.e., the feedback effect from superconductivity on this self-energy is weak. The self-energy Σ(±πT ) becomes finite below T c (N ), but remains smaller by 1/N than Σ(ω m ) at other Matsubara frequencies. Still, it is larger by √ N than Φ(±πT ). We show that in this situation, ∆(ω m , T ) FIG. The solid line is the onset temperature for superconductivity, T c (N ). The dashed line marks the crossover from the behavior similar to a BCS superconductor at a lower T to the novel behavior at a higher T , in which superconducting order does not provide a substantial feedback effect on the fermionic self-energy, and it largely remains the same as in the normal state. In this region, the spectral function A(ω) and the DOS N (ω) are functions of ω/T rather than of ω/∆(T ). The critical N cr separates superconducting and normal states at T = 0. This phase diagram has been obtained within the Eliashberg theory and does not include phase fluctuations. The latter likely destroy long-range superconducting order in some T range below T c (N ). Our results for N (ω) and A(ω) above the crossover line should survive in this range as they do not rely on the existence of a long-range superconducting order. is monotonic as a function of ω m , with the largest value at ±πT , but non-monotonic as a function of temperature, i.e., ∆(πT ) first increases when T decreases below T c (N ), then passes through a maximum and eventually vanishes at T = 0. At N < N cr , ∆(πT ) becomes non-zero at T = 0, and its magnitude increases as N gets progressively smaller than N cr . At N ≤ N cr , the temperature dependence of ∆(πT ) is still non-monotonic, with the maximum at a finite T . At smaller N , the maximum becomes more shallow, and at N 1, ∆(πT ) monotonically increases with decreasing T . We use the results along the Matsubara axis as an input and obtain the behavior of Φ(ω) and Σ(ω) along real frequency axis. Using these Φ(ω) and Σ(ω), we obtain the DOS The thermal contributions to Φ(ω) and to ω + Σ(ω) are the same and they cancel out in the DOS, i.e., in the calculations one can replace Φ(ω) and Σ(ω) by Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω), which are the solutions of the Eliashberg equations with thermal contributions explicitly taken out. We show that, for N > N cr , N (ω) is finite for all frequencies, including ω = 0, and its dependence on ω is determined by a universal scaling function of ω/T . As the consequence, the frequency at which N (ω) has a maximum, linearly increases with increasing T . As T approaches T c from below, DOS "fills in", i.e., the N (ω) approaches N 0 , but the position of the maximum in N (ω) remains at a finite frequency. At N < N cr , the DOS N (ω) at the lowest T < T cross (N ) displays a sharp gap, , i.e., it nearly vanishes at ω < ω 0 , where ω 0 is roughly equal to ∆(0) (more exactly, ω 0 is the solution of ∆(ω 0 ) = ω 0 ). As T increases, the position of the maximum in the DOS initially shifts to a lower frequency, as in a BCS superconductor, because ∆(0) gets smaller with increasing T , i.e., the gap in the DOS "closes in" with increasing temperature. However, once temperature exceeds T cross (N ), this behavior changes and becomes the same as for larger N , i.e., at these T the the position of the maximum in DOS shifts to a higher frequency with increasing T and remains finite at T = T c (N )-0, i.e., the DOS "fills in" with increasing T . We emphasize that these two distinct regimes of system behavior are present also in the original physical model with N = 1. In this respect, the extension to N > 1 is just a convenient way to understand the origin of such behavior by extending the regime in which superconductivity is generated by fermions with ω = ±πT . A representative of our results for the DOS is shown in Fig. where frequency-independent P = P (T ) describes the thermal contribution to self-energy, and Σ * (ω), Φ * (ω) are obtained from Σ(ω), Φ(ω) by excluding thermal contributions (see (44) and the Appendix for more details). For large P , A(ω) ∝ N (ω), i.e., the spectral function displays the same crossover from "gap closing" to "gap filling" as the DOS. For smaller P , when the term next to P in (2) is larger than P , A(ω) at T < T cross shows two sharp peaks at ω = ±ω 0 . At temperatures above T cross , the two peaks merge, and A(ω) develops a maximum at ω = 0, like in the normal state. A representative of our results for A(ω) is shown in Fig. The transformation from "gap closing" to "gap filling" behavior in the DOS has been observed in several superconducting materials, most notably the cuprates The angular range in which the system displays a single peak above a certain T is termed as a Fermi arc The crossover from "gap closing" to "gap filling" in the DOS and in A(ω) in the antinodal regions, and the crossover from two peaks to a single peak in A(ω) in the nodal regions, have been phenomenologically described by assuming that the pairing vertex Φ * (ω) = ∆(T ), as in a BCS superconductor, and Σ * (ω) = iΓ(T ) (Refs. Without Γ(T ), the DOS vanishes at ω < ∆ and is singular at ω = ∆ + 0. A non-zero Γ(T ) makes N (ω) continuous and non-zero down to ω = 0. Furthermore, the position of the peak in N (ω) shifts to a higher frequency from ω = ∆(T ) (see Fig. remains at a finite ω = √ 3Γ. In other words, the magnitude of the deviation of N (ω) from N 0 is set by ∆ 2 , while its frequency dependence is set by Re 1 (ω+iΓ) 2 and does not depend on ∆. If one additionally sets Γ = O(T ), as in marginal FL theory, one obtains that the position of the maximum in the DOS increases linearly with T near T = T c , when Γ > ∆(T ). The same phenomenolgical model with Γ(T ) ∝ T was used This spectral function has two separate peaks at positive and negative ω at Γ(T ) < √ 3∆(T ), and a single maximum at ω = 0 at Γ(T ) > √ 3∆(T ) (Fig. This phenomenon when N (0) becomes finite is known as "gapless superconductivity". It was originally found by Abrikosov and Gorkov in their analysis of an s-wave BCS superconductor with magnetic impurities We view our results as the microscopic explanation of the rapid increase of Σ (0) above a certain T within the superconducting state and the related transformation from "gap closing" to "gap filling" behavior of the DOS and the spectral function at large P (and the transformation from gap to Fermi arc behavior at smaller P ). To reiterate -we argue that the conventional "gap closing" behavior occurs at T < T c,1 , while the "gap filling" behavior occurs at T c,1 < T < T c , where in Matsubata formalism the pairing is induced by two lowest Matsubata frequencies at which self-energy vanishes, and would not happen if fermions with these two frequencies were eliminated from the gap equation. The issue which we do not address here is the role of pairing fluctuations. We remind the reader that Eliashberg theory neglects phase and amplitude fluctuations of the pairing vertex and in this respect should be treated as effectively a "mean-field" theory. It is very likely that in some range below Eliashberg T c fluctuations destroy long-range superconducting order, and the actual T c,act < T c . Our results, that the DOS N (ω) is non-zero at all ω and the position of its maximum increases with T , should survive at T c,act < T < T c as our reasoning only explores the fact that in this T range the feedback from the pairing on the fermionic self-energy is weak. Gap fluctuations reduce this feedback even further. The same holds for the spectral function both at large P and at smaller P . In other words, our theory describes gap filling and Fermi arcs in the pseudogap region. Still, to fully address the issue of gap fluctuations one needs to go beyond Eliashberg theory and analyze the full Luttinger-Ward functional The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we present the microscopic model of pairing mediated by a gapless boson with χ(Ω m ) = (g/|Ω m |) γ (the γ-model) and its extension to We present the set of coupled Eliashberg equations along Matsubara axis for the pairing vertex Φ(ω m ) and the fermionic self-energy Σ(ω m ) and summarize, in Sec. II A earlier results of the analysis of the linearized equation for Φ(ω m ). At T = 0, these results show that there exists the critical N cr , separating the superconducting state at N < N cr and the normal state at N > N cr . At T > 0, these calculations show that superconductivity emerges for all N , below a certain T s (N ) which only vanishes at N = ∞. In Sec. III we discuss the system behavior at N > N cr , first in Matsubara frequencies, in Sec. III A, and then in real frequencies, in Sec. III C. We present the analytical solution of the Eliashberg equations at large N and discuss the behavior of the gap, the Free energy and the specific heat, the DOS, and the spectral function. In Sec. IV we discuss system behavior at N < N cr , again first in Matsubara frequencies, in Sec. IV A, and then in real frequencies, in Sec.IV B. In Sec. V we summarize our results and compare them with the experimental data. We consider a model of itinerant fermions at the onset of a long-range order in either spin or charge channel. At the critical point the propagator of a soft boson becomes massless and mediates singular interaction between fermions. We follow earlier works where Σ(ω m ) = ω m + Σ(ω m ). Note that we define Σ(ω m ) as a real function of frequency, i.e., without the overall factor of i. The self-energy along Matsubara axis, related by Kramers-Krong (KK) formula to Σ (ω) along the real frequency axis, does contain the factor i. The superconducting gap ∆(ω m ) is defined as a real variable The equation for ∆(ω) is readily obtained from (5): This equation contains a single function ∆(ω), but for the prize that ∆(ω m ) appears on both sides of the equation, which makes (7) less convenient for the analysis than Eqs. ( The r.h.s. of the equations for Φ(ω m ) and Σ(ω m ) contain divergent pieces from the terms with m = m, i.e., from χ(0). The divergence can be regularized by moving slightly away from a QCP, in which case χ(0) is large but finite. This term mimics the effect of nonmagnetic impurities. To get rid of the thermal piece in the equations for Φ(ω) and Σ(ω), we follow The ratio Using (8), one can easily verify that the equations on Φ * (ω m ) and Σ * (ω m ) are the same as in ( One can also solve ( Eq. ( ), a 2D pairing 37 with interaction peaked at 2k F (γ = 1/4), pairing at a 2D nematic/Ising-ferromagnetic QCP The full set of Eliashberg equations for electron-mediated pairing contains also the equation describing the feedback from the pairing on χ(Ω), e.g., the emergence of a propagating mode (often called a resonance mode) in the dynamical spin susceptibility for d-wave pairing mediated by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations. To avoid additional complications, we do not include this feedback into our consideration. In general terms, the feedback from the pairing makes bosons less incoherent and can be modeled by assuming that γ moves towards γ = 1 as T moves down from T c . The two equations in (5) describe the interplay between two competing tendencies -the tendency towards superconductivity, specified by Φ, and the tendency towards incoherent non-Fermi liquid behavior, specified by Σ. The competition between the two tendencies is encoded in the fact that Σ appears in the denominator of the equation for Φ and Φ appears in the denominator of the equation for Σ. Accordingly, a large, non-FL self-energy is an obstacle to Cooper pairing, while once Φ develops, it reduces the strength of the self-energy, i.e., moves a system back into a FL regime. Like we said in the Introduction, our goal is to analyze the special role of fermions with Matsubara frequencies ω m = ±πT in the situation when the tendency towards pairing is reduced compared to that for NFL normal state. For this, we extend the model to matrix SU (N ). Under this extension, the interaction in the particle-hole channel, which gives rise to fermionic self-energy, remains intact, while the interaction in the particle-particle channel acquires an additional factor 1/N . We emphasize that we extend to N = 1 after we invoke the analog of the Anderson theorem and eliminate the thermal contributions to Φ(ω m ) and Σ(ω m ). In this respect our approach differs from the one in Ref. The modified equations for Φ * (ω m ) and Σ * (ω m ) become (10) and the equation on ∆(ω m ) becomes Below we will also need the expression for the Free energy F sc of a superconductor, described by the Eliashberg theory. The formula for F sc has been obtained in Refs. Extending the results to γ < 1, QC regime, and N = 1, we obtain where ∆ m = ∆(ω m ). The gap equation ( In the normal state the expression for the Free energy reduces to The difference between F sc and F n at T = 0 is known as the condensation energy of a superconductor. At a finite T , where To obtain T c it is sufficient to consider the linearized gap equation. It is obtained from (10) by setting Φ * to be infinitesimally small. Then Φ * (ω m ) in the denominators of (10) can be ignored and the self energy Σ * (ω m ) is approximated by its normal state value. The resulting equations are: By power-lay counting we expect Σ * (ω m ) ∝ g γ ω We plot N cr (γ) in Fig. T c is non-zero at any N , and the line T c (N ) by-passes N cr and approaches zero only at N → ∞ (see Fig. ) γ , and it becomes large at small enough T . A simple experimentation shows that in this situation the gap equation reduces to The last equation is for ω m = ±πT . We will be searching for even-frequency solutions of the gap equation: Φ * (ω m ) = Φ * (-ω m ). Then the first equation in (18) sets T c = (g/2π)1/N 1/γ , and the second shows that a non-zero Φ * (ω m ) is induced by Φ * (±πT ). The functional form T c ∝ 1/N 1/γ at large N has been verified numerically in Ref. We begin with the case N > N cr when Tc = 0, i.e. the pairing would be impossible if the self-energy did not vanish at ω m = ±πT . The limit N 1 can be treated analytically and we consider it in some detail below. The non-linear equation for the pairing vertex Φ * (ω m ) along with the equation for the fermionic self-energy Σ * (ω m ) with the feedback from the pairing are given in (10). We recall that at large N the pairing temperature T c (N ) is obtained by solving the linearized equation for Φ * (ω m ) for fermions with only two Matsubara frequencies ω m = ±πT ; the pairing vertex Φ * (ω m ) for other ω m is then expressed via Φ * (πT ) = Φ * (-πT ). We assume and then verify that this holds also for T < T c , i.e., that the non-linear gap equation can be approximated by restricting to ω m = ±πT in the r.h.s. of Eq. (10). Re-labeling , and Σ * 0 = πT + Σ ( πT ) to shorten notations, we obtain from (10) /g /g /g /g FIG. The solution of (19) to leading order in 1/N is The superconducting gap ∆(±πT ) = ∆ 0 is The gap ∆ 0 vanishes both at T = 0 and at T = T c . In between, it is finite, but for any T , D 0 = ∆ 0 /(πT ) is small and at most of order 1/N 1/2 . In other words, the gap at N 1 remains smaller than the temperature. Solving next the set of Eliashberg equations for other ω m = ±πT we obtain at large N where H(a, b) = a 1 n -b is a Harmonic number. We plot Φ * (ω m ) and Σ * (ω m ) in Fig. From (22) we have both at m = O(1) and at m 1. We see that at any T < T c , ∆(ω m ) at any Matsubara frequency is parametrically smaller than T . Put it differently, D(ω m ) = ∆(ω m )/ω m is small, of order 1/N 3/2 , at m = O(1), and even smaller at larger m. We plot ∆(ω m ) and D(ω m ) in Fig. Taking -iD 0 as an estimate for small frequency limit of D R (ω) ≡ ∆ R ((ω)/ω in real frequencies, we find that D R (ω → 0) tends to a finite imaginary value, i.e., at large N is a gapless superconductivity in the sense that ∆ R (ω) ∝ iω. For notational simplicity for all functions of real frequencies below we will drop the superscript "R". for the DOS (N 0 is the normal state value), we find that the DOS at zero frequency 0 is reduced below T c compared to the normal state value, but remains finite for any T , like it is expected in a gapless superconductor. To verify this result and to get the full form of N (ω) we need to obtain ∆(ω) as a function of a real frequency ω. This is what we will do in Sec. III C. Before that, we use the result for D(ω m ) and obtain the Free energy F sc (T ) and the specific heat C(T ) at N > N cr . The Free energy F sc and ∆F = F sc -F n are given by Eqs. ( Varying δF by ∆ 0 , one reproduces Eq. ( The specific heat variation between the superconducting and the normal state where At T → 0, C γ (0) → 0, i.e., δC v vanishes and C v recovers its normal state limiting behavior , the magnitude of the specific heat jump at T c is The specific heat in the normal state is obtained from (13). The first term in (13) gives the conventional free-fermion contribution to Free energy F n,f ree (T ) = F n,f ree (0) -N 0 π 2 T 2 /3. The second term gives At T ∼ T c , this second term is larger by N than the free-fermion contribution. The calculation of the double sum in (30) requires care as one needs to extract the universal constant on top of formally ultra-violet divergent contribution, which actually is the factor in F n,int (0). To extract the universal constant, we note that the summation over m -m can be done explicitly. The result is where, we remind, H(m, γ) = m 1 1/p γ is the Harmonic number. For the remaining summation we use the Euler-Maclaurin formula where We plot Q γ in Fig. Substituting the result into (30) and differentiating the free energy over T , we obtain The ratio of the specific heat jump to its value at T = T c + 0 is then We see that the relative jump of C v at T c is by 1/N 2 smaller than in a BCS superconductor. In Fig. We now go beyond the leading order in 1/N . The goal here is to analyze how fermions with other ω m affect the magnitudes of Φ(πT ) = Φ 0 and D(πT ) = D 0 at a small but finite temperature. We recall that at large N , Φ 0 ≈ (2/N ) 1/2 πT (T c /T ) γ and D 0 ≈ (2/N ) 1/2 . We show that both Φ 0 and D 0 increase as N get smaller. For the analysis to next order in 1/N we use the fact that D 0 ∝ 1/N 1/2 , while for other Matsubara frequencies D(ω m ) ∝ 1/N 3/2 (Eqs ( The expansion to next order in 1/N in the equation for Φ 0 requires more care as the leading term (the one kept in the first equation in ( Substituting D(ω m ) from Eq. ( we obtain where and, we remind, H(m, γ) = m 1 1/n γ is a Harmonic number. We plot W γ in inset of Fig. The analysis at larger T ≤ T c proceeds in the same way and we refrain from presenting the full formulas. In Fig. The result for Φ * 0 can be cast into Φ * 0 ≈ (2/(N -N * cr )) where N * cr = 3(W γ -1)/2 is some γ-dependent constant. Taking this approximate formula as an indication of the evolution of Φ * 0 with decreasing N , we find that Φ * 0 ∝ T 1-γ /(N -N * cr ) 1/2 . At N > N * cr (γ), Φ 0 vanishes at T = 0 (we recall that we consider γ < 1), but N = N * cr (γ) the slope of Φ * 0 (T )/T 1-γ (and of ∆ 0 ) diverges. This divergence is consistent with the T = 0 analysis, which indicates that at N < N cr , given by Eq. ( The N * cr (γ) = 3(W γ -1)/2 is an approximate form of critical N and does not have to coincide with the actual N cr (γ), given by Eq. ( Interestingly, N * cr (γ) and N cr (γ) show quite similar variation with γ. We next consider the solutions for the pairing vertex and the self-energy in real frequencies. This will allow up to compute the spectral function A(ω) and the DOS N (ω). The transformation of Elishberg equations for electron-phonon interaction from Matsubara to real frequencies using spectral decomposition method and analytical continuation has been discussed in several publications The details of the conversion procedure are presented in the Appendix. The conversion procedure requires special care by two reasons. First, if one simply replaces ω m by -iω, the bosonic propagator χ(ω m + iω) will have a set of branch cuts in the complex ω plane, along ω = iω m + b, where b is real. One then need to add additional terms to the r.h.s. of the equations for retarded functions Φ(ω) and Σ(ω) to cancel these singularities and restore analyticity. Second, we again need to eliminate singular contributions from the terms with zero bosonic Matsubara frequency. This is done in the same way as in the calculations along the Matsubara axis. Namely, we introduce new functions Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω) related to Φ(ω) and Σ(ω) = ω + Σ(ω) as where Q ω is singular (see Eq. ( The gap function ∆(ω) = ωΦ(ω)/ Σ(ω) is equally expressed in terms of Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω): The equations on Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω) are the same as on Φ(ω) and Σ(ω), but with additional terms which cancel out divergent contribution from χ(0). We have (see Appendix for details) where and χ (x) = sgn(x) g γ |x| γ sin πγ 2 . In these equations, the solution of the Eliashberg set in Matsubara frequencies, i.e., Φ * (ω m ) and Σ * (ω m ) are considered as inputs. The first term in each of the two equations is obtained by just replacing ω m by -iω, and the second one cancels out non-analyticities. The last piece in the second term cancels out the divergent contribution from χ(0). Note that the subtraction of the divergence at x = 0 has to be done before extending the model to large N . The function Q(ω), which determines the relations between Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω) and the original Φ(ω) and Σ(ω), Eqs. (42), is where Equivalently we can express Φ(ω) and Σ(ω) via Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω) as where In Eqs. (45-49) the branch cut of the square root is defined along positive real axis. At ω = 0 we have The first term in the formula for Σ * (0) vanishes by symmetry, after summing up the contributions from positive and negative ω m . We first consider large N . We assume and then verify that in this case Σ * is parametrically larger than Φ * not only along the Matsubara axis but also along the real axis. To leading order in 1/N we then have for the self-energy where We plot S γ in Fig. Using the fact that at large N the dominant contribution to the Matsubara sum comes from m = 0, -1 and substituting the expressions for Φ * (±πT ) and Σ * (±πT ), we obtain Then D 0 = Φ * (0)/ Σ * (0) is and the DOS at zero frequency is This agrees, up to a prefactor, with the result that we obtained along the Matsubara axis, by assuming that D(πT ) is comparable with D(ω = 0). We emphasize that N (0) differs from the normal state value N 0 at all T < T c , including T = 0, where we expect superconductivity to disappear. We will show below that the limit ω → 0 and T → 0 has to be taken carefully, and at any non-zero ω the DOS indeed transforms into N 0 at T → 0. Still, strictly at ω = 0, N (0) < N 0 . This is similar, but indeed not identical, to behavior of N (ω) in an ideal BCS superconductor, where N (0) = 0 for all T up to T c , while N (ω = 0) approaches N 0 at T → T c . We next move to finite ω. For Φ(ω), the second term in (44) still scales as Φ(ω)/N and can be neglected. Evaluating the first term by summing up contributions from m = 0, -1 where Note that in this large N approximation Φ * (ω) is real and even in ω. Because Φ * (ω) is small in 1/N 3/2 , the self-energy at finite ω remains the same as in the normal state, up to 1/N 3 corrections: where The first term in F Σ (x) is real, the second is imaginary. At large x (i.e., at ω πT ), . We plot the scaling functions F Φ (x), Re[F Σ (x)], and Im[F Σ (x)] in Fig. We recall that F Φ ( ω πT ) and F Σ ( ω πT ) are computed without the thermal contribution. The function F Φ (x) is real, F Σ (x) and F D (x) are complex, i.e., the gap function ∆(x) is a complex function of frequency. The results are for γ = 0.3 and γ = 0.9. Observe that Im F Σ (x) changes sign at some frequency. This sign change is necessary to satisfy KK relation on Σ * (πT ) = 0 (see Fig. and the vanishing of the integral in ( • Based on Eq.( ■ From Eq.( From KK relation From Eq. ( FIG. is obtained by KK transformation from Im F Σ (x) along the real axis, see (60). The two expressions coincide. To better show this we manually split the two expressions for Σ * (iω n ) by multiplying the yellow curve by 1.01. Observe that F Σ (iπT ) = 0, i.e., the self-energy Σ * (iω n ), extracted from KK transformation, vanishes at the first Matsubara frequency. We set γ = 0.9 and T = 0.01g. Fig. For the full self-energy Im[Σ(ω)] indeed remains positive for all frequencies. Substituting the results for Φ * (ω) and Σ * (ω) into D(ω) = Φ * (ω)/ Σ( ω), we obtain where at ω ≤ g, when the bare ω term is smaller than Σ * (ω), i.e., Σ * (ω) ≈ Σ * (ω), The DOS is We see that the magnitude of N (ω)/N 0 -1 = 1 2 Re D 2 (ω) is determined by the overall temperature-dependent factor in (62) and depends on T /T c ratio. However, the frequency dependence of D(ω) and of the DOS is determined by F D (ω/(πT )), which for any given γ is a universal function of ω/T and does not depend on T /T c . This implies that the characteristic frequency, at which N (ω) deviates from N 0 , is determined by the temperature rather than by the magnitude of the superconducting gap, as was the case for a BCS superconductor. FIG. At small x = ω/πT , Re F Σ (x) ∝ x 2 and Im F Σ (x) is finite. Then Re F 2 D (x) is negative. At x where Im F Σ (x) changes sign, Re F Σ (x) is finite, hence for this x, Re F 2 D (x) is positive. In between Re F 2 D (x) then necessary changes sign. This in turn implies that N (ω) < N 0 at small x and exceeds N 0 at larger x. At even larger x 1, N (ω) approaches N 0 . Then, for any γ, N (ω) has a dip at ω = 0 and a hump at a characteristic frequency set by temperature, rather than by the gap itself. This frequency then increases with increasing T , in qualitative difference with a BCS superconductor, in which the maximum in the DOS is located at ω = ∆(T ), and shifts to a lower frequency with increasing T because ∆(T ) gets smaller. We plot Re F 2 D (x) in Fig. On a more careful look, we find that there is still a small difference in the behavior of the DOS between γ < 1/2 and γ > 1/2. Namely, at ω T , Re Σ * (x) = cos πγ/2(x 1-γ /(1 -γ)) and Im Σ * (x) = sin πγ/2(x 1-γ /(1 -γ)). As a result, Re F 2 D (x) ∝ cos πγ, i.e., it is positive at γ < 1/2 and negative at γ > 1/2. This implies that for γ > 1/2 N (ω) crosses N 0 twice at ω = O(T ) because (Im F Σ (x)) 2 is larger than (Re F Σ (x)) 2 at both large and small Red lines are for the real part ∆ (ω) and blue lines are for the imaginary part ∆ (ω). At small but non zero ω, both the real and imaginary parts are finite, in contrast to the BCS-like behavior where ∆ (ω) is zero up to some ω 0 ≈ ∆ at low temperatures. frequencies. The second crossing at x ∼ 7 is seen in Fig. In Fig. A remark is in order here. The dωN (ω), with N (ω) as in Fig. This additional contribution must be included to ensure particle conservation. We next consider the spectral function In terms of original Φ(ω) and Σ(ω), we have Expressing Σ(ω) and Φ(ω) via Σ * (ω) and Φ * (ω), Eq. ( where To leading order in 1/P , A(ω)  ∝ N (ω)/N 0 , i.e., the spectral function has the same dependence on ω as the DOS. Accordingly, at a finite T , A(ω) is nonzero for any frequency, and the position of the maximum in A(ω) scales with T and remains at a finite frequency at T c (Fig. we find that in this situation A(ω) is peaked at zero frequency, as if the system was in the normal state (see Fig. The analysis beyond the leading order in 1/N proceeds in the same way as for Matsubara frequencies. As N gets smaller, the maximum in the DOS becomes more pronounced, and, at the same time, the DOS at zero frequency, N (0) gets smaller. These modifications get larger as N decreases towards N cr and eventually qualitatively change the system behavior at N < N cr and T < T cross , as we show in the next Section. At smaller N < N cr analytical solution is difficult to obtain because there is no obvious small parameter, so our discussion will be based on numerical results. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. We used the same computational procedure as at large N and obtained Φ * (ω), Σ * (ω), and ∆(ω) along the real frequency axis. We present the results in Fig. 24. We again see the crossover in the system behavior around T cross (N ). At smaller T , the behavior of the gap function is conventional in the sense that ∆ (ω = 0) is finite and ∆ (ω) emerges only above a finite frequency ω 0 ≈ ∆ (0). At higher T , at small frequencies ∆ (ω) ∝ ω and ∆ (ω) ∝ ω 2 , i.e., the systems displays gapless superconductivity. The self-energy Σ * (ω) is strongly reduced below ω 0 at small T compared to that in the normal state, but almost recovers the normal state value in the regime of gapless superconductivity (Fig. In Fig. The spectral function A(ω) shows the similar crossover (Fig. In this work we analyzed the interplay between the tendency towards fermionic incoherence and the tendency towards pairing near a quantum-critical point in a metal. We used the γ model of dynamical fermion-fermion interaction mediated by a critical boson with susceptibility χ(Ω m ) ∝ (g/|Ω m |) γ . We extended the model to SU (N ) global symmetry and used N as a parameter. At large N , the interaction in the pairing channel is smaller by 1/N than the one in the particle-hole channel, which gives rise to a fermionic incoherence. Earlier work by some of us and others 21 found markedly different behavior at T = 0 and at a finite T . Namely, the calculations at T = 0 showed that superconductivity develops if N is smaller than some γ-dependent N cr , while at larger γ the system remains in a NFL normal state. On the other hand, computations of the onset temperature for the pairing T c (N ) showed that T c (N ) remains finite at any N and the line T c (N ) by-passes N cr (Fig. The authors of 21 argued that this discrepancy is due to the fact that Eliashberg equations for spin-singlet pairing contain fermionic self-energy without thermal contribution (the self-below Eliashberg T c (N ) long-range superconducting order gets destroyed, and the actual T c,act < T c . We note in this regard that in our theory, the transformation from "gap closing" to "gap filling" in the DOS and the spectral function at T ∼ T cross (N ) is due to the fact that at T > T cross (N ), the feedback from the pairing on the fermionic self-energy is weak. This last result does not actually rely on the existence of long-range superconducting order. If fluctuations destroy superconducting phase coherence, the feedback will be further reduced, but we emphasize that the feedback on fermions as small above T cross (N ) already within the Eliashberg theory. The same argument holds for the transformation from two peaks at a finite frequency in A(ω) to a single peak at ω = 0. The transformation from "gap closing" behavior at small T to "gap filling" behavior at T ∼ T c has been observed in high-T c cuprates, in the DOS A final remark. In our analysis we didn't include the dependence of the pairing vertex and the gap on the angle along the Fermi surface, e.g., cos 2θ dependence for the d-wave gap in the cuprate superconductors. The d-wave form of the pairing gap does not affect our results for the DOS and A(ω) in the antinodal region, as there the gap can be approximated by the constant. We note in this regard that our results for the development of the dip with increasing T in the DOS and in the spectral function at large P , (e.g., representative results in Fig. has a dip at ω = 0 and a shallow maximum, whose frequency scales with T . At T < T cross , A(ω) has two weakly separated peaks in the nodal region and strongly separated peaks in the antinodal region (Fig. along real axis as where "R" stands for "retarded". We then explicitly sum over ω m and integrate over k and obtain the expressions for Σ(iω m ) and Φ(iω m ), in which the dependence on ω m is only via 1/(iω m -x -y). This form can be straightforwardly continued analytically to real frequency by just replacing iω m by ω + i0 + . For compactness, we do the calculations in Nambu formalism, in which one operates with the matrix Green's function Ĝ(iω m , k) and treats both Σ(iω m ) and Φ(iω m )) as elements of matrix self-energy Σ(iω m ). The Eliashberg equation in Nambu formalism is where Equations ( Eqs. (84) have been solved numerically by iterations. For practical purposes, we found that in some cases the convergence is faster if we do calculations in two steps: first evaluate intermediate Φ * * and Σ * * , related to Φ and Σ as in (85), but with P = δ -δ dy Im χ(y) T y , where δ is some finite number, and then compute Φ * and Σ * by adding the rest of the integral in P . The best convergence is achieved by adjusting the value of δ.