Nanomagnetic logic, which makes use of arrays of dipolar-coupled single domain nanomagnets for computation, holds promise as a low power alternative to traditional computation with CMOS. Beyond the use of nanomagnets for Boolean logic, nanomagnets can also be exploited for non-deterministic computational schemes such as edge detection in images and for solving the traveling salesman problem. Here, we demonstrate the potential of arrangements of thermally-active nanomagnets based on artificial spin ice for both deterministic and probabilistic computation. This is achieved by engineering structures that follow particular thermal relaxation pathway consisting of a sequence of reorientations of magnet moments from an initial field-set state to a final low energy output state. Additionally, we demonstrate that it is possible to tune the probability of attaining a particular final low-energy state, and therefore the likelihood of a given output, by modifying the intermagnet distance. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate a scheme to connect several computational building blocks for complex computation. All-magnetic computation with arrays of dipolarcoupled nanomagnets has the potential to provide a lowpower alternative to existing CMOS technologies A variety of approaches have been developed to apply nanomagnets to computation, including strain-mediated logic The exploitation of more complex arrangements of nanomagnets such as those found in artificial spin ice, where nanomagnets are placed on the sites of a periodic lattice such as a square In this work, we control the energy landscape associated with artificial spin ice, engineering the relaxation pathways in structures containing arrays of thermally-active dipolar-coupled nanomagnets. These relaxation pathways consist of a sequence of reorientations of the nanomagnet moments as the structures relax from an initial field-set state to a final low-energy state. Based on measurements of the thermal evolution of the magnetic configurations, as well as kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations, we identify two distinct types of pathways in the energy landscape that are either deterministic or probabilistic. For a deterministic relaxation from an initial field-set state, the final state is expected to always be a particular low energy state. In contrast, for probabilistic relaxation, there are two or more possible final low energy states, which occur with a certain probability within a particular time-frame. Here we present strategies to tune the probability of low-energy states. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate a way to integrate individual computational units into large circuits. With this, we provide a foundation for the implementation of artificial spin ice for deterministic and probabilistic computation. Due to their shape anisotropy, elongated nanomagnets made from soft magnetic materials, such as Permalloy (Ni80Fe20), form single-domain states with a net magnetic moment pointing along the long axis of the nanomagnet, and thus can be represented by macrospins with Ising degrees of freedom. For arrangements of dipolarcoupled nanomagnets such as those shown in Fig. (2) Here, υ 0 is the attempt frequency, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T the temperature. The barrier energy E T = E b + 1 2 ΔE m→l is the energy required for a single magnet in the array to switch and includes the single-nanomagnet switching barrier energy E b , which is modified by the difference in dipolar energy ΔE m→l between the initial and final nanomagnetic states m and l that are separated by a single moment reorientation Whether the paths are monotonous or intermittent strongly depends on the spatial arrangement of the nanomagnets. This is illustrated by the relaxation behavior from an initial field-set configuration to the ground state for two basic motifs with four nanomagnets derived from artificial square ice shown in Fig. the nanomagnets meet at a common vertex. In both cases, the initial field-set state with energy E is set by applying a magnetic field H, indicated by a blue arrow in Figs. The relaxation paths between different states can be depicted using a state network diagram for the energy landscape, as shown in Figs. of the state along the horizontal axis. The sign of ±|M| indicates whether M is parallel or antiparallel to the initial applied field H (blue arrows in Fig. Boolean operations can be realized with nanomagnet structures exhibiting a monotonous relaxation pathway, which guides the relaxation towards a specific final state. In contrast, intermittent relaxation pathways lead to a probability of achieving particular low-energy states, which can be implemented in computational schemes where weighted outputs are desired such as artificial neural networks. It should be noted that the relaxation pathways may incorporate metastable states, indicated by the triangles in the state network diagrams in Figs. Arrays of elongated Permalloy nanomagnets, with a length of 470 nm and a width of 170 nm, were fabricated on a silicon substrate using electron beam lithography in combination with lift-off processing. The nanomagnet arrangements in this work are based on an artificial square ice design, with the nanomagnet center-to-center distance a = 600 nm [see Fig. Magnetic imaging of the nanomagnets arrays was performed using X-ray photoemission electron microscopy (X-PEEM), which makes use of resonant X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) at the Fe L3 edge to obtain magnetic contrast The following experimental protocol was implemented to probe thermal relaxation behavior in different arrangements of nanomagnets. After field-setting the nanomagnets, so that all moments align towards the direction of the applied magnetic field, the sample was heated in order to assist thermal relaxation to a state of lower dipolar energy Experimental observations were compared to theoretical predictions based on kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations We begin by presenting the relaxation dynamics of the design shown in Fig. The lower probability of reaching G1 as compared to G2 indicates that the transition barriers towards G1 must be higher than those that occur on the path towards G2. This is illustrated in the state network diagram in Fig. The relaxation dynamics characterizing the exploration of competing relaxation paths by the P-gate is experimentally shown in the image sequence in Fig. In summary, intermittent paths in the state network diagram result in probabilistic relaxation. The direction of an applied field is also important since this defines the initial state and thus the subsequent energy landscape. Finally, it should be pointed out that the intermittent relaxation path for the P-gate is a result of the incorporation of the 4-vertex structure shown in Fig. Deterministic relaxation towards a specific ground state can be realized by introducing the 4-loop structure shown in Fig. The relaxation outcome of the D-gate can be modified, by physically altering its design. This can be achieved through a change in the position of one of the two 4loop structures so that it is at different distances d away from the vertex point [see Fig. We tested the thermal relaxation behavior of 51 modified D-gates for each d, for different separations d between 0 nm and 80 nm. It should be noted that the thermal protocol was different than that used in our earlier experiments So far, we discussed the relaxation behavior of individual computational building blocks containing a few nanomagnets each. To create extended circuits capable of advanced calculations, such as adders or artificial neural networks, these individual gates need to be combined into larger structures. In order to integrate more than one gate into a larger circuit, several conditions need to be met. First, each individual logic gate requires two or more input magnets and an output magnet. Second, the input and output magnets of different gates need to be at a location that allows them to be linked to neighboring gates. Third, there needs to be a strong coupling between the output magnet of one gate and the input magnet of the next gate. Finally, their respective relaxation kinetics, which governs their operational reliability, should remain largely unaffected when the gates are linked together. An experimental realization of three D-gates connected by linear chains of strongly-coupled nanomagnets is shown in Fig. In this work, we have shown how different relaxation pathways can be engineered in artificial spin ice structures comprising arrays of dipolar-coupled nanomagnets for deterministic and probabilistic computation. We have identified two distinct categories of relaxation pathways, which can be (1) monotonous and (2) intermittent and were visualized using a nanomagnetic state network diagram. The implementation of loop-based designs in the Dgates, which favors monotonous relaxation pathways, greatly improves the reliability of Boolean logic gates as demonstrated previously We have also demonstrated that the probability of low-energy states can be tuned by changing the logic gate design. This also depends on, for example, the direction of the applied magnetic field used to set the initial state of different gates. This control could also be achieved in-situ, for example with Oersted fields in a current-carrying nanowire Finally, the integration of individual logic gates into extended circuits opens the possibility for implementation in both conventional computation 