The steady decrease in the levelized cost of solar energy (LCOE) has made it increasingly cost-competitive against fossil fuels. The cost reduction is supported by a combination of material, device, and system innovations. To this end, bifacial solar farms are expected to decrease LCOE further by increasing the energy yield; but given the rapid pace of design/manufacturing innovations, a cost-inclusive optimization of bifacial solar farms has not been reported. In our worldwide study, we use a fundamentally new approach to decouple energy yield from cost considerations by parameterizing the LCOE formula in terms of "land-cost" and "module cost" to show that an interplay of these parameters defines the optimum design of bifacial farms. For ground-mounted solar panels, we observe that the panels must be oriented horizontally and packed densely for locations with high "land-cost", whereas the panels should be optimally tilted for places with high "module-cost". Compared to a monofacial farm, the modules in an optimized bifacial farm must be tilted ~15-20° higher and will reduce LCOE by ~8-10% in many locations of the world. The results in this paper will guide the deployment of LCOE-minimized ground-mounted tilted bifacial farms around the world. Solar energy is spearheading the renewable energy growth around the world Towards designing energy-efficient modules and farms Unfortunately, a combined effect of panel-to-panel (mutual) and panel-to-ground (self) shading in a solar farm may erode the perceived advantage of stand-alone bifacial farms. Recently, Appelbaum Most importantly, the reports to date focus on bifacial energy gain, but it is unclear if the gain is sufficient to offset the additional cost of a bifacial solar farm to make the technology commercially viable. A recent study The calculation of farm-level levelized cost of energy (LCOE) is difficult because some of the factors (e.g. land cost, module and installation cost, degradation rates, and bankability) may not be known for years to come. Therefore, we need to reformulate/re-parameterize the LCOE calculation in a way that allows design optimization and decision making even when all the cost details are not known. The new approach will have an additional benefit of providing a clear understanding of the impact of various parameters on bifacial LCOE and a worldwide mapping/analysis will show us a trend in the economic viability of the bifacial solar cell technology. In this paper, we explore the design optimization of tilted bifacial solar farms for all the locations across the globe. The objective is to find the key design parameters, appropriately model the insolation and light collection at the farm-level, and subsequently incorporate a parameterized cost analysis to eventually find an optimized design that minimizes the cost of electricity produced. Our generalized model shown in Fig. The cost of a single solar module per unit height (includes fabrication and installation costs) In Sec. 2 we explain the models used in our study -In Sec. 2.1, we start with re-parameterization of LCOE in terms of land cost (C L ), module cost (C M ), and yearly energy yield (YY). Next, in Sec. 2.2, we describe the methodology to calculate the local irradiance by using the available meteorological data. The outcome of this analysis will provide the illumination/energy incident on the solar farm area. We then discuss, in Sec. 2.3, the light collection model for estimating the fraction of incident light absorbed by front/rear faces of the solar modules to calculate the power output from the farm in terms of annual energy yield. Thenceforth, in Sec. 3, we optimize the bifacial farm to minimize the levelized cost of energy. Finally, in Sec. 4, we present the results of the simulations and a global perspective of minimized levelized cost of energy for optimum system parameters. Our conclusions are summarized in Sec. 5 of the paper. An LCOE-aware modeling and optimization of bifacial solar farm involves a series of calculations. In this section, we will focus on three aspects of the modeling framework: (A) Reparameterizing LCOE, (B) Irradiance modeling, and (C) Collection of light. These topics are discussed below. LCOE is defined as the ratio of the total cost of a PV system and the total energy yield of the system over its lifetime Total Cost ($) Total Energy Yield (kWh) ) -C rv (Y) E(Y) C M + C L + C bos,f E(Y) where Subscripts m, l, and bos stand for module, land, and balance of systems. Moreover, r is the discount rate that normalizes future costs in terms of current cost in order to have a fair comparison using a single metric. The key insight of Eq. ( The denominator of Eq. (2) describes the total energy yield E(Y) of the solar farm: Here, E 0 = P 0 × T Y is the energy output for the first year expressed as the product of first year power output (P 0 ) and total number of active hours in a year (T Y ). The yearly energy degradation rate (d) defines the lifetime (Y, in years) of the solar farm. The discount rate (r) accounts for the following fact: If we continue to sell a unit of energy for c $/watt, the present value of the lifetime revenue must account for the fact that future earnings are less valuable than present earning. Given the dimensions of a solar farm and the modules installed, LCOE expression in Eq. ( where C M is the cost per unit meter of module (height), C L is the cost per unit meter of land (pitch), M is the number of rows/arrays of modules and Z is the number of modules in an array (in the z-direction, into the page). YY(= E 0 ) is the yearly energy yield per meter of a pristine module for one period/pitch (p) such that the yearly energy of the farm is E(Y) = YY. M. Z. h. χ(d, r), where χ = ∑ (1 -d) k (1 + r) -k Y 0 . YY is a function of the physical design parameters (p, h, β, γ, R A ). Further, the residual cost associated with the balance of system (c bos,f ) is typically negligible as compared to the essential costs, C M and C L Eq. ( The parametric reformulation of LCOE in terms of LCOE * decouples the cost analysis (embedded in M L ) from design considerations (reflected in p/h and YY). In other words, we can optimize a farm with M L as a parameter, realizing that M L will evolve as the process technology evolves. Equation To estimate the energy yield of a solar farm, the simulation proceeds in three steps. First, we calculate the amount of sunlight incident at a particular location defined by its latitude and longitude. Next, we quantify the amount of light collected by the solar panels installed at that location. Finally, we find the daily and yearly power/energy-output of the farm. To calculate the temporal solar irradiance data at a particular location, we need to know the solar trajectory (or Solar path) and the intensity of light Since GHI is measured on a flat ground while the solar panels are tilted, we need to decompose the amount of direct light, called Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI or I DNI ), and the amount of diffused (scattered) light, called the Diffuse Horizontal Irradiance (DHI or I DHI ), which are related to the GHI as follows: Since we have one equation and two unknown variables, I DNI and I DHI , thus, we estimate one of the variables, I DHI , using the Orgill and Hollands model which empirically calculates the diffuse fraction using the clearness index of the sky, defined as the ratio between I GHI and extraterrestrial irradiance (I 0 ) on a horizontal surface, as shown below. Here, I 0 comes from an analytical expression in Ref. Once we calculate I DHI using I GHI and k T , Eq. ( We need to calculate the AOI to find the component of direct light (I DNI ) falling on the tilted panel's front and/or the back face (depending on the tilt angle). The AOI for N-S facing tilted panels can be analytically expressed as AOI Back = θ B = cos -1 (cos θ Z cos (180 -β) + (sin θ Z sin (180 -β) cos((γ -180) -A))) where θ F and θ B are angles of incidence on front and back surfaces of the panel, respectively, and A is the azimuth angle of the sun. We now have the irradiance and angle of incidence information to proceed with estimation of light collection and energy generation by the solar panels. The panels have height h, tilted at an angle β, separated by pitch (or period) p, and are oriented at array azimuth angle γ = 180° (i.e., south-facing panels) for farms in the northern hemisphere and γ = 0° (i.e., north-facing panels) for farms in the southern hemisphere (see Fig. Starting from I DNI estimated earlier, we find that the component of direct illumination normal to the front surface of the panel is given by I DNI cos θ F . Next, we use an empirical model [39R] to incorporate the angle-dependent reflectivity (R(θ F )) of the panel. Finally, including the efficiency η dir , we arrive at the power output per unit panel area. The contribution of power from the shaded area of the panel is assumed to be zero. Thus, the power output per unit height of a panel is equal to I PV:DNI F,Panel . Now, the power output per pitch of the farm (I PV:DNI F,Farm ) is given by: Similarly, we can find the direct light collection for back surface (I PV:DNI B,Farm ) with the tilt angle equal to 180°-β and AOI Back = θ B . Therefore, the total power output per unit farm area due to direct light (I PV:DNI Farm ) is the sum of I PV:DNI F,Farm and I PV:DNI B,Farm . The estimation of the diffuse light collection is more involved as compared to direct light. Using the widely-accepted technique of the average diffuse masking angle The spacing between the arrays is such that there is no mutual shading for direct light for most part of the day, however, the isotropic diffuse light does result in mutual shading. The diffuse light falling on the front face of a panel is partially shaded by the panels of the adjacent arrays. The point at length l from the bottom of the panel views an angle ψ(l) shaded or masked by the adjacent panel (see Fig. The diffuse light intensity on the front face, at position l along the panel is given by I DHI × F dl-sky (l). The view factor from dl to the unobstructed sky, F dl-sky (l) = 1/2(1 + cos(ψ(l) + β)) Hence, the total integrated power output per pitch is given by Similarly, for the back surface, with array tilt angle equal to 180°-β, the total power output per unit farm area due to diffuse light (I PV:DNI Farm ) is the sum of I PV:DNI F,Farm and I PV:DNI B,Farm . Fig. The estimation of the collection of albedo light is the most complex and lengthy amongst the three components and the complete formulation can be found in appendix section S1. The final expression is as follows: where total albedo light collected on the panel (I PV:Alb Farm ) is the sum of albedo due to direct light (I PV:Alb.dir Farm ) and diffuse light (I PV:Alb.diff Farm ). Finally, the total power generated due to light collected from all the components of irradiance is the combination of Eqs. ( For energy output, we integrate the power generated over the desired period of time. We define the energy yield per pitch of a farm over a period of one year as yearly yield (YY). YY(p, β, h, γ, R A ) = ∫ I PV Total (p, β, h, γ, R A ) Next, we will consider the overall optimization of LCOE * . Once we have the energy output (YY) from a farm in terms of the fundamental variables (p, β, h, γ, and R A ), we incorporate this information into Eq. ( Mutual shading refers to the shading (or obstruction of direct sunlight) of one array of panels by the neighboring array. Partial shading reduces light collection and energy output, and the nonuniform illumination increases self-heating and module degradation Consequently, the mutual shading constraint allows us to calculate the pitch as a function of the array tilt angle, i.e., p ns = f(β). The corresponding plot is shown in Fig. The simulations yield interesting and noteworthy results which are discussed in the following section. As noted previously, the LCOE * is dependent on several physical and economic parameters. Assuming h = 1 m, γ = 0° or 180°, and R A = 0.5, and finding a relationship between pitch and array tilt angle, p = f(β), we finally derived Eq. ( Before we proceed with the global analysis, it is instructive to examine the optimization of β to minimize the LCOE * for a specific location, e.g., Washington DC (38.91 ∘ N, 77.04 ∘ W). The variation of LCOE * with the array tilt angle is analyzed and plotted for two extreme cases shown below. In this case, we observe from Fig. Case 2: L = (i.e., ≪ L the modules are much more expensive than the land) For the other extreme case, where the modules are much more expensive than the land, Fig. Case 3: 0 < L < ( ~ L ) Several locations in the world might fall in this category, where the land and module costs are comparable. Historically, M L has ranged from ~0.1 to 15. Thus, we specifically explore the variation of LCOE * and β opt over this typical range of M L (see inset of Fig. For Washington, DC (38.91 o N, 77.04 o W), we find that the minimum LCOE * increases linearly until M L ∼ 8 and then deviates from linearity (increases sub-linearly) for higher M L (see Fig. where c 1 = 0.07, c 2 = 3.6 and c 3 = 1.6 are location-based empirical constants. Here, M L * ~8 is the threshold cost ratio, below which β opt = 0°. Note that since YY depends on latitude/longitude of a location, so does the M L * for that location. The location-specific M L * (typically 0-10) is calculated numerically (see Fig. To rationalize the trends in LCOE * , we examine the (relative) contributions of essential costs vs. energy yield. In this regard, we reconsider Eq. ( Fig. Here, the cost is a function of p/h and M L whereas yearly energy yield is a function of p/h and β. With the objective of achieving negative (or less positive) ΔLCOE * , let us now examine the results through the above equation, and Fig. For M L = 0, the land cost is much higher than the module cost, which necessitates maximum collection of light for the lowest land area (pitch). This is achieved when Δp → 0 (as shown in Fig. For M L = 100, the land cost is much lower than the module cost, and it is vital to maximally collect light per unit area of the module. This is attained by collecting direct light incident perpendicular onto the front face of the panel and collecting the albedo light on both faces to increase the energy yield i.e., ΔYY > 0. This comes at the expense of increased cost (M L = 100) i.e., ΔC > 0, but overall the magnitude of ΔYY is greater than that of ΔC, therefore, LCOE * decreases (i.e., ΔLCOE * < 0). Fig. We now understand the variations in LCOE * and optimum tilt angle for various cases at a particular location (Washington, D.C.). This enables us to scrutinize the global trends in optimum tilt angle (β opt ), yearly energy yield (YY), and LCOE * . In this section, we will examine the results of worldwide simulations and draw inferences from these results. Note that beyond |latitude| > 60°, the days are extremely short during winters, hence, the simulation yields unphysical values for p ns = f(β). Therefore, we do not include the results for |latitude| > 60°. For Case 1 where module cost is much smaller than the land cost (M L → 0), Fig. For Case 2 where modules are much more expensive than land (M L = 100), Fig. Fig. Next, we analyze the yearly energy output from a tiltoptimized solar farm for two limiting cases: (i) M L = 0, i.e., the module costs negligible as compared to land. These locations can be cosmopolitans, megacities, and cities, and, in general, densely populated areas; (ii) M L = 100 where modules are much more expensive compared to land. These can be remote locations and sparsely populated areas. Fig. Given the information about optimum tilt-angle (Sec. 4.1, 4.2.1) and energy yield (Sec. 4.2.2), we can now calculate minimum LCOE * for locations around the world. Fig. When the land cost is very high as compared to module cost (M L = 0), then the LCOE * is dominated by the yearly energy yield, and hence we observe the similar (but inverse) trend since LCOE * is inversely proportional to YY. Whereas in the reverse case (M L = 100), LCOE * is dominated by M L . Therefore, we see in Fig. To scrutinize the viability of bifacial solar farms, it is important to juxtapose the performance of bifacial solar farms with their monofacial counterparts. The cost of bifacial modules has been falling consistently over the years We find that LCOE min * reduces by ~6% for |latitude| > 30 o . Since the panels are tilted facing the direct light for M L = 100, hence this observation indicates that a bifacial farm is more economical than a monofacial farm in terms of LCOE * , for places where diffuse light is a dominant component of light over direct light. The analysis in Sec. 4.1.1 justifies this conclusion. Finally, due to the improvement in energy yield for bifacial solar farms for these locations, there is a decrease in LCOE * (~ 2 -8 %) for a bifacial farm compared to a monofacial farm, which is displayed clearly in Fig. We have parametrically explored the economic viability of ground-mounted tilted bifacial solar farms and explained how the farm topology must be optimized for a given location, and module and land cost considerations. We have redefined the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) in terms of 'essential levelized cost of energy' (LCOE * ) which is ultimately a function of module to land cost ratio (M L ) and array tilt angle (β). The redefined LCOE * decouples cost analysis from energy yield modeling, thereby dramatically simplifying the optimization of solar farms based on new technologies. Using a previously developed global irradiance model obtain the yearly yield for the specific solar farm configuration (defined by panel tilt and array period). Once we correlate the configuration of a farm to the cost of its installation and the yearly yield, we can determine LCOE * . The panel tilt β defines the array period, which in turn sets the number of panels required in a solar farm. Therefore β is implicitly related to the farm cost (and of course the energy). In the end, cost ratio (M L ) and array tilt angle (β) are the handles to control the LCOE * . For a fixed M L , we numerically and analytically found an optimum tilt angle (β opt ) for each location. Our analysis leads to the following key conclusions: • For places where land is scarce and expensive (M L → 0), panels should be laid flat on the ground (β opt = 0°) to ensure maximum energy collection over a given land area. On the contrary, for practical values of M L (~1 -15) when the land is relatively inexpensive, panels have location specific optimum tilt (β opt ~0°-60°) to achieve least LCOE * . • PV installers can use an analytical expression of the form of Eq. ( • The difference in optimum tilt angle (Δβ opt ) between bifacial and monofacial designs can reach up to 15°-20° for |latitude| > 30° and places with high diffuse light fraction, e.g., Canada, Western Europe, Central China, etc. Moreover, higher tilt angle makes the design soilingresistant, in turn reducing cleaning cost. • For the same module-to-land cost ratio and similar lifetimes (reliability), ground-mounted bifacial solar farm design is more economically viable over monofacial design for locations where the diffuse fraction is high. The relative reduction in LCOE * (Bifacial Gain LCOE * ) is ~ 2 -8 %, for bifacial solar farm design over monofacial for locations with higher fractions of diffuse light (low clearness index, k T ) e.g., locations with |latitude| > 30° (Central Europe, Northern parts of North America, and Central China). Alternatively, bifacial modules can be at most ~2 -8% more expensive compared to monofacial modules for a bifacial solar farm to be cost-competitive compared to a monofacial farm. Although this is the first report of LCOE-optimized farm design, the present work can be generalized in a number of ways. One can use the current approach to easily account for location-specific albedo and tilt-angle. Furthermore, currently the bifacial panels are slightly more expensive (but also known to be more reliable To conclude, the reduction in LCOE through optimized farm design and continually reducing bifacial module prices makes bifacial PV technology an economically preferable alternative over monofacial solar farm. Therefore, the power generated per area of the panel for the front face is given by I PV:Alb.dir F,Panel (l) = I Gnd:DNI × R A × F dl-gnd (l) × η diff By incorporating the collection from the back surface, we will have the total albedo due to direct light (I PV:Alb.dir ). For albedo from the diffuse light we combine the method used by Khan et al. and the view factors for our tilted panels. Similar to the collection of direct light on the ground, we find the collection of diffuse light on the ground taking into account the masking due to adjacent panels/arrays. The mutual shading constraint at a particular locations on the shortest of day of the year (21 st December for Northern Hemisphere and 21 st June for the Southern Hemisphere) gives us a relation between the pitch (period) of the farm and tilt angle of the panels (arrays). Fig. Fig. The yearly energy yield for the two extreme cases is shown in Fig. 