We investigate the dynamical effects of pairing interaction on superconductivity in BCS-BEC crossover by studying the Holstein model at half-filling where the electron-phonon coupling g controls the crossover. The dynamical mean-field theory was employed in combination with the numerical renormalization group technique. The dynamical effects induce distinct features such as absence of the dispersion back-bending of Bogoliubov quasi-particles, non-monotonous coupling dependence of the pairing gap, and the soft phonon spectrum due to the Goldstone mode of local pair phase fluctuations. Also interesting is the maximum critical temperature being at the normal state phase boundary. Some of these features have intriguing similarities with the recent observations in the FeSe1-xSx and Fe1+ySexTe1-x iron-chalcogenides in the BCS-BEC crossover. Introduction -It suits nature of physics to envisage a unified theory to understand the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity and Bose-Einstein-condensation (BEC) of composite bosons on an equal footing Experimental investigations into the crossover have not progressed much because of the difficulties in realizing quantum materials in the BEC regime of ∆ p / F ∼ 1, whereas the ratio is ∼ 10 -4 for conventional superconductors. Then came a burst of research activities because cuprate high-temperature superconductors in the underdoped pseudogap region seem to be in the BEC regime (∆ p / F ∼ 1) where the carrier density and F are strongly suppressed by the Mott physics This crossover has also been extensively studied in dilute ultracold Fermi alkali gases by tuning the interaction between the Fermi atoms using a Feshbach resonance Recently, interest in the BCS-BEC crossover in SC materials has been renewed in iron-chalcogenide superconductors because it apparently seems that they can be tuned into both regimes. FeSe doped with isovalent S, FeSe 1-x S x , is in the nematic phase for x < ∼ 0.17 and in the tetragonal phase for x > ∼ 0.17. The specific heat C p measurements exhibit the classic BCS behavior with a finite jump at T = T c at x = 0 and 0.1, but, at x = 0.2, show C p /T ∝ T /T c below T c and the archetypical BEC behavior of the λ transition Also interesting is the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study on Fe 1+y Se x Te 1-x by Kanigel group M odel -The Holstein model is given by where c iσ and a i are the fermion of spin σ and boson operators at the site i, and i, j implies the nearest neighbors with the coordination number q, and n i = σ c † iσ c iσ is the electron density operator at the site i. The electrons are coupled with the Einstein phonon of frequency ω 0 with the onsite coupling constant g. The model has been explored previously via various tools including the dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) technique A useful way to get a grip on this model to integrate the phonons out and write the effective interaction between electrons as In the limit , where E b = 2g 2 /ω 0 is the bipoalron energy. The Holstein model in the regime ω 0 D is mapped onto the attractive-Hubbard model with the onsite interaction |U | = E b and the ω dependence may be neglected. D = 2t is the halfbandwidth and is equal to F for half-filled cases. Then, the dynamical effects become pronounced for adiabatic cases of ω 0 D. This regime, however, has been a challenge to treat theoretically because of the different energy scales of electrons and phonons and of emergent superconductivity and soft boson modes Here, we solve the Holstein model at half-filling ( n = 1) at zero temperature employing DMFT in combination with Wilson's numerical renormalization group (NRG) technique. The NRG technique can zoom in, via a logarithmic discretization of the conduction band, onto the low energy with an arbitrary precision and is ideal to address the small energy scales in this problem Normal state -Let us recall what has been established in the normal state Superconducting ∆ p and T c -The outcomes of the DMFT calculations are the diagonal self-energy Σ(ω) and off-diagonal self-energy φ(ω) in SC state. There is no renormalization of the chemical potential μ because at the half-filling it is fixed at the center of the band. We will present below the calculations for T c , ∆ p , density of states, and the spectral function A( , ω) from the obtained self-energies. The SC gap ∆ p is given by the solution of where ∆(ω) = φ(ω)/Z(ω) and Z(ω) = 1 -Σ(ω)/ω. They are shown in Fig. T c may be determined by fitting the NRG energy flows (E N /Λ -N/2 ) with respect to the NRG site number N as Λ (N -N T c )/2 , and the T c is given by where Λ is the NRG discretization parameter Recall that T c is limited by ∆ p in the BCS and by D S in BEC regimes, where D S is the superfluid stiffness. An estimate of T c taking this observation into account may be done by an interpolation of the gap amplitude and phase stiffness temperature scales of T ∆ = ∆ p /1.75 and . We found that the exponent α = 1.4 gives the best results from the least square fitting of the above NRG T c calculations. This was represented by the gray dashed curves in Fig. The most interesting for T c is that the maximum occurs at the lower critical value of g c1 . This holds regardless of the phonon frequency as can be seen from the Fig. As the electron-phonon coupling g increases the phonon frequency is renormalized and a zero frequency mode appears at the critical coupling. As g is further increased it hardens back in normal state Dynamical properties -The electronic density of states in SC states are presented in Fig. The phase coherence is due to the superfluid stiffness, and we already saw that D S is significantly suppressed in the BEC regime of the adiabatic case from Fig. 2(b). However, D S does not decrease rapidly in the antiadiabatic case as shown in Fig. Spectral intensity A( , ω) -We now show the spectral function in Fig. where, stands for k . The spectral intensity plot in the plane of of and ω represents the quasiparticle dispersion relation, which is probed by the angle-resolved photoemision spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments. We present the representative spectral intensity plots for BCS, crossover, and BEC regimes, respectively, in Fig. In the BEC regime, the quasi-particle dispersion for adiabatic and anti-adiabatic cases behave differently as shown in Fig. Summary and discussion -Our main results for dynamical effects on the crossover are: (a) The pairing gap ∆ p does not keep increasing; ∆ p increases and decreases as the coupling g increases for adiabatic phonon cases. (b) The maximum T c occurs at the lower critical coupling g c1 concomitantly with the emergence of the Goldstone mode due to the local pair phase fluctuations. (c) The SC quasi-particle dispersion in the crossover or BEC regime does not exhibit the back-bending in the adiabatic case. The (b) holds regardless of the phonon frequency, and (a) and (c) are pronounced in the adiabatic cases. It is important to note that the quasi-particle dispersion may or may not exhibit the back-bending in the BEC regime of superconductivity from dynamically induced insulators. In contrast, the back-bending always shows up in superconductivity emerging from insulators induced by an instantaneous interaction like the attractive-Hubbard model, while it is absent in superconductivity from band insulators Superconductivity emerging from a dynamically induced insulator we consider here, the absence of backbending can be traced back to the insulating behavior of the diagonal self-energy Σ(ω) in SC state, that is, the slope of ReΣ(ω) → ∞ as ω → 0. In both adiabatic and anti-adiabatic cases the self-energy in the local pair insulating regime shows this behavior in the normal state like in the Mott insulating state Tae-Ho Park 1 and Han-Yong Choi 1, 2 The superconducting pairing term breaking the particle number symmetry is implemented in the bath of the effective impurity Hamiltonian where f σ is the fermionic operator on the impurity site, n f = σ f † σ f σ , and we solve Eq. (S1a) using density matrix numerical renormalization group (DM-NRG) technique For nonzero ∆ SC k , the Hamiltonian of Eq. (S1a) introduces not only a single-particle Green's function k↑ ω but also an anomalous Green's function F k (ω) = c k,↑ , c -k↓ ω . The double bracket represents the correlator which is defined as in Ref. Here, θ is the step function, the thermodynamic average, and ζ = + if both O 1 and O 2 are fermion operators and ζ =otherwise. The equation of motion of the correlator is given by To describe the superconductivity, it is convenient to use the Nambu spinor representation as , then the lattice Green's function can be represented by matrix form as Ĝk and using the Dyson equation in terms of the local self-energy Σ(ω) for infinite dimensions, the Green's function Eq. ( , where τ i (i = 1, 2, 3) is the Pauli matrix, τ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, and μ is the chemical potential. In the Holstein model, the self-energy is attributed to the electron-phonon coupling term and the relevant correlation functions from the effective impurity model are and the self-energy is obtained by Σ -2 . -1 . -1 . - R e For the matrix convenience, we decompose the self-energy matrix to Σ(ω) = Σ(ω)τ 0 + φ(ω)τ 1 and define a function W (ω) ≡ ω -Σ(ω) for the diagonal component. Then, the lattice Green's function can be simply rewritten as Ĝk (ω The self-consistency for DMFT calculation is achieved by using the local Green's function Ĝloc (ω) , Ĝ-1 where Ĝ-1 0 (ω) is matrix form of the Weiss field and the local Green's function is obtained by momentum (k) summation ( Ĝloc (ω) = k Ĝk (ω)). By considering the semi-elliptic bare density of state per spin D( ) = (2/π) √ D 2 -2 /D 2 for the infinite dimensional Bethe lattice, the local Green's function can be obtained as Ĝloc where s = sgn Im W ( ) 2φ( ) 2 , and the Weiss field is obtained as Ĝ-1 PAIRING GAP, SUPERFLUID STIFFNESS AND CRITICAL TEMPERATURE For the Holstein model of Eq. ( where V ( ) = (D 2 -2 )/3 for the Bethe lattice and By inserting Eq. (S12) to Eq. (S11), we obtain where The T c (black asterisks in Fig. The superconducting critical temperatures T c can be determined by fitting the low lying excitation energy flows E N /Λ -N/2 with respect to the NRG site number N by Λ (N -N T c )/2 as shown in Fig. FIG. regime with large g for adiabatic phonon case, which is consistent with the Fig. We present the excitation energy flows in the logarithmic scale in Fig. We show in Fig. Consider the anti-adiabatic case first. For = 0 there are three intersection points for ω > 0 region. Label them as ω 1 , ω , and ω 3 . (ω 1 < ω 2 < ω 3 ). The spectral function is given by Note from the plot (i) that the imaginary part of the function F (ω) is such that ImF (ω 1 ) < ImF (ω 3 ) < ImF (ω 2 ). Therefore, the spectral function exhibits a peak near ω 1 and a smaller peak around ω 3 , but a dip around ω ≈ ω 2 . The numerator of W (ω) + is anti-symmetric with respect to ω for = 0 and the spectral function A is symmetric. As increases, the intersection point ω 1 increases and ω 3 increases more rapidly, as can be seen from the plot (i). The symmetricity with respect to ω = 0 does not hold for = 0. The branch closer to the bare dispersion appears with a stronger weight. For = 0.5 the resulting A( , ω) vs. ω is shown in the plot (j).