A semi-empirical acoustic model for self-noise was adapted to predict the sound radiated from an axial fan featuring rotating controlled diffusion blades (RCDB). Experimental data for wake velocity, mass flow rate across the fan, and fan rotational speed were obtained. These experimental data along with typical characteristics of turbulent boundary layers were used to predict the noise of the axial fan. Hot-wire wake measurements were made in the near region downstream of the fan plane. The fan noise was measured upstream of the fan. The experimentally obtained self-noise was then compared to the predictions made by the semi-empirical acoustic model. Goody's and Rozenberg's models for surface pressure spectra were used in the semi-empirical acoustic model. Rozenberg's model offered a more accurate prediction in the final fan noise spectra. The predictions were in reasonable agreement with experimental data, and the model was found to be a useful tool to reasonably estimate acoustic emissions of a fan with limited information about the velocity field in the fan wake. Different operating conditions and blade configurations were examined. For a given dimensionless operating condition, the self-noise was obtained for different rotational speeds, and the effect of the fan speed on the propagated noise was evaluated. The acoustic scaling function was experimentally obtained as a function of normalized frequency and dimensionless operating condition and it was found to be quite frequency dependent despite it is often assumed as a constant value. Axial fans are widely used for relatively high volume flow rate and low pressure rise applications. cooling fans and ventilation systems are common application areas. Current and pending regulations on noise emissions make noise measurements and modeling for axial fans important topical areas for original equipment manufacturers and suppliers. This paper presents measurements and modeling for a three and a nine blade axial fan. The cross section of the fan blades was designed with a Controlled Diffusion (CD) airfoil. The CD airfoil controls the boundary layer growth on the suction side that is of importance in axial fan design. Surface pressure fluctuations of the CD airfoil have been studied in The characteristics of the blade wakes and blade surface pressure for the three blade axial fan was investigated by The noise generated by an axial fan in the absence of inflow turbulence and distortion is termed fan self-noise. Self-noise represents distinct noise sources such as Turbulent Boundary Layer Trailing Edge (TBL-TE) noise, separation noise, tip leakage noise, vortex shedding noise, etc. It is difficult to quantitatively determine the amplitude of each of type of acoustic source since there are usually a number of contributors in each experiment. TBL-TE noise is often considered to be an important source of the overall noise generation. Semi-empirical acoustic models often utilize the surface pressure spectra upstream of the TE as an input to predict the self-noise; see Amiet An increase in pressure rise across an axial fan is generally associated with increase in noise generation Longhouse Stephens and Morris An empirical self-noise prediction code was developed by Brooks et al. Acoustic and wake measurements are reported for both three and nine blade configurations in this paper. An acoustic model adapted from Stephen and Morris Accurate measurements of flow rate (through the fan plane), rotational speed, wake velocity and emitted noise (in the region upstream of the fan) can be obtained using the Axial Fan Research and Development (AFRD) Facility of the Turbulent Shear Flows Laboratory at Michigan State University, see An overall schematic of the facility is shown in Fig. It is noted that Davoudi et al It is noted that the environment in which the acoustic measurements were made was not anechoic. A microphone installed in the fan upstream will receive the target sound (from the blades), coherent reflections from the surrounding walls, and also the ambient noise. This issue was be mitigated by measuring the acoustic field using multiple microphone locations simultaneously. This allows the use of post-processing techniques to reduce the effects of unwanted noise sources. Ten calibrated microphones were placed in two circular arrays upstream of the fan. The upper and the lower arrays contain 5 microphones that are evenly spaced every 72 degrees with a stagger angle of 36 degrees between them. The arrays were centered (above the blades' mid-span) and placed at two different elevations (1041 mm and 1606 mm) above the fan plane; see Fig. The axial fan blades have a specific Controlled Diffusion (CD) airfoil profile; the chord length (c) is 133.9mm, the thickness-to-chord ratio is 4%, and the camber angle is 12 • . The fan blades are referred to as Rotating Controlled Diffusion Blade (RCDB). Publications that have investigated the same CD profile were cited in the introduction. Schematics of the three and nine blade fans are depicted in Fig. The three blade characteristics for 8 different rotational speeds are shown in Figure The nine blade fan characteristics are shown in Figure One objective of this paper is to apply a simplified modeling approach for the radiated sound generated by the fan. The approach will follow the methods originally introduced by Blake's Blake (1) where, M c is the convective Mach number (M c = U c /c 0 ). c 0 is the sound velocity. Λ 3 (f ) is the span-wise integral length scale of the unsteady wall pressure. Blake Accounting for compactness of an airfoil in the frequency range of interest, Eq.1 and Eq.2 follow as: The c 0 /C ratio is about 2.5 KHz for the RCDB (c = 133.9mm). Thus, the RCDB can be considered to be a compact airfoil below 2.5 KHz. The half-plane edge noise principle can be used for frequency values above this limit. In Eqs. 3 and 4, the auto-spectral density of the surface pressure fluctuations can be obtained by time resolved surface pressure measurements. Alternatively, these values can be approximated using semi-empirical models (i.e., As indicated before, Blake's model was defined for a stationary airfoil exposed to a uniform free stream. This can be used for a rotating airfoil using a "strip-theory" approach. Specifically, the rotating blade can be divided into small spanwise segments with a width of dr. The net noise source is then recovered by an summation of the contributions from each strip. The surface pressure spectra (proposed by Goody) are different for each radial location. Thus, Blake's equation can be re-written for RCDB fan as: where, is the convective Mach number (W ∞ (r)/c 0 ) and Φ pp-ss (f, r), Φ pp-ps (f, r) are the suction side, pressure side surface pressure spectra. B is also the number of blades. Goody ( ωδ Ue ) 0.75 + 0.5 in which, δ is the boundary layer thickness, U e is the velocity at the edge of the boundary layer, ω is the angular frequency, and τ w is the wall stress. R T is the ratio of the timescales of the outer to inner boundary layer and is defined as: where u τ is the friction velocity. It is noted that time the scale ratio also contains the effect of Reynolds number. Goody Wake measurements were obtained in the fan downstream as will be discussed in details in the next section. The purpose of the measurements is to provide basic understanding of the flow field in order to interpret the acoustic measurements. Additionally, it will be assumed that the wake flow field (close to the TE of a blade) can be used to obtain estimates of the upstream boundary layer characteristics. Hence, the Goody model with wake values used as input parameters can be utilized to provide an approximate description of the surface pressure spectra near the TE of the RCDB. The required U e can be approximated by the blade relative velocity (w ∞ = Ū 2 + (rΩ) 2 ). Wall shear stress can be approximated with the maximum of the RMS of velocity fluctuations squared in the wake region of a blade A few approximations must be made in order to obtain the required parameters to utilize Goody's model. Spalart and Watmuff Rozenberg et al where, ) is the equilibrium parameter for self-similarity determination defined by Clauser Velocity measurements were obtained using single-sensor hot-wires at an axial plane that was 2mm downstream of the rotor trailing edge. The data are used here to study the flow field characteristics and to approximate the quantitative parameters needed for the acoustic model. The sensors respond to the component of the air speed that is perpendicular to the hot-wire filament. Hence, it was necessary to orient the probe such that the hot-wire was normal to the mean flow angle of the air leaving the fan exit plane. This flow angle was found by first using a small tuft in order to document the mean flow angles. To obtain the velocity fluctuation level distributions in the wake region at 1000RP M , the time-series velocity data were phase-locked to the rotor, and RMS values of the difference between velocity data and phase-averaged mean velocity were computed at each rotor phase. Five different span-wise locations (starting from hub to tip) in the downstream region of the fan were selected for the wake measurements. (r/r tip = 0.707, 0.77, 0.83, 0.89, 0.96). The RMS of the velocity fluctuations for the nine blade fan, made non-dimensional by V tip are provided in Fig The wake velocity fluctuations for the nine bladed fan at a φ = 0.49 is shown in Fig. Results for φ = 0.31 are plotted in Fig. The results for post-stall case (φ = 0.29) is shown in Fig. Acoustic radiation from the three and nine blade fans were measured with the ten microphones as described earlier (Fig. The broadband amplitudes are generally decreasing with frequency over the range noted with a relatively constant slope. The model spectra indicate a relatively good approximation to the overall-amplitude in the mid-higher frequency (i.e., acoustically non-compact) range. The lower frequency range (acoustically compact) shows that the model underestimates the measurements by about 10 dB. It is also noted that the slope of the model very closely approximates the experimental spectra over a relatively wide frequency range (f>1000 Hz). As noted, using either Goody's or Rozenberg's models to estimate the surface pressure spectra do not make a considerable difference in the predicted emissions, and they differ by about 1 dB for φ = 0.49 The predicted self-noise for Φ = 0.36 shown in Fig. The acoustic semi-empirical model indeed incorporated many approximations and assumptions, however, the results were found to be in reasonable agreement with the experiments for both three and nine blade fans. Measurements of the emitted fan noise were carried out for different rotational speeds for a given flow and pressure rise coefficients. Using those measurements, the function "n", described in the Introduction section of this paper, was experimentally determined. These results are shown in Fig. The function "n" was found to vary considerably with frequency. Also, the scaling function values in lower frequencies were quite similar for different operating condition, however, they were different for mid-high frequencies. Very large peaks with a maximum of nearly 15 were observed in low frequencies in Fig. A semi-empirical acoustic model was adopted and modified to predict the emitted self-noise of Rotating Controlled Diffusion Blades (RCDBs) configured as a three and a nine blade axial fan. Four/two operating conditions were selected for the nine/three blade fans, respectively. Wake thickness measurements in a plane near the blades' TE, and mass flow rate measurements across the fan plane were the inputs to the semi-empirical acoustic model. Surface pressure spectra that was used in the semi-empirical acoustic model was obtained by Goody's and Rozenberg's models separately, and Rozenberg's model offered a more accurate prediction. Constant temperature hot-wire anemometer data were utilized to obtain velocity fluctuations level signatures International Journal of Aeroacoustics in the fan blades wake. Those velocity fluctuations level signatures were then used to obtain wake thickness approximations. Aeroacoustic measurements were obtained using an array of microphones and the experimental data were compared with the predicted self-noise. The self-noise predictions were found to be in acceptable agreement with the experimental observations. It was also observed that the larger wake thickness values were correlated with stronger acoustic emissions. Given that aeroacoustics measurements are relatively cumbersome, it could be an efficient procedure to perform single probe hot-wire measurements in the fan wake region and use the presented semi-empirical model to estimate the fan noise. Also, computationally affordable CFD simulations could be employed to estimate the wake characteristics as the inputs to the semi-empirical acoustic model. International Journal of Aeroacoustics