We propose and numerically analyze the hybrid Si-Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 strip waveguide switches for Mid-IR wavelength of 2.1 μm. The switches investigated are one input-one output (on-off) type and one input-two outputs (directional coupler) type. The reversible transition between the switch states is achieved by inducing the phase transition from crystalline to amorphous and vice-versa by application of voltage pulses. The approach of embedding the nanoscale active material Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 within the Si waveguide is taken to enhance the interaction of light with the active region of the switches. The dimensions of the active regions of the switches are optimized to achieve low insertion loss, low switching energy and high extinction ratio. In case of one input-one output switch, an extinction ratio of 33.79 dB along with an extremely low insertion loss of 0.52 dB is achieved using optimum Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 length of only 0.92 μm. For one input-two outputs switch, an extinction ratio of 10.33 dB and 5.23 dB is obtained in cross and bar state respectively using an active length of 52 μm. These values of extinction ratio, which are otherwise 18.59 dB and 8.33 dB respectively, are due to the necessity of doping the Si beneath the Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 to facilitate the electrical conduction needed for Joule heating. A suitable gap of 100 nm is kept between the active and passive arm of the directional coupler switch. The electro-thermal co-simulations confirm that phase change occurs in whole of the Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 region in both types of switches. The internet data traffic over the fiber optic network has been increasing at an exponential rate and rapidly approaching the projected ultimate data transmission capacity limits, raising concerns over a future capacity crunch. Thus, a new non-conventional physical technology will soon be indispensable Recently, a well-known phase change material Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 (GST) has been utilized as an active material in nonvolatile on-chip active devices on different photonic platforms The switches designed here are hybrid Si-GST one input-one output (1 × 1) waveguide switch and one input-two outputs (1 × 2) directional coupler switch. The Si strip waveguide is designed in SOI platform with a 400 nm height Si layer and a 2 μm thick buried silicon dioxide substrate. For the single mode operation at 2.1 μm the cross section of waveguide is 800 nm × 400 nm (width × height). The approaches taken to design hybrid Si-GST switches are described below. In 1 × 1 waveguide switch, the output optical power through the Si waveguide is altered by changing the phase of GST (from a-GST to c-GST and vice-versa) embedded inside the Si waveguide. The optical mode is launched from the left side and output is measured from the right side of the waveguide shown in figure 1. To achieve high overlap between the optical mode and the GST, first, we fully etched the Si waveguide in the middle and embedded GST in the trench as shown in figure In the second design of 1 × 1 waveguide switch, the GST is embedded in partially etched Si waveguide as shown in figure Figure 3 Analysis and results For 1 × 1 waveguide switch depicted in figure In 1 × 2 directional coupler switch, we plotted output optical power emerging from the bar and the cross port as a function of device length l GST . Using these plots, coupling length l c are obtained for different values of coupler gap 'g'. To give a particular example, the normalized optical power with the value of g = 100 nm for both phases of the GST is plotted in figure The cross and bar states of this switch for g value of 100 nm are illustrated in figure In this section, we present the investigations of electrically induced phase transition in GST using voltage pulses. The phase transition of GST from a-GST to c-GST and vice-versa is induced by heating the GST through Joule heating. For this purpose, we implemented an electro-thermal co-simulation model using the CST Microwave Studio. In this cosimulation model, the electrical simulations predict the current and voltage distributions in the device, while thermal simulations are used to obtain temperature distribution in the device. The governing equations for the electrical and thermal simulations are the following: In (1), σ and V represents the electrical conductivity of the material and applied voltage respectively. In (2), k, T and C v denotes the thermal conductivity, temperature and volumetric heat capacity respectively while Q is the Joule heat generation associated with electric field (E) and is represented by In order to find the voltage and energy required for complete phase transformation of the GST, we recorded the rise in temperature for a different set of applied voltages. The duration of voltage pulses is chosen as 100 ns and 10 ns for amorphous to crystalline and crystalline to amorphous phase transformation respectively We have designed and theoretically analyzed ultra-compact hybrid Si-GST switches for the emerging wavelengths window of Mid-IR around 2 μm. In a 1 × 1 waveguide switch, we obtained 33.79 dB extinction ratio with 0.52 dB insertion loss at 2.1 μm for an optimized GST length of only 0.92 μm. Reversible on-off switching is achieved by electrical actuation of GST through ITO electrodes. The amorphous to crystalline transition in GST is induced by a 5 V voltage pulse corresponding to the energy consumption of 0.9 nJ. While in case of crystalline to amorphous transition a 7.5 V voltage pulse is sufficient to increase the GST temperature to 1120 • C, and the energy consumed during this process in 22.8 nJ. Moreover in both cases, the phase change happens in the complete GST region. In a 1 × 2 directional coupler switch, we showed that reversible switching between the cross-bar state can be achieved with an extinction ratio of 10.33 dB and 5.23 dB in the cross and bar state respectively with an optimized active length of only 52 μm. The voltages required for amorphization and crystallization of GST are 6 V and 7.5 V respectively. The energy consumed for a complete cycle of phase transition is 44.67 nJ. Our work will help in experimental realization of ultra-compact high on-off ratio electro-optic switches for inter-chip and intra-chip photonic applications. • C. The energy consumed