We demonstrate high-frequency mechanical resonators in ballistic graphene p-n junctions. Fully suspended graphene devices with two bottom gates exhibit ballistic bipolar behavior after current annealing. We determine the graphene mass density and built-in tension for different current annealing steps by comparing the measured mechanical resonant response to a simplified membrane model. In a graphene membrane with high built-in tension, but still of macroscopic size with dimensions 3 × 1 m 2 , a record resonance frequency of 1.17 GHz is observed after the final current annealing step. We further compare the resonance response measured in the unipolar with the one in the bipolar regime. Remarkably, the resonant signals are strongly enhanced in the bipolar regime. Owing to the exceptional mechanical properties of graphene, such as high strength, graphenebased nanoelectromechanical systems have stimulated intensive research activities in recent years. However, such resonators are needed in order to reach the quantum regime without having to actively cool the resonator by opto-mechanical side-band cooling. In this work, we demonstrate a GHz mechanical resonator in a ballistic graphene p-n junction. Fully suspended graphene resonators were fabricated with two bottom gates which are used to control the carrier type and density. To increase the quality of the suspended graphene layer, it is current annealed in a vacuum chamber at low temperature. A device schematic and measurement setup are shown in Fig. All measurements in this work were carried out in a vacuum chamber with a pressure of typically < 10 -5 mbar at T ~ 8 K. We first performed DC conductance measurements of an ultraclean graphene p-n junction using standard lock-in technique. Most as-fabricated devices exhibit a very weak dependence of the conductance on the gate voltage, not showing the suppressed conductance that is expected to arise at the charge-neutrality point (CNP). This is due to strong doping by resist residues. To remove these residues, the device is current-annealed in a vacuum chamber at 8 K until the CNP peak is significantly pronounced. The applied AC signal also exerts a time-varying force to the graphene membrane, driving a displacement in position indicated in Fig. where f is the carrier frequency, f ∆ is the frequency deviation, t is time, and f L denotes the modulation frequency, which we have typically chosen to be 671 Hz. For a unipolar graphene doubly-clamped membrane, the amplitude of the mixing current can be expressed as, where G is the conductance of the graphene device, C G (z) is the capacitance between the gate electrode and graphene, and Re[z(f)] is the real part of the graphene oscillation amplitude. Equation ( has a peak at resonance as shown in the inset of Fig. To interpret the experimental data, we model the behavior of the graphene resonators. We assume pure uniaxial strain which allows us to apply a simplified model, shown in Fig. In this model the membrane is reduced to a 1D string with length L. We also assume that there is only a single homogenous gate instead of two gates like in our device. Furthermore, it is assumed that the force of the gate voltage is only acting at the middle of the string. As a result, the resonant frequency f of the graphene membrane can be approximated as (see ESI for the derivation of the equation), where L is the length of the suspended graphene membrane, w the width, ρ the 2D mass density, T 0 the built-in tension in units of Newton (N), and E the 1D Young's modulus in units of force/meter (N/m). Note, that the built-in tension is defined as T 0 = T(F)| F=0 , see Fig. The primes on C G denote derivatives with respect to z. From the argument in the root we see that the negative term ∝ V G 2 dominates if T 0 is large, resulting in a prominent negative dispersion of the resonant frequency. As the gate voltage increases, the V G We here investigate the evolution of the resonant response as a function of current annealing steps. We could not observe the CNP and resonant responses in the as-fabricated devices due to strong chemical doping by resist residues. As shown in Fig. The built-in strain values converted from the tensions are estimated to be 1.2 % and 0.4 % after the initial and final current annealing, respectively, showing that the built-in strain significantly decreased after current annealing. This is probably due to the heat in the device generated during current annealing leading to a partial release of the built-in in tension. shown in (c) and (d), respectively. The mechanical mixing current I Mix is measured as a function of f and VG2 at VG1 = 0 V (dashed lines in panels a and b). After the final current annealing step, the resonance frequency increased to ~ 1.17 GHz at VG1 = 0 V, which is the highest resonance frequency for a graphene mechanical resonator. The inset of (d) shows the quality factor Q as a function of incident RF power. Using the same method, we achieved a GHz graphene mechanical resonator in device B. Similar to Fig. Young's modulus of 340 N/m derived from a 3D Young's modulus of 1 TPa. There have also been reports of larger values for the graphene modulus, which could lower our estimated strain values. For the lowest power we obtain a Q ≈ 1500. We then obtain for the quality frequency product Q • f the value 1.8 ×10 12 s -1 , which brings this resonator at the measurement temperature of 8 K well into the quantum regime with Qf > kT/h , where optical side-band cooling could efficiently be applied to bring the resonator into the ground state. However, there is also another reason why the mixing current could be substantially larger in the bipolar as compared to the unipolar regime. The photothermoelectric (PTE) effect can become very pronounced in systems with p-n junctions. In our previous work, We have demonstrated graphene mechanical resonators with very high frequencies of several 100 MHz to > 1 GHz. We have used ultraclean suspended and current-annealed graphene p-n junctions and determine the graphene mass density and built-in tension after different current annealing steps by fitting the measured resonance frequency dependence on gate voltage to a simplified resonator model. After the final current annealing step, the graphene mass density decreases and likely reaches the pure graphene mass density, indicating that virtually resist residues are removed. In a clean graphene membrane the fundamental mechanic resonance mode has been found to be 1.17 GHz at V G = 0 V. This large resonance frequency for a macroscopic membrane of size 3 × 1.2 m is only possible due to low mass density of graphene and the high tension that graphene can sustain. In this particular GHz case, the built-in tension is estimated to be T0/W ~ 15 N/m, corresponding to a strain of ~ 4 %. Furthermore, the graphene membrane with two separated gates enables bipolar gating. In this bipolar regime (either p-n or n-p) we have found a strongly enhanced mixing current, while it is weak in the unipolar regime (either n-n or p-p). Our work shows that graphene p-n junctions could be useful for detecting mechanical resonance signals.