We investigate PT -symmetric coherent perfect absorbers (CPAs) in the TE mode solution of a linear homogeneous optical system surrounded by graphene sheets. It is revealed that presence of graphene sheets contributes the enhancement of absorption in a coherent perfect absorber. We derive exact analytic expressions, and work through their possible impacts on lasing threshold and CPA conditions. We point out roles of each parameter governing optical system with graphene and show that optimal conditions of these parameters give rise to enhancement and possible experimental realization of a CPA laser. Presence of graphene leads the required gain amount to reduce considerably based on its chemical potential and temperature. We obtain that relation between system parameters decides the measure of CPA condition. We find out that graphene features contributing to resonance effect in graphene sheets are rather preferable to build a better coherent perfect absorber. The coherent perfect absorbers (CPAs), or antilasers, Since its debut, PT symmetry has found considerable interest in optics and related fields due to its smoothness to realize experimental investigations and immediate applications. A generic PT -symmetric Hamiltonian in optics is vested with a potential whose peculiar property is V (x) = V ⋆ (-x) Emergence of CPA-lasers is among the most notable applications of PT -symmetric potentials in optics. In the context of PT -symmetry, the condition for appearance of a spectral singularity coincides with that of its timereversal Physical properties of graphene has been profoundly unveiled and thus its numerous applications in condensed matter physics and optics have attracted interest of researchers for over a decade In a scattering problem the transfer matrix is used to encapsule all the scattering data Our analysis fulfils oblique incidence Gain Loss Regions I and IV correspond to the vacuum. Our analysis demonstrates all possible configurations of the system leading to spectral singularity and CPA solutions. We find out complete solutions and schematically demonstrate their behaviors using various parameter choices. Among all possible parameters of the system which provide valuable information about the CPA-lasers, only optimal ones lead to achieve performing an efficient CPA. In particular, we obtain analytic expressions for the spectral singularity and CPA configurations, and examine behaviors of practically most desirable choices of parameters corresponding to TE waves. We reveal that optimal control of graphene parameters, such as gain coefficient, incidence angle, slab thickness, temperature, and chemical potential, gives rise to a desired outcome for achieving enhancement of absorption, and computing correct amplitude and phase contrasts in a CPA-laser. Thus, we provide a concrete ground that restrict the mentioned parameters of graphene in certain ranges. Optimal values of these parameters should be adjusted in a given system if one desires the experimental realization of CPA. Consider a one-dimensional linear homogeneous and optically active parallel pair of slab system whose exterior planar surfaces are covered by graphene layers as depicted in Fig. where the index j = 1, 2, 3, 4 represents the regions sketched in Fig. ε 0 and μ 0 are respectively the permeability and permittivity of the vacuum. We defined complex quantity z j (z) such that the subindex j = 1, 4 correspond to vacuum at which n 1 = n 4 = 1, j = 2, 3 represent respectively the gain and loss components of the slab, and z j stands for z coordinates in the specified j-th region as depicted in Fig. where ρ g and σ (l) g are respectively the free charge and conductivity on the l-th layer of graphene, with l = 1, 2. Notice that ρ j (z) and σ j (z) are associated to each other by the continuity equation for the electric current density J j := σ j (z) E j . Conductivity of graphene sheets has been determined within the random phase approximation in Here ν ± := ω ± 2μ, χ := 2k B T , -e is electron charge, is reduced Planck's constant, k B is Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, Γ is the scattering rate of charge carriers, μ is the chemical potential, and ω is the photon energy where r := (x, y, z), k := ω/c is the wavenumber, c := 1/ √ μ 0 ε 0 is the speed of light in vacuum, and Z 0 := μ 0 /ε 0 is the impedance of vacuum. We stress out that TE waves correspond to the solutions of where êx , êy , and êz , are respectively the unit vectors along the x-, y-and z-directions, and θ ∈ [-90 • , 90 • ] is the incidence angle (See Fig. Thus, the electric field corresponding to TE waves is given by where E j is solution of the Schrödinger equation for the potential v j (z Here we define ñ j The fact that potential v j (z) is constant in regions of interest gives rise to a solution in relevant regions where a j and b j , with j = 1, 2, 3, 4, are K-dependent complex coefficients, and In particular, E j (Lz) is given by the right-hand side of ( ± are defined as -b1 + b4e -2iK Right outgoing waves could be associated to the left ones by means of the transfer matrix. Transfer matrix is favored over the scattering matrix by virtue of its composition property, which helps being articulated the scattering properties of any optical system. For our two-layer optical system furnished by PT -symmetry with graphene sheets, total transfer matrix can be obtained as the product of transfer matrices of gain and loss regions. If individual transfer matrices corresponding to the gain and loss regions of the slab are denoted by M 1 and M 2 respectively, then total transfer matrix M = [M ij ] satisfies composition property M = M 2 M 1 , and is expressed by Spectral singularities match up to real zeros of M 22 component of M, which is computed explicitly as where we identify It is apparent that PT -symmetry implies the following relations Thus it amounts that currents on the left and right graphene sheets flow in opposite directions by virtue of PT symmetry. Spectral singularities correspond to real values of the wavenumber k such that M 22 = 0. Hence, We note that quantities u (2,3) -involve the effect of graphene in the spectral singularities as given by identity Spectral singularities corresponding to our optical setup in Refractive index n and ñ are expressed in real and imaginary parts as follows Most of the materials safely satisfy the condition |κ| ≪ η -1 < η. In particular, this practical restriction of materials leads η and κ to be expressed in terms of η and leading order of κ as We next introduce the gain coefficient g and its threshold value g 0 at resonance frequency where λ 0 corresponds to the resonance wavelength. In the light of ( where we define a ± and g for convenience as follows In practice, Eqs. ( and graphene sheets with characterizations with graphene without graphene . ) FIG. We use parameter values given in ( In Fig. Figure It turns out that characteristics of graphene layers manifest themselves in determining the rate of gain decrement. Fig. We now assume that there exist a dispersion in the refractive index n , and investigate its possible impacts on the spectral singularities. For this purpose, we include wavenumber k dependence of n . We assume that active part of our optical system composing the gain ingredient is formed by doping a host medium of refractive index n 0 , and its refractive index satisfies the following dispersion relation Here ω := ω/ω 0 , γ := γ/ω 0 , ωp := ω p /ω 0 , ω 0 is the resonance frequency, γ is the damping coefficient, and ω p is the plasmon frequency. The ω2 p can be described in leading order of the imaginary part κ 0 of n at the resonance wavelength λ 0 := 2πc/ω 0 , by the expression ω2 p = 2n 0 γκ 0 At resonance wavelength λ 0 , the κ 0 can be written as κ 0 = -λ 0 g 0 /4π, see Our PT -symmetric optical slab encrusted by graphene sheets serves as a CPA provided that time reversed system is fulfilled once the spectral singularities are prevalent. This phenomenon happens to exist only if correct phase and amplitude of incoming waves are originated. Thus, incoming waves are perfectly absorbed by the optical system that gives rise to a CPA-laser, see Fig. CPA-laser operates once the incoming waves emergent by angle -θ are absorbed perfectly so that full destructive interference occurs. This can be measured by the ratio ρ of complex amplitude of incoming waves for z → 0 and Spectrally Singular Waves Time Reversed Waves CPA Waves Region I b1 e iK(x tan θ-z) b * 1 e -iK(x tan θ-z) a * 4 e -2iK e -iK(x tan θ+z) Region IV a4 e iK(x tan θ+z) a * 4 e -iK(x tan θ+z) b * 1 e 2iK e -iK(x tan θ-z) z → 2L. In view of amplitudes given in Table In fact, a 4 can be denominated in terms of b 1 by employing the spectral singularity condition. We recall that spectral singularities correspond to purely outgoing waves such that This, together with the boundary conditions in Table Thus, it is easy to show that incoming waves are perfectly absorbed provided that ratio of incoming amplitudes specified by ρ satisfies Hence, ratio of amplitudes and phase factors of the waves incoming from left-and right-hand sides are characterized by |ρ| and δφ respectively, and the latter is quantified as Consequently, the CPA-laser action can outrightly be obtained once the |ρ| and δφ of incoming waves from the left and right-hand sides are tuned in according to expressions In Figs. This study benefits the idea that a CPA-laser is the time reversal construct of a regular laser which could be expressed by means of the spectral singularities. Nowadays, experimental realization of CPA-lasers is the main challenge due to difficulties in adjusting exact amplitude and phase factors of incoming waves. Current studies exploit various techniques in order to measure the quantities pointing CPA actions. In this work, we employed an optical system which respects the property of PT -symmetry accompanied by graphene containment. In We require that graphene coatings respect overall PT symmetry which leads to formation of currents flowing in opposite directions. We emphasize that PT symmetry enables the emergence of lasing and CPA conditions due to its power to control the system parameters as distinct from non-PT -symmetric structures. In particular, we find out that graphene insertion into a PT -symmetric optical system leads lower gain values depending upon the graphene features, especially temperature and chemical potential. At this point, resonance occurrence of graphene plays a significant role which happens to exist at μ r ≈ 2.56 meV at absolute zero temperature, and slightly shifts up with increasing temperature. In general, below the resonance point, the lower temperature and chemical potential of graphene sheets are, the less gain amount is. The results of spectral singularities and in turn lasing threshold conditions facilitate the path towards obtaining a CPA because of coincidence of both phenomena at the same points. We observe that efficiency of a CPA-laser could be improved once the parameters of the optical system together with graphene features are well-adjusted. We consider PT -symmetry to achieve computational and thus experimental accessibility of the optical system by tuning appropriate parameters of the system. Accordingly, we place graphene sheets at the ends of PT -symmetric slab system just to realize that optimal conditions for the CPA-laser action can be obtained by computing appropriate intensity and phase contrasts. In order to get a lower intensity and higher phase contrast that yield an almost destructive interference, one should opt for lower temperatures and chemical potentials for the graphene sheets at which the resonance effect occurs. Also, small incidence angles provide relatively lower intensities in the presence of graphene, which lead to larger phase difference as desired. This is the main reason to use graphene sheets in the optical system. In view of our findings, one can shape a reliable CPA equipment provided that parameters specifying the graphene and bilayer slab system are well-adjusted. In Tables III and IV we provide explicit values of parameters in order to build a concrete CPA. Our primary purpose in placing graphene is to improve absorption of waves and utilize arrangement of parameters. We explored that this is achieved at values especially around the resonance effect of graphene. Furthermore, it is observed that graphene causes the necessary gain amount to lessen. In this respect, we infer that presence of graphene gives valuable information about enhancement of absorption in a CPA, which helps building a better CPA. This suggests even a more effective material could be used instead of graphene to make a unity ratio of amplitudes and smooth phase contrast to make a perfect destructive interference. In this direction recently some prominent candidates have been intensely studied like Weyl semimetals may be in the limelight to build a better CPA. As a final note, it would be interesting to describe the role of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) in our system. But, no surface modes should exist at the interface between the slab and graphene since we focused on TE polarization solutions. SPPs exist only for TM polarization. • K, μ = 0.027 eV, and T = 200