Phonon polaritons (PhPs) are long-lived electromagnetic modes that originate from the coupling of infrared photons with the bound ionic lattice of a polar crystal. Cubic-Boron nitride (cBN) is such a polar, semiconductor material, which due to the light atomic masses can support high frequency optical phonons. Here, we report on random arrays of cBN nanostructures fabricated via an unpatterned reactive ion etching process. FTIR reflection spectra suggest the presence of localized surface PhPs within the Reststrahlen band, with quality factors in excess of 38 observed. These can provide the basis of next generation infrared optical components like antennas for communication, improved chemical spectroscopies, and enhanced emitters, sources and detectors. The identification of surface phonon polaritons (SPhPs) as a low loss alternative to surface plasmons has led to a surge in recent research identifying polar dielectric materials capable of supporting these deeply sub-diffractional modes. These long-lived electromagnetic modes originate from the coupling of infrared photons with the bound ionic lattice vibrations of a polar crystal. These polaritons have been demonstrated to provide exceptional increases in the quality factor (Q-factor) for localized polariton modes in comparison to their plasmonic (SPP) counterparts. Due to their phononic origin, the scattering lifetimes of SPhPs are orders of magnitudes longer than those of SPPs Two key applications of interest for these materials are surface enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA) While the materials discussed above span a spectral range including the mid/long-wave and far-infrared, a spectral gap exists between the active regions of hBN and SiC where no high quality SPhP materials have been reported (Fig. Cubic boron nitride (cBN) is one material that can potentially meet these needs. The so-called Reststrahlen band, bound by the transverse (TO) and longitudinal optic (LO) phonons, is found between ~1050 and 1300 cm -1 , thus, SPhPs can be supported over a spectral range covering much of the regime desired. A dramatic modification of the optical response of materials (e.g. molecules) can occur when they are placed in the vicinity of nanostructures that induce strong, highly localized electromagnetic fields where ε $ is the high frequency dielectric permittivity, w LO /w TO, are the frequencies of the LO/TO optical phonon modes and g LO /g TO are the corresponding damping rates. The initial guess for these parameters was taken from the literature In summary, we demonstrate the realization of cBN nanostructures by using a reactive ion etching method to create aperiodically distributed particles that produce resonance Q-factors in excess of what is typically observed with monodisperse, top-down fabricated SPP-based structures. These resonances are derived from the localized SPhPs that are supported within the nanostructures inside the Reststrahlen band. We show that light can be confined in volumes significantly smaller than the incident wavelength, with Q-factors as high as 38. These results suggest a lithography-free approach to fabricating nanostructures in cBN that can effectively confine light in the subdiffraction limit in the IR regime by localized SPhP resonances. The advantage of the long-lived SPhPs, in contrast with SPP lifetimes, enables nanophotonic devices with enhanced IR absorption, extremely sensitive detection capabilities for molecular spectroscopy, and negative refractive index materials. Methods: For the sample preparation commercially available High Pressure High Temperature grown cBN powder was used. A single cBN particle ~200 μm was immobilized on a Silicon substrate via graphitization of a photoresist. Oxygen plasma treatment was then used to clean the top surface of the cBN particle prior to etching.The sample was then exposed to a CF 4 plasma for 13 min, and then a SF 6 plasma for an additional 13 min.Another oxygen plasma treatment was carried out to remove remaining residual organics. The sample with the <111> plane exposed to the plasma will develop triangular, pyramidal and oval shape nanoparticles. To characterize the resonances a thermoscientific Nicolet FTIR microscope was used with a 15x objective 0.58 NA. The SEM and AFM images were taken by a Zeiss LEO and Bruker AFM microscope, respectively. The Raman spectra were collected by a home-built system with a 50x Mitutoyo objective lens at 488 nm wavelength excitation, and 2 mW power with a spot diameter 0.5 μm. To simulate the resonances in the reflectance spectrum we numerically solved the Maxwell equations by performing 3-D electromagnetic calculation using CST Studio Suite software. All of the parameters for the model have been extracted from the SEM/AFM images and the dielectric function of the cBN has been determined by fitting the experimental data of the reflectivity from the unpatterned cBN sample. For the simulations, P-and S-polarization were employed such that both the transverse and the longitudinal components of the electromagnetic fields relative to the pillars were included. All the resultant spectra from both polarizations were averaged and shown in Fig. 