Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials exhibit versatile electronic properties in their different phases. The intrinsic electronic properties of these materials can be modulated through doping or intercalation. In this study, we investigated the electronic properties of Hf-doped ZrSe2 single crystals using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) combined with firstprinciples density functional theory (DFT) calculations. It is observed that the valence band maxima of ZrSe2, located below the Fermi level, undergo a significant change with the introduction of Hf substitution. Hf can introduce extra charges into the conduction band, rather than making a mixed structure of HfSe2 and ZrSe2 band structure, which can cross the Fermi level. Compared to the semiconducting band structure of ZrSe2, we observed that the conduction band crosses the Fermi level at the high symmetry M point in Hf-doped ZrSe2. This suggests an increase of electron-type carriers around the Fermi level, resulting in an extrinsic charge carrier density in the conduction band, which can form a metallic behaviour. It can be noticed that the Hf cations can create disorder in the form of excess atoms of Zr, which yields more carriers in the conduction band in the shape of "smeared bands". The tails of the "smeared band" occupied the d-orbitals extended into the Fermi level and left the d-band below. Similarly, the electrical resistance measurements further confirm the metallic-like character of Hf-doped ZrSe2 compared to the semiconductor ZrSe2, indicating increased carriers. This metallic-like behavior is suggested to be predisposed by the extrinsic electrons induced by the substitutional disorder. This study further demonstrates the possibility of band gap engineering through heavy metal doping in 2D materials. The transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit unique and distinct electronic characteristics in different hybrid structures. Changing the band gap property allows tuning the electronic and optical properties However, the band structures of the crystals reveal the presence of saddle points near the Fermi surface, indicating the occurrence of a phase transition Electronic phase transition plays a crucial role in various physical properties Similarly, in ZrSe2, the conduction band maximum (CMB) crosses the Fermi level at the M point due to the in situ surface doping of sodium, acting as an electron dopant In this study, we examine the electronic properties of Zr1-xHfxSe2 (x = 0.12, determined via ICP) single crystal alloys compared to ZrSe2. The samples were synthesized using the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method. The electronic structures were analyzed using synchrotron-based Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES) and first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our findings reveal a substantial change in the band structures of pristine ZrSe2 upon substituting Hf atoms. In Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2, the electronic properties exhibit additional electron carriers near the bottom of the CB at the M point, crossing the Fermi level and behaving as a metallic character. However, the overall structure is intact and preserved. The single crystals of ZrSe2 and Zr1-xHfxSe2 were synthesized by using the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method. A highly purity of 99.98% zirconium (Zr) and hafnium (Hf) powders from (Alfa-Aesar, UK) and 99.98% Se from (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was used for the single crystal growth. The stoichiometric amount with a transport agent of iodine in the ratio of 5 mg/ml was ground for some time to mixed very well and kept in a quartz tube. Later, the tubes containing the accumulated amount of the reactants and purified iodine were attached to the vacuum line with argon gas to evacuate and seal silica tubes with pressure at ~10 -4 torr. The evacuated quartz tubes were than placed into a two-zone furnace with reaction temperature of 950 °C and a growth temperature of 850 °C. The temperature of the furnace was gradually increased to the transport temperature in 5 hours. With the increase in temperature, the vapor pressure was increased, and the reaction of selenium with the Zr and Hf was continued slowly. The ampule was kept at this temperature for 5 days, after that it was slowly cooled down to 500 o C in 5 hours, followed by a transition to room temperature. After finishing the experimental process, we successfully attained the high-quality single crystals of pristine ZrSe2 and Zr1-xHfxSe2 (shown in Fig. We synthesized ZrSe2 and Hf-doped ZrSe2 using the CVT method. Fig. The energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was performed to estimate the appropriate amount of each element in the single crystal of Hf-doped ZrSe2 (see Fig. From the EDS and ICP, we have confirmed the elemental composition as Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2. Additionally, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) also revealed the detailed elemental composition along with the chemical states of Hf, Zr and Se, respectively. The XPS spectra were analyzed to investigate the chemical states of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 compared to ZrSe2, as depicted in Figs. The primary cause of this shift is the reduction in bond length or lattice contraction, which increases the binding energy of the Zr 3d core level spectra. Similar observations have been made in MexTiSe2 (Me = Cr, Mn, Cu) The Raman spectra were used to compare the in-plane and out-of-plane structural properties of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 with the pristine sample. The lattice vibration is observed to be well retained compared with ZrSe2 (Fig. X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy experiments were conducted to investigate the possible corrugations of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 compared with ZrSe2 as presented in Fig. To investigate the electronic band structures of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 compared with the parent compound using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) for a detailed study. Further details of the ARPES measurement can found in the supporting information. Notably, we know that the nature of ZrSe2 is semiconducting, which is well understood, while it needed to be clarified whether the Hf-doped ZrSe2 ternary alloy is still a semiconducting phase. Therefore, the electronic structure of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 single crystals compared to pure ZrSe2 was investigated using ARPES combined with DFT calculations as shown in Fig. Resistance vs temperature (RT) measurement was performed on Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 and ZrSe2, as shown in Fig. As considering the excess carriers in the conduction band can be created by the disorder effects via replacing Zr with Hf, which can't be observed in similar oxidation states atoms in any other way. It can be detected that the presented disorder can be created by the excess Zr in the van der Waals gaps and other forms of lattice defects due to the substitution of the Hf. This is called a substitutional disorder. This kind of effect cannot be seen in the k-space if not too severe, but the energy bands can have some excess spectral weight that can be counted in the spectral functions representing, in some sense, "smeared bands". It is suggested that these extrinsic n-type electrons can be observed in some particular atoms, which are sensitive to these kinds of disorders, as seen in Therefore, the excess electrons from additional Ti presumably enter both into  point hole pockets and the L/M point electron pockets of Ti, which can reduce the number of holes and increase the number of electrons Notably, it can be clearly seen in the band dispersion and FS contour plots that the electrons appear at the FL with Hf substitution due to excess electrons. Our study shows only the shift in the band structure and increased conductivity due to the excess electrons in the Zr d-band due to Hf doping. The Hf substitution on the Zr site can cause the disorder in the lattice by introducing excess Zr in the layers, which induces extrinsic electrons. The excess electrons enter the hole and electron pockets, reducing the hole number and enhancing the electron number. The excess electrons can increase the spectral weight of the conduction bands whose tail shows a rigid shift that can cross the FL. Furthermore, the VB moves to lower binding energy due to the reduction of the hole numbers. The extrinsic electrons can increase the carrier density, enhancing their conductivity and showing a metallic-like character. The electronic structure of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 in compression with pristine ZrSe2 single crystals synthesized by the CVT method is investigated through ARPES measurement combined with firstprinciples DFT calculations. We have found the weak metallic-like transition in ZrSe2 with Hf substitution. ARPES measurements and DFT calculations revealed the typical semiconducting behavior of ZrSe2, while Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 shows metallic character due to excess electrons. Interestingly, it has been observed that substituting a significant amount of Hf on the Zr site leads to creating extra Zr atoms, which can enter into the hole and electron pockets that can shift the conduction and valence band to the lower binding energy. Furthermore, the reduced bond length shows the lattice change with Hf doping. Moreover, from the ARPES results, we have observed that the overall system remains preserved, except that the conduction band's tail crossed the Fermi level due to extrinsic electrons. Similarly, the transport measurements further confirm the metallic character of Zr0.88Hf0.12Se2 due to excess charge carriers. These results highlight the importance of cation substitution-induced transition in 2D layered materials, which can enable these materials for future quantum electronics and valleytronic applications.