The full spatial 3D profile of Majorana bound states (MBS) in a nanowire-like setup featuring a semiconducting carbon nanotube (CNT) as the central element is discussed. By atomic tightbinding calculations we show that the chiral nature of the CNT lattice is imprinted in the MBS wave function which has a helical structure, anisotropic in the transverse direction. The local spin canting angle displays a similar spiral pattern, varying around the CNT circumference. We reconstruct the intricate 3D profile of the MBS wave function analytically, using an effective low energy Hamiltonian accounting both for the electronic spin and valley degrees of freedom of the CNT. In our model the four components of the Majorana spinor are related by the three symmetries of our Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, reducing the number of independent components to one. A Fourier transform analysis uncovers the presence of three contributions to the MBS, one from the Γ-point and one from each of the Fermi points, with further complexity added by the presence of two valley states in each contribution. Over the past decade Majorana fermions have been of great interest in condensed matter physics. Under special conditions they arise as quasiparticles in superconductors, 1 where they are zero energy eigenstates of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian and of the particle-hole symmetry operator. Theoretically such quasiparticles were predicted to appear in the elusive one-dimensional p-wave superconductors; 2 but it is also possible to engineer s-wave systems in such a way that they mimic p-wave superconductivity. In this work we show that the spatial profile of MBS can be derived analytically with good accuracy in a setup which uses a carbon nanotube (CNT) in proximity with an s-wave superconductor. Similar to the nanowires, such CNTs can host MBS at their ends. Geometrically, a single wall carbon nanotube is equivalent to a rolled-up strip taken from the two-dimensional honeycomb of carbon atoms that makes up a graphene sheet. The proximity to a superconducting substrate induces Cooper pairing in the CNT. The excitation spectrum of the system can be determined from the BdG Hamiltonian, where the superconducting correlations are treated in a mean-field approximation. In the microscopic model G. 1. Setup and bulk properties of a (12, 4) carbon nanotube with proximity-induced superconductivity. (a) Schematic of the system including the CNT which lies on top of an s-wave superconductor (SC) with a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the nanotube axis. The nearest neighbor hopping t ij,ss is spin-dependent due to curvature. The superconducting substrate breaks the rotational symmetry of the nanotube which induces a valley-mixing term in the Hamiltonian. Moreover it generates an on-site superconducting pairing term ∆0. The numerical values of the various parameters of the model can be found in Appendix A 1. (b) The low energy spectrum of the CNT consists of 1D cuts across the Dirac cones, with two valleys and two spin directions at each energy. (c) The single particle energy spectrum of a (12,4) nanotube in the vicinity of the Γ-point for a magnetic field of B ⊥ = 14T. Color scale shows the expectation value of sz for the corresponding energy state. A finite ∆0 induces in the k-space two superconducting pairing terms ∆s (k) and ∆p (k) whose action is indicated by the magenta and green lines, respectively. (d) The two superconducting pairing terms ∆s (k) (interband), and ∆p (k) (intraband), as functions of k. (e) The action of the particle-hole P, pseudo time-reversal T and chiral C operations on the components of a Nambu spinor in the real space. (f) The counterpart of these relations in the reciprocal space. The fact that P relates uτs(k) and v * τ s (k) follows from Pγ k = γ † -k . this corresponds to an on-site pairing term, The CNT alone has a crystalline symmetry of rotation by π around an axis perpendicular to the CNT (C 2 axis in Fig. ], these operators convert between the u s and v s components of the different states in the way shown schematically in Fig. The wave function of the Majorana bound state is given by r | Ψ M = Ψ M ( r), where |Ψ M = γM |0 and γ † M = γM is the Majorana creation operator. Here r = (z, r ⊥ ), where z and r ⊥ denote the longitudinal and the transverse components, respectively. The MBS is described by a spinor, T , with u M s ( r) and v M s ( r) the electron and hole components, respectively, and s indicating the spin degree of freedom. As detailed below, it is enough to find the u M ↑ ( r) components and use the symmetries of the underlying Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian to determine the rest. The first relation is a consequence of the fundamental property PΨ M ( r) As we will show in Section III, the MBS are also eigenstates of the chiral symmetry C, implying v M s ( r) = iu M,-s ( r). Finally, since C = T P, the Majorana state must be an eigenstate of T as well, yielding the last relation u M s ( r) = -iu M,-s ( r). The relations illustrated in Fig. In the nanowire/quantum dot setups where the character of the potential MBS is determined by analyzing its coupling to the discrete levels of a quantum dot, the spin canting of the MBS turns out to play an important role. The expectation value s z is zero because of the pseudo time-reversal symmetry. Knowing the values of s x ( r) and s y ( r) we can define a local spin direction in the plane perpendicular to the nanotube, The full 3D spatial profile of the wave function together with the local θ xy ( r) for our numerically obtained Majorana state is shown in Fig. The low energy Hamiltonian of a non-superconducting CNT in the basis {|kK ↑ , |kK ↓ , |kK ↑ , |kK ↓ } is given by where ξ τ s (k) = ε τ s (k) -μ is the single-particle energy measured with respect to the chemical potential μ, ε τ s (k) is the single-particle energy of the electrons (see Eq. (A4)), ∆ KK is the energy scale associated with the valley mixing and μ B B ⊥ is the Zeeman energy due to the perpendicular magnetic field B ⊥ . Diagonalization of this Hamiltonian results in four spin-and valley-mixed bands shown in Fig. In the eigenbasis of (2) with the two-band approximation the corresponding BdG Hamiltonian for our system is given by Out of the two superconducting pairing terms, ∆s (k) = ∆s (-k) is an even function of k, while ∆p (k) = -∆p (-k) is an odd function of k, see Fig. Then, the rotated BdG Hamiltonian is block-diagonal and the blocks are given by The quasiparticle energies ξ± (k) are The functions ξ+ (k) and ∆p (k) are sketched in Fig. Majorana bound states are zero energy eigenstates of the BdG Hamiltonian and of the particle-hole symmetry operator. From the behavior of ξ+ (k) we infer that the low-energy physics has three contributions: one from the Γ-point and one from each of the Fermi points. This ansatz is confirmed by the Fourier transforms for several azimuthal cuts (φ = r ⊥ /R = const) of the numerically obtained MBS wave function, shown in Fig. We will later take into account the 3D nature of each of these three contributions and reconstruct the 3D spatial profile of the Majorana wave function. For now we approximate Ĥ+ BdG ≈ ĤΓ BdG + ĤR BdG + ĤL BdG , where we make Taylor expansions around the momenta k = 0 and k = ±k F , with k F determined by the constraint ξ+ (k F ) = 0. The details of the calculation are presented in Appendix B. Crucially, the spinorial components of the solutions at each of the three k points are the same, which allows us to combine them into a single state which is also an eigenstate of both P and C. With the three contributions we can construct the 1D solution from the generic solution (5). It is characterized by an exponential decay governed by the imaginary wave vectors κ i (i = Γ, L, R). The coefficients can be determined by the three constraints From previous findings Therefore, the wave function can be written as These eigenvectors are not eigenstates of the particlehole operator P = τ x K, but we can multiply them by a complex number c ± = ±1 + i , such that they satify the Majorana constraint. Then, by applying the Majorana (6a) and the boundary (6b) conditions we get the 1D solution, which is given by where encodes the dependence of the wave function on the longitudinal coordinate. The sum ψ (z) + ψ * (z) satisfies the boundary condition (6b), and N is the normalization constant determined from (6c). The contribution from the Γ-point is a pure evanescent state and from the contribution from the Fermi points we get a decaying oscillation with the wavevector k F . In the remaining part of this work we will provide the analytical form only for u ↑ ( r) (dropping the M subscript for compactness of notation), since the remaining Majorana spinor components can be obtained by the application of P, T and C symmetries. The Majorana operator to create the state (5) is defined as In order to find the analytical wave function we need to transform the wave function from the one-band back to the four-band model; this procedure is discussed in Appendix C. To express the Majorana state in the sublattice-and spin-resolved basis we need the transformations reversing (A7), (A12) and (A18). At the end we obtain γM = k,τ,s for k ∈ {Γ, ±k F }, where the coefficients u τ s (k) correspond to the electron and v τ s (k) to the hole contribution, respectively. We find a compact form for the coefficients The coefficients g(k), h(k) and n(k), m(k) are found below, in Eqs. (A13) and (A19), respectively. By using the relations Finally, we arrive at the symmetry relations of the electron and hole coefficients u τ s (k) and v τ s (k) illustrated in Fig. We have now the expression of the wave function in conduction basis. In order to apply the boundary condition it must however be recast in the sublattice-resolved basis. In general for the transformation into the sublattice basis one needs also the valence band contribution. Here we can use the fact that, due to the high chemical potential, we are far away from the charge neutrality point and therefore the contribution from the valence band is negligible. With this the components in the sublattice basis are defined as u pτ s (k) = e ipη τ sk u τ s (k), where η τ s (k) = arg (γ τ s (k)) is the phase of (A2) in the lowenergy regime, and p = +1 for A sublattice and p = -1 for B sublattice. Since our nanotube is chiral, the open boundary conditions imply that the wave function must vanish on one end at the missing A atoms and on the other end at the missing B atoms. The amplitudes can be fixed by observing that the Ma-jorana condition requires the open boundary condition in longitudinal direction we obtain a relation between A R and A Γ ; hence the particle component of the wave function can be written as The expressions for u τ s (k) are given in Eq. ( In order to test the accuracy of our formula Eq. ( (ii) In the analytics we neglected some correlations due to the magnetic field. Further, we performed Taylor expansions around the three momenta k = 0, ±k F . Thus, the values κ Γ , κ F and k F from the analytics are slightly different from those which are obtained by fitting the numerical data using (13), see Tab. I. Analytics ( (iii) We implemented the valley mixing through a continuous potential ridge along the CNT/superconductor interface. This results in the coupling between the two valleys, but also in their coupling to higher transverse momentum bands which therefore also contribute, albeit very weakly, to the final Majorana state. In consequence, although we expect A R to be independent of φ, we ob-tain from the fitting procedure different A R for different φ cuts, with the resulting values of |A R (φ)| shown in Fig. In this work we have shown in a combination of numerical modelling and analytical calculations how to determine the full spatial profile of the Majorana bound state in a proximitized semiconducting carbon nanotube. The wave function has three contributions: one from the Γ-point and one from each Fermi point, which is also supported by an analysis of the numerical data via a Fourier transformation. We find the symmetry relations which must be fulfilled by the components of the Majo- rana spinor. The excellent agreement between the analytically obtained and the numerically calculated spin and sublattice resolved spinor gives us confidence in the accuracy of the local observables further derived in this work. Despite being obtained for a CNT, our results might serve as a reference also for other systems where a microscopic calculation of the MBS spinor is not possible. The features which our model captures very well are: the three main momentum contributions to the MBS, the decaying behaviour of the wave function combined with its spiral pattern, its oscillation and the symmetries linking the different components of the Nambu spinor. We show that our analytical model fits very well the numerical data of the wave function obtained by a tight-binding calculation. Our results will be useful for modeling and interpreting the experimental results in a realistic quantum transport setup where the properties of the Majorana states are probed locally. where K ⊥ , K are the transverse and longitudinal components of momentum at the Dirac point K. The quantum numbers τ and s are are defined in the main text. In the case of the (12,4) semiconducting nanotube, the numerical values of those momentum shifts in our calculations are ∆k c ⊥ = -22.83 μm -1 , ∆k c = 66.62 μm -1 , ∆k SO = -2.917 μm -1 , K = 0, and the lowest energy subbands shown in Fig. The value of k ⊥ for the K valley subband in our nanotube is -35/R, where R is the CNT radius. Note that the single-particle energies satisfy the time-reversal conjugation, ε τ s (k) = ε -τ -s (-k). The low-energy Bloch Hamiltonian (2) contains also the valley mixing and Zeeman field contributions, H = H CNT + H ∆ KK + H Z . Since the nanotube we are studying is of the zigzag class, and couples states with the same spin and k but opposite valley. Following Ref. 29, we set ∆ KK = 2.5 meV. The Zeeman effect with the field aplied along the x axis couples opposite spins in the same valley, The CNT Hamiltonian (2) can be brought to a diagonal form by employing two unitary transformations. More details about the transformations can be found in Appendix D.1 of Ref. [29]. The first transformation diagonalizes the Hamiltonian without Zeeman energy (B ⊥ = 0) and is defined as with a s (k) 2 + b s (k) 2 = 1 and the following values of a s (k) and b s (k), where the energy eigenvalues are Due to the time-reversal conjugation of ξ τ s (k) = ξ -τ -s (-k), it can be shown that a s (k) = b -s (-k) and Using equations (A7) the Zeeman term can be expressed as The magnetic field B⊥ couples the spins within the lower and upper band pair, while B ⊥ couples the spins between band pairs. Both are symmetric in k, i.e. B⊥ (k) = B⊥ (-k) and B ⊥ (k) = B ⊥ (-k). This is a consequence of the pseudo-time reversal symmetry. In the regime of small Zeeman energy, i.e. ∆E = |E +s -E -s | > μ B B ⊥ , the terms with B ⊥ can be omitted. This allows us to treat the upper and lower pair of bands separately. We shall proceed to find the solutions for the lower band pair only, assuming that the chemical potential μ is tuned into the gap between the two energy bands Ẽ1 and Ẽ2 . Therefore, we will neglect the influence of the bands Ẽ3 and Ẽ4 because those bands are not occupied. Then, the second transformation diagonalizing the Hamiltonian with magnetic field is defined as where the coefficients must satify g 2 (h)+h 2 (k) = 1. The new quantum number in (A12) i ∈ {1,2} just reflects the ordering of the energy bands E 1 < E 2 . The coefficients g and h are defined as The coefficients satisfy the pseudo-time-reversal conjugation g (k) = h (-k). Then, the single-particle energies of the full Hamiltonian with decoupled band pairs are The renormalized magnetic field opens a band gap at the Γ-point. The single-particle energies have the property Ẽi (k) = Ẽi (-k) with i ∈ {1,2} because B⊥ (k) = B⊥ (-k). This pseudo-time reversal symmetry for conduction band states results in the relation depicted in Fig. The pseudo-time reversal invariance holds exactly for our effective model Hamiltonian (2). For the real space Hamiltonian it is however broken by two effects, both absent in our four-band model. The first and smaller one is the presence of the Peierls phase. Including superconducting correlations on a mean-field level we add to the Hamiltonian a superconducting pairing term, A15) where ∆ 0 is the superconducting order parameter, which we take to be 0.4 meV. We can express the pairing Hamiltonian (A15) in the eigenbasis of the CNT (2) and, after applying the approximations and transformations described in Appendix A 1, we obtain the BdG Hamiltonian We see that the pairing term ∆s (k) has an even and ∆p (k) an odd parity, as shown in Fig. with the normalization condition m 2 (k) + n 2 (k) = 1 and the coefficients defined in the following way: BdG has three contributions, as illustrated in Fig. The first contribution is coming from the Γ-point. Therefore, we obtain from a Taylor expansion around the Γpoint ξ+ (k) ≈ ξ+ (0) + Now, we interpret k as the momentum operator k → k = -i∂ z and make the ansatz For the momentum κ Γ we need to solve the secular equation det ĤΓ BdG -E1 ! = 0 for any energy E and we obtain