This work performs a comparative numerical study of the impurity average selffrequency ω in an unconventional superconducting alloy with non-magnetic impurities. Two methods are used: the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm as a non-linear minimization problem, and a fixed-point iteration procedure. The unconventional superconducting renormalized by impurities ω is a self-consistent complex nonlinear equation with two varying parameters: the impurity concentration Γ + and the strength of the impurities c, for which its numerical solution is a computational challenge. This study uses an order parameter that corresponds to the high-temperature superconducting ceramics (HTS) with a well-established gap symmetry. The results reveal the computational efficiency of the non-linear minimization technique by improving the calculations of the ω computation when using a 2D parameter space ( Γ + , c), particularly in the unitary regime, where the imaginary part of ω is a complicated expression of those parameters; this allows to enhance the study of the universal behavior of this particular quantum mechanical state. The effect caused by non-magnetic impurities in unconventional superconductors play a fundamental role in the understanding of their physical properties when these materials are doped. We use an order parameter well established for (HTS) For example for Y BCO ceramics doped with Zn impurities, the transition temperature T c begins to decrease rapidly We know that for (HTS) the energy gap corresponds to a paired singlet quantum state with a d x 2 -y 2 symmetry, for example in hole-doped cuprate superconductors such as YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 and Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6 This work consists of five sections. The first section introduces the subject of the dirty dwave (HTS) and limits our study to an spherical (isotropic) Fermi surface with a line-nodes order-parameter of the one-dimensional representation B 1g of the tetragonal group D 4h . The second section explains shortly the ω formalism given by Mineev and Samokhin In the case of unconventional superconductors with a singlet pairing state such as (HTS), when non-magnetic impurities effects are added, the interaction Hamiltonian between impurities and Cooper pairs is given by the following expression: where U 0 is the interaction potential, ĉi and ĉ+ f are the annihilation and creation operators of the cooper pairs. When multiple elastic scattering of a Cooper pair occurs However, the fixed-point method has problems finding a proper ω . We consider the important case of weak disorder (restricting our calculation more). It means that at sufficiently low concentration of impurities, the condition k f l ≫ 1 where l the mean free path prevails and crossed Feynman diagrams are ignored. Physically, this means that there is no interference between scattered waves having different probability amplitudes. We further consider the dimensionless Planck units (h = c = k B = 1) for the whole calculation. Nerveless, the renormalized frequency ω does not depend on angle, but because of the elastic impurity scattering changes (elastic scattering is the only scattering process accounted for in our work). The dimensionless self-consistent frequency equation for ω in a t-matrix approximation is Where in equation ( in equation ( where We call equation ( We write the imaginary part of equation ( We used two different algorithms to find the numerical solution of equation ( and a minimization routine based on the non-linear Levenberg-Marquardt method Both were developed in a C language (Standard C11) The fixed-point algorithm The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm , where x = (x 1 , ..., x m ) is a vector, and each r j is a function r j : R n → Rn. r j is known as a residual (it is assumed that m ≥ n). f (x) in this methodology is represented as a residual vector r such that r : R n → R n where r(x) = (r 1 (x), ..., r m (x)). The derivatives of f (x) are written using a Jacobian matrix J. The methodology considers the case where every function r j is linear, the Jacobian is constant, and r represented as an hyperplane (a 2D space parameter in our case). ∇ 2 f (x) = JJ T is given by its quadrature, and it is obtained by solving the minimum when ∇f (x) = 0, in such a case it is found that which is the solution for the normalized equation ( Returning to the non-linear case, we have that the distinctive feature of the least-squares problem is that given the Jacobian matrix J, the Hessian ∇ 2 f (x) can be found. If this is possible, r j are approximated by linear functions where the r j (x) and the r 2 j (x) are small and the Hessian becomes ∇ 2 f (x) = J T J which is the same equation obtained for the linear case. This common approach applies to systems where the residuals r j are small (in our case a 2D ( Γ + , c) space parameter). We begin testing the two algorithms to find a solution for equation On the other hand, the Levenberg-Marquardt non-linear algorithm performs a minimization for equation (2) and accurately differentiates small and large values of both parameters: Γ + and c. Thanks to this algorithm, we are able to find the results showed in Fig. gives the maximum γ value in Fig. That means that for higher impurity concentration, the Cooper pair lifetime τ (ω) → 0 decreases faster when c → 0, giving that for values c ≤ 0.1 the probability of destroying the superconducting state by the impurity is calculated correctly. Nonetheless, for γ values with relatively small U 0 given when c ≥ 0.1, bound states still remain in the sample with a small τ (ω). Consequently, the imaginary part of the zero-frequency dispersion decays faster, implying that the average lifetime increases faster if the potential strength is not so small. Fig. As a next step, we display the 3D figure of the transcendental equation ( It can be seen from Fig. According to our interpretation, it doesn't imply that the quasiparticles lifetime τ (0) is infinite, just its physically nonentity. As soon as small finite values of the impurities concentration appears (Γ + ∼ n imp ), the 3D manifold emerges (Fig. At this point, we find the smallest lifetime τ (0) in the unitary regime and ω = 0 (a red colored neighborhood on the right side in Fig. straight line ω = ω -i γ(Γ + , c = 0). In this case ω = 0 has a very large potential (and a greater slope), with Γ + equivalent to the Landau Lifshitz parameter Γ mentioned in their Quantum Mechanical Book, Chapter XVII, section 132, equation 132.1 Moreover, as the interaction parameter c moves away from the unitary limit (with τ (0) → 0), the maximum of the disintegration probability Im[ω(ω)] decreases as the parameter c increases (the interaction potential U 0 decreases) as a function of the frequency ω. From values for c ≥ 0.2, its observed that the behavior is close to the Born limit, for which the value of the interaction potential U 0 is small in comparison with the electronic energy; therefore τ (ω) increases. Top frame of Fig. The bottom part of Fig. Bottom frame of Fig. that there is no residual density of states N(0) at zero frequency at it was shown in ref. [7] for HTC d-wave superconductors, and in ref. For the calculation of the DOS in this work, we use two Γ + values to test the non-linear minimization technique. This study compares and implements two algorithms to solve the imaginary non-linear self-consistent equation for ω in non-magnetic unconventional superconductors. As a main conclusion, this work states that the minimization algorithm Additionally, it was possible to obtain the inverse of the average lifetime τ (ω) and the imaginary part (disintegration probability) Im[ω(ω)] in Fig. Finally, this study emphasizes that the physics of the unitary regime in superconducting metals needs further clarification 