We investigate a model nanopore sensor that is able to detect analyte ions that are present in the electrolyte solution in very small concentrations. The nanopore selectively binds the analyte ions with which the local concentrations of the ions of the background electrolyte (KCl), and, thus, the ionic current flowing through the pore is changed. Analyte concentration can be determined from calibration curves. In our previous study (M ádai et al. J. Chem. Phys., 147(24):244702, 2017.), we proposed a symmetric model (surface charge is negative all along the pore). The mechanism of sensing was a competition between K + and positive analyte ions, so increasing analyte concentration decreased K + current. Here we allow asymmetric charge patterns on the pore wall (positive/negative/neutral along the pore), thus, gaining an additional device function, rectification, resulting in a dual responsive device. We find that a bipolar nanopore is an efficient geometry with Cl -ions being the main charge carriers. The mechanism of sensing is that more positive analyte ions attract more Cl -ions into the pore thus increasing the current. Also they make the pore less asymmetric and, thus, decrease rectification. We use a hybrid computer simulation method, where a generalization of the grand canonical Monte Carlo method to non-equilibrium (Local Equilibrium Monte Carlo) is coupled to the Nernst-Planck equation with which the flux is computed. There has been a growing interest in designing and fabricating nanodevices for the purpose of chemical and biochemical sensing on the basis of the peculiar properties of nanopores Another important feature of nanopores is that their walls can be manipulated via chemical treatment. Various charge patterns can be established along the nanopore Chemical methods can also be used to tether molecules to the pore wall that bind other molecules (ions) selectively. If these bound ions play the role of an analyte, and their binding events change the ionic current flowing through the pore, the nanopore can be used as a sensor. A lot depends on the nature and strength of the binding. If binding is strong, the analyte ions stay bound for a time comparable to the time of the measurement. In this case, detection of these ions is based on studying transient phenomena. One example is the case when the analyte ion is so large that its binding results in a detectable signal, a measurable change in electrical current (resistive pulse sensing If binding energy is weaker, the analyte molecules bind and unbind many times during the time of measurement. This results in a reversible binding process and a large number of binding/unbinding events, large enough to form and ensemble and to use statistical methods for quantitative analysis. In these cases, called ensemble methods, individual binding/unbinding events cannot be detected. Their effect, however, can be measured by relating analyte concentration to ionic current. Because we use Monte Carlo (MC) simulations to model the nanopore sensor and compute probabilities, we are obviously in the realm of ensemble methods. In our previous study The device function was the I/I 0 ratio, namely, the ratio of the currents in the presence and in the absence of X + ions. In that symmetric setup, I/I 0 was the only device function. In this extended study, we examine various asymmetric nanopore designs thus gaining an additional device function to detect the effect of the X + ions thus gaining a dual responsive device. This device function is rectification that appears when the nanopore is asymmetric in its structural features This work was considerably inspired by the studies of Ensinger et al. The paper of Vlassiouk et al. Nanopore-based sensors relying on selective binding of various ions to functionalized pore surfaces are abundant in the literature. The molecule that binds the targeted ion depends on the chemical specificity of that ion. For example, different active molecules are used for Li + In this modeling study, specificity of the binding potential is taken into account simply by defining the SW potential to act only on the X + ions. In the continuum water framework applied in this study, model parameters include ion charges, ion radii, pore radius, pore length, pore charges, ion concentrations, and voltage (here, we change only pore charges, voltage, and X + concentration). This modeling level including continuum solvent and hard sphere ions is especially appropriate for the nanopore sensor studied here for the following reasons. (1) Proper description of the competition between ions requires accurate computation of ionic correlations including their finite sizes. Computer simulation of ions with finite diameters in a non-equilibrium system, therefore, is necessary. Simulation is also useful if we want to consider complex geometries and interparticle potentials. (2) We need to simulate ions of very low (micromolar) concentrations. This requires implicit solvent. While Brownian dynamics (BD) would be an obvious choice We have proposed a solution for this challenge Our systematic study presents different combinations of positive, negative, and zero surface charges in the left and right regions of a nanopore. We present results for uniformly charged, unipolar, and bipolar nanopores. We discuss advantages and disadvantages of the various combinations and show that a bipolar pore proves to be the most appropriate design next to our original design (uniformly charged negative pore The nanopore is a cylindrical pore of radius R pore = 1 nm penetrating a membrane of width 6 nm (Fig. The right region, called binding region, contains the binding sites and carries σ B surface charge. Its length, H B = 2 nm, is half of the left region in this study. The surface charge is represented by fractional point charges that are situated on a rectangular grid, where a surface element is approximately a square of size 0.2 × 0.2 nm 2 . The magnitude of the point charges is established so that the surface charge density corresponds to the prescribed values, σ L and σ B . We investigated various combinations depending whether the values of surface charges take the value of 1 e nm -2 (denoted by p and red color in the figures), 0 e nm -2 (denoted by 0 and black color in the figures), or -1 e nm -2 (denoted by n and blue color in the figures). The value of the σ L charge is either -1 or 1 e nm -2 , while the value of the σ B charge can take either -1, 0, or 1 e nm -2 . That makes six combinations denoted by nn, n0, np, pp, p0, and pn. In the main text, we will use these notations without colors from now on. The electrolyte model is the "primitive" model that represents ions as charged hard spheres of charges, q i , and radii, R i : where ε 0 is the permittivity of vacuum, ε is the dielectric constant of the electrolyte, and r is the distance between two ions. Subscript i can take values i = +, -, and X, where these symbols refer to the cation of the electolyte (K + ), the anion of the electrolyte (Cl -), and the analyte ion (X + ), respectively. The ionic radii are R + = 0.133 nm, R -= 0.181 nm (Pauling radii), and R X = 0.3 nm, in this study. The concentration of the KCl background electrolyte is fixed at 0.01 M. The solvent is represented as a continuum background characterized by two response functions. One is the dielectric constant, ε = 78.5, that describes the screening effect of the water molecules. The other is a diffusion coefficient function, D i (z), that describes the ability of water molecules to affect the diffusion of ions. This function is space dependent in our case; it is a piecewise constant function that is different inside the pore (D pore i ) and in the bulk (D bulk i ). The bulk value is experimental (D K + = 1.849 × 10 -9 m 2 s -1 and D Cl -= D X + = 2.032 × 10 -9 m 2 s -1 ), while D pore i just scales the current without influencing the I/I 0 ratio. Following our previous studies In other studies, where reference was available, we fitted the D pore i value to experimental We placed the binding sites on the pore wall in 3 rings placed at z = 1, 2, and 3 nm. Each ring contains 4 binding sites where r is the distance of the site and the ion center. This short-range potential attracts X + with -ε SW = -10 kT energy once the closest point of the X + ion's surface is closer to the site than the distance parameter d SW = 0.2 nm. This model takes into account that the active site of the X + ion is usually on its surface while keeping the spherical symmetry of the ion (it neglects the possible orientation dependence of binding). The SW potential acts only on the X + ions in the simulations. In the NP+LEMC technique where T = 298.15 K is temperature, k is Boltzmann's constant, c i (r) is the concentration profile, μ i (r) is the electrochemical potential profile, and j i (r) is the particle flux density. The effect of the charge pattern on the applicability of a nanopore as a sensor -4/10 Solution of the NP equation requires a relation between c i (r) and μ i (r). Here we use the Local Equilibrium Monte Carlo (LEMC) simulation method that is an adaptation of the GCMC technique to a non-equilibrium situation. Due to its grand canonical nature, LEMC can handle small concentrations easily. We divide the computation domain of the NP system into volume elements, D α , and use different μ α i values in each volume element. Insertions/deletions of ions are attempted into/from these volume elements with equal probability. These trials are accepted or refused on the basis of the Metropolis algorithm The computational domain is a closed system (no periodic boundary conditions are applied). We apply boundary conditions for concentration (chemical potential) and electrical potential on the boundary of our cell that is a cylinder in this study. Different constant values are applied on the two sides of the membrane at the boundaries of the two half-cylinders as described in our previous studies In our previous study Here, the pore is asymmetric because of the asymmetric placement of the binding sites in only the right region. This choice reflects the experimental setup where binding sites are placed at the tip of conical nanopores We provide a systematic study for various combinations of the σ L and σ B surface charges and the effects of these surface charge patterns on the efficiency of a nanopore-based sensor, where binding sites that selectively bind the analyte ions (X + ) are placed in the right (σ B ) region. The left region is either n or p, while the binding region can be n, 0, or p. These six combinations denoted by nn, n0, np, pp, p0, and pn have been studied by performing simulations for varying voltages and X + concentrations. Figure Although the shape of the I -U curve can also be considered as a device function, we are interested in a more quantitative analysis. Therefore, we choose two representative voltages (±200 mV) and show detailed results for these cases. Figure The nn case practically corresponds to the geometry of our previous work The sign of the charge of the X + ion makes the difference between the charge patterns regarding the sign of either σ L or σ B . As a test, we performed simulations for the pp case (Fig. When the surface charges on the right hand side are removed (e.g., σ B = 0), we obtain unipolar nanopores, n0 and p0. These are rectifying pores, but their rectifications are so small that they do not provide rectification as an additional device function (Fig. In the p0 geometry (Fig. As expected, rectification appears as an additional device function when we create bipolar pores: np or pn. The np geometry (Fig. The pn geometry (Fig. In the absence of X + , this is mainly anion current, because the σ L region is longer than the σ B region. The ratio of the anion vs. cation currents can be adjusted with the lengths of the two regions, H L and H B . As the concentration of X + is increased, cation currents decrease because the X + ions outcompete the K + ions in the right region. In the meantime, the presence of X + ions in the right regions increase the concentration of the Cl -ions in the right region thus increasing anion current. All these effects are well visible in Fig. The bottom panels show the results for the cases, when the anions are the main charge carriers (σ L = 1 e/nm 2 ). In this case, the pn geometry shows considerable binding of X + ions for c X = 10 -4 M. They squeeze the cations out and attract anions in. This latter effect is the basis of sensor function. While in the nn case a c X -dependent competition between K + and X + ions was the basis of sensing the X + ions, here an attraction between X + ions and the charge-carrier Cl -ions is the basis of the c X -sensitive effect. This is primarily an electrostatic effect. The X + ions are attracted by the negative σ B surface charge, but only to the right region. The X + ions tune both the Cl -concentration in the right region and the asymmetry of the pore. This way, both the I/I 0 ratio and rectification can be used as a device function. Inspired by experimental works in the field of nanosensing We found that the pn geometry (making a bipolar nanopore) is an appropriate setup for several reasons. The analyte ions are attracted electrostatically (in addition to the square-well short-range attraction), so the pore is sensitive to the presence of the X + ions. The X + ions exert their effect on the main charge carriers (anions) by attracting them. Rectification is also a proper device function, because the pore becomes less asymmetric as more X + ions are bound. Rectification, therefore, decreases with increasing X + concentration. In this study we focused on the effect of charge pattern and fixed most of the parameters of our model sensor. In a subsequent study, we present results of extensive simulations for the pn geometry by changing experimentally controllable parameters (pore radius, KCl concentration, charge of analyte ion, and pH) in order to explore the capabilities of this seemingly promising geometry as a sensor.