For many applications it is important to measure the local work function of a surface with high lateral resolution. Low-energy electron microscopy is regularly employed to this end since it is, in principle, very well suited as it combines high resolution imaging with high sensitivity to local electrostatic potentials. For surfaces with areas of different work function, however, lateral electrostatic fields inevitably associated with work function discontinuities deflect the low-energy electrons and thereby cause artifacts near these discontinuities. We use ray-tracing simulations to show that these artifacts extend over hundreds of nanometers and cause an overestimation of the true work function difference near the discontinuity by a factor of 1.6 if the standard image analysis methods are used. We demonstrate on a mixed-terminated strontium titanate surface that comparing LEEM data with detailed ray-tracing simulations leads to much a more robust estimate of the work function difference. . The work function (WF) Φ of a material is the energy needed to remove an electron from the surface into the vacuum, i.e., the difference between vacuum energy and Fermi level Φ = E vac -E F . It is an important fundamental property defining, for example, the photoemission threshold probing electrons) start to interact with the surface. As E F is constant throughout the sample, WF differences cause a shift of the energetic position of the MMT. Measuring this shift of the MMT for all IV-curves in an area is widely used to extract local WF differences due to the good lateral resolution of LEEM This sensitivity, however, poses major challenges in the interpretation of the data that are typically overlooked in literature. In particular, at the boundary between two materials with different WF, the equipotential lines above the surface are curved, as sketched in Fig. In this paper, we show that these effects are unavoidable around WF discontinuities and quantify the magnitude and lateral size of the resulting artifacts in the determined ∆Φ by ray-tracing simulations. We lay out a methodology to extract correct values of ∆Φ by comparing experimental data with simulation results. We demonstrate this framework on the mixed-terminated surface of strontium titanate (STO) but it is applicable to virtually any material and geometry. To simulate LEEM images arising from a WF discontinuity, we perform ray-tracing simulations using the program SIMION 8.1.1.32 We take the non-ideal lateral resolution in mirror mode and the energy spread of the electrons into account by smoothing those simulated images with a Gaussian of standard deviation σ x = 10 nm and one with σ E = 0.11 eV, respectively. The sample consist of two materials, A and B, that exhibit a WF difference of ∆Φ which is simulated by off-setting the potential of the respective areas by ∆Φ. Identical to the experimental situation, we vary the total sample potential in the simulation to change the landing energy of the electrons. We reference E 0 = 0 with respect to material A, the large part of the sample shown in lighter gray in Fig. In the following, we discuss simulation results of two sample geometries. First, we study a single stripe of material A embedded in a homogeneous area of material B. Second, we simulate a geometry that we observe experimentally in a mixedterminated STO sample that consists of multiple, almost parallel stripes of alternating materials. In order to quantify imaging artifacts induced by WF changes, we start with the simplest geometry possible: a single stripe of material A with a WF of Φ + ∆Φ is surrounded by material B with a WF of Φ. In particular, we simulate LEEM images around the MMT and determine the resulting errors in the extracted value of ∆Φ, Figure In experimental LEEM images, these features correspond to dark and bright fringes that are regularly observed around work function discontinuities (e.g., Fig. To make matters worse, these WF-induced artifacts strongly affect the IV-curves and with this the extracted local work function as we will show in the following. We demonstrate this by deriving apparent WF differences ∆Φ app from the simulations following the procedure that is generally used for experimental LEEM data, where local WF differences ∆Φ app (x) are identified as shifts of the MMT in IV-curves [cf. Fig. In the vicinity of the discontinuity, the IV-curves show fieldinduced artifacts that affect the fitting result. (b) The ∆Φapp is extracted as the position of the MMT from fitting Eq. ( dicates, that this method is reliable for uniform samples. Close to the point of WF change, on the other hand, the shape of the IV-curves strongly deviates from the expected behavior, showing either a peak before the MMT or a slow decrease of intensity instead of a sudden drop. The exact shape of the IV-curves is determined by the deflection of electron trajectories by local in-plane fields, which depends on the electron energy in a non-trivial way. Since the resulting IV-curves deviate from the simple step-like behavior, the description by an error function is no longer valid and the extracted V MMT by fitting Eq. ( The minima and maxima in ∆Φ app shown in Fig. The total apparent WF difference in Fig. Not only is this artifact in the apparent WF large in energy, but also in its lateral extension. Figure Our analysis clearly reveals that extracting WF differences from the MMT is intrinsically unsuited for measuring ∆Φ close to points where the WF changes since every WF discontinuity intrinsically causes in-plane fields and thus, those ∆Φ app artifacts. Overall, this canonical method greatly overestimates ∆Φ and is particularly inadequate for small-scale objects that are typically investigated in LEEM. In the following, we demonstrate on an experimental data set how extreme this overestimation can be and introduce a more robust way to extract the WF difference between two materials by comparing measured LEEM data to simulations. For this purpose, we use mixed-terminated STO as well-defined test sample that exhibits nearly parallel stripes of different WF. The samples are prepared by annealing commercial STO (100) single crystals from Crystec GmbH in air for 12 h following the recipe described in Ref. A LEEM micrograph in Fig. In other words, the shape of the experimental IV-curves is affected by local in-plane fields around WF steps as discussed above. Figure A much more robust way to quantify ∆Φ of the two terminations is to compare the experimental data to simulations. To do this, we extract the spacing of SrO-and TiO 2 -terminated stripes from a line profile in Fig. As pointed out above, it is difficult to identify focusing condition d = 0 and the true landing energy in an experiment close to a WF discontinuity due to the distorted IV-curves. In the simulation, on the other hand, those parameters are well defined. We therefore select a set of profiles for different landing energies E 0 from the experimental data. We cannot yet know the exact value of E 0 but we know that the difference between different E 0 is correct and E 0 and the true E 0 can only differ by a constant offset E off = E 0 -E 0 . To determine E off we chose experimental profiles that span the full range of profiles from almost flat ones (deep in mirror mode) to ones with pronounced spikes (close to the MMT). Next we calculate the sum of squared residuals between the experimental profiles I exp (x i , E 0 ) and the simulated profiles ) for all positions x i and then add them up for all with the offset d off from perfect focus in the experiment. This yields an indicator of the quality of the description of the experimental data by a given set of simulations. In addition to the ∆Φ set during the simulation, SSR(E off , d off ) depends only on E off and d off and allows us to compare different simulations with the data set to decide which parameters best describe our experiment. We use this methodology to compute ideal E off and d off together with the resulting SSR for various ∆Φ (this requires to rerun SIMION for every ∆Φ and to extract image profiles I sim (x i , E 0 , d off ) for all the runs). The results are summarized in Fig. Samples that contain areas of different WF pose a serious problem for the quantitative interpretation of mirror-mode LEEM data. All WF discontinuities inevitable cause lateral fields that deflect slow, incoming electrons. Those deflections cause imaging artifacts such as caustics around the WF step as well as position-dependent deformations of the LEEM IV-curves. In particular, around the MMT, where electrons are particularly slow and thus vulnerable to lateral fields, the IV-curves deviate from the ideal, step-like shape. Fitting an error function to extract the local WF, causes characteristic errors that can be spotted in experimental WF maps as ridges and depressions around WF features. Note that here we only consider a WF difference on a flat surface. On real samples WF discontinuities almost always are accompanied by a step in sample height. The image deformation due to this geometric effect will complicate matters further 