Mechanical strain is a powerful technique for tuning electronic structure and interactions in quantum materials. In a system with tetragonal symmetry, a tunable uniaxial in-plane strain can be used to probe nematic correlations in the same way that a tunable magnetic field is used to probe magnetic correlations. Here, we present a new spectroscopic scanned probe technique that provides atomic-resolution insight into the effect of anisotropic strain on the electronic structure. We use this technique to study nematic fluctuations and nematic order across the phase diagram of a prototypical iron-based superconductor. By extracting quantitatively the electronic anisotropy as function of applied strain, we show that while true long range nematic order is established at the tetragonal to orthorhombic structural transition temperature, sizable nematic fluctuations persist to high temperatures and also to the overdoped end of the superconducting dome. Remarkably, we find that uniaxial strain in the pnictides significantly enhances the amplitude of the nematic fluctuations, indicating a strong nonlinear coupling between structure and electronic nematicity. Due to its strong effect on energy gaps, effective masses and scattering rates, strain has been used extensively to tune the electronic properties of semiconductors. Less explored but equally interesting is the effect of strain on metallic or semimetallic materials with strong electronic interactions. Such materials often exhibit electronic nematic phases that spontaneously break a discrete rotational symmetry of the lattice[1] and as a consequence couple linearly to uniaxial strain. Strain thus offers a unique tuning knob to study nematic correlations in materials, analogous to the effect of magnetic fields on a ferromagnet. Recently, elegant measurements of the strain dependence of dc transport [2-4] and optical Electronic nematicity is the spontaneous breaking of a rotational symmetry of an electron gas. Although not necessarily driven by the lattice, electronic nematic order couples linearly to certain elastic modes and, consequently, triggers a simultaneous structural transition. Nematic effects are observed in many quantum materials including 2D quantum hall states across the 122 While the existence of nematic order in the iron-arsenide materials has been convincingly demonstrated, key physics issues remain widely debated. A central question is about the origin of the nematicity, and its relevance to superconductivity and other phenomena. The second major issue is on the role of the lattice to nematicity. While symmetry arguments prescribe the form of the coupling of nematic order and fluctuations to applied strain, the magnitude and impact of the nematic-strain coupling remains unknown. This coupling is particularly important to elucidate unusual effects observed in the "para-nematic" state existing above the nematic transition temperature TS, which vanishes near optimal doping. Transport measurements In order to probe the relationship between mechanical strain and microscopic electronic nematicity, we designed an apparatus by which anisotropic mechanical strain can be continuously applied to a sample while atomically-resolved STM and STS (scanning tunneling spectroscopy) measurements are performed on the same area. We term the new technique Elasto-Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy (or E-STS). The chief technical problems to overcome are the incorporation of the strain-producing apparatus within the available sample space of a few millimeters typical for high-resolution cryogenic STMs; the design of the experiment to allow the same nanoscopic area of the sample to be traced while varying the strain; and the typical issues associated with multilayer piezoelectrics including drift, creep and noise, especially at high temperature. Our design is shown in figure We perform E-STS on the iron-pnictide parent compound NaFeAs We first discuss E-STS measurements performed on NaFeAs at low temperature (T=6K). In this regime the material has both long-range magnetic (stripe SDW) and structural (orthorhombic) order. Global constraints on the strain state, presumably arising from the details of sample mounting, mean that the orthorhombic order is not uniform across the sample. Instead, micron sized domains with near atomically sharp domain boundaries appear. The domain size presumably is set by the competition of domain wall and strain energies, and boundaries between domains have been previously visualized in STS imaging measurements In panels a-e of Fig. We can directly quantify the magnitude of electronic C4 symmetry breaking as a function of strain from Fig. The data in Fig. We now turn to E-STS measurements at 54K, above TS. Figs. 2a and 2b compare the STS images for our most negative (Fig. To interpret the high temperature E-STS data we first observe that experimental samples experience built-in strain, arising from sample growth, from the process of incorporation into the device, and from differential thermal contraction when cooled to low temperature. To reach a zero strain situation, external strain must be applied to counteract the built-in strain At high temperature we observe neither the hysteresis nor the nematic domains (see below for the temperature evolution of domain walls, and supplementary section SVI) that were characteristic of the response in the long-range ordered state for T<TSDW. In the low T state, strain only affects the relative areas of the different domains, but not the locally determined magnitude of the anisotropy. In sharp contrast, at high T above TS there is no evidence of domains and the local value of the anisotropy depends on the applied strain. The fact that for a certain value of applied strain the electronic anisotropy can be reduced to a nearly vanishing value at every point in a wide field of view is conclusive evidence that the electronic structure above TS does not exhibit long-range nematic order. This implies that the anisotropic data shown in Fig. Our observation that the magnitude of the anisotropy can be controlled by strain at high temperature is a key new insight that E-STS provides. We will show below that the intensity of the electronic anisotropy seen in STM is directly related to the amplitude of the nematic fluctuations. Thus our data show that the amplitude of the nematic fluctuations themselves are set by the strain applied to the system. Such a strong nonlinear coupling between the structure and electronic nematicity has not previously been anticipated, and indicates the importance of properly accounting for the structural degrees of freedom in any description of the electronic properties of the pnictides. To present the anisotropy in a form that can be compared more directly to theory we subtracted the FT image from its rotation by 90 degrees (see supplementary material section SIII and SV for details) to create difference plots (Fig 2e Having established the role of strain in the electronic anisotropy observed in STS, we present a quantitative measure of the electronic anisotropy as a function of temperature. To do this, we track a constant area of the sample as a function of temperature while keeping the externally applied strain to zero. Shown in Fig. We next use the temperature-dependent dataset in Fig. To understand the consequences of these measurements, we have developed a theoretical model to compute the QPI signal resulting from a Fermi surface reconstruction arising from either long-ranged stripe SDW order (at T<TSDW) or stripe SDW fluctuations (at T>TSDW) or a combination of the two. The model (see the supplementary material section SIV for details) involves a gap parameter DSDW parametrizing the amplitude of the fully coherent SDW order that sets in below TSDW, a gap parameter DLRA parametrizing incoherent SDW amplitude fluctuations (nematic fluctuations) at T>TSDW and the correlation length x introduced above. The results, shown in Fig We now study the entire doping and temperature phase diagram of the system NaFe1-xCoxAs. Fig. Our doping dependent measurements show that electronic anisotropy exists both inside (Figure In summary, we have introduced a new E-STS technique that enables investigation of the strain dependence of electronic properties with real-space atomic resolution. With this method we are able to experimentally distinguish between long-range electronic plus lattice nematic order (marked by the presence of domain walls and hysteresis under switching of strain) and purely electronic asymmetry due to fluctuations in the presence of strain (marked by C2 symmetry in the response to defects). We showed that the dominant source of electronic nematic response is antiferromagnetic (stripe) spin fluctuations and found that the amplitude of the slow stripe fluctuations in the paramagnetic phase depends strongly on the magnitude of the actual strain felt by the electrons. We note that the energy scale associated with nematicity observed in STM remains several tens of meV even on the overdoped side, indicating that there is not a direct proportionality between superconducting TC and the energy scale associated with nematicity. At the same time, our STM measurements show a clear decrease in the intensity of the nematicity as a function of increasing doping, pointing to an interesting intertwining with superconducting order. By extending our E-STS measurements to the optimal and overdoped range ironbased compounds, we can gain insight into the relationship between nematicity order, fluctuations and superconductivity. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation via grant DMR-1610110 (E.F.A., A.N.). Salary and materials support is also provided by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research via grant number FA9550-16-1-0601 (E.R., A.N.P.). R.M.F. and X.W. are supported by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy, under award DE-SC001233 6. X.W. is also supported by a Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship in University of Minnesota. and A.J.M. by the National Science Foundation under grant DMR-1308236. Work at IOPCAS is supported by NSF & MOST of China through Research Projects, as well as by the CAS External Cooperation Program of BIC (112111KYS820150017). Figure STM "#/"% maps were obtained using standard lock-in techniques with oscillation frequencies between 1.5 and 1.8 kHz. To generate Fourier space images shown in the main text, the following procedures are performed: We acquired a total of 68 LDOS images at a bias of +10 mV while varying the strain from -250V to +250V and back down to -250V. We manually line up the images with each other using the defect positions (which do not change with strain) and compile them to produce a movie. We outline below the procedures used to calculate the C4 anisotropy in STS images in Fig. where r̃ is the 90 degree rotation of r about the P direction and the prime indicates the sum over the smaller region of the average defect. In the presence of large numbers of defects where individual defects cannot be identified with certainty, as well as cases where the QPI signal is weak relative to other spectroscopic features present in the sample, we cannot directly identify the anisotropic signature due to a single defect experimentally without additional modeling. This is the case in NaFeAs at high temperature in the presence of strain (Fig. The relevant experimental quantity is the derivative with respect to bias voltage Vbias of the sample-tip tunneling current I (dI/dV), measured as a function of position r on the surface of the sample. In an ideal sample the measured quantity would have the full translational and rotational symmetry of the lattice, but in the presence of defects at positions Ri the measured quantity varies with position in a manner which is believed to be proportional to the defect-induced change *n(r,.) in the local electronic density of states (LDOS) at position r and energy .=eVbias. The LDOS in turn is related to the defect scattering potentials Vi by an electronic susceptibility R that encodes information about the electronic physics and is discussed in more detail below: Here we have assumed (as is the case in the experiment) that the resolution is on the scale of the unit cell size or greater so we may take the susceptibility to be translation-invariant and neglect local field corrections. For simplicity we also assume, following standard practice in the STS field, that each defect is point-like and gives rise to the same scattering potential and that the scattering is weak enough that a linear-response ansatz for the electronic response suffices. The physical information is carried by the response function R, which describes the electronic standing waves created around each defect. The interference of the standing waves from different randomly positioned defects creates complicated patterns. We have found by modeling situations with different densities that if the pattern associated with an individual defect cannot be isolated, the procedure of smoothing as described in section I above and then computing the difference of the image and its 90 degree rotation provides the best way to extract information about R. Model: We use a four-band model of the pnictide Fermi surface with two zone-center hole-like Fermi pockets, labeled by W X and W H , and two elliptical electron pockets, labeled by Y and Y. In the Brillouin zone appropriate to the single-Fe unit cell, the two electron pockets are centered at the The band dispersions of the two hole pockets are given in terms of a function h3_ `5 = -a while the band dispersions of the electron pockets are The parameters b = 4, a `= -0.17, _ `= -2, r = 0.12, a u = 0.32, and _ u = 0.4 are chosen so that the resulting Fermi surface resembles the Fermi surface of NaFeAs measured by ARPES To compute the effect of SDW order and fluctuations on this Fermi surface we follow Refs. The temperature dependence of anisotropy parameter results shown in Fig. with í ∞ = 40≤, í ~= 52≤, ê y = 20, | y = 0.14 and | ÇÉÑ = 0.052. To model the momentum space data we Fourier transform the real-space calculations and take the absolute value. The experimental QPI signal can be determined in one of two ways -it can either be determined from the FT of a single defect, or from the FT of a large area map that includes many defects. While the two procedures give similar results, they differ in some important respects. Figure In our temperature-dependent measurements shown in figure (b) To get even better statistics on the presence of domain walls, we scan multiple areas of the sample at each temperature. The fine scan limit of our STM is between 1-1.5 μm (depending on temperature) and we can futher move around macroscopically on the sample to different locations with coarse motors. We have scanned (conservative estimate) about 80 μm 2 on the parent compound of NaFeAs across tens of samples at temperatures just below (temperatures that range from 3-7 K below TS) and above (temperatures that range from 1-7 K above TS) TS. From our measurements just below TS we find that the average size of the domain is about 0.05 square microns. On the other hand, we have never seen any domains above TS in all of our measurements. If we assume a Poisson distribution of the density of domain walls, our observation of no domain walls implies that the probability that domain walls exist above TS (but we have missed them in all our measurements so far) is < 10 -6 . The temperature dependence of the anisotropy parameter in figure For the domain that disappears at TS, we can analyze the anisotropy parameter as a function of temperature up to the highest temperature at which the domain is observed. The results of this analysis are shown in figure 