For two-dimensional superconductors, the high stability in ambient conditions is critical for experiments and applications. Few-layer antimonene can be non-degradative over a couple of months, which is superior to the akin black phosphorus. Based on the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg theory and maximally-localised Wannier functions, this work predicts that electron-doping and Caintercalation can transform β-Sb bilayer from a semimetal to a superconductor. However, the stability of antimonene bilayer in air trends to be decreased due to the electron doping. To overcome this drawback, two kinds of protective layers (graphene and h-BN) are proposed to enhance the stability. Interestingly, the superconducting transition temperature will also be enhanced to 9.6 K, making it a promising candidate as nanoscale superconductor. Recently, few-layer black phosphorus (BP) as an emerging member of two-dimensional (2D) materials has drawn lots of research attentions due to its unique properties, such as high carrier mobility (up to 1000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at room temperature) In this work, using density functional theory (DFT), anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg theory, and maximallylocalised Wannier functions (MLWFs), the stability and superconductivity of electron-doped and Ca-intercalated β-Sb bilayer have been investigated. Our calculation finds that it will transform β-Sb bilayer from a semimetal to superconductor by increasing the carrier density. However, when the doping density is > 0.8 electrons/cell, the strong EPC would lead to dynamic instability of the β-Sb bilayer structure. To pursuit stable and superconducting β-Sb bilayer, two kinds of protective layers, graphene and h-BN, have been considered, which can improve the superconducting T C to 9.6 K. The electronic structure, molecular dynamics (MD), and climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) calculations have been performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) with projector-augmented wave (PAW) potentials A. Pristine antimonene bilayer Among all known allotropes of antimonene, β-Sb is the ground state of monolayers The β-Sb bilayer adopts the A-B type configuration (CG) [Fig. From their corresponding Raman intensity [Fig. Doping is a powerful method to improve carrier density in materials. To verify the maximum doping concentrations in β-Sb bilayer, pure electron doping will be tested first. Five doping concentrations (0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 electrons/cell) are considered here, and the corresponding maximal carrier density is about 6.6 × 10 14 cm -1 . After doping, the in-plane lattice constants and atomic positions are further optimized, and the A-B CG still owns the lowest energy. As expected, electron doping makes β-Sb bilayer transform from a semimetal to a metal [Fig. The calculated phonon dispersions and EPC constant λ qν for electron-doped antimonene bilayer are shown in Fig. To study the superconductivity of electron-doped β-Sb bilayer, the EPC constant λ is also calculated by summing over the first Brillouin zone (BZ), or integrating the α 2 F (ω) in the q space The obtained α 2 F (ω), phonon density of states (PDOS, F (ω)) and λ(ω) are plotted in Fig. Comparing with F (ω)'s, all α 2 F (ω)'s have similar shape, implying that all vibration modes contribute to the EPC and corresponding frequency region is very remarkable (red area of Fig. where μ * is the Coulomb repulsion parameter and ω ln is the logarithmically averaged frequency. When taking a typical value μ * = 0.1, the estimated T C and corresponding superconductive parameter are shown in Fig. When the doping concentration is less than 0.6 electrons/cell, all T C 's are under 1 K, and the effect of SOC is not obvious. The EPC is rapidly enhanced when more electrons are added to β-Sb bilayer and the SOC may also promote EPC. The highest T C can reach 2.6 K. As aforementioned, the strong EPC in electron-doped β-Sb bilayer restricts its doping concentration (< 7.0 × 10 14 cm -1 ). In the following, the superconductivity of β-Sb bilayer under the real Ca-doping conditions will be investigated. Considering the symmetry, there are four mostly possible configurations for Ca intercalation: AB-I CG [Fig. The calculated band structures without/with SOC for AB-I CG (AB-III CG) are shown in Fig. The phonon dispersion and corresponding EPC of AB-I and AB-III are also calculated, as shown in Fig. Our results for α 2 F (ω), PDOS, and λ(ω) of AB-I and AB-III CG's are shown in Fig. From above electronic phonon calculations, one can notice that the Fermi surface and phonon dispersion are anisotropic due to the remarkable difference between Γ -M and Γ -K, which may raise the question whether the EPC is also anisotropic. Hence, the proper treatment of anisotropic EPC based on Wannier function is adopted in following study. Moreover, the superconducting gap is also calculated, which is given by 31 : where Z(k, iω n ) and φ(k, iω n ) are the mass renormalization function and the order parameter, respectively. From this quantity, the leading edge of the superconducting gap for electron momentum k on the Fermi surface is obtained by solving for ω in Re∆(k, iω n ) = ω. The T C of superconductor is obtained from ∆ 0 = 0 at the highest temperature, while ∆ 0 = 0 in the whole temperature range for usual metal. To calculate ∆, the DFT band structure is fitted by using Wannier functions. The obtained superconducting gap of AB-I is shown in Fig. From Fig. In the end of this subsection, the way how to insert Ca into the interlayer of β-Sb bilayer is proposed. First, it is difficult for Ca to directly cross through the atomic gaps of β-Sb due to the large energy barrier (about 2.5 eV according to the NEB result). Even though, there remain two possible ways to insert Ca, i.e. using boundary and vacancy. By inserting Ca from boundary, our MD simulation indicates that Ca atoms could spontaneously go into the interlayer of β-Sb bilayer. However, due to the stronger interlayer interaction than those in graphene and h-BN, there is a large energy barrier (about 1.2 eV) preventing Ca's freely moving in interior at room temperature. By inserting Ca from vacancy of β-Sb, there are mainly three processes, including generating vacancy, inserting Ca via vacancy, and restoring vacancy. According to our MD simulation, Ca atoms could cross through the vacancy with the help of thermal fluctuation, but they could not spontaneously move in the interlayer, similar to above boundary-inserting case. Hence, additional driving forces (e.g. electric current) are required for internal moving within the interlayer of β-Sb bilayer, which deserve further studies. The superconductivity of β-Sb bilayer has been predicted upon Ca intercalation. The stability in ambient conditions is the first condition for experiments, which needs careful theoretical investigations. To simulate the Ca-intercalated β-Sb bilayer in air, here the interaction between O 2 and AB-I CG is studied using a 4 × 4 supercell. There are three most possibly adsorption sites for O 2 on its surface, as shown in Fig. In order to improve the stability and protect the superconductivity of Ca-intercalated β-Sb bilayer, two kinds of protective layers (graphene and h-BN) are considered to avoid the effect of oxygen or water (Fig. The dynamic stability of these two systems are also confirmed by phonon dispersion [Fig. In summary, using the first-principles calculations, it is found that different stacking leads to varying interlayer interaction and interlayer hopping parameter, which have great influence on electronic structure of β-Sb bilayer. In addition, electron-doping and Ca-intercalation can transform the β-Sb bilayer from a semimetal to a superconductor. However, the strong EPC would lead to dynamic instability of β-Sb bilayer, when the doping density is > 0.8 electrons/cell. Moreover, the stability of antimonene bilayer in air is decreased after the electron transfer. For further experiments and applications, two kinds of protective layers (graphene and h-BN) have been designed, which have little influence on the Fermi surface of Caintercalated β-Sb bilayer. More importantly, the superconducting T C is enhanced to 9.6 K with the help of these protective layers. 4 0 10 20