Since the experimental formation of a vortex with a fractional quantized magnetic flux in a thin superconducting s-wave bi-layer was recently reported, we calculate the local density of states (LDOS) around two half quantum vortices in a s-wave superconductor on the basis of the quasiclassical Eilenberger theory to investigate the effect of the phase discontinuity. We show that the LDOS pattern around fractional vortices is qualitatively different from that around conventional vortex. We find that the novel bow-tie-shaped bound states appear in the high energy region, which can be an evidence for the fractional vortices through scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy. We also show that the system with n fractional vortices with the vorticity 1/n has a similarity to the Josephson junctions. Recently, Tanaka et al. reported observation of fractionalization of magnetic flux Φ 0 in a thin superconducting Nb bi-layer The term "fractional vortex", however, has been used in two ways: fractionally-quantized-flux vortex and/or fractional-phase vortex. The former is the vortex whose magnetic flux is fractionally quantized and the latter is the vortex whose superconducting phase is fractional. In both cases, the magnetic flux of a vortex is fractionally quantized. Fractionally-quantizedflux vortices have been discussed in multi-component superconductors The observation of fractional quantized magnetic flux in the bi-layer s-wave superconductor does not necessarily mean the existence of the latter fractional vortex, a fractional-phase one, since the SQUID experiment can not measure the phase of the order parameter. Thus, another experimental measurement is needed to conclude which fractional vortex appears in the bi-layer s-wave superconductor. Through out this paper, we use "fractional vortex" as the fractional-phase vortex. The quasiparticle bound states around a vortex reflects the pairing symmetry. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the quasiparticle bound states around fractional vortices in swave superconductor. For simplicity, we consider the single-band isotropic s-wave superconductor with the two-dimensional isotropic Fermi surface on the basis of quasiclassical Eilenberger theory This paper is organized as follows. The model and method are shown in Sec. II. The systems with the isolated fractional vortices are shown in Sec. III. In this sec- tion, we consider the two half vortices and n fractional vortices with vorticity 1/n. The system with the two connected fractional vortices is shown in Sec. VI. The discussion is given in Sec. V. The conclusion is given in Sec. VI. We use the quasiclassical theory developed by Eilenberger, Larkin and Ovchinnikov We discuss LDOS ν( , r) for quasiparticles with excitation energy at each position r around fractional vortices. For our purpose, it suffices to calculate diagonal part (in particle-hole space) of quasiclassical Green function g( + i0, k) as a function of and the position on the Fermi surface (denoted by a two-dimensional unit vector k). The LDOS follows from g averaged over the Fermi surface where ν(0) denotes the density of states on Fermi surface in the normal metallic state. The equation of motion for g is called Eilenberger equation, which can be simplified by introducing auxiliary functions a and b defined by The auxiliary functions a and b satisfy which is Eilenberger equation in Riccati formalism ∆(r) the gap function. We use the analytic continuation iω n → + iδ when we calculate the LDOS. Since these equations ( There are branch cuts between fractional vortices. Crossing the branch cut, the phase arg(∆(r)) ≡ φ changes π/n. Here, n denotes an inverse of a vorticity (i.e., n = 2 with two half vortices). We consider two cases about a spatial dependence of the gap amplitude. In the former case, we consider "isolated" fractional vortices, where the gap amplitude |∆(r)| ≡ f (r) = 0 on the branch cut between each isolated fractional vortex as shown in Fig. (1)(a). In the latter, we consider "connected" fractional vortices, where f (r) = 0 on the branch cut between each connected fractional vortices as shown in We consider the system with the two isolated half fractional vortices. Here, the origin is at a midpoint between half vortices(See, Fig. where as shown in Fig. We calculate the LDOS with δ = 0.8ξ numerically as shown in Fig. In the quasiclassical theory, the equations of motion for quasiparticles running in a certain direction can be respectively solved since we assume the non-selfconsistent gap function as shown in Eqs. ( The features of the LDOS pattern in this energy region are that the low energy LDOS pattern is like a triangular shape (See, Fig. We show the energy dependence of the peak positions for the quasiparticles running in the Y -direction are shown in Fig. This feature is explained on the basis of the Kramer-Pesch approximation, which is appropriate in the low energy region. = - This Green function diverges at the zero energy (iω n = 0) so that the Andreev bound states occur at the zero energy at the origin. We consider this Green function as an unperturbed Green function. Let us expand the pair function ∆(x, y) = f (x, y) exp(iφ(x, y)) with respect to y near the origin. We can regard as f (x, y) ∼ const. when the inter-vortex distance is large. The phase φ is expressed as Here, δθ 1 and δθ 2 are defined as shown in Fig. Then, we obtain the pair function ∆(x, y) with respect to y: Here, ∆ 0 = -∆ ∞ sign (x) exp i π 2 . In the Kramer-Pesch approximation about a single vortex, the first order of the pair function is expressed as ∆ 1 = iy/x∆ 0 . Therefore, as in the Ref. This relation means that, with increasing the energy, the quasiparticle path shifts away from the origin, so that the peak positions of quasiparticle bound states also shift away from the origin on the X-axis. As shown in Fig. At the gap energy ∼ 0.3∆, the LDOS patterns change from that like the triangular to that like the ellipse. We show the LDOS with the energy = 0.4∆ in Fig. As shown Fig. Here, c 0 and c 1 do not depend on the angle θ. Therefore, the ellipsoidal LDOS patterns are in proportion to the energy in this energy region. In the high energy region, the novel quasiparticle bowtie-shaped bound states are found inside the conventional circular symmetric LDOS pattern (See, Fig. One can observe the LDOS pattern as the evidence of the fractional vortices in the high energy region rather than the low energy region. In the low energy region, the novel bound states are located between two half vortices, so that one has to observe it precisely. One can easily observe the bow-tie-shaped LDOS patterns in high energy region by STM/STS since the novel bound states in this region are larger than the two half vortices. The inter-vortex distance δ depends on the free-energy in the real materials. We investigate the energy dependence of peak positions for the quasiparticles running in X-direction as shown in Fig. We show that these novel bound states also appear in the the zero-core (phase vortex) model, where only the phase of the pair-potential spatially changes and the amplitude of that does not change. In the zero-core model, we can solve Eqs. ( Here, we use dimensionless variables as ω n /∆ ∞ → ω n , X/ξ 0 → X. We can solve Eqs. ( the general solutions in the system with the half phase vortices are written as b Bg (X) = -a Bg (-X), where c = 2 ω 2 n + 1. Then, we obtain the Green function from Eqs. ( where c = 2 √ 1 -2 and iω n → + iη (η → +0). Therefore, the inter-vortex distance dependence of the peak position on the X-axis is written as At the energy = 1/ √ 2, the inter-vortex distance δ diverges as shown in Fig. We also calculate the energy dependence of the Andreev bound states in the system with n fractional vortices with vorticity 1/n on the X axis to investigate the effects of the vorticity. We assume the zero-core model (phase vortex model) and consider the frame of the space as shown in Fig. The energy of the bound states is obtained by solving the equation written as Therefore, we obtain the energy of the bound states written as In the case of n = 3, 4, the bound energies are 1/4,ana = cos These results can be understood by the analogy of the Josephson junctions. In this limit, the quasiparticles running on X axis pass through the single vortex with vorticity 1/n. Therefore, we can regard this single vortex as the single Josephson junction between the superconductors with different phase of the pair-potential. The bound energy at the junction between two superconductors with the phase difference ∆φ = π/n is written as We consider the pair function of the two connected half fractional vortices is written as where As shown in Fig. We calculate the local density of states with two connected half vortices. As shown in Fig. We obtain the energy dependence of the bound states as shown in Fig. We do not solve the gap equation self-consistently for simplicity. In the real materials, we do not know whether the pair-amplitude on the branch cut is zero (isolated vortices) or not (connected vortices). However, we show that the appearance of the bow-tie-shaped LDOS pattern in the high energy region is robust against the spatial dependence of the pair-amplitude. This result suggests that the topological effects of the fractional vortices cause the bow-tie-shaped LDOS pattern in the high energy region. With the use of quasiclassical Eilenberger theory, we can separately consider each quasiparticles with certain momentum k. Therefore, we can suggest that the quasiparticles running through both half vortices form the novel bound states in the high energy region (∆ ∞ 0.8∆ ∞ ) in unconventional superconductors. In conclusion, we investigated the local density of states around two half vortices. We studied the isolated and connected two half vortices, respectively. We obtained the novel bound states in the high energy region in both cases. With increasing energy, the LDOS pattern changes from the triangular-like pattern to the ellipsoidal pattern. In the high energy region, the novel bow-tieshaped LDOS pattern is inside the circular LDOS pat-tern. We showed that the LDOS patterns by the numerical method can be understood by the enveloping curve of the quasiparticle paths. We also showed that the appearance of these novel bound states does not depend on the details of the gap-amplitude distribution. These results suggest that these novel LDOS pattern can be observed by the STM/STS. We also calculate the quasiparticle dispersion in the system with isolated n fractional vortices with 1/n vorticity. We noted that n fractional vortices with 1/n vorticity is similar to the multi Josephson junctions.