We propose and demonstrate a technique easy to fabricate and measure water depth based on selective mode excitation using single-multi-single (SMS) mode structure. The high extinction ratio has been achieved by equally exciting preselected modes of the multi-mode fibre (MMF) by optimizing the core offset at both the input/output splices of the SMS structure, and a wavelength shifting has been achieved by varying the ratio of major to minor axis of the MMF loop. A theoretical analysis of the observed behaviour is also presented showing an excellent agreement between the theoretical and experimental results. W AVELENGTH division multiplexing (WDM) is widely used to handle numerous data streams to increase the transmission capacity of data communication network Modal intereference effect in SMS structures has been extensively used to develop several optical devices such as G. Bawa, K. Dandapat and S. M. Tripathi are with the Physics Department, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India (e-mail: garimab@iitk.ac.in, krishnd@iitk.ac.in; tripathi.iit@gmail.com). G. Kumar is with Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 247667, India (email: gyaniitk@gmail.com). I. Kumar and S. M. Tripathi are with Center for Lasers and Photonics, Indian Institute of technology Kanpur, Knapur 2018016, India(e-mail: k.indrajeet@gmail.com; tripathi.iit@gmail.com) Manuscript received xx, xxxx. band pass/stop filters In a SMS structure, two identical single mode fibers (SMFs) are axially spliced with a small section of multi mode fibre (MMF) in between them. When both the splices are perfectly aligned, only first few symmetric modes of MMF get excited, with the fundamental mode carrying most of the power In Fig. In another arrangement, the SMS structure was mounted on rigid point and force was applied vertically along the loop axis. The length of loop axis was decreased along the applied force direction and there is a change in the major to minor axis of the MMF. The transmiaaion spectra were recorded for change in axis length from 7.5 cm to 7.1 cm and shown in Fig. In our analysis the transverse offset between the SMF-MMF at the input and output splice points has been incorporated by replacing ψ s (r) with ψ s (r-r in ) and ψ s (r-r out ), respectively. Here, r in and r out are the transverse offsets at the input and output splice, and in accordance with the experimental offset their values are taken as 2.7 μm and 1.5 μm respectively. The normalised modal fields of the SMF and MMF has been taken as The total power (P SM ) carried by the lead out SMF is expressed as ) Here, a in/out m is the overlap integral (calculated using eqn. 1) of the LP 01 mode of SMF with LP 0m modes of the MMF at the lead in/out splice of the SMS structure. In accordance with the experimental refractive index profile of the MMF, in our calculations also we considered a parabolic index distrubition of the MMF. The propagation constants corresponding to different modes in the MMF are given by Here, k 0 and n 0 are the free space wave number and the refractive index of the core of MMF, respectively. The parameter α m = 2/W 2 m , with W m being the spot size of the m th mode of the MMF. For the symmetric modes l = 0 and m has the values 0, 1, 2, etc. In our calculation, the core region of both SMF and MMF are considered to be made of GeO 2 doped silica with the dopant concentrations of 3.1 mol% and 13.5 mol%, respectively. The wavelength dependent refractive indices of core and cladding regions of both the fibres are calculated using the well-known Sellmeier relation where, (∂a M /∂l)∆l = (a M σ/l)∆l = -a m σε, σ is Poisson ratio, ε is the axial strain, n i and n 0i is the refractive indices of core/cladding with and without strain, ∆l is the elongation in the fibre, p 11 and p 12 are the strain-optic coefficients of the fused silica. The values of the parameters: p 11 = 0.12, p 12 = 0.27, σ = 0.17 Simulated spectral shift with the strain corresponding to the transmission minima for the wavelength range 1540 nm-1560 nm and its linear fit(black). shift. In agreement with the experimental results, theoretical spectrum also exhibits a linear blue shift with increasing axial strain, which has been shown in Fig. In conclusion, we present a new technique for water pressure measurement based on multi-modal interference effect in optical fibers by using single mode-multimode-single mode structure. This method is cost effective than other existing methods and is very easy to fabricate. Theoretical calculations are also carried out to explain the increased extinction ratio. A fair agreement is found between the theory and experimental results.