We have measured magnetization at high pressure in the uranium ferromagnetic superconductor UGe2 and analyzed the magnetic data using Takahashi's spin fluctuation theory. There is a peak in the pressure dependence of the width of the spin fluctuation spectrum in the energy space T0 at Px, the phase boundary of FM1 and FM2 where the superconducting transition temperature Tsc is highest. This suggests a clear correlation between the superconductivity and pressure-enhanced magnetic fluctuations developed at Px. The pressure effect on TCurie/T0, where TCurie is the Curie temperature, suggests that the less itinerant ferromagnetic state FM2 is changed to a more itinerant one FM1 across Px. Peculiar features in relations between T0 and Tsc in uranium ferromagnetic superconductors UGe2, URhGe and UCoGe are discussed in comparison with those in high-Tc cuprate and heavy fermion superconductors. Ferromagnetism and usual s-wave superconductivity are antagonistic phenomena since the superconducting pairs are easily destroyed by the ferromagnetic exchange field. The coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism both carried by the same electrons has been considered as a fantastic theoretical possibility since its prediction by Ginzburg Let us look other systems. Generally, unconventional superconductivity appears around phase boundaries of magnetic phases in strongly correlated electron systems Figure We used a high-quality single crystal of UGe 2 with residual resistivity ratio RRR = 600. The details of the sample preparation were reported previously The development of longitudinal magnetic fluctuations in UGe 2 has been suggested from NMR experiments , where N A is Avogadoro's number and k B is the Boltzmann constant. T 0 and T A can be estimated with the value of p s using Eqs. ( where g represents the Lande's g factor and Figure The values of T x determined in the present study are slightly lower than those by the resistivity measurement. This difference in T x might be related to two anomalies in the temperature dependence of the thermal expansion Figure The decreases of T C and p s under compression suggest a pressure-driven magnetic instability towards the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic quantum phase transition at P c We analyzed the magnetic data at 2.0 K using Takahashi's spin fluctuation theory. Figure We analyzed the magnetic data read from Ref. The drastic changes have been observed in the pressure dependence of A, γ, p s and Fermi surfaces at P x The ferromagnetism in the uranium ferromagnetic superconductors is carried by the itinerant 5f electrons Relations between T 0 and T sc in UGe 2 are discussed quantitatively. T sc is most sensitive to T 0 in the strong coupling theory for spin fluctuation-induced superconductivity high transition temperatures. The correlation between the two quantities has been pointed out in several strongly correlated electron superconductors and UCoGe The relation between T sc and T 0 is expressed as T sc ∝ (T 0 ) α with α = 2.3 ± 0.1 in FM1, which is contrary to the cuprate and heavy fermion superconductor where the linear relation has been discussed. This may reflect unique features in the superconductivity in UGe 2 . In addition, recent NMR and uniaxial compression studies have suggested the importance of transverse magnetic fluctuations in URhGe In conclusion, we have measured magnetization of UGe 2 at high pressure. The analysis of the magnetic data with Takahashi's spin fluctuation theory suggests that the superconductivity in UGe 2 is mediated by magnetic fluctuations with characteristic energy of 300 K developing around P x , the first order phase boundary of FM1 and FM2 where T sc is highest. The pressure dependence of T Curie /T 0 suggests that the less itinerant ferromagnetic state FM2 is to the more itinerant one FM1 across P x . Peculiar features in the relations between T 0 and T sc in uranium ferromagnetic superconductors UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe are discussed in comparison with those in high-T c cuprate and heavy fermion superconductors.