Recent experiments show the spontaneous breaking of rotational symmetry in the superconducting topological insulators MxBi2Se3 (M represents Cu, Sr, or Nd), suggesting that the pairing belongs to a two-dimensional representation of the D 3d symmetry group of the crystal. Motivated by these progresses, we construct an exhaustive list of possible two-component pairings of the MxBi2Se3 superconductors, both for the odd-parity Eu representation and for the even-parity Eg representation. Starting from a tight-binding model for the normal phase of Bi2Se3 and MxBi2Se3, we firstly construct the pairing channels in the spin-orbital basis, up to second-nearest-neighbor pairing correlations in the basal plane. We then infer the properties of these pairings by transforming them to the band (pseudospin) basis for the conduction band. A comparison with the key experimental consensuses on MxBi2Se3 superconductors shows that the true pairings should also be multichannel. Besides a nematic and time-reversal symmetric pairing combination, the other pairings that we have identified are chiral and nematic at the same time, which may be nonunitary and have a spontaneous magnetization. A complementary set of experiments are proposed to identify the true pairing symmetries of these superconductors and their evolution with the doping concentration x. The nature of the pairing of superconducting topological insulators, to be abbreviated as M x Bi 2 Se 3 with M representing a metallic element that might be Cu, Sr or Nd, has been mysterious since their discovery Multiple theoretical analysis have been made to account for these new experimental findings After a comprehensive review over the experimental consensuses on these superconductors, including their bulk spectrum, surface spectrum, and magnetic properties, we infer the constraints of these experiments on the pairing symmetry. The major conclusion of the comparison is that the pairing has to be multichannel, in addition to having two components. A purely nematic pairing combination in the E u representation can give a fully-gapped and two-fold symmetric bulk spectrum, fully-gapped surface spectrum, and two-fold symmetric electronic spin susceptibility. In addition, we find several chiral and nematic pairing combinations that can explain the key experimental results, in both the E g representation and the E u representation. The chiral and nematic pairing of the E u representation, besides breaking the time-reversal symmetry, may also be nonunitary and having a spontaneous magnetization. We finally discuss the implications of the present work to the future experiments, which are highly desirable to determine the true pairing symmetry of the M x Bi 2 Se 3 superconductors. The low-energy band structures of Bi 2 Se 3 and M x Bi 2 Se 3 (M denotes Cu, Sr, or Nd) can be described by the following two-orbital tight-binding model, defined on a quasi-two-dimensional hexagonal lattice The basis operator is taken as , where the a and b orbitals separately correspond to the p z orbitals of the top and bottom Se layers of the Bi 2 Se 3 quintuple units, with a certain amount of hybridization with the p z orbitals of the neighboring Bi layers The above model was obtained previously Here, the four NN bond vectors of the hexagonal lattice are δ 1 = ( 2 a, 0), δ 3 = (0, -a, 0), and δ 4 = (0, 0, c). The three in-plane 2NN bond vectors in d 1 (k) are a 1 = δ 1δ 2 , a 2 = δ 2δ 3 , and a 3 = δ 3δ 1 . The last and second last terms of H 0 (k) induce hexagonal warping of the Fermi surface and the topological surface states The dopants of M x Bi 2 Se 3 (M is Cu, Sr, or Nd) dope electrons to the system, so that only the conduction band contributes to the Fermi surface. In studying the bulk properties of a superconductor, it is easier to work with the band (pseudospin) basis and retain only the states of the conduction band where α and β are the two pseudospin degrees of freedom. The Kramers degeneracy relates the two bases via |k, β = P T |k, α . The two auxiliary bases are defined as and where the first and second two-component vectors are separately spinors in the subspaces of the original orbital and spin degrees of freedom. The unitary matrix connecting the two basis sets is For notational simplicity, we have introduced the following abbreviations in Eqs. ( The above formulae define the pseudospin basis for the conduction band states on the northern hemisphere of the BZ (k z > 0). For conduction band states on the southern hemisphere (i.e., k z < 0), the pseudospin basis are related to the pseudospin basis for states on the northern hemisphere by the symmetry operations: We introduce the new Pauli matrices ̺ i (i = 1, 2, 3) and the corresponding unit matrix ̺ 0 in the subspace of the two pseudospin bases. The reduced model containing only states of the conduction band is simply where the dispersion of the conduction band is We now construct the full lists of the basis functions for the E g and E u representations of the D 3d group, up to 2NN in-plane pairing correlations, consistent with the tight-binding model which is up to 2NN in-plane hopping terms We will first construct in the spin-orbital basis the full lists of pairing channels in both the E g and the E u representations, up to 2NN in-plane pairing correlations. Basis functions for the irreducible representations of the D 3d symmetry group can be constructed in terms of the Γ matrices or the symmetrized Fourier functions. Here, we define the 'symmetrized Fourier functions' as linear combinations of the trigonometric functions cos(k • l) and sin(k • l), where k is the wave vector and l represents an NN or 2NN bond vectors defined in section II. Full lists of these basis functions exist in previous works To be self-contained, we include them in Table and We have introduced the abbreviation k ± = k x ± ik y . If we extend to include the inter-quintuple-layer pairings, we can replace φ 0 (k) with However, we will focus on the intra-quintuple-layer pairings in this work. By multiplying the basis functions in Table constraints, together with the time-reversal symmetry of the materials, eliminate many combinations. If a basis set is taken as the superconducting pairing term, then it has to satisfy the Fermi exchange statistics. Another important aspect about the symmetry of the pairing term is related to the peculiar transformation property of the pairing term under the time-reversal operation where the superscript 'T' means taking the transpose, and H.c. means the Hermitian conjugate of the first term. According to Blount transforms in the same manner as φ k under the action of the D 3d symmetry group and the time-reversal operation the matrix has the same transformation property as the terms in the model for the normal state electronic structures. As a result, we can construct the basis functions according to the general procedure for the normal state ] instead, then the pairing term will be in the form of Eq.( The resulting basis sets (up to 2NN in-plane pairing correlations) for the E g and E u representations are separately shown in Table where both μ and ν run from 1 to 5. Note that, we have multiplied a factor of σ 0 ⊗ is 2 to each component of the basis sets. To get the final expressions for the pairing components, we have to multiply back a factor of σ 0 ⊗ (-is 2 ) to each component listed in the tables Basis functions for the even-parity twodimensional representation Eg, expressed as linear combinations of products between the Γ matrices and the symmetrized Fourier functions. The first column is the numbering of the various pairing channels. The second and third columns are separately the two components of the corresponding basis sets. The symmetry channels listed in Table u are completely k-independent. This is the pairing channel that has attracted the most attention as a promising candidate for the nematic pairing in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 u is spin-singlet in the spin-orbital basis. According to a theorem by Yip and Garg, the most general pairing can be written as a linear combination of all independent basis sets of the representation (η 1 , η 2 ) is the same vector for all seven E g pairing channels, so that the order parameter transforms as a welldefined vector in the subspace of the E g representation. Similarly, the general pairing in the E u representation is written as Again, (η 1 , η2 ) are the same vector for all twelve E u pairing channels. Notice that, we have restricted the pairing to the same (i.e., E u or E g ) irreducible representation of the symmetry group. The superconducting state with mixed even-parity and odd-parity components, which was found to stabilize under suitable circumstances Among the pairing combinations contained in Eqs.( u and E The even-parity E g channels have attracted much less attention. The only theoretical paper focusing on the even-parity pairings studied the leading pairing instabilities resulting from the purely repulsive short-range electron-electron interactions (1) g , and E (3) g . In all these three E g channels, the difference between the two basis components comes completely from the k-dependent symmetry factors. The nature of the pairing defined by Eq.( is a nonzero and finite complex number. To understand the properties of various pairings, we turn from the spin-orbital basis to the band (pseudospin) basis A pairing wave function (i.e., superconducting order parameter) expressed as ∆(k) in the original spin-orbital basis transforms to in the pseudospin basis A. The Eg pairings First consider the E g representation. Define ), and define the Pauli matrices in the pseudospin basis as ̺ i (i = 0, 1, 2, 3). In terms of Eq.( While only three (i.e., E g , E g , and E (3) g ) out of the seven channels listed in Table (1) g and E (2) g in the spin-orbital basis, the symmetry factors of the two basis components of E x -k 2 y and -2k x k y in the band (pseudospin) basis, qualitatively the same as the corresponding basis components of E g is identical to E (1) g , and E (3) g (3) g were incorrectly identified as belonging to the E u representation To understand the qualitative properties of the various pairing channels, we consider each pairing channel separately. That is, we assume that only one among the seven ∆ α parameters in Eq.( x + k 2 y a. For states lying on the Fermi surface, we have and M (k) vary only slightly over states on the Fermi surface, and so does E k (1) g is of the order (ka) 2 . E (2) g and E g . The superconducting gaps of E (4,5,6) g are all in the order of (ka) 4 and are two powers smaller than (ka) 2 . For c z (k) = 0, the superconducting gap for E (3) g is also in the order of (ka) 4 . However, the two components of E ing the superconducting gap. The angular dependence of the pairing amplitudes on the k x k y plane, which was neglected in the above analysis in terms of the ka factor, can be obtained from Eqs.( Among the seven pairing channels in Table (3) g can give SABSs on the natural xy surface of the M x Bi 2 Se 3 superconductors. As regards the topological surface states of the normal phase, according to a previous theoretical study g is special as regards the surface properties. The surface states for the E (3) g pairings were studied in a previous work We next study the pairings belonging to the E u representation. We define Γ ′ μν = Γ μν (-iσ 0 ⊗ s 2 ) for μ, ν = 1, ..., 5 and μ < ν. As have been noticed in previous studies, the E u channel, which is k-independent in the spin-orbital basis, has a complicated k-dependence in the band (pseudospin) basis u is a direct product of Γ 35 which belongs to the A 1u representation (Table The k-dependence of the terms in the results are suppressed to simplify the notations. In contrast to the salient two-fold anisotropy in the spin structure factors in the two bases for E u , the spin structure factors for E The symmetrized Fourier functions for the remaining E u channels are all odd functions of k. The properties of these pairing channels can also be understood by combining the symmetry factors and the expressions of the remaining six Γ-matrices in the pseudospin basis. By straightforward applications of Eq.( ) Again, the k-dependence of the terms in the results are suppressed. The expression multiplying ̺ 3 in the third line of Eq.( The transformations in Eqs.( There is an interesting relation among the six basis transformations in Eqs. ( Note that I 4 + Γ 5 = I 4 + P , which underlies the above combinations, is the projection operator to the evenparity subspace in the spin-orbital basis. Eqs. ( Although more complex than Eqs.( u }, {E u , E where the (η 1 , η2 ) vector does not change, ∆1p = ( ∆5 + ∆6 )/2 and ∆1m = ( ∆5 -∆6 )/2. Hereafter, we consider u to E u in Table , and . The topological surface states inherited from the normal state may or may not open a gap at the Fermi level in the superconducting phase, depending both on the nature of the bulk pairing and on the nature of the topological surface states. A full list of the pairings that open a gap in the topological surface states of Bi 2 Se 3 was constructed previously u , E u , and E (4) u cannot gap the topological surface states. On the other hand, all the remaining pairings can at least partially gap the topological surface states. For example, ψ 1 can gap all the topological surface states at the Fermi level, except for the crossing points between the topological surface states at the Fermi level and the lines determined by φ 2 (k) = 0. To infer the qualitative behaviors of the electronic spin susceptibility relevant to the Knight shift experiment, we reformulate the pairing defined by Eq.( where d 0 (k) is the pseudospin-singlet component of the pairing, ) is a threecomponent vector for the pseudospin-triplet part of the pairing, and ̺ = (̺ 1 , ̺ 2 , ̺ 3 ). From the above results, we have d(k) = (0, 0, 0) for the even-parity E g pairings and d 0 (k) = 0 for the odd-parity E u pairings. The d(k) vector of an E u pairing is perpendicular to the spin direction of the corresponding Cooper pair (1) u channel break the spin rotational symmetry in the xyplane to two-fold symmetry. It is also clear that both E (2) u and E (3) u respect the spin rotational symmetry in the xy plane. For E (4) u , while the two Γ-matrices that are contained in each channel breaks the spin rotational symmetry in the xy-plane, the linear combination restores this symmetry. E In this section, we first make a survey over the main experimental consensuses on the three superconductors. Then we combine the results in the previous section to infer the most probable pairings for the three superconductors. To be clear, we categorize the relevant experiments on the M x Bi 2 Se 3 (M is Cu, Sr, or Nd) superconductors into three broad classes, which separately probe the bulk spectrum, the surface spectrum (along the natural xy surface parallel to the basal plane), and the magnetic properties. Since both the bulk spectrum and the surface spectrum influence the magnetic properties, this division is by no means absolute. For the bulk spectrum, both Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 For the surface spectrum, the situation is rather confusing, for all three superconductors. While several early experiments, in particular those based on point-contact spectroscopy, claim to have found evidence of SABSs for Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 For the magnetic properties, Nd x Bi 2 Se 3 was reported to have spontaneous magnetization in the superconducting phase In the light of the above survey, the most wellestablished experimental feature is the two-fold rotational symmetry in the basal plane, for all three superconductors. This two-fold symmetry has two incarnations, (1) in the electronic spin susceptibility, and (2) in the momentum-dependence of the superconducting gap amplitude. As we explain below, these two aspects of the two-fold symmetry are independent of each other. (1) u is the most well-known candidate for the two-fold symmetry in the electronic spin susceptibility (1) u channel should therefore decrease slightly for an out-ofplane magnetic field The two-fold symmetry in the k-dependence of the superconducting gap amplitudes could be explained by the nematic realization of E u or E g . E (2m) u and E (3m) u also result in two-fold symmetry in the k x k y plane. But the (ka) 5 dependence of their pairing amplitude implies that they are unlikely the leading pairing instability. The remaining channels in Table (1) u . Now we consider further constraints imposed by the nodal structures of the bulk spectra. For both Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 ψ( u is the only pairing component in Table u ) give true nodes to the bulk spectrum, for both spheroidal and corrugated cylindrical Fermi surfaces. For several of the pairing channels other than E (4p) u , we can also get a fully-gapped bulk spectrum by forming chiral combinations of the two pairing components, for suitable Fermi surface topology. These channels include E u have more complicated behaviors. For a spheroidal Fermi surface, the purely chiral combinations of the two components of E (1) u have two point nodes at the k x = k y = 0 points of the Fermi sur-face (1) u channel can explain the two-fold symmetry and bulk spectrum with (real or approximate) point nodes, the complexity of the Fermi surface of this compound complicates the comparison To get a fully-gapped bulk spectrum with two-fold symmetry in the superconducting gap amplitude, in terms of a multichannel pairing in the E g representation, the (η 1 , η 2 ) vector in Eq.( (1) g , or E (2) g , or E (1) g (2) g , or E Finally, it is interesting to notice that several pairing channels in Table From the analysis of the previous section, the available experiments have imposed stringent constraints on the true pairing symmetries of the M x Bi 2 Se 3 (M is Cu, Sr, or Nd) superconductors. In particular, they point to the multichannel two-component pairings. These experiments, on the other hand, do not provide sufficient and consistent information to unambiguously identify the true pairing symmetry of these superconductors. In particular, for each of the three superconductors, the parameter x defines a series of superconductors which might have qualitatively different Fermi surface topology in the normal state and different pairing symmetries in the superconducting state. This doping dependence has not been systematically investigated for any of three superconductors, although the phase diagram of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 exists Based on the survey over the experimental consensuses and the comparison with the possible pairing channels, the relevant properties and the experiments that may be performed to probe them include: (1) The evolution of the Fermi surface with the doping concentration x. The magnetic oscillation experiments, including the Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation and the de Haas-van Alphen effect, can probe the Fermi surface contour in the normal phase For each member of the three series of superconductors, a systematic study of the above experiments should be able to identify the genuine pairing symmetry. From the breadth of the experimental tools involved, extensive experimental collaborations by sharing the same highquality samples are highly desirable. Besides the experiments listed above, other experiments which may probe further implications of the candidate pairings would also be of great potential interest. For example, as a natural consequence of the twocomponent nature of the pairing, the domain structure should exist in the superconducting state. Although most of the multichannel two-component pairings inferred from the analysis of the previous section do not support SABSs on the xy surface, all the E u pairings should give ABSs as domain wall states for domain walls parallel to the z axis, because the superconducting order parameters are odd functions of k x and k y in the pseudospin basis. Evidence of domains was reported in the experiment of Yonezawa et al Starting from a tight-binding model for the normal state electronic structures, we have constructed the full lists of two-component pairings for M x Bi 2 Se 3 (M is Cu, Sr, or Nd). We then transform the pairings to the pseudospin basis, based on which we study their qualitative properties. Comparisons to the main experimental consensuses on these superconductors show that the true pairing symmetry for them has to be multichannel, in addition to having two components. Besides a timereversal symmetric nematic pairing belonging to the E u representation, we identify chiral and nematic pairings in both the E g and the E u representations. However, for all three superconductors, the existing experiments are insufficient to unambiguously determine the nature of the superconducting state. In particular, the studies on the dependence of the Fermi surface and the superconducting properties on the doping concentration x are inadequate for all three superconductors. A complementary set of experiments is suggested to identify unambiguously the genuine pairing symmetries of the three superconducting electron-doped Bi 2 Se 3 .