We describe a resonantly enhanced Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) that can be operated over a wide temperature range of 55 o C without being actively biased, while providing a significant resonant enhancement of 6.8 at the nominal wavelength / temperature compared to a linear MZM driven with a distributed driver. More importantly, it enables a ~20X improvement in power consumption compared to a 50 W matched linear travelling wave modulator with comparable phase shifter technology, drive voltage and output optical modulation amplitude. Passive biasing of the Mach-Zehnder interferometer is further implemented by replacing a splitter element in the MZM with a novel device combining splitting and fiber coupling functionalities in a single, multi-modal structure, that converts permanent fiber placement into a phase correction. Both concepts are combined in a single modulator device, removing the need for any type of active control in a wide temperature operation range. Reducing the power consumption of electro-optic transceivers in data centers has become a key objective on par with the reduction of manufacturing cost: Since interconnects have been estimated to consume 23% of the total datacenter energy intake Travelling wave (TW) modulators can make up a substantial portion of an electro-optic transmitter's power consumption, which has motivated the investigation of alternative modulator and driver topologies enabling a significant reduction of the required power. Distributed drivers are one such alternative In addition to the RF power consumption, additional power is associated to the stabilization of the modulators against temperature changes and process bias: Silicon possesses a relatively high thermo-optic coefficient of 1.87e-4 RIU/K at room temperature For the aforementioned reasons, a lumped element, resonantly enhanced device that does not require dynamic tuning and that can be fabricated in a standard silicon photonics fabrication line would be highly desirable. Here, we combine two techniques to achieve this objective: We have previously shown that multi-mode fiber/laser-to-chip couplers initially developed to relax alignment tolerances In In a parallel single mode optics (PSM) transceiver, this varying phase at the output of the coupler is irrelevant, since the light is never recombined: One seeks to guarantee a minimum power in any of the downstream parallel communication channels (obtained by further splitting of the light). In Adequacy of this technique is contingent on a few elements: The fiber position can be assumed to be reliably fixed in place since packaging based on UV curable epoxy is an established technology. Moreover, the couplers themselves can be designed to be sufficiently temperature tolerant so that their functionalities, 3 dB splitting and a fixed phase offset at the output, is maintained over a wide temperature range. However, one also has to assume that the mismatch of the interferometer is of a sufficiently low order for the static correction of a fixed phase term to rebalance it over all relevant temperatures and wavelengths (which is easy to verify or to invalidate for a given interferometer). Lastly, one has to assume that the phase mismatch occurring in the two arms of the interferometer does not drift over time due to additional effects, such as for example the diffusion of fixed charges in surrounding dielectrics, that can not only cause losses, but also effective index changes The concept of the alignment tolerant grating coupler is shown in Fig. The concept of the entire MZI is illustrated in Fig. As seen in figure A number of other techniques have been shown to modify the bias point of passive interferometers or resonant devices. These comprise local oxidation of the waveguide The phase shifters in the MZM are implemented in the form of collectively driven, highly overcoupled RRMs loaded on a common bus waveguide where ! &' , ! "#$ are the field amplitudes in the bus waveguide, respectively before and after the ring, 1, 2 are respectively the average wave number and linear losses inside the ring, 3 is the finesse given as the ratio of the FSR to the full width at half maximum (FWHM) and 4 is the circumference of the ring. Thus, it can be seen that the ring behaves as a linear waveguide whose length 4 has been demultiplied by a factor 23 6, hence the resonant enhancement factor applied to an embedded phase shifter section. Importantly, in the absence of excess losses due to e.g. waveguide bends or excess losses in the ring to waveguide coupling junction, the 7 / 4 • 2 figure of merit of the phase shifter remains unchanged, wherein 7 / 4 is the drive voltage required to achieve a phase shift of 6 in a phase shifter of length 4. In order to obtain a high optical bandwidth, an increased FWHM and thus a reduced resonator quality (Q-)factor are required. This also reduces the resonant enhancement factor 23 6 (assuming the embedded phase shifter to cover the entire circumference) since the finesse scales as the opposite of the FWHM. This can be compensated by increasing the FSR, i.e., reducing the circumference 4 of the ring (this ought to make sense intuitively, as the capacitance of the embedded phase shifter, and thus its power consumption, scales with its length). While this is conceptually simple, its reduction to practice is quite tricky: As the circumference shrinks, the sensitivity of the device to increased coupling losses rises (since the excess losses are distributed over the waveguide length to convert them into effective waveguide losses). In addition, bending losses go up, also contributing to increase 7 / 42. Finally, it becomes increasingly difficult to obtain sufficiently high coupling strengths over shrinking distances in order to maintain the high overcoupling regime required to spoil the resonator Q-factor without incurring excess losses. The design problem can thus be formulated as shrinking the device, while minimizing excess losses to maintain the same 7 / 42 and sufficiently overcoupling the ring. A diagram and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated waveguides (prior to back-end-of-line fabrication) can be seen in Figs. As mentioned above, excess losses occurring at the waveguide to ring junction are critical in order to avoid spoiling the 7 / 42 of the phase shifter. In order to reduce these, a wiggle was introduced in the bus waveguide shape in order to smoothly taper the gap size The factor 6.8 reported above essentially corresponds to the reduction in RF power consumption associated to the signal delivered to the modulator, as compared to a linear modulator with identical PIN junction design (embedded in high confinement, 400 nm wide waveguides) and sized to have identical modulation penalty. The insertion losses of the resonantly enhanced modulator, 1.2 dB higher than the equivalent linear modulator, however also have to be factored in to yield a fair comparison. Increasing the drive voltage from 2 V pp to 2.7 V pp would for example compensate for these additional insertion losses, provided the driver technology is able to support such a voltage increase, resulting in a reduced effective power enhancement slightly below 4. From this perspective, the improvement of the device seems very modest, particularly in view of the remaining thermal sensitivity. This would however be missing the main improvement, as the comparison above is really between the resonantly enhanced modulator and an equivalent linear modular, assuming it can be driven as a lumped element, which, with a cumulative length of > 500 μm would not be the case at RF frequencies above a few GHz. Thus, in order for this comparison to hold, the linear modulator would need to be driven by a distributed driver. In other words, the resonantly enhanced device provides the benefits of lumped element driving without requiring a distributed driver. Compared to a TW wave device, the ~8.1 mW required by the resonantly enhanced device at 25 Gbps assuming a 3 V pp drive voltage is a very substantial improvement (20X compared to a dual drive, 50 W, linear TW MZM driven with a 2 V pp signal taking into account the reduction of the drive signal due to lower insertion losses). The improved temperature tolerance should also be discussed: In Fortunately, this can be improved by increasing the number of rings loaded on each of the modulator arms, with the only penalty being, at moderate increase, a corresponding increase in power consumption, which, starting from ~8 mW is quite acceptable. Practical difficulties associated to increasing the number of rings are expected to be related to driving the increased capacitance, for example increasing the difficulty of designing a fitting low output impedance driver due to increase current sourcing requirements or worsening the detrimental effect of parasitic inductances associated to packaging. Figure This can be understood with the following considerations: The OMA of a linear modulator with phase shifters of length L driven in dual drive configuration with a drive voltage swing V d can be simply calculated as 9:! ;< = 10?@A BC DEF 7 G • 4 • 6 7 / 4 (2) -10 • 2 • 4 ?@A 10 where a is the linear loss term associated to the phase shifters. Even when ignoring the nonlinearity introduced by the sine function, one can straightforwardly see that this results in an optimum modulator length due to the different scaling of ?@A 4 and 4. This is also what drives the trends in Fig. As a final step, we combined the two concepts described in the following sections in a single device. A micrograph of the combined device can be seen in Fig. The temperature tolerant MZM itself corresponds to exactly the same design as reported in the previous section, and has thus the same temperature and wavelength tolerance. Fig. In conclusion, we have shown a resonantly enhanced Mach-Zehnder modulator driven as a lumped element load with a ~20X reduction of power consumption compared to a linear travelling wave device with identical output optical modulation amplitude. The optical modulation amplitude is maintained within 3 dB of its maximum in a 55 o C temperature range, which can be further increased by increasing the number of collectively driven RRMs on each branch. The Mach-Zehnder modulator was passively biased at its quadrature point by selective placement of the input and output fibers on top of multi-mode grating couplers also used as the input and output splitters of the interferometer.