In a recent communication, Weber and co-workers 1 presented a surprising study on chargelocalization effects in the N,N'-dimethylpiperazine (DMP + ) diamine cation to provide a stringent test of density functional theory (DFT) methods. Within their study, the authors examined various DFT methods and concluded that "all DFT functionals commonly used today, including hybrid functionals with exact exchange, fail to predict a stable charge-localized state." 1 This surprising conclusion is based on the authors' use of a self-interaction correction (namely, complex-valued Perdew-Zunger Self-Interaction Correction (PZ-SIC)) 2,3 to DFT, which appears to give excellent agreement with experiment and other wavefunction-based benchmarks. Since the publication of this recent communication, the same DMP + molecule has been cited in numerous subsequent studies 4-13 as a prototypical example of the importance of self-interaction corrections for accurately calculating other chemical systems. In this correspondence, we have carried out new high-level CCSD(T) analyses on the DMP + cation to show that DFT actually performs quite well for this system (in contrast to their conclusion that all DFT functionals fail), whereas the PZ-SIC approach used by Weber et al. is the outlier that is inconsistent with the high-level CCSD(T) (coupled-cluster with single and double excitations and perturbative triples) calculations. Our new findings and analysis for this system are briefly discussed in this correspondence. In Figure Before proceeding to a final discussion on the PZ-SIC transition-state geometry, we briefly discuss the accuracy of our CCSD(T) calculations, which we used as high-level calculations to benchmark both the PZ-SIC and DFT methods discussed above. First, to check for possible nondynamical correlation effects in our CCSD(T) calculations, we computed the T1 diagnostic Finally, the CCSD(T) method is often referred to as the gold standard of quantum chemistry (whereas the performance of the PZ-SIC functional is much less known), and both the CCSD(T) and CCSD(T)-F12 barrier heights are extremely small (essentially barrierless and in agreement with DFT), in stark contrast to the significantly larger 0.2 eV barrier obtained from the PZ-SIC approach. Finally, we discuss a few discrepancies regarding the transition-state geometries obtained from the PZ-SIC versus the wavefunction-based approaches. We obtained our CCSD-and MP2optimized transition-state geometries using the Synchronous Transit-Guided Quasi-Newton (STQN) In conclusion, we have carried out new high-level CCSD(T) analyses on the DMP + cation to investigate the surprising claim that "all DFT functionals commonly used today, including hybrid functionals with exact exchange, fail to predict a stable charge-localized state" for this relatively simple system. Our new high-level CCSD(T) analyses on the DMP + cation show that DFT actually performs quite well for this system, whereas the PZ-SIC approach used by Weber et al. is the outlier that is inconsistent (and predicts a significantly larger barrier height), compared to the highly-accurate CCSD(T) benchmarks. Although the experiments by Weber et al. appear to give excellent agreement with their PZ-SIC approach, it should also be noted that their rationale for a charge-localized state of the DMP-L + cation was inferred from time-resolved measurements of the Rydberg states of the cation rather than the ground-state potential energy surface of the cation itself. While there are certainly cases where self-interaction corrections are essential for obtaining correct results in pathological chemical systems, the potential energy surface of the diamine cation, unfortunately, is not one of them.