Detailed experimental investigations of thermal and magnetic properties are presented for Cu(NH 3 ) 4 SO 4 H 2 O, an ideal uniform Heisenberg spin 1⁄2 chain compound. A comparison of these properties with relevant spin models is also presented. The temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility and specific heat data has been compared with the exact solution for uniform Heisenberg chain model derived by means of Bethe ansatz technique. Field dependent isothermal magnetization curves are simulated by Quantum Monte Carlo technique and compared with the corresponding experimental ones. Specific heat as a function of magnetic field (up to 7T) and temperature (down to 2K) is reported. Subsequently, the data are compared with the corresponding theoretical curves for the infinite Heisenberg spin 1⁄2 chain model with J=6K. Moreover, internal energy and entropy are calculated by analyzing the experimental specific heat data. Magnetic field and temperature dependent behavior of entropy and internal energy are in good agreement with the theoretical predictions. In recent times, numerous successful efforts have been devoted to explore spin systems with low dimensional magnetic interactions. Many low dimensional spin systems could be suitably described by physical models there by capturing the essential experimental manifestations Theoretical descriptions of low dimensional spin systems have been realized using powerful numerical techniques like Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations Low dimensional quantum spin 1⁄2 systems exhibit novel magnetic and thermal properties. A wellknown Spin-Peierls compound CuGeO 3 , which possesses a dimerized spin state below a critical temperature T c =14K, has shown direct evidence for a singlet-triplet transition in neutron inelastic scattering experiment In the present work, we have experimentally investigated detailed magnetic and thermal properties of such an antiferromagnetic uniform spin 1⁄2 chain with isotropic Heisenberg interaction. The Hamiltonian of a one dimensional antiferromagnetic spin chain with S=1/2 in presence of applied external magnetic field can be written as, Where 0 ≤  ≤ 1, 0 ≤  ≤1, B is the external magnetic field, , , neighboring spins along the chain is also negligible here. We have made a detailed estimation of various thermodynamic quantities from experimentally obtained data. The data has been analyzed within the framework of Heisenberg antiferomagnetic spin chain model with full isotropy. Temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility and field dependence of isothermal magnetization are investigated experimentally. Furthermore, the heat capacity data were collected both at zero field and in presence of externally applied magnetic field. Exact results for Heisenberg spin chain have been compared with the experimental data. Subsequently, zero field and field dependence specific heat data were used to obtain experimental estimates of internal energy and entropy. The experiments were performed on single crystalline Cu(NH 3 ) 4 SO 4 H 2 O of purest grade (99.999 %), supplied by Sigma Aldrich. Magnetic susceptibility and magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) and Oxford Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM). Temperature dependence of static magnetic susceptibility was measured in a temperature range of 1.9 K to 30 K. Subsequently, isothermal magnetization measurements were carried out as a function of field at various temperatures. The field was varied from 0T to 14 T and the temperature was varied from 1.9 K to 10 K. The specific heat measurements were performed by a standard relaxation method in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (QD PPMS). Zero field specific heat data were collected in a temperature range of 2K to 10 K. Furthermore, the field dependent specific heat was measured in the same temperature range. The magnetic field was varied from 0T to 7T. Careful subtraction of background was performed by carrying out addenda measurement before starting the experiments. Figure However, due the finite size effects, their results cannot satisfactorily explain the experimental results. Subsequently, by following the analytical approach of Bethe ansatz Experimentally measured specific heat of Cu(NH 3 ) 4 SO 4 H 2 O single crystals taken from 2K to 10K in zero magnetic field is shown in figure Here C m is the magnetic specific heat and the lattice contribution is determined by the coefficient  . We have implemented the Bethe ansatz formulation for specific heat for the case of isotropic Heisenberg chain model to analyze the magnetic part of our experimental specific heat data Subsequently, the exact numerical data calculated by Bethe ansatz technique was compared with the experimental magnetic specific heat in the same plot in figure The estimation of Debye temperature was performed by substituting the value of  (0.00218) in the above equation. We got D  =96.27K for the present compound. The most notable aspect of the specific heat curve is the observed broad peak around 3K which arises due to the intrinsic contribution from the many-level energyspectrum of the Heisenberg spin chain However, with increase in temperature, the probability of occupation of higher energy states increases and the specific heat starts rising. Subsequently, the rate of absorption of thermal energy reaches its maximum value which is responsible for the broad maximum in the specific heat curve around 3K. Upon further increasing temperature, the specific heat drops down to lower value as the energy levels become populated equally and no differential change in the internal energy occurs. Figure Subsequently, A Klümper investigated the thermodynamics of infinite spin 1⁄2 Heisenberg chain and calculated specific heat as a function of temperature at different applied magnetic fields Experimentally measured specific heat vs. temperature datasets at constant fields were used to create the 3D plot shown in figure Next, the fundamental thermodynamic quantities, namely, internal energy and entropy are quantified for Cu(NH 3 ) 4 SO 4 H 2 O from the experimental specific heat data. In general, the internal energy at some particular temperature T is related to the specific heat by the following equation with 2 K U being the internal energy at 2K. Numerical integration was carried out on the specific heat data in the temperature range of 2K to 10K and the above mentioned integral equation was used to quantify experimental internal energy for the present compound. Similar analysis was performed for each field dependent specific heat datasets. In order to determine 2 K U , the theoretical treatment of A Klümper is followed where the field evolution of internal energy was investigated for Heisenberg isotropic chain by means of application of Bethe ansatz. We have used J=6K obtained from earlier analyses. Therefore, the theoretical values of internal energies 2 K U at the particular fields corresponding to the experimental Cp vs. T datasets are substituted in the integral equation ( UT vs. T] at different fixed fields. Both the theoretical and the experimental energies are scaled in units of Kelvin. These extracted   UT vs. T datasets are plotted in figure Fundamental thermodynamic relations imply that the entropy increment of a system could be simply calculated from specific heat using the relation . Here 2 K S is the entropy at 2K. Hence, we substituted the experimental specific heat data in the above equation and integrated numerically to estimate the entropy increment. The above treatment was performed for all C(T) vs. T datasets obtained at fixed fields and these results are shown in figure The present work exemplifies an investigation of thermodynamics of a Heisenberg spin 1⁄2 chain material where various information about the system has been captured. In summary, we have performed a detailed study of thermal and magnetic properties of Cu(NH 3 ) 4 SO 4 H 2 O which can be best described by an ideal spin 1⁄2 chain with isotropic Heisenberg interaction. The experimental data have been compared with the exact solutions calculated using the Bethe ansatz technique. Temperature dependent susceptibility and specific heat data are in perfect agreement with the calculation using an exchange coupling constant J=6K. This consistency indicates that the material displays spin chain behavior in the temperature range down to 2K. Field dependent magnetization curves were generated numerically using the QMC technique at the Heisenberg extreme. Numerically simulated curves are in agreement with the experimental ones. Temperature dependent specific heat data at various applied fields were also compatible with the exact results for infinite Heisenberg spin chain. Furthermore, numerical integration was performed on the experimental specific heat data to obtain the variation of internal energy and entropy with temperature at various fields. These spin chain systems can have fruitful applications from the perspective of quantum communications. Bose has described that an entangled spin chain can be used as an appropriate channel for transmitting a quantum state over a short distance 