We report on an experimental study of the effect of Mn impurities in the optimally doped LaFe-AsO0.89F0.11 compound. The results show that a very tiny amount of Mn, of the order of 0.1%, is enough to destroy superconductivity and to recover at low temperatures both the magnetic ground state and the orthorhombic structure of the pristine LaFeAsO parent compound. The results are discussed within a model where electron correlations enhance the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida interaction among impurities. The study of the effect of impurities in superconductors is relevant both in view of their technological applications 1-3 as well as for the understanding of the microscopic mechanisms driving superconductivity The unique effect of Mn substitution was ascribed to the peculiar nature of the Mn 2+ ions, a 3d 5 species characterized by a strong Hund's coupling In the following we show that the changes in the electronic structure driven by Mn impurities also cause a change in the crystal structure and that, remarkably, Mn impurities tune the electronic, magnetic and structural properties back to those observed in the parent compound LaFeAsO. The LaFe 1-x Mn x AsO 0.89 F 0.11 polycrystalline samples investigated here, with x = 0, 0.00025, 0.00075, 0.001, 0.002, 0.005, and 0.0075 are the same ones studied in Ref. Superposition of diffraction patterns for LaFe1-xMnxAsO0.89F0.11 with 0.001 ≤ x ≤ 0.0075 in the Q-region where the tetragonal 220 peak is observed. On the right: data at 200 K; on the left: data at 10 K. At room temperature all the samples display the standard P4/nmm tetragonal structure as observed for the pure LaFeAsO compound. In particular, the compound LaFeAsO undergoes a tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition on cooling at ∼ 150 K At 200 K all samples display a single and quite symmetric peak, characterizing the tetragonal structure. At 10 K the peak split is evident for samples with x = 0.005 and 0.0075, indicating an orthorhombic crystal structure. For samples with x = 0.002 and 0.001 the peak is asymmetrically broadened; this feature can be possibly due an anisotropic distribution of the lattice microstrain in the hh0 plane or even to a convolution of orthorhombic diffraction lines producing an incomplete peak split (vide infra). The occurrence of the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition is generally based on the observation of selected peak splitting. Fig. Fig. In a typical μSR experiment two opposite detectors count the number of positrons emitted along or in the opposite direction of the initial muon spin polarization, N F and N B respectively, arising from the asymmetric muon decay. The time evolution of the muon spin polarization is described by the muon asymmetry A(t) = (N F (t) -N B (t)) / (N F (t) + N B (t)) normalized by the total initial decay asymmetry A 0 . The latter is calibrated for each sample in the paramagnetic phase. No muon precessions are expected in a non magnetic phase (non magnetic samples or above the magnetic transition temperature) and the muon asymmetry A(t) is characterized by a single component with a slow gaussian decay rate (∼ 0.1 μs -1 ), due to the interaction with the weak surrounding nuclear magnetic moments (Fig. For all the samples we fitted the muon polarization to the following phenomenological function: where γ μ is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, B μ,i for i=1 or 2 is the local field at two different muon sites, expected for 1111 compounds A representative set of measurements of the time evolution of the muon asymmetry and the best fit to Eq.1 for selected temperatures are displayed in Fig. We summarize the results of this work in the phase diagram displayed in Fig. The effect of the Fe/Mn substitution in Ln1111 has been theoretically studied by a five band real Hamiltonian model The comparison between experiments and theory 11,15 suggests that the electron correlation is reduced upon squeezing the lattice by increasing the chemical pressure with smaller radius Ln ions, hence going from the bigger La to smaller Sm. We expect that the bandwidth of the system increases with the lattice squeezing, hence producing the enhancement of the kinetic energy and a weakening of the electron correlations. This mechanism qualitatively justifies why for Ln=Sm the effect of Mn is weaker than for Ln=La. These arguments suggest that the electron correlation strength in La1111 drives the system very close to an electronic instability. A small perturbation introduced by a tiny amount of Mn is enough to dramatically change the electronic properties of the system which at low temperatures precipitates back to the magnetic (π/a, 0) stripe spin density wave ground state of the parent compound with its associated orthorhombic structure. Based on muon spin relaxation measurements and high resolution X-ray diffraction, we draw the phase diagram of on LaFe 1-x Mn x AsO 0.89 F 0.11 for x = 0 -0.0075 (Fig. Ma Y, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 113001 (2012).