Graphene-based hyperbolic metamaterials have been predicted to transport evanescent fields with extraordinarily large vacuum wave-vectors. It is particularly at much higher wave vector values that the commonly employed descriptional models involving structure homogenization and assumptions of an approximatively local graphene conductivity start breaking down. Here, we combine a nonlocal quantum conductivity model of graphene with an exact mathematical treatment of the periodic structure in order to develop a tool-set for determining the hyperbolic behavior of these graphenebased hyperbolic metamaterials. The quantum conductivity model of graphene facilitates us to predict the plasmonic amplification in graphene sheets of the considered structures. This allows us to reverse the problem of Ohmic and temperature losses, making this simple yet powerful arrangement practically applicable. We analyze the electric field distribution inside of the finite structures, concluding that Bloch boundary solutions can be used to predict their behavior. With the transfer matrix method we show that at finite temperature and collision loss we can compensate for losses, restoring imaging qualities of the finite structure via an introduction of chemical imbalance. Graphene-based hyperbolic metamaterials have been predicted to transport evanescent fields with large vacuum wave-vectors Concurrently, moving deeper into the sub-wavelength region, the models, currently used to predict properties of such systems, lose their applicability: the medium homogenization approximations fail when the wavelengths are comparable to the unit cell thickness In this study we apply a non-local quantum conductivity model, derived from irreducible polarizability of a particle-hole plasma to GHMMs. This facilitates exact in RPA calculations of the carrier distributions and interactions at arbitrary temperatures and levels of doping Further, we couple this conductivity model to a periodic structure description, treating such an arrangement as a photonic crystal, to calculate and identify where the metamaterial exhibits elliptic or hyperbolic properties. Due to the linearity of the Dirac Cone, the proposed band structure is of a general nature, describing simultaneously the behavior of the material under all physical values of excitation frequencies and doping levels for the separate cases of passive and active graphene. This generalized treatment eliminates the necessity to study individual regions of doping and excitation values, as it covers the full parameter space. We propose a scheme, in which we can calculate the effective optical parameters of the structure exactly, avoiding, in particular, homogenization techniques, which have a limited validity. We also provide a set of analytic tools and treatments, which could be used for an efficient characterization of graphene-based HMMs, as well as any HMMs where the conductive layers are a two-dimensional material. We use the developed methods in order to analyze the behavior of the structure when the graphene sheets are doped, photo-inverted and at realistic temperatures. We show that in such an arrangement the stimulated plasmonic emission occurs in a frequency band of regulated width, as opposed to the line of the single graphene sheet, suspended in air. Further analysis shows that we can compensate and overcompensate Ohmic losses, opening an avenue to removing an important obstacle to a practical realization of hyperbolic metamaterials. Finally, we calculate the quasi-static electric field dis-tribution in finite GHMM structures, generated by a propagating narrow spatial Gaussian field envelope. In comparison with the loss-less case, we shed light on the degrading effects of collision and temperature losses on imaging of the envelope in the passive structure. Then, putting graphene sheets in the state of optical inversion, we show the length of propagation of the field through the structure being restored due to the plasmonic gain to that of the ideal system with no losses. In order to calculate exactly the plasmon dispersion in graphene and predict plasmon amplification or attenuation, it is necessary to use a conductivity model which is both non-local and remains valid within the regions of inter-band processes. This requires an exact treatment of large wavevectors and complex frequencies. This is not achieved with the local Drude 4 and Kubo 3,5 formulas, most often used in studies of graphene-based HMMs. They become increasingly inaccurate in the parameter space of the inter-and intra-band transitions where Π(q, ω) is the propagator of the electron-hole pairs. For a general 2D electron gas in random phase approximation (RPA) it is given by the Lindhard formula where Π The plasmon dispersion of graphene is calculated using the exact in RPA model for zero temperature doped graphene sheet without and with photo-excitation, and is presented as green solid lines in the Figs. 1a and 1b respectively. The excitation frequency on the vertical axis is scaled with the value of chemical imbalance μ, and the in-plane wavevector on the horizontal axis is scaled with the excitation frequency. With such scaling the light cone transforms into the vertical line at k x /k 0 = 1 and the Dirac cone transforms into the vertical line at k x /k 0 = c 0 /v F ermi = 300. The plots without excitation frequency scaling are shown in the Figs. 6a and 6b in Appendix A. Chemical doping of the graphene sheet causes a shift of the Fermi level away from the Dirac point. This creates a region in phase space where inter-band processes are not possible due to insufficient excitation energies. This corresponds to the region we denote by II in the Figs. Optical pumping of doped graphene creates a twocomponent plasma of electrons and holes. This opens up a phase space within region II, where the plasmons couple to the inverted carrier plasma, trigger stimulated recombination and get amplified. We denote this area as the region I in the Fig. The relative sizes of regions I, II and III in the active case depend on the value of doping and imbalance between the chemical potentials of electrons and holes (illustrated in the inserts of the Figs. For comparison, the Drude model, modified to include the inter-band transitions, has been used in order to calculate the plasmon dispersion in the case of active and passive doped graphene. These are shown in the Figs. 1a and 1b as dashed black curves. As can be seen, they follow the exact plasmon dispersion, calculated from the non-local quantum model in the regions of small in-plane wavevectors, but start deviating for the wavevectors, approaching the region of inter-band transitions. respectively. The plasmons experience gain within region I due to inter-band electron-hole recombination; loss -within regions III and IV due to the inter-and intra-band absorption respectively; and propagate without loss or gain within region II due to the absence of phase space for any inter-or intraband transitions. Let us first consider an infinite periodic structure, consisting of alternating graphene/dielectric layers and schematically shown in the Fig. Applying the transfer-matrix method where K is the magnitude of the Bloch wave-vector, D -the period of the structure, z -the axis of anisotropy, ε 1 -the permittivity of dielectric, d 1 -its thickness, k 0 -the wavevector of the incident radiation, k z,1 -its zcomponent in the dielectric and σ s (q, ω) -the non-local graphene sheet conductivity. Eq. ( For illustration purposes, we consider an infinite structure with the period of d 1 = 300 nm and the permittivity of the dielectric ε 1 = 1. In Fig. The role of thin metallic layers in a general hyperbolic metamaterial is to provide a confining medium for plane plasma oscillations, excited by TM polarized excitations (see Fig. In case of a metal with finite thickness, both ε x-ef f and ε z-ef f are affected by the negative ε of the metal, since due to the metal's finite thickness both in-and outof plane electric field components couple to the plasma FIG. oscillations. A detailed procedure of finding the components of the dielectric tensor of a general layered metamaterial has been described, for example, in Here, K = K +iK is the wavevector of the Bloch modes of the structure, calculated from Eq. (3). From this, the effective ε x-ef f can be obtained: where the quantity k 2 0 -k 2 x ε d is negative outside of the light cone. Analysis of Eq. ( From Eq. ( with two edge conditions (a) and (c) bounding the phase space of hyperbolic character. The modes are undamped between conditions (a) and (b), and experience spatial damping between conditions (b) and (c). We can derive a corresponding set of analytic expressions of the boundaries in the ω/k x space, on which the conditions (6) are satisfied. In terms of the imaginary part of graphene's non-local conductivity σ s for the lossless case these boundaries have the following form(details of the derivation may be found in the appendix): ) These conditions are satisfied along the solid, dotted and dashed black lines respectively, as presented in Figs. Plasmonic metamaterials are inherently lossy due to their exploitation of the plasma resonances. This causes the wavevector of the plasmonic modes to have a large imaginary part, corresponding to a decay of the modes in space. In order to overcome this problem, it was proposed to incorporate gain medium in the dielectric layers In the case of a single graphene sheet, the conditions for excitation of plasmons are satisfied on the line in the (q, ω) space (Figs. A non-zero imaginary part of the wavevector defines the change in the amplitude of the Bloch wave, as it propagates through the structure. This parameter acquires meaning only in conjunction with Re To illustrate this, we are using the quantum conductivity model together with Eq. ( The region where Re [ε x-ef f ] < 0 in Fig. The isofrequency contours of representative modes are shown in Fig. So far we have considered light propagating in infinite periodic stacks. Despite being a good approximation for a description of sufficiently large structures, it is not clear how this model would generalize to structures at the current level manufacturing possibilities, consisting of just several layers. To answer this question we use the transfer matrix method (TMM), which allows us to spatially resolve the electric and magnetic fields, as well as calculate the Poynting vector, inside of the finite structure with the given set of input or output fields. With this we calculate the quasi-static field distribution, resulting from the illumination of the finite stack with a narrow spatial Gaussian intensity envelope. The Gaussian envelope is sufficiently small in real space, thus consisting of k x components that are evanescent in free space, and coupling to the plasmonic modes of the considered heterostructure. We start with calculations of the forward-traveling component of the electric field distribution in a structure consisting of 14 unit cells, as shown in the Fig. Subsequently, we keep the parameters of the structure and stimulation the same, but introduce a finite temperature (resulting in a smearing of the graphene Fermi level, while graphene is still doped to the same level), and add collision loss in the graphene sheets. The calculated field intensity distribution is shown in Fig. Finally, we introduce gain to our heterostructure in the form of optical inversion of graphene, entering the model as carrier imbalance of the electrons and holes. The temperature conditions and scattering losses are yet again the same as in the previous calculation. The resultant field distribution is presented in Fig. So far we have computationally investigated the propagation of a small Gaussian envelope in a finite stack, as well as studied the behavior of an infinite stack, deriving a set of analytic tools for analysis and prediction of the properties of an infinite structure. An interesting question to answer is would it be possible to use analytic approach used for an infinite structure in order to predict behavior of a finite stack, without having to perform computationally intense simulations of the finite stack? Let us consider the TMM framework (which provides the basis for the analysis of a finite stack). To propagate a narrow spatial envelope through the stack we decompose it into a finite number of Gaussian spatial components k x , propagating them individually through the stack and recombining them at the output end with their Fourier weights. In doing so we impose a condition on the fields at the output layer to be traveling out of the structure only. This means that the obtained field distributions for a particular k x in general are not the eigenmodes of the structure, but are a linear combination of two counterpropagating eigenmodes. The eigenmodes of the finite structure are calculated as eigenmodes of its single unit cell (that is also what we are calculating in Eq. ( Since the eigenmodes of the unit cell of infinite and finite structures are calculated identically, we can use the isofrequency contours of an infinite structure to predict the behavior of a finite one. Therefore, in order to ensure a loss-less propagation of the pulse through the finite structure, the Fourier components of the pulse should be located within the range of k x /k 0 where Im [KD] = 0. At the same time, regimes where Im [KD] > 0, although showing gain, are also detrimental to the pulse propagation, resulting in non-zero Poynting vector. In this regard, k x /k 0 can be treated as a resolution limit of a finite structure, as it defines the minimum size of the pulse which can propagate, and can be obtained from the isofrequency contours for an infinite structure for the condition where Im [KD] = 0. As was shown earlier, the condition of Im [KD] = 0 is satisfied when the stack is supporting plasmonic modes in the loss-less case, or in case of losses compensated by gain. Therefore, the resolution limit of the structure is defined as the boundary of plasmonic band of operation ε x-ef f = 0, shown as black contours in Figs. We have studied the behavior of graphene-based hyperbolic metamaterials. Employing an RPA model for the graphene conductivity, which accounts for the plasmonic gain and loss, we developed an analytic tool-set for the characterization of the regions of behavior of the infinite structures. This allows us to uncover the possibility of plasmonic amplification in optically excited heterostructures. Considering structures with the finite number of layers, we demonstrate that the theory assuming infinite structures has a good applicability there as well. We also demonstrated the quasi-equilibrium field distributions of the Gaussian envelopes propagating in graphenebased hyperbolic metamaterials, and showed that these structures can be used to compensate occurring graphene losses. In general, Π(q, ω) in the Eq. ( This expression sums over all possible intra-band (k) → (k + q) and inter-band s → s transitions, contains spin/valley degeneracy within the constant g = 4, and is weighted with the square of the transition matrix From Eq. ( where . This expression describes the polarizability of doped graphene sheet at equilibrium, with the corresponding chemical potential μ. The particle-hole symmetry is implicit in Π (q, ω) -μ . The expression (10) is analytic for Im [ω] > 0, and can be evaluated for Im [ω] < 0 via the analytic continuation The single sheet plasmon dispersion is calculated exactly for the doped equilibrium graphene and is shown in the Figs. 1a and 6a as a green solid line. It begins in the region II, where the excitation energies are below the chemical potential of doping, thus are insufficient to decay into the inter-band transitions (γ pl = 0). At zero doping region II disappears, and all phase space within the Dirac cone is occupied by the region III. After region II the plasmon dispersion passes through the region III with Landau damping; region IV with intra-band excitations and loss-free region V. Optical pumping of graphene would create a bath of excited electron-hole pairs. This opens up a region I in the phase space of regions II and III. The plasmons within region I would trigger recombination of electronhole pairs, thus undergoing coherent amplification. For comparison, the single-sheet plasmon dispersion of the extrinsic active graphene is shown in the Fig. The sheet conductivity σ s (q, ω) in the Eq. ( Z0a tanh k0d1a 2 (a) σ s (q, ω) = 2ε1 Z0a cosh(k0d1a)+cosh(π) sinh(k0d1a) Finding the values of (q, ω), at which the above equalities are satisfied, will define the region ε x-ef f < 0. The same procedure can be used to find the boundary of undamped hyperbolic modes, where Re [KD] = π, and Im [KD] = 0: The conditions (a) and (b) of the Eqs. ( Z0a . Expectedly, this coincides with the single-sheet plasmon dispersion.