For a transparent projection screen based on metallic nanoparticle's localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), in the ideal case the metallic nanoparticles dispersed in a transparent matrix only selectively scatter red, green and blue light and transmit the visible light of other colours. However, metal's optical loss and size effect at nanoscale degenerate the desired performance by broadening the resonance peak width and increasing the absorption ratio. In this work, it is shown that the problem can be solved by introducing gain material. Numerical simulations are performed on nanostructures based on silver (Ag), gold (Au) or aluminium (Al) with or without gain material, to examine the effect of gain material and to search for suitable structures for sharp selective scattering of red, green and blue light. And it is found that introducing gain material greatly improves performance of the structures based on Ag or Au except the structures based on Al. The most suitable structures for sharp selective scattering of red, green and blue light are respectively found to be the core-shell structures of silica@Au, silica@Ag and Ag@silica, all with gain material. Recently, the idea of wavelength-selective scattering of light to achieve transparent projection screen has been proposed based on metallic nanoparticle's localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), In this section, reasons of choosing the metals and structures for subsequent optimizations are given, and the method of optimization is described. Since in this work, selective scattering of light is based on metallic nanoparticle's LSPR, and LSPR is a result of resonant oscillation of free electrons in response to incident electromagnetic wave, The surrounding medium's refractive index n s is assumed to be a constant of 1.5, which is about the same as the refractive indices of glass and most polymers, in which the nanoparticles to be designed are supposed to be dispersed. In quasi-static limit, namely, when the size of a metallic nanosphere is much smaller than the wavelength of incident light, the LSPR peak appears at a particular wavelength at which the real part of the metal's dielectric function is equal to negative 2 times of surrounding medium's dielectric function, With the above considerations, the structures to be considered during optimization are summarized in Table Table Red Au sphere, silica@Au, silica@Ag, silica@Al Au@silica, silica@Au, silica@Ag, silica@Al Green Ag sphere, silica@Ag, silica@Al Ag@silica, silica@Ag, silica@Al Blue Ag sphere, silica@Ag, silica@Al Ag@silica, silica@Ag, silica@Al For the purpose of optimization, a figure of merit (FOM) is defined: where σ sca and σ abs are the scattering and absorption cross sections, respectively which are calculated by the Mie's theory, Since at nanoscale, the size of a metallic nanoparticle is comparable to free electrons' mean free path in the bulk metal, effect of surface scattering of conduction electrons on the metal's dielectric function cannot be ignored. where v F is the Fermi velocity of electrons in metal, and its values for Ag, Au and Al are given in Table where r o and r i are the outer and inner radii of the core-shell structure, respectively. For metallic nanosphere or the silica-coated metallic nanosphere (i.e., metal@silica), L B is given by equation ( where r is the radius of metallic nanosphere or the inner radius of silica-coated metallic nanosphere. For silica without gain material, it is assumed to have a constant refractive index N Si = 1.45. For silica doped with gain material, its refractive index is given by The optimization is carried out with BOBYQA, 30 a local optimization algorithm, which starts from an initial guess of tuning parameters and searches for an optimized set of tuning parameters that give maximum value of FOM . Here, the set of tuning parameters are dimensions of the nanostructures shown in Table In this section, apart from the optimized tuning parameters, and values of optimized FOM, the calculated optical spectrums are also presented to give an intuitive view of sharp selective scattering. The spectrums are presented in terms of extinction efficiency ( Q ext ), scattering efficiency (Q sca ) and absorption efficiency (Q abs ), which are obtained from dividing their corresponding cross sections: σ ext , σ sca and σ abs , calculated by Mie's theory, For the calculated efficiencies shown in Figures 2, 3 and 4, Mie's theory takes the following parameters as its inputs: the surrounding medium's dielectric function ε s = n s 2 = 2.25 , optimized nanostructure's dimensions (i.e., core diameter and shell thickness for a core-shell structure, or diameter for a nanosphere), metal's sizedependent dielectric function given by equation ( Since one gain material only provides gain in a small wavelength range, a negative k over a short wavelength range is more physically meaningful. For this purpose, for those structures with gain material, we have also investigated the effect on value of FOM when replacing the wavelength-independent k with a gaussian-form k. Here, the gaussian-form k has the following expression: where k optimal and λ R are the optimized k value and resonance wavelength respectively for a structure with gain material, λ is incident light's wavelength, a is associated with gaussian curve's full width at half maximum (FWHM), and FWHM is assumed to be 30 nm in this work. The gaussian-form k is equal to the optimized k in Tables 3, 4 and 5 at the resonance wavelength, and decreases in magnitude for wavelengths away from the resonance wavelength. For structures with gain material, their values of FOM calculated with gaussian-form k , with other optimized parameters unchanged, are also shown in Tables Nevertheless, k is assumed to be wavelength-independent during optimization and in Figures Figure Silica@Ag without gain. (f) Silica@Ag with gain. (g) Silica@Al without gain. (h) Silica@Al with gain. For each structure, the optimized parameters and optimized values of FOM are tabulated in Table By observing Figures 2, 3 and 4, it is obvious that Al-based structures are not suitable for selective scattering, since their resonance peaks are too broad, even though absorptions are low. The efficiency spectrums for Al-based structures do not show apparent improvements even after gain material is introduced. And the broad resonance peaks for Al-based structures can be explained by Al's low quality factor, which determines strength of resonance, defined by -Re[ε m ] Im[ε m ] ⁄ , over the whole visible wavelength range. The largest values of FOM in Tables 3, 4 and 5 (3.17, 2.4128 and 2.5227 respectively) suggest that the most suitable structures for sharp selective scattering of red, green and blue light are the structures of silica@Au with gain material (see Table For the structures with gain material, after replacing wavelength-independent k with gaussian-form k , change in FOM is not significant except for the structure of Silica@Ag with gain material (item f in Table Among the three most suitable structures, the one for selective scattering of red light, i.e., the structure of silica@Au with gain material (item d in Table In this work, for the purpose of realizing a transparent projection screen, we have searched for structures that may achieve sharp selective scattering of red, green and blue light based on metallic nanoparticle's LSPR effect and gain material's optical compensation. By comparing behaviors of structures optimized with gain material to those without gain material, it is found that for the structures based on Au and Ag, introducing gain material greatly improves the performance in terms of sharper scattering peak and overall lower absorption, while for the Al-based structures little improvement is observed. The most suitable structures for sharp selective scattering of red, green and blue light are respectively found to be silica@Au, silica@Ag and Ag@silica, all with gain material, with their corresponding optimized parameters shown in Tables 3, 4 and 5. And among gain values of the three most suitable structures, the largest one is still within physical limit.