In this paper, we present a piezo-metastructure shunted with bistable circuits to achieve adaptive nonreciprocal elastic wave transmission. Static properties of the bistable circuit are first investigated, followed by numerical investigation of wave transmission characteristics on the nonlinear piezo-metastructure. Both the local-resonance bandgap and the bandgap transmission phenomenon, also known as supratransmission, are explored and investigated. By introducing circuit asymmetry, the supratransmission thresholds, critical excitation amplitudes to enable bandgap transmission, are found at different levels for the different wave transmission directions and hence creating an excitation amplitude range within which nonreciprocal wave transmission can be facilitated. Effect of the asymmetry factor on nonreciprocity properties is subsequently analyzed and the trade-offs between the forward transmission amplitude and the range of excitation with nonreciprocity are identified. Additionally, it is demonstrated that wave transmission characteristics of the proposed nonlinear piezo-metastructure can be adaptively tuned by conveniently adjusting stable equilibria of the bistable circuit. Lastly, the observed wave transmission properties are further corroborated by experimental investigations. Overall, the results illustrate a novel means to manipulate unidirectional elastic wave transmission using a nonlinear piezo-metastructure. For conventional linear time-invariant systems, wave transmission has to obey the reciprocity theorem Piezoelectric material-systems, which have the benefit of light add-on mass and easy implementation, have been extensively studied for various applications The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the model of the nonlinear piezo-metastructure is presented and its dynamic equation is derived. Numerical investigations are performed to elucidate the bandgap, supratransmission and nonreciprocity of the proposed system, and discussed in Section 3. In Section 4, experiments conducted to verify the observed wave transmission properties are presented. Lastly, some concluding remarks are summarized in Section 5. The schematic of the proposed system is shown in Fig. The bistable circuit used in part II is shown in Fig. Before analyzing the response of the overall system, we first study properties of the bistable circuit. The dynamic equation of the bistable circuit without excitations can be derived as 0 ( ) 0 where the voltage response U, indicated in Fig. where the voltage function P(U) is () In Eq. (3), g is the amplification factor of one op-amp with negative feedback, given as It can be seen from Eq. ( Using the ideal diode model where the op-amp amplification factor 1 g is defined as 1 and VD is the constant diode forward voltage beyond which the current can transmit through the diode. Substituting Eq. ( This kind of characteristic cannot be reflected using the ideal diode model. Hence, in this paper, we will use the Shockley diode model for more accurate characterization where I S , V T and  are diode model constants. On the other hand, I 0 can be expressed as Hence, the relation between U and V d can be derived by combining Eqs.( From Eqs.( When P(U)=0, which means that the bistable circuit is at its static equilibrium, V d can be obtained from Eq. ( we can induce that U e also depends on the voltage source applied on diode V a and the op-amp amplification factors g and g 1 . Linearizing the nonlinear relation between U and V d in Eq. ( where ( , ) a de f V V can be derived from Eq.( From Eqs.(2)(3)(10), the linearized resonance frequency of the bistable circuit around its stable equilibrium is which shows that n f depends on the controlled DC voltage source V a and the product of op-amp amplification factors 1 gg . Eqs. ( The parameters of the bistable circuit are shown in Table Other than the DC voltage source V a , the op-amps amplification factors g and 1 g , which depend on R 1 , R 2 , R 3 and R 4 , can also affect the profile of voltage function P(U). Especially, varying g and 1 g would affect the ratio r n of negative stiffness range to the distance between the two stable equilibria, which can be derived as Therefore, the nonlinear properties of the proposed bistable circuit, which is governed by the voltage function P(U) and characterized by the stable equilibria U e , can be adaptive by adjusting the DC voltages source V a and the opamps amplification factors ( g and 1 g ). This provides us the opportunities to adjust the wave transmission properties of the proposed nonlinear piezo-metastructure. Fig. Fig. Fig. With the derived dynamic equation of the bistable circuit, in this section, we seek to determine the equations of motion of the overall system. Following the method used for a linear piezo-metastructure To investigate the bandgap and supratransmission properties, the linear circuits of part I, as shown in Fig. and it represents the mechanical-electric coupling factor. EI is the bending stiffness of the piezo-beam, given as m is the mass per unit length: Since the response of the two bistable circuits within the same unit is identical, we only need to establish the dynamic equation of one circuit for each unit, which can be given as () 2  is the permittivity of the piezoelectric material at constant stress. Using the assumed mode expansion method where () j x  is the jth normal mode function of a uniform clamped-clamped beam and () j t  is the jth general coordinate. Z is the number of modal functions we employ. Substituting Eq. ( where 12 2 ( , ... ) C d is the assumed damping matrix. For the purpose of achieving nonreciprocal wave transmission, the asymmetry needs to be introduced and hence circuits in part I (Fig. With the derived dynamic equations of the proposed nonlinear piezo-metastructure in Eq.(20), we perform numerical investigations to study the wave transmission properties. We first investigate the local-resonance bandgap of the piezo-metastructure under small excitations, followed by analyzing the supratransmission phenomenon in the localresonance bandgap. Then we explore the nonreciprocal wave transmission based on the supratransmission phenomenon. In the numerical investigation, parameters of the bistable circuit are listed in Table applied to the system and the initial conditions for all dynamic variables are set to be the equilibrium values. Damping ratio 0.02 The bandgap is a frequency range within which the wave transmission is prohibited. In order to obtain the bandgap property of the proposed system, we excite the system on point A 1 and analyze the transmissibility T from sensing point S 1 to S 2 , which is defined as the ratio of root-meansquare value of velocity on point S 2 to that on point S 1 , i.e. For illustration purposes, a small excitation with forcing amplitude F m =0.1 N is employed and the amplification factors of op-amps are set to be 1 3, 2 gg  . Fig. Eq. ( Supratransmission From Section 3.1, we find that the proposed system exhibits local-resonance bandgap with small excitation force. In order to study the wave transmission properties with increasing forcing amplitudes, the relation between the output response o v (sensing point S 2 ) and the excitation amplitude F m on A 1 is shown in Fig. Fig. Fig. For a symmetric system, the supratransmission thresholds for wave propagating along the two opposite directions are the same. When asymmetry is introduced to intentionally engineer the supratransmission thresholds at different levels in the two transmission directions, one-way wave transmission would exist in the excitation range bounded by the two thresholds. To verify the hypothesis and illustrate the phenomenon, numerical simulations are performed with the proposed nonlinear piezo-metastructure. For purposes, V a is set to be 0 V and the amplification factors are selected to be 1 3, 2 gg  . The excitation frequency is 4520 Hz, which is in the bandgap of the linearized system. In contrast to short circuits on ends of the system used in previous analysis on bandgap and supratransmission, linear L-R circuits are on part to induce as in Fig. The results shown in Fig. Since decreasing R a could increase the wave attenuation effect in part I, it will increase the supratransmission thresholds in the backward direction and hence increase the nonreciprocity excitation amplitude range, but it will also reduce the forward transmission amplitude in this range, as can be seen in Fig. Experiments are conducted to verify intriguing properties observed in numerical investigation and performance of the proposed nonlinear piezo-metastructure. The schematic and photograph of the experimental set-up are shown in Fig. In the experiment, we tune R v to ensure that the resonance frequency of the linear circuit is the same with the linearized resonance frequency of the bistable circuit operating at its stable equilibria. The stable equilibria U e of the bistable circuit are measured with varying voltages V a applied by the DC voltage source. The results are shown in Fig. To discover the bandgap property of the system, the linear circuits in part I are shorted. The excitation voltage is applied on piezo-patch A 1 and a frequency-sweeping voltage signal with amplitude U m =2.2 V is used. The transmissibility from the voltage on sensing piezo-patch S 1 to the voltage on sensing piezo-patch S 2 is measured, as shown in Fig. To verify the supratransmission phenomenon in the proposed system, we applied harmonic excitation voltage signal on A 2 with different amplitude U m . V a is set as 0 V and the excitation frequency is chosen to be f e =5150 Hz, which is in the bandgap, as shown in Fig. Lastly, we seek to explore the nonreciprocal wave transmission experimentally. In order to study the effect of asymmetry factor on the nonreciprocity properties, we connected a resistor R b in series with the synthetic inductor used in part I, which has an inherent resistance In this research, we propose a piezo-metastructure shunted with bistable circuits, and investigate numerically and experimentally the adaptive bandgap, supratransmission and nonreciprocal wave propagation phenomena in this system. Within the linearized local-resonance bandgap of the piezometastructure, we uncover the supratransmission phenomenon, a bandgap transmission property of nonlinear systems. It is then verified that by introducing circuit asymmetry, we are able to enable nonreciprocal wave energy transmission by triggering supratransmission at different input amplitudes in the two opposite directions. Additionally, we find that increasing the asymmetry factor could result in a larger excitation amplitude range to facilitate nonreciprocity while lowering the forward transmission amplitude in this range. Hence a trade-off between the breadth and the strength of the nonreciprocal response of the system has to be considered when selecting the asymmetry factor. Different from constituents of nonlinear mechanical metamaterials, the nonlinear properties of bistable circuits in the proposed piezo-metastructure could be easily adjusted by tuning the DC voltage sources or changing the amplification factors of op-amps with negative feedback. This feature can facilitate adaptive nonreciprocal wave transmission. Overall, the proposed system creates a paradigm shift for manipulating elastic wave transmission with unprecedented programmability, which would inspire more research activities in the field of nonlinear piezo-metastructures. (A.4) 