Superfluidity has recently been reported in double electron-hole bilayer graphene. The multiband nature of the bilayers is important because of the very small band gaps between conduction and valence bands. The long range nature of the superfluid pairing interaction means that screening must be fully taken into account. We have carried out a systematic mean-field investigation that includes (i) contributions to screening from both intraband and interband excitations, (ii) the lowenergy band structure of bilayer graphene with its small band gap and flattened Mexican hat-like low-energy bands, (iii) the large density of states at the bottom of the bands, (iv) electron-hole pairing in the multibands, and (v) electron-hole pair transfers between the conduction and valence band condensates. We find that the superfluidity strongly modifies the intraband contributions to the screening, but that the interband contributions are unaffected. Unexpectedly, the net effect of the screening is to suppress Josephson-like pair transfers and to confine the superfluid pairing entirely to the conduction band condensate even for very small band gaps, making the system behave similarly to a one-band superfluid. The recent report of enhanced tunneling at equal densities in electron-hole double graphene bilayers 1 strongly points to the existence of an electron-hole superfluid condensate The low-energy band structure of bilayer graphene usually has a small band gap that depends in magnitude on the applied perpendicular electric fields The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we recall the physical structure of the electron-hole double bilayer graphene system and its electronic bandstructure. In Sec. III we recall multicondensate superfluidity where the superfluid pairs form in more than one band. In Sec. IV we discuss in some detail, linear screening in a system where there are two graphene bilayers, each with a conduction band and a valence band. We discuss the very significant changes in the screening when the system makes a transition from the normal state to the superfluid state. In Sec. V we present and discuss our results, and Sec. VI contains a summary of our main points and our conclusions. Our system comprises a pair of electrically isolated graphene bilayers, one bilayer doped with electrons and the other with holes, separated by a thin insulating barrier. The dopings can be induced by applying voltages to top and bottom metal gates The effective Hamiltonian can be written, We have made the standard transformation for the pdoped bilayer to fill the bands with positively charged holes up to a positive energy Fermi level located in the conduction band. The creation and annihilation operators c γ † k and c γ k are for electrons in the conduction (γ = +) or valence band (γ = -) of the n-doped bilayer. d γ † k and d γ k are the corresponding operators for holes in the p-doped bilayer. V S k k ′ in Eq. ( We take the dielectric constant ǫ = 2 for bilayer graphene sheets encapsulated in a few layers of insulating hBN. where Since we are working at low densities for which the carriers occupy only the low energy part of the bands, we retain only two of the four bands (see Fig. Since each bilayer in the electron-hole double bilayer has two bands, pairing in a superfluid can occur between an electron and hole in the conduction band or in the valence band. In principle there could also be crosspairing where , and the geometrical form factor F γγ ′ kk ′ is the overlap of a single-particle state in band γ with a state in band γ ′ . For a given carrier density n, the chemical potential μ is determined from the density equation for the conduction band, coupled with the gap equations. We define Bogoliubov amplitudes v γ k and u γ k for the conduction and valence bands, Since we are using the term "holes" for the carriers in the p-doped bilayer, to avoid confusion we will refer to an absence of a carrier in the otherwise filled valence band as a "valence-band vacancy". In the gap equations, Eqs. (5), coupling of ∆ + k with ∆ - k arises from Josephson-like transfers of pairs, where a pair from one band is virtually excited into the other band. Pairs that have formed in the valence band can excite into the conduction band, and in the conduction band they reinforce the strength of the ∆ + k . The long range nature of the bare Coulomb interaction means that screening of interactions must be taken into account. With two bilayers, a Coulomb interaction in one bilayer induces a charge response not only in the same bilayer but also in the opposite bilayer. We use the linear-response random phase approximation (RPA) for screening. In the RPA, electrons respond like noninteracting particles to a sum of the external potentials plus the mean-field Hartree potentials from the charge densities induced by the electrons. The screened interlayer Coulomb potential in the normal state is f k,γ is the Fermi distribution function for band γ. The bilayer spin and valley degeneracies are In Eq. ( We characterize the different roles played by Π intra (q) and Π inter (q) in the screening as follows. For Π intra (q), only the conduction band contributes, Π intra (q) ≃ Π ++ (q). The valence band contribution Π --(q), is negligible because the valence band is completely full. Π ++ (q) scales with the DOS in the conduction band, so Π ++ (q) = 0 for n = 0. There is a peak in Π ++ (q) at q = 2k F , and then for q > 2k F it falls rapidly to zero In contrast, for Π inter (q) the enormous reservoir of carriers in the valence band ensures that Π inter (q) is not zero even when the conduction band density n = 0. At q = 0, we always have Π inter (0) = 0, because interband vertical scatterings and back scatterings are forbidden. Π inter (q) grows monotonically from zero with q, and becomes larger than Π intra (q) for q > 2k F . In real space, the large-q behavior of Π inter (q) reduces the strength of screened interaction at small r < r c . Since Π inter (q) involves excitations across the band gap E g , Π inter (q) should be sensitive to E g , being strongest for small E g . In the presence of superfluidity, the existence of the superfluid gap in the energy spectrum weakens the RPA screened interaction. The superfluid condensate reduces the population of free carriers available for screening. The RPA screened interaction in the superfluid state is given by where Π n (q) is the normal polarizability that is modified from the polarizability in the Fermi liquid state by the superfluidity, and Π a (q) is the anomalous polarizability, Again q = |kk ′ |. From Eq. ( 1. One band References 3, 13, and 15 considered only the conduction band, and found within mean-field that superfluidity can significantly weaken screening in a graphene system. Recently, quantum Monte Carlo calculations on the system considered in Refs. 3 and 15, have produced results in good quantitative agreement with the mean-field results In Refs. 3, 15, and 16, no solutions to Eqs. (5, 6, 11, 12) of physical relevance existed in the weak-coupled BCS superfluid regime with ∆ ≪ E F . Only in the strongcoupled crossover and BEC regimes, with superfluid gaps ∆ > E F , did solutions exist. Physically, this result means that when ∆ > E F , such a wide range of lowlying excited states in the energy spectrum are blocked, that the screening of the electron-hole attractive interaction is sufficiently weakened to allow the superfluidity to exist. Further, the large superfluid condensate fraction in the strong-coupled crossover and BEC regimes, means that the population of free carriers available for screening is significantly reduced. Since the weak-coupled regime would occur at high density, this leads to the prediction of a maximum value of the density for superfluidity to exist, that is, an onset density for superfluidity. Turning to the multiband electron-hole bilayer graphene, Fig. Figure Figure Finally, Fig. Figure Figure An unexpected result in Fig. To illustrate why Josephson-like transfer of electronhole pairs are small when ∆ ± ≪ E g , Fig. Without a band gap, the conduction and valence bands in bilayer graphene are parabolic at low energies. However, the opening of a band gap E g is accompanied by a flattening of the low-energy bands and the appearance of a small maximum centered on the K point, the Mexican hat shape The large build-up of the DOS at the bottom of the bilayer conduction band significantly reduces E F at a given density compared with E F for the band, but the flattening of the bands increases k F . In addition, at low densities E F lies below the central maximum of the conduction band, leading to additional effects, discussed below. Figure Figure In the superfluid state (Fig. To summarize, the primary new effects of the bilayer bands are that (i) the intraband contributions dominate out to significantly larger values of qr 0 than for parabolic bands, and we recall that only intraband contributions are suppressed by superfluidity; and (ii) the residual interband contributions to the screening are much smaller for bilayer bands than for parabolic bands, because of the large enhancement of the DOS in the low-lying states of the bilayer conduction bands. In the absence of screening, the system naturally divides into two regimes depending on the energy scales 12 : (i) for E g E F , the system resembles a one band system because the contributions from the valence band are negligible; (ii) for E g E F , the contribution from the valence band is significant. However when the electron-hole pairing attraction is screened, the compensatory nature of multiband screening pushes the system to resemble a one-band system, even when the band gap E g is small. We have seen that interband screening keeps ∆ + < E g . The near complete absence of valence-band vacancies generated by the superfluid, together with negligible Josephson-like pair transfers, keeps ∆ -very small. The large DOS at the bottom of the bilayer conduction band keeps E F smaller than E g , even for relatively large densities and very small gaps. Further independent confirmation of the nearly oneband nature of the superfluidity comes from the behavior of the chemical potential in the limit of small conduction band density, lim n→0 μ (Fig. The small band gaps characteristic of bilayer graphene mean that screening by carriers from the filled valence bands strengthens the overall screening. This is due to the additional interband contributions to the screening coming from excitations out of the valence band into the conduction band. The very large DOS at the bottom of the bilayer conduction band from van Hove-like singularities together with the flattening of the band results, for a given density, in a much smaller Fermi energy E F than for the parabolic band. The small Fermi energies permit the superfluidity to be very effective in suppressing screening, with the superfluid energy gap blocking a wide range of low-lying excitations on the scale of E F . Despite the small band gaps, Josephson-like pair transfers between the condensates in the valence and conduction bands are negligible. This unexpected result is because multiband screening always keeps the superfluid gaps small compared with the band gap: any Josephsonlike transfer of electron-hole pairs from the valence to the conduction bands leaves behind an increased population of free valence-band vacancies, and these add to the screening. The increased screening reduces the superfluid gap. The net effect of this compensation is to keep the superfluid gap smaller than the band gap. The suppression of Josephson-like pair transfers means that the superfluid condensates in the valence and conduction bands are decoupled, with the superfluid condensate in the valence band very weak, so that the superfluidity is dominated by the decoupled conduction band condensate. The conduction band superfluid gap is significantly weakened by the additional interband screening arising from excitations from the valence band. The density range predicted for the superfluidity is consistent with the range predicted in Ref. 3, and of the order of the range reported in recent experiments Multicomponent screening effects and the evolution of the low-energy bilayer graphene bands with variable band gap, result in a complex interplay of energy and length scales beyond the already rich mean-field results discussed in Ref. 12. The comprehensive results presented here, demonstrate the robustness of double bilayer graphene as an optimum platform for realizing and exploiting electron-hole superfluidity under practical experimental conditions.