Phononic crystals and acoustic metamaterials are periodic structures whose effective properties can be tailored at will to achieve extreme control on wave propagation. Their refractive index is obtained from the homogenization of the infinite periodic system, but it is possible to locally change the properties of a finite crystal in such a way that it results in an effective gradient of the refractive index (GRIN). In such case the propagation of waves can be accurately described by means of ray theory, and different refractive devices can be designed in the framework of wave propagation in inhomogeneous media. In this paper we review the different devices that have been studied for the control of both bulk or guided acoustic waves based on graded phononic crystals. Phononic crystals and acoustic metamaterials enable to achieve innovative properties for the propagation of mechanical waves (air-borne sound waves, water-borne acoustic waves, water waves, elastic waves, surface acoustic waves, Lamb waves) inapproachable in natural materials. Phononic crystals consist of periodic arrangements of scatterers in a given matrix, and they were firstly proposed in 1993 In this regime the wavelength l of the acoustic field is comparable to the periodicity a of the lattice, l»a, and to be observable it is also required that the thickness D of the bulk phononic crystals be at least four or five periodicities, D>>a. In the subwavelength range, l>>a , it is possible to find local resonances in the scatterers and the designed structures exhibit hybridization band gaps which give rise to novel effects such as negative mass density or negative elastic modulus. In this exotic regime the structure behaves as a special type of materials called "acoustic metamaterials", which were firstly proposed in the seminal work While interesting, most of the extraordinary properties of metamaterials are in general singlefrequency or narrow-band, since outside the resonant regime metamaterials behave as common composites. However, non-resonant phononic crystals in the low frequency regime behave as homogeneous non-dispersive materials whose effective parameters can be easily tailored, and in this regime gradient index (GRIN) acoustic materials, or GRIN devices, are easily doable. These devices were firstly proposed for acoustic waves by Torrent et al in 2007 The attained effective refractive index of the GRIN device can be smaller or larger than that of the background medium, which corresponds to phase advance Comparing to the wavelength, the thinner is the device, the larger will be the highest required index. If the width of the whole device is downscaled to the subwavelength regime, the GRIN device becomes a metasurface GRIN phononic crystals and metamaterials can be applied to various types of waves in a long frequency limit, such as surface water waves The objective of this review is to provide a comprehensive picture of the evolution of the domain of GRIN devices for mechanical waves, to demonstrate the wide variety of applications at the nanoscale that these devices offer and to present the challenges to be accomplished to further develop this field. The paper is organized as follows: after this introduction, we will review the fundamental ideas of the homogenization of sonic and phononic crystals in Section II and of phononic crystal plates in Section III, which offers efficient tools to obtain the effective elastic properties and, consequently, their effective refractive index; Then we will review GRIN devices for bulk acoustic and elastic waves in Section IV and for flexural waves in Section V; the advanced full control of polarizations in elastic plates with multimodal GRIN devices will be reviewed in Section VI. Last section will present some conclusions and future challenges. Graded materials with specific variations of the refractive index are obviously not found in nature, and they have to be artificially engineered. The inclusion of scatterers in a given matrix is an excellent way for the realization of artificially graded materials, since the average behavior of the scatterers is to modify the effective velocity of acoustic waves in the matrix, and this effective velocity can be tuned by means of the size of the inclusions. When these inclusions are arranged in a regular array we call the composite a sonic (fluid matrix) or phononic (solid matrix) crystal, and the computation of the effective sound velocity is made by a set of mathematical tools called homogenization theories. Roughly speaking, the homogenization region is the range of frequencies at which the propagating field cannot distinguish the individual scatterers of the composite and perceives the structure as a uniform material with some effective parameters (stiffness constant, mass density, viscosity, etc. are the parameters to be computed by means of the most adequate homogenization method). Homogenization is an old problem and a great bibliography is available in this realm (see for instance As mentioned before, a sonic crystal consists of a periodic distribution of solid or fluid inclusions embedded in a fluid matrix. When the operating wavelength is larger than the typical distance between inclusions (lattice constant) the field cannot distinguish individual scatterers and perceives the structure as a homogeneous material with some effective parameters (mass density, compressibility, speed of sound, etc). There exists a vast literature about homogenization of periodic and random materials For airborne propagation any solid material will have a much higher density than that of air, and the extreme impedance mismatch blocks the penetration of the acoustic wave into the solid inclusions. Therefore, those solids can be assumed to be "rigid" inclusions and their mass density and compressibility can be set as infinite. In this case, if the filling fraction is small and the multiple scattering interactions can be neglected( D can be regarded as 1) the effective mass density and velocity can be simplified as and we recover the effective mass density and effective sound velocity derived by Barryman As an example of application, a circular cluster of 151 wooden cylinders arranged in a hexagonal lattice embedded in air was homogenized by multiple scattering, and the resulting effective parameters as a function of the filling fraction are shown in the left panel of Fig. Eq.( The right panel of Fig. Multiple scattering allows the homogenization of finite clusters, therefore it is a versatile method to study the behavior of the effective parameters when disorder is introduced in the lattice Metamaterials for acoustic or elastic waves have been mainly studied by means of sonic or phononic crystals. As said before, in the low frequency limit, an anisotropic phononic crystal behaves as a homogeneous material with some effective parameters. The plane wave expansion (PWE) method is an alternative method to multiple scattering for the homogenization of periodic composites. This approach was firstly proposed by Krokhin where r is the mass density, w is the angular frequency, u i is the displacement, k is the wavenumber, n is a unit vector, C is the stiffness tensor and we use Voigt notation for the sub indexes. In a phononic crystal the mass density and stiffness tensors are periodic functions of the spatial coordinates, and an inhomogeneous version of the above equation has to be used. The plane wave expansion method is applied and then we arrive to an eigenvalue equation where ρ G , C GI G and (u GM ) 8 are the Fourier components of the mass density, stiffness tensor and the displacement field, respectively. The summation over repeated indexes has been assumed. The above equation can be manipulated to solve for the average field (G=0 component), and this average field can be used to describe the effective behavior of the crystal. Then, after some complex mathematical manipulation we arrive to an expression for the dispersion relation of the average field, which consists in calculating the roots of the determinant of the matrix G as Eq.( where the effective mass density ρ 8J * , the effective stiffness C GI * and the coupling tensor S Ij are The above formulas offer a way to describe resonant (χ __M ) and nonlocal (k) phononic crystals. In the low frequency (ω → 0) and local (k → 0) limit, from the Eq.( the mass density is a scalar as the volume average value, the effective stiffness tensor is simplified as where (M GMG ) 8J = G 8G C GI G*G' G′ IJ . The information about the details of the phononic crystal structures is included in the stiffness tensor whose symmetry relates with the background matrix, inclusion, and lattice symmetry. Periodic homogenization is therefore a versatile calculation method of the effective parameters, where once we know the shape of the scatterer or scatterers in the unit cell we can Fourier-transform their spatial distribution and obtain the effective parameters. The major drawback of this method is that it is not suitable for high-contrast of inclusions or fluid-elastic composites, since in this case convergence is poor. Also, due to periodicity, order-disorder effects are not easy to study. It is therefore a complementary technique to the multiple scattering method presented in the previous section. In a homogeneous thin elastic plate, the propagation of flexural waves (antisymmetric Lamb mode wave) can be approximately described by the bi-Helmholtz equation (assuming time harmonic dependence of the field) D @ ∇ g -ρ @ h @ ω C W x, y = 0 Eq.( where ρ @ , h b and D @ = E @ h @ m /12(1 -v @ C ) are the mass density, the thickness and the rigidity of the plate, respectively, being E b the Young's modulus and v b the Poisson's ratio. W is the out of plane displacement field. Multiple scattering can also be applied for the homogenization of distribution of scatterers in elastic plates, and frequency-dependent effective parameters were obtained in Eq.( !/p + q + !*p + /q ( !/p ( *' !*p + [q + !/p + *q ( !/p ( ] q + !*p + /q ( !/p ( *'[q + !/p + *q ( !/p ( ] D @ Eq.( where the subscript "a"("b") means the parameters for inclusions (background). The effective phase velocity can be obtained by the ratio of the wavenumber between the effective medium and the background, giving Eq.( As an example, let us consider circular inclusions in a thin aluminum plate (h b =0.1a) and let the inclusion's material be chosen as hole (empty inclusion), lead and rubber, whose parameters can be found in Ref , which allow us to relate both, even if the propagation of the S mode has not been included in the theory. Actually, there are three fundamental plate modes as it is seen in the right panel of Fig. In Fig. As an example, a phononic crystal plate with the unit cell shown in Fig. As a conclusion, the homogenization procedure for phononic crystal plates illustrated in Fig. This section is devoted to the review of GRIN devices for waves in bulk materials, therefore no interfaces are assumed and surface or guided waves are excluded in this section (they will be considered in the next one). In principle we could divide the devices in two types, depending on the nature of the matrix which can be fluid or solid. This division makes sense since in the former shear waves does not exist in the background and the field is described entirely by a scalar pressure field, while in the latter shear waves with different propagation velocities have to be as well considered. However, for the fluid matrix an additional division can be made, since the physics involved in the scattering process is different if the background is air or water. While in air almost all solid materials are acoustically rigid due to the impedance mismatch between air and any solid, in underwater acoustics this impedance mismatch is of the same order, so that we have to consider the elastic nature of the inclusions. For this reason, we divide this section in three subsections, corresponding to the study and design of GRIN devices for air, water and solid backgrounds. In this section, we will discuss about the flat GRIN lens for focusing whose surface is flat instead of being curved as in traditional lens. The index profile of GRIN flat lens keeps constant along the propagating x axis while changes along the vertical y axis as where h is the half-height in y axis of the lens, n 0 is the refractive index at y=0, and n h is the index at the upper or lower edges y = ±h. Such index profile is designed with the aim of presenting low aberrations As shown in Fig. and experimentally (lower panel). Similar focal spots and side-lobes are evidently seen. To quantitatively characterize the focusing effect, the pressure along the x and y axes are also plotted in Fig. Different from the impedance mismatch between the air and solid scatters, the mass density and acoustic velocity are in the same order for most scatterers and water, so that the scatters can't be regarded as rigid anymore. From Eq.(1) in Sec.2.1, one can also calculate the effective parameters of phononic crystals in water. For the same type of GRIN flat lens as in the last section, similar phononic crystals made of radius-varied steel cylinders are proposed in water To be noted that this GRIN lens also supports the source off the central axis, which was demonstrated numerically and experimentally The effective parameters for bulk elastic wave in 2D phononic crystals can be from Eq.( where c b is the acoustic velocity in the background matrix, c is the group velocity of the bulk elastic wave mode, GX and GM are two orientations in the first Brillouin zone. For an epoxy matrix phononic crystal, the diagram of the first band of shear-vertical (SV) mode is plotted in two ways: i) steel inclusions with different filling fractions (different radii) as shown in the part (a) of the upper panel of Fig. From the dispersion curve variations, for a given band the effective index will change locally along the reduced frequency and for different bands the dispersive properties of the effective index are slightly different. Therefore, if a GRIN flat lens is designed based on a given frequency, it may have a small deviation in focal length as the effective or fitted gradient coefficient a in Eq.( changes, as seen in the lower panel of Fig. The control of elastic waves in plates provides the most interesting applications such as onchip acoustic propagation, thermal conductivity control, opto-mechanic interactions in micro/nanoscale for GRIN devices, which can be attractive for the communities of physics, materials, and Nano science. For 2D thin plates, or membranes, the elastic waves propagate as surface waves due to the constrains of the plate's two boundaries, resulting in antisymmetric, symmetric and shear-horizontal polarizations. Among those modes, the fundamental antisymmetric mode, in another word flexural mode, is widely studied since it is mainly characterized by out-of-plane displacement component in plates that can be easily detected by means of optical methods. Fig. Piezoelectric energy harvester disks are deposited on a GRIN flat lens and a Luneburg lens at a position where the incident plane wave is focused as a spot. Comparing to the energy harvested in the background plate, the GRIN devices enable to generate output electrical power an order of magnitude higher. In Sec.3, Eq.( Eq.( from where one can see that the phase velocity is not only related to the elastic parameters but also depends on plate's thickness. This special property of flexural waves allows to design GRIN devices just by locally varying the plate's thickness without any phononic crystal with holes. The refractive index for flexural wave can be easily derived when all elastic parameters remain fixed as in In the upper-left panel of Fig. Concentrator lenses Invisibility is always a challenging problem for wave control in physics. Acoustic cloaks in principle require inhomogeneous and anisotropic materials for their realization, which are quite complicated to fabricate in practice Nevertheless, from a practical point of view, the central index can be chosen with a proper finite value in accordance with the step in design. A ray enters the lens and exits in the same direction by flowing a loop around the center inside the lens, thus producing an invisible effect. The multifrequency performance of the invisible lens is simulated with cylindrical waves from a point source From Fig. iii) the wide blue domain shows that it is possible to design a special (n S0 , n SH0 ) trajectory that makes a GRIN device work as one type of lens for S0 mode and as another lens for SH0 mode. After defining the index profiles for SH0 and S0 modes, the index of A0 mode can be designed by means of an independent thickness variation, and such that it works similarly to the one or both of the SH0 and S0 modes or as another totally different lens. Thus, a full control of Lamb modes and advanced multimodal GRIN device become achievable. In Fig. Over the past two decades, we witnessed the rapid growth of the development of phononic crystals and metamaterials as well we the recent emergence of metasurfaces to deepen the understanding of wave physics. Although the effective index is a homogenized result from infinite periodic structures, it is still proper to define a local index in a gradient structure, being a bridge between infinity and locality. The homogenization theories of phononic crystals/metamaterials and the design principles of GRIN devices are implemented in terms of wavelength, mainly in long wavelength limit l>3~4a. Therefore, the gradient index conception can be applied to structure's size from nm to m and different wave natures propagating in solids, liquids and gases with free or constrained boundary conditions, among which the applications for elastic waves in thin plates at nanoscales show a promising potential in future for wireless telecommunications, heat conductivity, phonon sensor and so on. The complex properties of elastic waves in thin plates are also fully demonstrated to design more advanced and multimodal GRIN devices. Most applications of GRIN phononic crystals and metamaterials are dealing with lensing properties, while another big application is acoustic cloaking, which are studied among wide communities. Nevertheless, several challenges remain to be answered in future: 1) When wave propagates from one medium to another one, from a uniform surface point of view its behavior is governed by the Snell's law that involves the ratio of the refractive index between the two media. However, the wave energy transfer rate is governed by the impedance ratio between the two media. Some GRIN devices such as flat lens and transmitted-type metasurface, the impedance matching condition is not always easily fulfilled, which will limit the focusing energy level and the corresponding energy harvesting efficiency. 2) New refractive index profiles are needed to discover from mathematical methods that can help to design updated wave functionalities. 3) New physics such as thermal conductivity behaviors and nonlinear optical/acoustic responses in gradient phoxonic crystals at nanoscale. It is foreseeable that new breakthroughs will be reported by the united efforts in the communities of physics, material science, engineering, Nano science, mathematics among others.