Motivated by recent experiments on FeTe1-xSex, we construct an explicit minimal model of an iron-based superconductor with band inversion at the Z point and non-topological bulk s± pairing. While there has been considerable interest in Majorana zero modes localized at vortices in such systems, we find that our model -without any vortices -intrinsically supports 1D helical Majorana modes localized at the hinges between ( Introduction -In the decade since their initial discovery, iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) have been studied vigorously This indeed appears to be the case with the vortex core MZM recently observed in the unconventional iron-based superconductor FeTe 1-x Se x (x = 0.45) (FTS) In this letter, we present a completely different mechanism for Majorana states in FeSCs in the absence of vortices. Specifically, we demonstrate the emergence of higher-order topology Model Hamiltonian -Our minimal BdG model describes a 3D TI with s ± pairing on a cubic lattice: ces Γ i are chosen to be where σ and s are Pauli matrices for the orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. The time-reversal (Θ) and the parity (P ) symmetry operations are given by Θ = iσ 0 ⊗ s y K = -iΓ 13 K, P = σ z ⊗ s 0 = Γ 5 The s ± pairing function is We first restrict to μ = 0 for simplicity, which is also justified by the small chemical potential observed in the ARPES experiments. As we adiabatically turn on the pairing, the bulk remains a topologically trivial superconductor. However, unlike the case of uniform s-wave pairing, the s ± pairing will gap out the TI surface states in an anisotropic way. This is the basic principle that enables the realization of new surface topological phenomena beyond the conventional bulk topology. Theory of Surface States -To visualize the anisotropy of surface state pairing, we first notice that any surface termination of a crystal can be described as a tangent plane of the unit sphere , where m0 = m 0 -2m 1 + m 2 . To solve for the effective surface theory for Σ(φ, θ), we apply the coordinate rotation where R Y (θ) and R Z (φ) are Euler rotations around yaxis and z-axis, respectively. It is easy to check that k 3 = n Σ • k and any surface state on Σ(θ, φ) can now be obtained by imposing open boundary conditions on Generally, H Z 0 (k ) has a complicated form in k . However, we notice that there always exists the unitary transformation U (φ, θ) = e iΓ13θ/2 e iΓ12φ/2 such that HZ We have defined m1 = (m 1 cos 2 θ -m 2 sin 2 θ)/2, m2 = (m 2 cos 2 θ -m 1 sin 2 θ)/2 and m13 = (m 1 + m 2 ) sin 2θ/2. Now we solve for the zero mode equation of h0 (k 1 = k 2 = 0) and consider h1 as a perturbation to extract the surface state dispersion of Σ(φ, θ). Replacing k 3 → -i∂ x3 yields the zero mode equation With the boundary conditions ψ(x 3 = 0) = ψ(x 3 = -∞) = 0, we find two solutions ψ1,2 that are exponentially localized near x 3 = 0: ψi = N sin(βx 3 )e αx3 e i(k1x1+k2x2) ξ i , i = 1, 2. (8 where we have defined and the normalization factor N = 4α(α 2 + β 2 )/β 2 . The spinor part of ψi are the eigenstates of Γ 35 with eigenvalue -1: Treating h1 as a perturbation, the low energy description of the surface state is given by where ς are pseudo-spin Pauli matrices in the space spanned by ξ 1 and ξ 2 . Surface State Pairing -The effective pairing h ∆ (θ, φ) on a surface Σ(φ, θ) is solved by treating the s ± SC pairing ∆(k)τ y ⊗ Γ 13 as a perturbation (τ are the Pauli matrices for the particle-hole basis). The particle-hole redundancy requires the hole counterparts of Eq. 8, and the spinor part of the zero modes in the BdG basis are where we have undone the unitary transformation U (φ, θ) of ξ i . By rotating ∆(k) to ∆(k ) and expanding it around Z, the effective pairing at the surface Dirac point with We expect that h ∆ (φ, θ) = ∆ eff (θ)Λ(φ, θ), where ∆ eff and Λ come from the zero mode projection of the scalar momentum part ∆(k) and the matrix part τ y ⊗ Γ 13 respectively. Interestingly, the matrix part Λ is independent of the surface Σ(φ, θ): The spatial anisotropy of h ∆ (φ, θ) arises completely from ∆ eff (θ). Our main analytic result is an approximate formula for the effective surface pairing, The effective surface SC theory for any facet Σ(φ, θ) is finally given by, Helical hinge Majoranas -The angular anisotropy of ∆ eff (θ) enables a nontrivial situation where the pairing gap flips its sign while crossing the hinge between two facets Σ(φ, θ 1 ) and Σ(φ, θ 2 ). Mathematically, With Eq. 17, the hinge physics manifests itself as a TRI topological domain wall problem of 2D BdG Dirac fermions. As a result, the sign reversal of the pairing gaps necessarily binds the hinge with a pair of 1D helical Majoranas. Furthermore, the hinge Majorana condition in Eq. 17 requires the existence of a topological critical angle θ c , where ∆ eff (θ c ) = 0. This critical angle θ c is given by Helical hinge Majoranas will appear as long as θ c exists, i.e., when cot 2 θ c > 0. With our choice of model parameters, the condition is In Fig. The appearance of helical hinge Majoranas has a topological origin. In the supplementary materials [56], we study the Wannier bands We emphasize that the helical surface Wannier bands should not be interpreted as a surface topological index for any single isolated surface, e.g. the (001) surface. Importantly, any surface Hamiltonian H Σ in Eq. 16 is topologically trivial by itself, and the helical hinge Majoranas only arise when a domain wall is formed between neighboring facets. Therefore, the higher order topology here is a combined effect with contributions from all surfaces in a crystal. Stability -Having demonstrated the existence of hinge modes under ideal circumstances, we now show that they persist even when the chemical potential is moved from the Dirac point. The analytic theory can no longer be easily applied for finite chemical potential, but we can characterize the phase hosting hinge modes through either its surface spectrum or its Wannier band spectrum. As the surface gap closes and reopens, the helical (gapped) surface Wannier bands will simultaneously develop a gap (become helical), indicating a surface topological phase transition. By checking both surface energy band spectra and Wannier band spectra, we numerically obtain the phase diagram of our model as a function of the isotropic pairing ∆ 0 (in units of ∆ 1 ) and the chemical potential μ, shown in Fig. Conclusion and Discussion -Motivated by experimental results on the band topology of several FeSCs, we have constructed an explicit model of higher-order topological superconductivity supporting helical Majorana states at the hinges between different facets, depending on their orientations. The main ingredients are the band inversion at the Z point and s ± pairing. Unlike some related constructions for 2D higher-order TSC in heterostructures In addition to more realistic future numerical modeling of specific FeSCs to search for this physics, we also foresee some interesting generalizations of our theoretical construction. In our model, and in the 2D models of Refs. x (k y ) at k y can be calculated by constructing the Wilson loop operator of all occupied BdG bands of H (z) (k x , k y ) along k x . As shown in Fig. The normal state Hamiltonian isH 0 (k) = v(sin k x Γ 1 + sin k y Γ 2 + sin k z Γ 3 ) + m(k)Γ 5 with m(k) = m 0m 1 (cos k x + cos k y ) -m 2 cos k z