Three-dimensional (3D) topological Dirac semimetal, when thinned down to 2D few layers, is expected to possess gapped Dirac nodes via quantum confinement effect and concomitantly display the intriguing quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator phase. However, the 3D-to-2D crossover and the associated topological phase transition, which is valuable for understanding the topological quantum phases, remain unexplored. Here, we synthesize high-quality Na3Bi thin films with √3×√3 reconstruction on graphene, and systematically characterize their thickness-dependent electronic and topological properties by scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy in combination with first-principles calculations. We demonstrate that Dirac gaps emerge in Na3Bi films, providing spectroscopic evidences of dimensional crossover from a 3D semimetal to a 2D topological insulator. Importantly, the Dirac gaps are revealed to be of sizable magnitudes on 3 and 4 monolayers (72 and 65 meV, respectively) with topologically nontrivial edge states. Moreover, the Fermi energy of a Na3Bi film can be tuned via certain growth process, thus offering a viable way for achieving charge neutrality in transport. The feasibility of controlling Dirac gap opening and charge neutrality enables realizing intrinsic high-temperature QSH effect in Na3Bi films and achieving potential applications in topological devices. Topological Dirac semimetals (DSMs) host 3D Dirac fermions that disperse linearly along all three momentum directions around the Dirac points, Dimensionality provides an additional degree of freedom that can bring about fruitful phenomena to the topological DSMs. When the film thickness of DSM is comparable to the quasiparticle wavelength, finite-size effect quantizes the wave vector perpendicular to the film plane, resulting in 2D massive Dirac fermions in the bulk. In this study, we grow high-quality Na3Bi films with a √3×√3 surface reconstruction of variant thicknesses by molecular beam epitaxy on a graphene-covered 6H-SiC(0001) substrate, which has weak van der Waals interactions with Na3Bi films. Through proper growth condition, we are able to in situ tune the Fermi energy (EF) of Na3Bi film and thus achieve charge neutrality point of carriers. By scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we clarify that Na3Bi experiences a 3D-to-2D transition from a bulk semimetal to a gapped insulator in form of ultrathin films, where a Dirac band gap of ~72 meV (~65 meV) is observed for 3 MLs (4 MLs) due to quantum confinement. Quasiparticle interference imaging reveals the characteristic Dirac-cone states in both gapped and gapless Na3Bi films. Furthermore, our observations of edge states, whose energies locate inside the insulating bulk gap and have a decay length comparable with our DFT calculations, support their ascription as topological edge states. Our study illustrates the dimensional crossover and topological phase transition of Na3Bi(001) films, and demonstrates its viability for carrier control, which are all valuable for realization of QSH transport and device applications. Bulk Na3Bi crystallizes in a hexagonal P63/mmc phase, whose ML is composed of a Na-(Na/Bi)-Na sandwiched structure with an in-plane lattice constant of 5.448 Å. Based on DFT calculations and ab initio random structure searching (Method section), we have considered thousands possible structures of freestanding Na3Bi films and identified the most stable configuration of the √3×√3 reconstruction. As displayed in Figure Certainly, we post-anneal the as-grown Na3Bi film in an extra Na flux, which shifts its ED to -5 meV (red curve in Figure Next, we investigate the electronic structure of Na3Bi film as a function of thickness from dI/dV spectra (Figure There exists a spectroscopic dip around ED for 5-8 MLs, reminiscent of a band gap. The dip becomes less clear with increasing thickness and completely disappear for thick films, gradually evolving into the bulk limit (Figure To examine the topological properties of the gapped film, we scrutinize the spatial distribution of STS spectra near the step edge of a 3-ML Na3Bi island (Figure Detailed results of band structure and edge states are presented in Figure Furthermore, the mini gap may also be influenced by other factors such as the effect of tunneling background, doping, disorder, strain, etc. We also present the calculated topological edge states of 3-ML Na3Bi in Figure The magnitude of λ is consistent with the experimental value for in-gap edge states (Figure To conclude, by combining STM/STS and DFT calculations, we have investigated the thicknesses-dependent electronic properties of Na3Bi films with simultaneous spatial, energy and momentum resolution. We observe clear signatures that Na3Bi undergoes a gap-opening transition in dimension-reduced films, a QSH state with a large energy gap and expected edge states that differs from the bulk counterpart. The EF in Na3Bi films can be successfully tuned controllably via proper growth condition, achieving charge neutrality. Our work provides a route toward studying exotic topological phenomena, Sample Preparation. To prepare a uniform graphene substrate, a commercial 6H-SiC(0001) wafer, was firstly degassed at 600°C for 3 hours, and then annealed at 950°C under a Si flux for 5 cycles. The SiC substrate became atomically flat terminated with graphene by flashing to 1400°C for 10 minutes. High-purity of Na (99.95%) and Bi (99.999%) were simultaneously co-evaporated from two homemade thermal effusion sources onto the substrate, whose temperature was held at 200°C. During the growth, the Bi:Na flux ratio, controlled by the temperatures of Bi (380°C) and Na (245°C) sources, was kept larger than 1:10. There are two ways to achieve the n-doped Na3Bi films: by raising the Na source to 260°C with a larger flux or by annealing the sample at the growth temperature for 10 minutes in a Na overflux. STM/STS characterization. STM/STS measurements were performed on a Unisoku STM system operating at 4.5 K. Accordingly, the energy resolution in STS is determined by the thermal broadening and lock-in modulation effects, and is given by: ∆E = √(2V mod,RMS ) 2 + (3.2k B T) Structure relaxations were carried out until atomic forces is converged to smaller than 0.01 eV/Å. The Brillion-zone was sampled by a 24×24×1 k-grid. Wannier90 and WannierTools codes The Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang (BHZ) model was used to compute the penetration depth of 3-ML Na3Bi as done previously. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: xxx. 