Semiconductor mode-locked lasers can be used in a variety of applications ranging from multi-carrier sources for WDM communication systems to time base references for metrology. Their packaging in compact chip-or module-level systems remains however burdened by their strong sensitivity to back-reflections, quickly destroying the coherence of the modelocking. Here, we investigate the stabilization of mode-locked lasers directly edge coupled to a silicon photonic integrated circuit, with the objective of moving isolators downstream to the output of the photonic circuit. A 2.77 kHz 3 dB RF linewidth, substantially improved compared to the 15.01 kHz of the free running laser, is obtained in the best case. Even in presence of detrimental reflections from the photonic circuit, substantial linewidth reductions from 20 kHz to 8.82 kHz, from 572 kHz to 14.8 kHz, and from 1.5 MHz to 40 kHz are realized. enchtop (Ti:sapphire) mode-locked lasers (MLLs) are able to produce pulse trains with extremely low phase noise Integration of MLLs into such systems by means of flip-chip bonding Notably, heterogeneous integration constitutes an alternative approach for integrating MLLs into a SiP platform, with the additional advantage of reducing parasitic reflections between the active waveguide and the remaining photonic integrated circuit (PIC) Our objective is to compensate detrimental effects from parasitic reflections occurring inside the transceiver chip, to improve MLL mode-locking characteristics, and to move the isolator to the output of the integrated transmitter chip when such heterogeneous integration is not available. Moreover, weak external feedback with the topology proposed in this paper maintains the high FSR required when high power per comb line is targeted Broadband reflection of the entire comb spectrum has proven to be conducive in free-space We anticipate the strong dispersion associated with integrated waveguides, as well as fabrication induced variability of the group index, to potentially become a problem as the length of the delay lines is increased. Indeed, ideally the phase of each back-reflected comb line should be dialed in to yield stabilizing feedback with a constructive interference condition. Difficulties associated to waveguide dispersion in case of broadband feedback, even in the case of moderately long delay lines (~8 mm), are discussed in details in We build on a PIC architecture previously used for the stabilization of distributed feedback lasers (DFBs) From a control perspective, four phases have to be dialed in: Two to tune the resonant wavelengths of the rings, and two others to set the overall phase of the two reflection paths. From an actuation perspective, this is more straightforward than e.g. incorporating an intra-cavity filter. Here, only the phase at a single MLL line matters for each optical path (which can be tuned with a simple phase shifter). On the other hand, in the case of an intra-cavity comb line selection filter, the filter's FSR has to be a multiple of the MLL's FSR. Thus, the waveguide's group index and dispersion are also critical. Dynamically tuning the group index of a waveguide independently of the effective index at a fixed wavelength, so as to adjust a filter's FSR while at the same time maintaining its alignment to a given resonance, boils down to wideband control of the dispersion curve and is much more difficult Maintaining the alignment of the ring resonances with the targeted comb lines is also relatively straightforward, as the power transmitted to the drop port can be monitored. On the other hand, dialing in and maintaining the right feedback phases in the scheme proposed here poses control challenges from the perspective of error signal acquisition, as the only obvious feedback resides in the RF linewidth of the MLL, that cannot be recorded without complex electronics. While there might be correlations between emitted power levels and the phase of the feedback A theoretical investigation of a semiconductor MLL under self-injection feedback from two external cavities has been reported in In our case, the external cavities simply serve to each select one comb line, and their FSR is irrelevant so long as it is large enough for adjacent resonances not to substantially overlay with the MLL spectrum. As such, it is analogous to the work described in Figure Light is first collected from the MLL via an inverse tapered edge coupler, in which the silicon waveguide is tapered down to 200 nm at the closest point to the interface (the waveguide is terminated ~1.1 μm before the interface to accommodate overlay tolerances). The facet of the chip was slightly angled (8 o ) in order to reduce back-reflections, and the inverse taper also angled inside the chip with a correction taking refraction of the beam into account. Given a typical mode field diameter (MFD) of 3 μm at the input of the chip, this angle allows reduction of the reflection back into the laser by an additional 3 dB relative to the -14 dB otherwise expected from the interface. Based on previous measurement results, insertion losses between MLL and on-chip waveguide are expected to be 3 dB to 6 dB as the distance between the MLL and the PIC is increased from 1.5 μm to 5 μm Two rings each serve to selectively couple out one comb line from the main bus waveguide and to drop it to an auxiliary waveguide. Each of these auxiliary waveguides form part of a delay line and are connected to a forward biased PIN phase shifter followed by a Sagnac loop acting as a reflector. The rings themselves are thermally tuned with titanium nitride (TiN) heaters implemented in the back-end of the chip While we showed nonlinear effects in the rings to be playing a role when applying feedback to a high power DFB The Sagnac loops were implemented with 2 by 2 multi-mode interferometers (MMIs), with a 6 μm width and a 43.25 μm length, followed by a waveguide loop. The insertion losses of the MMIs were measured on separate test structures and found to be below 0.5 dB (and below our ability to measure reliably in these test structures). The insertion losses of the phase shifters at 0 V were negligible, however due to the excessively wide intrinsic region width that was chosen, they proved to be very inefficient with thermal effects working against free carrier induced refractive index changes. Consequently, both the tuned feedback phase as well as the feedback strength are determined by the rings in the following experiments. A number of monitor ports were implemented (Fig. Based on the device characteristics, the back-reflection from the tunable feedback paths is calculated to be below -10 dB. The cumulative waveguide length separating the chip facet from the Sagnac loops is ~880 μm for both paths, resulting in round trip group delays of ~26 ps in addition to the ~66 ps arising from the rings at resonance. In addition to the back-reflection through the Sagnac loop, ring 2 might also generate some direct reflection due to Mie splitting when tuned into an MLL comb line Even though the facet reflection coefficient is estimated to be smaller than the reflection coefficient from the feedback loops, the applied tunable feedback remains weak compared to the broadband parasitic feedback from the chip facet, as a consequence of the former only being applied to two lines and the latter to 40+ lines. This is however partially compensated by the group delay of the tunable feedback being considerably larger, which leads to a stronger effective feedback strength The GCs at the output of the chip are another important source of reflection, in particular the GC connected to the main bus waveguide, since it also reflects back the entire comb. Based on ripples in GC loops, the waveguide-to-waveguide GC back-reflection has been extracted to be on the order of -17 dB. Taking into account edge coupler insertion losses as well as round trip waveguide losses, the resulting feedback can be expected to be below -25 dB. Even though here too the reflection coefficient is significantly smaller than that of the feedback loops, once it is taken into account that the GC reflection is applied to the entire comb, the reflected power from the GC can be seen to be commensurate and even a bit larger than the reflected power from a single tunable feedback loop (applied to a single line). Moreover, here the reflection is associated to a substantial round trip time delay of 44 ps, resulting from the 1.5 mm waveguide length between the edge coupler and the GC. Thus, this parasitic back-reflection is also expected to have a substantial effect on laser mode-locking. Several possibilities exist to reduce parasitic back-reflections in the future: An anti-reflective coating could be added to the input facet or the input facet angle further increased. While lowreflection GCs typically require very fine lithography The semiconductor MLL is a Q-dash buried ridge stripe (BRS) laser operated as a single section laser Figure Figure Operation of the laser was investigated under optical feedback, i.e., after placing the laser at a few micrometer distance of the PIC's edge coupler and aligning its position with a piezoelectric actuator to maximize the coupling efficiency. Tuning currents in the range 4 mA to 6 mA were independently applied to both rings, shifting their resonances by > 4 laser FSRs around the center of the laser spectrum. Adjacent ring resonances on the edges of the laser spectrum only interact with very weak comb lines, more than 10 dB below the power of the central lines, thus with weak effect on lasing dynamics (see Suppl. Mat. for details). Nonetheless, in view of this it would have been advantageous to slightly increase the ring's FSR, as spurious reflections of these other comb lines might be detrimental due to their uncontrolled phase. Figure Small drops in the transmitted power mark the spectral alignment of a ring with an MLL comb line, which is then dropped and filtered out before reaching the output port (alignment of the resonances with MLL comb lines was also independently verified based on the MLL's spectrum and the rings' tuning curves, see Suppl. Mat.). These ring bias points are marked by white lines in the figure, wherein these occur in pairs for ring 2 as a consequence of the split resonance. Five broad regions of operation, marked as R1 to R5, are visible in the RF linewidth. They respectively correspond to 3 dB RF linewidths on the order of ~5 kHz, 80 kHz, 20 kHz, several hundred kHz and 3 kHz. While the RF linewidths are better than that of the free running laser in regions R1 and R5, and comparable (if slightly worse) in region R3, in regions R2 and R4 the RF linewidths are severely broadened. These 5 regions are independent of the spectral alignment of the rings, since they are much wider than the regions in which the ring 2 resonance overlays with a comb line. Rather, they are a consequence of the broadband reflections from the PIC to the MLL (including reflections from the PIC facet as well as onchip devices such as grating couplers), that, depending on their phase, either help or hinder mode-locking, or of temperature drifts in the environment. Slow drifts in the test setup can change the phase of the broadband reflections, for example due to overall heating of the chip and its submount over time. Indeed, in the automated measurement, the ring 1 current sweep is embedded inside the ring 2 sweep, i.e., while ring 1 is rapidly and repeatedly swept between 4 mA and 6 mA, ring 2 is only swept once at a much slower pace. Thus, the ring 2 bias can also be taken as the time axis (21 hours total). The good mode-locking regions R1, R3 and R5 feature different laser FSRs respectively offset by ~0 MHz, -0.5 MHz and -0.25 MHz from 36.7 GHz. The FSR remains stable within a given mode-locking region. The poor mode-locking regions R2 and R4 on the other hand correspond to transitions between different stable mode-locking regimes. In these transitions, in which the RF linewidth is considerably broadened up to the MHz range, the MLL FSR is also lowered by about ~2 MHz relative to R1 and R5. As we will see in the following, this gives the opportunity to study the effect of controlled filtered feedback both within a mode-locking region (R3) and in a transition between mode-locking regions (R3 to R5). While the first will result in an improvement by a factor > 2, the second will result in an extension of the stable mode-locking region, thus yielding much higher improvements up to a factor 40. It is apparent that frequency selective feedback can modify the RF linewidth when a ring resonance overlays with an MLL comb line. Here too, the linewidth is reduced or enhanced depending on the feedback phase, but since the latter is also changed by the exact ring bias point, it can be fine-tuned with the ring provided the feedback phase at resonance is close enough to target. Since the phase of the light transmitted between the bus and drop ports is evaluated to change by 0.85p as the ring resonance is tuned through the MLL line, a total round trip phase tuning range of 1.7p can be reached this way (in the most general case, the phase shifters would ensure that a constructive interference condition can always be reached independently of the ring bias point and thus of the chosen feedback strength). E.g., in region R3 a crisscross pattern of deeper blue regions (in which the RF linewidth is improved) is seen in Fig. RF linewidths were measured with a resolution bandwidth (RBW) of 16 kHz, to avoid prohibitively long measurement times. Measured spectra have been fitted to a Voigt profile resulting from the convolution of a Lorentzian with the known Gaussian frequency response of the spectrum analyzer, with good fitting accuracy and stability (Suppl. Mat.). Numbers reported here correspond to the FWHM of the underlying Lorentzian linewidth. Figure Figure Figure It is apparent that the latter features a reduced RF linewidth at three tuning points, whenever ring 1 overlaps with an MLL comb line. The baseline of the red curve is at that same reduced level, as a consequence of the other ring, ring 2, always being aligned with a comb line. When both rings are aligned to separate comb lines (points PA and PC, as labeled), further enhancement is visible as a consequence of the collective action of both feedbacks. When both rings are aligned to the same comb line, no significant further improvement is observed (PB). Since very little of that comb line reaches the downstream ring, no additional feedback is created by the latter. The improved feedback under the collective effect of both rings at points PA and PC might be explained by the feedback qualitatively containing more information, as the beat tone between the two comb lines also provides feedback in respect to the RF phase, as opposed to only the optical phase as in the case of a single line. It is however also possible that it is simply a consequence of the feedback being quantitatively stronger, as the power from two lines is being sent back. As the 20 kHz linewidth in region R3 has been reduced to 8.82 kHz, the best linewidth at PA, it is apparent that a linewidth narrowing with a factor better than 2 has been obtained. This is a substantial improvement and beats even the linewidth of the free running laser by a factor 1.7, even though the baseline linewidth in region R3 starts out slightly worse. Thus, detrimental operating conditions seen in region R3 are more than compensated. However, it is still not as good as in regions R1 and R5 in which even smaller linewidths have been obtained, respectively on the order of 5 kHz and 3 kHz. The improvement in regions R1 and R5 may be due to the broadband reflection itself being favorable and contributing to linewidth reduction. As an example, Fig. In the following, we will see that much more substantial improvements have been achieved in regimes in which the RF linewidth of the MLL starts out as being very significantly deteriorated, to the point of recovering the free running RF linewidth (~15 kHz) in a wide range of highly unfavorable operating conditions in which phase locking between the modes had been almost completely destroyed (up to 572 kHz RF linewidth without stabilization). In the most extreme case, an RF linewidth of 1.5 MHz is narrowed back down to 40 kHz, which remains sufficient for the initially targeted direct detection WDM link application Indeed, an important question is how well the stabilization scheme works under very adverse broadband reflections severally broadening the RF linewidth beyond the free running condition, for example due to an ill-controlled laser to chipfacet distance in a flip-chip attachment process As seen in Fig. In the worst case shown in Fig. In order to obtain a better understanding of the functioning and limitations of the stabilization scheme, Fig. Looking first at the FSR without ring 1 feedback, it is apparent that the FSR transitions between two supermodes as a consequence of the changing parasitic feedback (the transition occurs between ring 2 currents 4.9 mA and 5.2 mA). At the Fig. Under ring 1 feedback, it is apparent that the initial supermode, while also being pulled to a lower FSR, remains stable in a larger region (as witnessed by the low RF linewidth), delaying the supermode switch that then occurs much more abruptly. The RF linewidth, as stabilized by feedback from ring 1, also remains relatively immune to the changing broadband feedback, maintaining a linewidth of ~15 kHz, until the baseline RF linewidth reaches 572 kHz, after which it relatively quickly deteriorates. Interestingly, 15 kHz is also the linewidth under single ring stabilization obtained in the stable regions of R3 far from the supermode (Section III.A), so that it appears the exact same performance is recovered here. The worst case RF linewidth is reached here too in the middle of the bifurcation. Moreover, the region of poor mode-locking is smaller, due to the sharp transition. It is apparent that the ring 1 feedback extends the region of stability of the first supermode, while it shrinks the range of stability of the second supermode (possibly as a consequence of a bistability given the abruptness of the transition). After the switch, the RF linewidth is also worsened rather than improved by ring 1 feedback. This may be due to the dialed in feedback phase, which could also explain why prior to the switch the FSR of the laser under tuned feedback is below that of the laser without tuned feedback, while after the switch the opposite is the case. Indeed, it could be indicative of the resonator induced feedback resulting in frequency pulling on the fed back comb line in opposite directions before and after the switch, also affecting the overall FSR of the laser in opposite ways via the four wave mixing nonlinearities at the origin of mode-locking in single section MLLs A study revealing more systematically the limits and capabilities of this stabilization scheme for different mode locking conditions would require improved long term mechanical stability, e.g. with a flip-chipped MLL, as well as functional phase shifters to deconvolute the feedback phase from the feedback strength. Moreover, while it has been verified that phase locking between longitudinal laser modes is maintained and improved, further investigation with autocorrelation traces (after dispersion compensation) would be beneficial to verify that the method utilized here does not deleteriously impact pulse shape in the time domain. While not allowing the laser to be fully immune to other detrimental effects (which would not have been expected), reasonable operating conditions could be obtained, in particular in view of the less stringent applications such as suppressing mode partition noise for multi-channel direct detection communication systems, even starting from severely deteriorated mode-locking. In a complete system combining an MLL stabilization scheme with modulator arrays, e.g. in the form of cascaded resonant ring modulators, insertion losses associated to the latter as well as extinction of unused comb lines by channel selection filters In order to compare the results reported here to others from the literature, a figure of merit (FOM) is required that takes both the RF linewidth and the repetition frequency into account, as achievable RF linewidths typically become worse with increasing repetition rate Table For fair comparison, it should be pointed out that the gain materials utilized in One may remark that while the obtained RF linewidth improvements are adequate for the main application pursued here -the utilization of single section semiconductor MLLs as multi-carrier sources for direct detection communication systems -others, in particular in the field of metrology, would require much more regular pulse trains. In order to achieve substantially lower RF phase noise operation, longer low loss delay lines (resonant or linear) would be desirable. Such could e.g. be provided by PIC platforms with low loss, silicon nitride (SiN) waveguides. Platforms with high confinement (and thus densely routable) waveguides have been shown with Q-factors as high as a couple of millions We believe that scaling the length of on-chip delay lines to the order of a few meters would be easier to realize in the architecture proposed here than with external broadband feedback or intra-cavity filters, as shown in In order to obtain the right feedback phase for all the comb lines in case of broadband reflection, the external group delay should be close to an integer of the cavity roundtrip time wherein " ( is the free-space center wavelength of the laser spectrum and -( is the speed of light in vacuum. For a 6 meter delay line as in Similar constraints apply to a laser with an intra-cavity delay line combined with an intracavity filter. Such a filter can be implemented as a ring resonator whose FSR is a multiple of that of the unfiltered laser cavity These constraints do not apply to the scheme described here, as phase errors at filtered MLL lines can be compensated with simple phase shifters as opposed to broadband dispersion control. Of course, scaling up delay lines by orders of magnitude will not come without other difficulties. For example, as delay lines become very long and the resulting Fabry-Perot resonances closely spaced, instabilities may appear in form of ripples in the phase noise spectrum of the laser. However, such spurious Fabry-Perot resonances may be filtered out by the ring resonators, or instabilities reduced by providing feedback over several length scales. A comprehensive analysis of the difficulties encountered in aggressively scaling up the delay lines and the realization of such a system remains the object of future work. In conclusion, we have shown improvement of the RF linewidth of a single section semiconductor MLL by feedback from a SiP PIC beyond the level obtained from the free running laser even in the presence of adverse operating conditions. RF linewidths as low as 2.77 kHz have been obtained in the best case. Even under adverse conditions with broadband parasitic reflections broadening the RF linewidth to 1.5 MHz, a 40 kHz RF linewidth, adequate for the targeted SiP direct detection transceiver application, could be recovered. Further improvements may require longer, low loss delay lines that could be implemented in a low loss SiN waveguide platform as well as tighter control of the feedback conditions, e.g. by a flipchip mounted MLL on a rigid PIC, to avoid microphony and drift. RF linewidths were measured with the resolution bandwidth (RBW) of the electrical spectrum analyzer set to 16 kHz with Gaussian filtering. As a consequence, the recorded spectra are convoluted with the frequency response of the spectrum analyzer. Assuming the spectra to be initially Lorentzian shaped, the end result would be a Voigt profile with a known Gaussian content. The goal of this section is to verify the adequacy of the Voigt profile fitting for extraction of the underlying RF linewidths. Fits are made by minimizing the residual sum of squares (RSS) obtained by comparing the data and the model on a dBm scale with data points spaced between -400 kHz and +400 kHz from the center of the spectrum on a 3 kHz grid. Lorentzian linewidth, the spectrum's center frequency and the maximum power are left as free parameters, wherein only tiny adjustments are made to the latter two since they are straightforwardly determined from the data beforehand. The RBW of the spectrum analyzer is fixed during RSS minimization. For the two spectra taken under optical feedback shown in Fig. Via the monitor ports shown in Fig. Both ring 1 and ring 2 feature periodic dips in the transmitted power, exemplarily marked by dashed circles, that are attributed to Fabry-Perot resonances occurring due to spurious reflections inside the PIC. Importantly, it can be seen that the rate at which the center wavelength of these dips varies is different from the rate at which the ring resonance moves (the change of the former being attributed to the variable phase offset resulting from the ring as it is being tuned). In addition, ring 2 features a marked split resonance, exemplarily marked by a continuous circle, wherein both resonances are tuned with the exact same rate. Figure Figure wherein it should be noted that the 70 pm/mA 2 tuning efficiency reported in the main part of the paper was obtained by forcing the small linear terms to zero and making a quadratic fit. These equations were then used to visualize the overlay of ring resonances with the MLL spectrum (as taken from the solitary laser) for the ring tuning points PA, PB and PC. This overlay can be seen in Fig. It can be seen that the worst case is for Ring 1 at point PC, at which the power of the MLL line at the next lower resonance was 14.2 dB below that of the main resonance. The best case is PA, at which this number for ring 1 is 20.1 dB. From Fig. For the case of broadband reflection, we first derive the required conditions for the phase of all reflected lines to remain within a phase error of ±p/4 relative to the reflection phase of a comb line at the center of the MLL's spectrum (that can be tuned with a phase tuner assumed to apply the same differential phase delay to all the comb lines). 8 9 (!) is the wave number of an ideal waveguide without any fabrication errors or dispersion, with a length resulting in a group delay that is a multiple of the laser repetition time. 8(!) is the wave number of the actually fabricated waveguide, that has both finite dispersion and a fabrication induced group index change. Both depend on the wavelength !. The MLL emission has a spectral width Δ!. = is the round-trip length of the delay line, > 9 the speed of light in vacuum, ? the angular frequency of the light. $ @ and $ @9 are the group indices of the fabricated and of the nominal waveguide and ∆$ @ = $ @ -$ @9 is the fabrication induced error. B @ and B @9 are the group indices and C the dispersion parameter. This requirement is then translated into As we will see below, the first term in the equation above depends primarily on fabrication tolerances applied to the group index, and the second on the dispersion parameter of the waveguide. The error depends on 8 -8 9 rather than on 8, since the ideal waveguide results in zero error. The group delay of the ideal waveguide is chosen for the phase error to be zero for all comb frequencies, so that only the deviation from this condition has to be considered. Evaluating first the constraints on group index variation, we start with which is reshaped into Since here we are investigating the main effect of waveguide dispersion instead of fabrication error, we assume B @ (! 9 ) = B @9 so that the condition can be further simplified into It now remains to be shown that Eqs. ( Note that only the waveguide group index at ! 9 determines the spectral offset between comb lines, as a consequence of modelocking maintaining the comb-line to comb-line spacing constant. Moreover, if the length of the passive intra-cavity delay line is much longer than the length of the active waveguide, $ @ (! 9 ) can be approximated as the group index of the passive delay line. The maximum allowable linewidth of the intra-cavity filter scales with the FSR, since the filter needs to select comb lines from the neighboring ones. The linewidth in turn constrains the required spectral alignment of the filter's resonances. As a criterium, we set here that the detuning of the filter's passbands should be no more than an eighth of the laser's FSR. Given a group index offset ∆$ @ (inside the filter) due to fabrication, the detuning W! at the edges of the MML spectrum is evaluated as which is again converted into Eq. ( MΔ$ @ M < ! 9 4=∆! The detuning due to dispersion is evaluated as W! = X Δ$ @ (!) $ @ F! ∆Y 6 9 Since C = FZ$ @ > 9 ⁄ \ F! ⁄ W! = X > 9 C(! -! 9 ) $ @ F! ∆Y 6 9 = > 9 C∆! Thus we obtain D > 9 C∆! 6 8$ @ D < ! 9 6 8=$ @ (! 9 ) resulting again in Eq. ( Extrapolated from the 10 dB linewidth assuming a Lorentzian shape. These correspond to the Lorentzian component of a Voigt fit. Results are listed in chronological order. => 9 ∆!