In this work, density functional computations and Monte Carlo simulations are performed to investigate structural, electronic, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties of Co/WS2 junction, a semiconductor WS2 monolayer covered by a ferromagnetic cobalt monolayer. In addition to a conventional semilocal exchange-correlation functional, three nonlocal functional, including the novel ACBN0 scheme, are applied to obtain reliable electronic and magnetic properties. It is argued that the ACBN0 scheme, is very efficient for first principles description of the Co/WS2 junction. The obtained electronic structures evidence a trustworthy half-metallic gap in the majority spin channel of the lowest energy configuration of the junction, promising for spintronic applications. The obtained magnetic thermodynamics properties from Monte Carlo simulations predict a Curie temperature of about 110 K, which is far small for device applications of this junction. The electronic and magnetic properties of the system are calculated under various compressive and tensile strains and it is shown that a tensile strain of about 4% may effectively improve thermal stability of halfmetallic ferromagnetism in the Co/WS2 junction. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are a known class of exfolibale structures, which are composed of sandwiched X-M-X monolayers (M=Cr,Mo,W, X=S,Se,Te). Individual MX 2 monolayers, in contrast to their multilayers, have a direct semiconducting band gap in the visible to near-infrared region and exhibit a high on/off switching ratio, hence are very promising for various nanoelectronics and optoelectronics applications. In this paper, we employ first principles computations to investigate possible emergence of magnetism in a single WS 2 monolayer covered by a Co monolayer and examine strain effects on electronic and magnetic properties of this system. The electronic structure calculations and structural relaxations were performed in the framework of Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) by using the pseudopotential plane wave technique, implemented in the Quantum-Espresso package. A vacuum thickness of 15 Å was used to prevent artificial interaction by the periodic boundary conditions perpendicular to the monolayer surface. A kinetic energy cutoff of 50 Ry was used for the plane-wave expansion of the wave functions and the Brillouin zone integrations were performed by using a mesh of 8 × 8 × 1 k points. The total energy and atomic force convergence thresholds were set to 10 -5 eV and 2 meV/ Å for the selfconsistent calculations and geometry optimizations, respectively. The temperature dependence of the magnetic properties of the system was investigated by using classical Monte Carlo (MC) simulations in a 20 × 20 × 1 supercell containing 1600 Co atoms with periodic boundary conditions. We performed simulations with 2×10 6 MC steps for thermalization and 2×10 6 MC samplings for the measurement. In order to study the electronic and magnetic properties of the Co/WS 2 junction, composed of a cobalt monolayer on a single monolayer of WS 2 , first we looked for the stable atomic structure at this interface. In this regard, four configurations of the interface atoms were considered. In these four configurations, which are sketched in Fig. where E[Co] and E[WS 2 ] are the total energies of a free cobalt atom and a relaxed WS 2 monolayer, respectively. The calculated binding energy as well as other structural parameters of the investigated configurations of Co/WS 2 are listed in table I. We observed that the Co monolayer does not stay on the bridge positions of the WS 2 surface and relaxes to other configurations, hence the b-site system is not appeared in the table. Our calculations show that W-top is the most stable configuration of the Co monolayer on WS 2 surface, and the other configurations are substantially higher (1.36 and 1.64 eV) in energy, indicating strong interface bonding in the W-top system. In this configuration, cobalt atoms make four interface bonds, three with the neighboring sulfur atoms and one with the underlying W atom. The corresponding bond distances are presented in table I. Moreover, we found that the strong interface bonding in the W-top system weakens the internal bonds in the WS 2 monolayer and consequently increases the W-S bond distance (2.53 Å) and the S-W-S bond angle (82.7 o ), compared to a pristine WS 2 monolayer (2.40 Å and 81.5 o ). The integer total spin moment of 4 μ B , obtained for the W-top configuration, is an evidence for the ferromagnetic half-metallic behavior of this system, while the S-top and h-site configurations exhibit ferromagnetic and non-magnetic metallic behaviors, respectively. To gain further insight into the structural and magnetic behavior of the W-top structure of Co/WS 2 , we in- vestigated projected density of states (PDOS) and band structure of this system, illustrated in Fig. In order to confirm the ferromagnetic ground state of the favorable configuration of Co/WS 2 , the total energy of this system was minimized by starting from an antiferromagnetic (AF) state, constructed in a 2 × 2 × 1 lateral supercell. We observed that this calculation converges to a nearly non-magnetic state with about 77 meV higher energy, compared with the FM state, indicating favorability of half-metallic ferromagnetism in the stable configuration (W-top) of a Co monolayer on a WS 2 monolayer. One may also expect non-trivial influence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) on the stable spin configuration of the system. Therefore, we carried out DFT+SOC calculations and obtained a metastable AF state for the W-top configuration, which is about 70 meV less stable than the FM state. Hence, ferromagnetic ordering is the true magnetic ground state of the stable configuration of Co/WS 2 , although, spin-orbit coupling enhances feasibility of formation of AF spin ordering in the system. Experimental observations confirm occurrence of ferromagnetism in the similar Co/WSe 2 and Co/MoS 2 junctions. Theoretical study of the Co/WS 2 junction is complicated by the correlated nature of the cobalt 3d electrons. Conventional local and semilocal DFT functionals (LDA/GGA), are known to suffer from the selfinteraction error, which enhances delocalization of the electronic wave functions and hence prevents a satisfactory description of the localized d or f states. To overcome this problem different corrections to the PBE wavefunctions are adopted. The DFT+U scheme is a popular method for better description of these localized orbitals, although proper identification of the Hubbard U parameter is an elaborating task. In older schemes, the Hubbard parameter is scanned in a proper range to recover some relevant experimental data, while in modern schemes, first principles determination of this parameter is more appreciated. Because of the lack of proper experimental data on Co/WS 2 , we focused on the first principles determination of U in the framework of linear response approach. The ACBN0 functional, recently proposed by Curtarolo and Nardelli, The obtained electronic structure of Co/WS 2 within the DFT+U, ACBN0, and HSE methods are presented in Fig. In order to calculate magnetic thermodynamic properties of the system, one has to perform extensive statistical averaging over a large ensemble of spin configurations of the system, by using the Monte Carlo scheme. To facilitate this procedure, the energy of individual spin configurations is usually parameterized in terms of magnetic exchange parameters J via the Heisenberg Hamiltonian H = -J ij S i • S j . The exchange parameters are conventionally calculated from the vertical energy difference of various spin configurations of the system with the ferromagnetic state. It means that the relaxed configuration of the system in the FM state is used to construct proper supercells for total energy calculation of various spin configurations. We used a 2×2 lateral supercell for calculation of exchange parameters. It should be noted that only one antiferromagnetic (AF) spin arrangement of cobalt atoms is applicable in a 2×2 supercell, hence, we only considered the nearest-neighbor Co-Co interaction for our thermodynamics study. The influence of the next nearest neighbor couplings will be estimated. Comparing the energy difference of the AF and FM states gives the nearest neighbor Co-Co exchange parameters, presented in table II. Among the four investigated methods, the best agreement is seen between HSE and ACBN0. It is seen that the nonlocal effects presented in DFT+U, HSE, and ACBN0, compared with PBE, weakens the exchange interaction between neighboring cobalt atoms. It is likely attributed to the attenuated hopping amplitude of the neighboring d electrons at the expense of enlarged on-site Coulomb repulsion in the nonlocal functionals. In other words, the more localized nature of the cobalt 3d electrons within DFT+U, HSE, and ACBN0, reduces the corresponding exchange overlap integrals, compared with the semilocal PBE functional. The obtained exchange parameter was used for classical MC calculation of the thermodynamic parameters heat capacity C v , susceptibility inverse 1/κ, and average magnetic moment μ in the temperature range of 5 to 240 K, with temperature steps of 5 K. The obtained results are presented in Fig. As it was mentioned, we have only considered the nearest neighbor exchange interaction for our thermodynamic study, because calculating next nearest neighbor couplings requires larger supercells. In order to estimate the error of this procedure, two different AF spin configurations were considered in a 4×4 supercell, within the PBE scheme. The obtained total energies are compared with that of the FM state to achieve nearest neighbor and next nearest neighbor exchange parameters J 1 = 6.3 and J 2 = 2.3 meV, respectively. After preforming proper MC calculations, the new Curie temperature of the system within PBE was found to be about 140 K, only 14 K higher than the result obtained by considering only the nearest neighbor exchange interaction (table II). It is already discussed that changing the number of Heisenberg exchange neighbors, although influence individual exchange parameters, has weak effect on the resulting thermodynamic properties. The overall conclusion of this section is that ACBN0 is an efficient scheme for first principles calculation of electronic and magnetic properties of the Co/WS 2 junction. The main reason is the close agreement observed between ACBN0 and the expensive HSE functional in determination of density of states, exchange parameter, and Curie temperature. Moreover, it was argued that the obtained half-metallic gap within ACBN0 is likely more accurate, compared with HSE and PBE results. Hence, in the next section, we will concentrate on the ACBN0 method for the study of strained Co/WS 2 junction. It was also shown that, within the PBE scheme, the spin-orbit coupling may influence the energy difference between FM and AF states of the junction, hence, magnetic exchange parameters and consequently magnetic thermodynamics properties may be sensitive to this relativistic correction. In this regard, we considered the spin orbit coupling in the ACBN0 scheme and calculated the energy difference of the FM and AF states by ACBN0+SOC method. The obtained exchange coupling constant (6.8 meV) show slight effect of the SOC correction in the magnetic thermodynamics properties of Co/WS 2 . In the previous section, it was seen that the predicted Curie temperature of Co/WS 2 junction (∼ 110 K) is very small for most technological applications. Hence, in this section, we investigate whether strain may be helpful to improve magnetic properties of this junction toward practical purposes. The strained junctions are calculated within the ACBN0 scheme, although the PBE results are also provided for comparison. The magnitude of strain ε is defined as ε = [(a -a 0 )/a 0 ] where a and a 0 are the lattice parameters of the strained and equilibrium structures, respectively. The atomic positions within all strained structures were fully relaxed. The first issue to be considered, is the stability of the junction under strain. Individual WS 2 sheets, in general, ex- hibit two polymorphs: trigonal prismatic (H-phase) and octahedral coordinated (T-phase). The most stable crystal structure is the semiconductor H phase, while the metastable T phase exhibits a metallic behavior. As shown in the figure, within both ACBN0 and PBE, the Co-Co distance is more sensitive to the strain, com- pared with the Co-S distance, because Co atoms are in the same plane while S atoms are in a separate layer close to the Co layer. Therefore, tensile strain is expected to enhance the role of FM superexchange interaction between cobalt atoms in the magnetic behavior of the junction. The faster increase of the Co-Co distance, compared with the Co-S distance, leads to increasing the Co-S-Co bond angle by increasing strain, illustrated in Fig 6 . However, obtained bond angle of the strained junctions remains well in the ferromagnetic region of the Kanamori-Goodenough rule. The half metallic gap of the system is found to decrease by both tensile and compressive strains, in such a way that the equilibrium structure gives the highest half metallic gap within ACBN0 and PBE. The observed decrease under compressive strain is faster and the gap is closed at the strain of -4%, while tensile strain up to 4% preserve the half metallic nature of the junction. Compared with PBE, ACBN0 gives a larger half metallic gap, which is expected to be more close to the reality. At the final step, we consider the effects of strain on magnetic thermodynamic properties of the stable configuration of Co/WS 2 junction. In this regard, first, the magnetic exchange parameters were calculated by computing the vertical energy difference between the FM and AF states of the strained systems. Then, with the same setup as equilibrium structure, classical MC calculations were performed to obtain magnetic thermodynamic properties of the strained junctions. The obtained magnetic exchange parameters and Curie temperatures, as a function of strain, are given in Fig. In summary, we employed pseudopotential DFT calculations to investigate structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of a Co monolayer on a semiconductor WS 2 monolayer. It was seen that cobalt atoms prefer to stay on top of W atoms to make a triangular pyramid with three neighboring surface S atoms. The electronic and magnetic properties of the stable configuration of the junction were considered within the semilocal PBE and nonlocal DFT+U, ACBN0, and hybrid HSE schemes. The obtained electronic structures indicate that PBE, ACBN0, and HSE predict a ferromagnetic half-metallic ground state for the Co/WS 2 junction, while DFT+U gives a metallic state, which is due to the overestimated value of the effective Hubbard parameter in the linear response approach. Next, by calculating the vertical energy distance between the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states, the nearest neighbor exchange coupling between cobalt atoms were extracted and used for Monte Carlo simulation of the thermodynamics properties of the junction. The obtained temperature profile of the magnetic order parameter and heat capacity indicate a transition temperature of about 110 K for the system. Comparing the obtained electronic and magnetic properties within PBE, DFT+U, ACBN0, and HSE indicates that the novel ACBN0 scheme is a very efficient method for first principles simulation of the Co/WS 2 junction. Hence, this scheme was used to investigate the effect of tensile and compressive strains on the electronic and magnetic properties of the system. It was shown that a tensile strain of about 4%, may effectively enhance the transition temperature of the junction toward room temperature, while preserving the half-metallic behavior of the system.