I review the principal theories that have been proposed for the superconducting phases of UPt3. The detailed H-T phase diagram places constraints on any theory for the multiple superconducting phases. Much attention has been given to the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) region of the phase diagram where the phase boundaries of three phases appear to meet at a tetracritical point. It has been argued that the existence of a tetracritical point for all field orientations eliminates the two-dimensional (2D) orbital representations coupled to a symmetry breaking field (SBF) as viable theory of these phases, and favors either (i) a theory based on two primary order parameters belonging to different irreducible representations that are accidentally degenerate [Chen and Garg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1689 (1993)], or (ii) a spin-triplet, orbital one-dimensional (1D) representation with no spin-orbit coupling in the pairing channel [Machida and Ozaki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3293 (1991)]. I comment on the limitations of the models proposed so far for the superconducting phases of UPt3. I also find that a theory in which the order parameter belongs to an orbital 2D representation coupled to a SBF is a viable model for the phases of UPt3, based on the existing body of experimental data. Specifically, I show that (1) the existing phase diagram (including an apparent tetracritical point for all field orientations), ( It is almost a cliché to say that many of the heavy fermion superconductors are thought to represent a novel form of superconductivity. But, in spite of considerable progress experimentally and theoretically we have not yet firmly identified the order parameter, even for the prime candidate UPt 3 . To date liquid In this article I examine the principal theories that have been proposed for the superconducting phases of UPt 3 . The detailed H-T phase diagram that is now available places stringent constraints on theories for the multiple superconducting phases. Much attention has been given to the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) region of the phase diagram where the phase boundaries of three phases appear to meet at a tetracritical point. Machida and Ozaki I argue that the 2D model coupled to a SBF is a viable model for the phases of UPt 3 based on the existing experimental data. However, the existence of an apparent tetracritical point for all field orientations restricts the order parameter to the E 2 representation. Furthermore, (1) the existing H-T phase diagram, (2) the anisotropy of the upper critical field over the full temperature range, (3) the correlation between superconductivity and basal plane antiferromagnetism and (4) low-temperature power laws in the transport and thermodynamic properties can be explained qualitatively and in many respects quantitatively by an odd-parity, E 2u order parameter with the spin quantization axis aligned such that S pair • c = 0. The coupling of an AFM moment to the superconducting order parameter is a SBF, which in this theory is responsible for the apparent tetracritical point as well as the double transition in zero field. The new results presented here for the E 2u representation are based on an analysis of the material parameters within BCS theory for the 2D representations and a refinement of the SBF model of Hess, et al. Considerable evidence in support of an unconventional superconducting state 20 in the heavy fermion materials has accumulated from specific heat, The H-T phase diagram of superconducting UPt 3 is unique; there are two superconducting phases in zero field, Velocity anomalies of order 1 -30 ppm were measured by Bruls, et al. 1. There are two zero-field superconducting phases with a difference in T c of ∆Tc Tc ≃ 0.1. Phase diagram for H ⊥ c from Ref. (10) showing three superconducting phases. Points represent transitions between phases determined from sound velocity anomalies. The lower critical field lines separating the Meissner states for the A and B phases are not shown. ) is observed for H ⊥ c, but not for H||c. 3. There are three flux phases. The phase transition lines separating the flux phases appear to meet at a tetracritical point for H ⊥ c, H||c and cos -1 (H • c) = 45 o , although the case for a tetracritical point is strongest for H ⊥ c. The resolution of the phase transition lines near the tetracritical point is ≈ 13 mK. All of the models to date start from the basic assumption that the phases are all related to an equal-time pairing amplitude, where α, β refer to the pseudo-spin labels of the quasiparticles. In the heavy fermion materials it is generally assumed that the spin-orbit interaction is strong; Essentially all of the heavy fermion superconductors, including UPt 3 , have inversion symmetry. This has an important consequence for the allowed classes of superconductivity; with The actual realization of superconductivity is determined by the order parameter which minimizes the free energy. The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory is formulated in terms of a stationary free energy functional of the pair amplitude, and is constructed from basic symmetry considerations. The central assumptions are that the free energy functional can be expanded in powers of the order parameter and that the GL functional has the full symmetry of the normal state. The leading order terms in the GL functional are of the form, There is a single quadratic invariant for each irreducible representation. The coefficients α Γ (T ) are material parameters that depend on temperature and pressure. Above T c all the coefficients α Γ (T ) > 0. The instability to the superconducting state is then the point at which one of the coefficients vanishes, e.g. α Γ * (T c ) = 0. Thus, near At T c the system is unstable to the development of all the amplitudes {η (Γ * ) i }, however, the higher order terms in the GL functional which stabilize the system, also select the ground state order parameter from the manifold of degenerate states at T c . In most superconductors the instability is in the even-parity, A 1g channel. This is conventional superconductivity in which only gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken. An instability in any other channel is a particular realization of unconventional superconductivity. There are two basic types of models that have been proposed to explain the phase diagram of UPt 3 : (i) theories based on a single primary order parameter belonging to a higher dimensional representation of the D 6h symmetry group of the normal state, and (ii) theories based on two primary order parameters belonging to different irreducible representations of D 6h which are nearly degenerate. The first class includes the theory proposed by Hess, et al. The Ginzburg-Landau functional is constructed from the amplitudes that parametrize ∆ αβ (k f ), e.g. if ∆ belongs to the E 2u representation listed in Table the GL order parameter is then a complex twocomponent vector, η = (η 1 , η 2 ), transforming according to the E 2 representation. In the case of strong spin-orbit coupling, the terms in the GL functional must be invariant under the symmetry group, G = D 6h × T × U (1), of point rotations, time-reversal and gauge transformations. The form of F is governed by the linearly independent invariants that can be constructed from fourthorder products, b ijkl η i η j η * k η * l , and second-order gradient terms, κ ijkl (D i η j )(D k η l ) * . For the 2D representations there are two independent fourthorder invariants and four independent secondorder gradients; the GL functional has the general form, where F [η, A ], at its minimum, is the difference between the superconducting and normal-state free energies, [α(T ), β 1 , β 2 , κ 1 , κ 2 , κ 3 , κ 4 ] are material parameters that can be calculated from microscopic theory, or be determined from comparision with experiment, and ∂ × A = B is the magnetic field. The gauge-invariant derivatives are denoted by The equilibrium order parameter and current distribution are determined by the stationarity conditions of the GL functional with respect to variations of the order parameter and the vector potential. These conditions yield the GL differential equations, 42 and the Maxwell equation, which are the basis for studies of the H-T phase diagram, vortices and related magnetic properties. , where η 0 = |α| 2β1 . The broken time-reversal symmetry of the two solutions, η ± , is exhibited by the two possible orientations of the internal orbital angular momentum, or spontaneous magnetic moment of the Cooper pairs. The presence of this term in the GL functional is not transparent from eq.( revealing the coupling of the orbital moment of the pairs to the magnetic field. Since the coupling of the order parameter to a magnetic field is primarily diamagnetic (for T ≃ T c ), the orbital moment is difficult to observe because of Meissner screening. In UPt 3 there appears to be a natural candidate for a SBF; 41 the AFM order in the basal plane reported by Aeppli, et al. where the coupling parameter ǫM 2 s determines the magnitude of the splitting of the superconducting transition (we denote the first transition by T c and the lower superconducting transition by T c * ). 4. The high temperature phase has broken rotational symmetry in the basal plane, induced by the SBF. The basal plane anisotropy of the order parameter then leads to anisotropic current flow and consequently an orthorhombic vortex lattice for H||c. However, the orthorhombic distortion will be small if κ 23 ≪ κ 1 as I argue below. 5. The upper critical field exhibits a change in slope, a 'kink' at high temperature for H ⊥ c, but not for H||c. The kink in H ⊥ c2 is isotropic in the basal plane provided the in-plane magnetic anisotropy energy is weak compared to the Zeeman energy acting on M s , in which case M s rotates to maintain M s ⊥ H. Recent magnetoresistance experiments support the interpretation of weak magnetic anisotropy energy in the basal plane. The phase diagram determined by ultrasound velocity measurements indicates that the phase boundary lines meet at a tetracritical point for both H||c and H ⊥ c. Besides the orbital Zeeman term, the terms Machida and Ozaki 16 relax the assumption of strong spin-orbit coupling in the pairing channel. Thus, the full symmetry group in their model in-cludes the continuous spin-rotation group, G = SO(3) spin × D 6h × T × U (1). They preserve the coupling of a SBF to superconductivity through the spin-triplet components of the order parameter, and avoid the 'level repulsion' problem by choosing a 1D representation for the orbital component of the order parameter. In their model where the d is a vector in spin space (in general complex) Consider the GL free energy functional for this theory, 64 The SBF term is written in a compact form with M s = M s x. The first transition is to a phase with d x = 0, followed by a second transition T c2 = T c1 -O(ǫM 2 s ) in which both d y and d z nucleate with a phase ±π/2 relative to that of d x . As in the orbital 2D models, β 2 > 0 is required for a double transition and as a result timereversal symmetry is broken below T c , but now by the spin degrees of freedom. The term proportional to |H • d| 2 is due to paramagnetism, and is associated with the reduction (g > 0) of the spin susceptibility for H||d. By itself the Zeeman energy, -H i δχ ij H j ∝ +|H • d| 2 , leads to a suppression of T c for H||d, but no suppression of T c for H ⊥ d. Machida and Ozaki include this term in order to obtain a tetracritical point in their model. However, there are additional consequences at low temperatures and high fields. If there were no spinorbit coupling to lock d to the crystal lattice, then the superconducting order parameter would nucleate at H c2 with d•H = 0, whatever the orientation of H, in order to minimize the Zeeman energy. In the model of Machida and Ozaki the only coupling of d to the crystal lattice comes through the SBF, which is weak by design, i.e. ǫM 2 s ≪ gH 2 c2 except for T ≃ T c . Thus, at low temperatures and high fields the Zeeman energy dominates the SBF energy. So for H||c the d vector will nucleate in the basal plane and there will be no Pauli limiting of H || c2 . Similarly, for H ⊥ c the d vector will nucleate in the basal plane, in this case with d ⊥ H ⊥ c. Thus, there is no paramagnetic lim- iting at low temperatures. This is an important fact, which appears to conflict with the experimental measurements of the upper critial field. for H||c, but no paramagnetic suppression for H ⊥ c. Choi and I obtained a quantitative explanation 65 of the upper critical field data 1. Uniaxial anisotropy of the Fermi velocity (i.e. anisotropic coherence lengths, ) determines the anisotropy of H c2 near T c , while paramagnetic coupling of the quasiparticle pseudospin to the magnetic field, and H ⊥ c2 yield a cross-over temperature of ≃ 200 mK in good agreement with the data. It is important to note that the anisotropy of the upper critical field is not explained by an evenparity order parameter and an anisotropic effective moment tensor even though μ ⊥ = μ || in UPt 3 . The susceptibility anisotropy of the normal state near Thus, for a conventional singlet gap the anisotropy of the Pauli limit at T = 0 is estimated to be which is the opposite of what is observed. Detailed calculations for the even-parity representa-tions confirm this simple argument; spin-singlet pairing is Pauli limited for all orientations, and the calculated anisotropy of H c2 65,66 is qualitatively inconsistent with the measured anisotropy of H c2 (T ) at low temperatures and the anisotropy of μ || /μ ⊥ . Chen and Garg The main features of this model are: 1. The nearly degenerate double transition occurs because of a near degeneracy of the pairing interaction in two channels unrelated by symmetry. 2. κ a and κ b , and similarly for the z-axis derivatives, are independent coefficients in this model. The 'accidental degeneracy' model is designed to explain the GL phase diagram, particularly the tetracritical point. However, as Garg and Chen However, if one assumes that both pairing channels are odd-parity with d||c, then the paramagnetic correction to the GL functional is corresponding to the suppression of the spin susceptibility for H||c. One expects both g a , g b > 0, i.e. paramagnetism suppresses both order parameters. By themselves the paramagnetic terms would lead to a reduction of The key features of the paramagnetic correction are (i) its origin is an oddparity order parameter with d||c, as I have argued based on the low-temperature anisotropy of , (ii) it allows for a tetracritical point for d||c with a small change in slope, and (iii) the sharp kink in H ⊥ c2 (T ) at the tetracritical point is consistent with the absence of a paramagnetic correction for H ⊥ c. The suppression of a kink in H || c2 comes about because the paramagnetic suppression of H c2 is dominant on the low temperature, high-field side of the tetracritical point. To leading order in g (I assume g a = g b = g) the ratio of the slopes of H || c2 (T ) above and below the tetracritcal point are where phase b is the high-field, low-temperature phase, and H K is the field at the tetracritical point. In the absence of of paramagnetism the ratio of slopes is given by κ a /κ b . As expected paramagnetism smooths the kink out. Paramagnetism also moves the tetracritcal point to lower temperatures, With the paramagnetic correction added to the model of Ref. (17) it is possible to account for the slopes of H c2 (T ) and the positions of the tetracritical point of Ref. (10). My analysis of the phase diagram within this model, which allows for a tetracritical point for H || c2 , with a very small slope discontinuity as a result of paramagnetic suppression, gives Although a model based on two primary order parameters is capable of explaining the existing experimental data for the phase diagram, when one considers the BCS relation between the effective interaction and the transition temperature, T c = ω c exp{-1 V }, an accidental degeneracy of two pairing channels at the level of a few percent seems implausible. However, a primary order parameter belonging to a single higher dimensional representation, which is coupled to a weak symmetry breaking field, provides a natural explanation for two superconducting phases with nearly degenerate transition temperatures. Here I argue that the SBF explanation for the double transition based on a 2D orbital representation is not ruled out by the 'topological isotropy of the tetracritical point'. In addition, I show how the apparent tetracritical point can arise from the SBF in this theory. Although the GL theories are formally the same for any of the 2D orbital representations, the predictions for the GL material parameters differ substantially depending on the symmetry of the Fermi surface and the Cooper pair basis functions. For example, the interpretation of the H c2 and susceptibility anisotropy in terms of anisotropic Pauli limiting requires an odd-parity, spin-triplet representation with the d-vector parallel to the c direction. This limits us to either the E 2u or E 1u basis functions among the four possible 2D representations. There are other important predictions from the weak-coupling BCS theory for the 2D representations. For any of the four 2D representations, the fourth-order free energy coefficients have the ratio, β2 β1 = 1 2 . This result was reportedfor the E 1g representation based on a clean-limit calculation and a spherical Fermi surface. Significant differences between the 2D models appear when we consider the gradient terms in the GL functional, or equivalently the GL differential equations, calculated from BCS theory. The gap equation is given by the mean-field BCS equation, where V αγ;βρ (k f , k ′ f ) is the pairing interaction, n(k f ) is the angle-resolved density of states on the Fermi surface and f (k f , x; ǫ n ) is the quasiclassical pair amplitude at Matsubara frequencies and momenta on the Fermi surface. In the weak-coupling limit the interaction is cutoff at a frequency T c ≪ ω c ≪ E f , and both the cutoff and the pairing interaction are eliminated with the linearized, homogeneous gap equation in favor of T c . In order to calculate the leading order gradient terms in the GL equation we need only examine the linearized gap equation. To linear order in ∆ the pair amplitude can be calculated straight-forwardly from the quasiclassical transport equations 70 ; in the clean limit f satisfies the differential equation (see e.g. Near T c the estimates apply, so that to leading order in gradients the linearized equation for the odd-parity gap function becomes, where K(T ) = ln(1.13ω c /T ) and V(k f , k ′ f ) is the pairing interaction in the odd-parity, spin-triplet channel. The same equation holds for the evenparity channel with the appropriate substitutions for the gap function and pairing interaction. This equation is used to generate the coefficients of the gradient terms in the GL equations. For the evenparity, or odd-parity with d||c, 2D models I obtain in the clean limit 72 where Y i (k f ) are the basis functions, N f , and N f is the density of states at the Fermi level. There are important differences between the the E 1 and E 2 representations when we evaluate these averages for the in-plane stiffness coefficients. In the clean limit, using the basis functions in Table while for the E 2 model I obtain 73 In fact, the three in-plane coefficients are identical for E 1 in the limit where the in-plane hexagonal anisotropy of the Fermi surface vanishes. In contrast, the coefficients κ 2 and κ 3 for the E 2 model both vanish when the hexagonal anisotropy of the Fermi surface is neglected. This latter result follows directly from the approximation of a cylindrically symmetric Fermi surface and Fermi velocity, || f kz z, and the higher angular momentum components of the E 2 basis functions, This is a crucial point; if there is weak hexagonal anisotropy then κ 23 ≪ κ 1 only for E 2 . Because both order parameter components appear with the same coefficients there is no crossing of different H c2 (T ) curves corresponding to different eigenfunctions, and therefore no apparent tetracritical point. However, the analysis of the slopes of the transition lines near the tetracritical point (see above) suggests that the difference in the gradient energies associated with the two components of the order parameter are finite, but small, i.e. |∆κ/2κ 1 | 0.2. This suggests that the SBF may be responsible for a splitting in the gradient coefficients as well as the transition temperature. In the model of Hess, et al. in eq.( which accounts for the double transition in zero field. The SBF coupling to the order parameter also contributes at second-order to the gradient energy, where and similarly for the c-axis gradients, It should be noted that the the replacement in eq.( which is consistent with the analysis of the tetracritical point. In addition to providing a reasonable description of the phase diagram, the E 2u model also has the geometry for the nodes of the excitation gap that accounts qualitatively for the temperature dependences of the acoustic attenuation and penetration depth at low temperatures. The existence of a line node in the basal plane has been argued by several authors, has a line of nodes in the basal plane as well as point nodes along the c-axis. The E 2u model, as well as other models for UPt 3 , exhibit a number of symmetries and broken symmetries that can, in principle, be used to uniquely identify, or eliminate, any one model as the order parameter for the phases of UPt 3 . I include a discussion of some further tests of the order parameter, some of which are 'crucial tests' in the sense that directly test for a broken symmetry or a residual symmetry of the order parameter. An important feature of the quasiparticle excitation spectrum in most unconventional superconductors is that the gap vanishes along lines or at points on the Fermi surface. These gapless regions imply low-energy excitations, at all temperatures, which give rise to power law temperature dependences for the penetration depth for T ≪ T c . The observation of non-activated behavior for λ(T ) at T ≪ T c is often interpreted as evidence for nodes in excitation gap. In the presence of the condensate flow field, v s = 1 2 (∂χ + 2e c A), the energy of a quasiparticle at the position k f on the Fermi surface is given by and ǫ is the quasiparticle energy in the normal state. The equilibrium distribution of quasiparticles is therefore f (E + v f • v s ). Consider the geometry where v s is directed in the basal plane. The important point is this: at T = 0, for any non-zero v s there is a wedge of occupied states near the node opposite to the flow velocity. Thus, the supercurrent is reduced even at T = 0 from the ideal value for pure condensate flow by a backflow correction of order ( v f vs 2∆o ). The net supercurrent is easily calculated from the phase space of occupied states to be, for v s in the basal plane. Here ∆ o is related to the rate at which the gap opens up at the nodes; for simplicity I assume the gap function . Note that the velocity dependence of the effective superfluid density, ρ s = ρ o {1 -|vs| 2∆o/v f }, is linear and non-analytic, in contrast to the quadratic behavior expected for backflow from thermally excited quasiparticles. The nonlinear current-velocity relation, in the clean limit, reflects the position and dimensionality of the nodes in the excitation gap, and implies a similar behavior for the field dependence of the penetration length, 86 where and n is the normal to the surface. Finite temperature effects produce a low-field cross-over for current flow in the basal plane as a result of redistribution of thermal quasiparticles in the flow field. Below this cross-over λ eff becomes quadratic in H for all orientations. The cross-over field is estimated by equating the excitation energy of a thermal quasiparticle with the shift in the quasiparticle energy associated with the superflow, πT The conditions for observing the linear field dependence associated with the zero-temperature anomaly in the Meissner current depend on several factors; (i) minimizing thermal quasiparticle backflow, (ii) reducing impurity scattering, which modifies the DOS near the nodes, and (iii) suppressing vortex nucleation. The latter effect requires fields below the vortex nucleation field, H c1 ≃ 100 G, which should be compared with the field scale H 0 ≃ φ0 πξ 2 ( ξ λ ⊥ ) ≃ 1 kG. At T ≃ 5 mK (T /T c ≃ 0.01) thermal quasiparticles are negligible except for very low fields. The cross-over field, below which the thermal backflow dominates the non-thermal quasiparticle backflow current, is approximately H x ≃ (T /T c )H 0 ≃ 0.1 H c1 . Thus, at this temperature there is a sizeable window of fields below H c1 which is dominated by the nonthermal backflow current. Furthermore, the resolution of the non-thermal current in the penetration depth should be observable; the change in penetration depth over the field range from zero to H c1 is of order δλ λ = Hc1 H0 ≃ 10 %. Observation of an isotropic linear field dependence of the low-temperature in-plane penetration depth would provide strong evidence for a line of nodes in the basal plane, and argue against those models with an array of point nodes or line nodes perpendicular to the basal plane. I summarize in Table The a.c. Josephson effect is arguably the most striking manifestation of broken gauge symmetry in superconductors. In an unconventional order parameter qualitative changes in the current-phase relation can occur which reflect the residual symmetry group of the order parameter. Consider the E 2u and E 1u parameters with d||c. Both states break gauge symmetry and rotational symmetry, but preserve six-fold gaugerotation symmetry; thus, the residual symmetry group is composed of all the six-fold rotations properly combined with gauge transformations. The Josephson current-phase relation is sensitive to the basic gauge transformation associated with the residual symmetry group. that is twice that acquired by the E 1u order parameter for the same rotation, -→ e iπ/3 ∆(E 2u ) . (40) Now consider the geometry of Fig. where φ s is the phase of the s-wave order parameter. This symmetry has an interesting experimental consequence. Consider the SQUID constructed from these junctions (Fig. The initial discovery of multiple superconducting phases in UPt 3 was made in field sweeps of the ultrasound absorption, where a peak was detected at a field of H ≃ 0.6H c2 . where ρ decays to zero as |x| → ∞, and the integers p and m correspond to the circulation quanta associated with the time-reversed pair of order parameters. Negelecting the SBF, the fourth-order GL functional is invariant under the group of rotations about the c axis, which simplifies in the classification of the vortex structures. The residual symmetry group of the ground state order parameter is U (1) Lz+I , the gauge-rotation group, whose generator is for orbital rotations about c and I is the generator of gauge transformations. Now η eq obeys, The vortex excitations of this condensate are then classified by the quantum numbers, q, of Q z ; in the asymptotic limit where the anisotropy of the vortex core can be neglected. The compatibility of eq.( Paramagnetism can serve as an important probe of the spin structure of the order parameter, particularly as an experimental signature to differentiate even-and odd-parity superconductivity. The effect of a magnetic field, or magnetic surface, is qualitatively different for even-and odd-parity order parameters; in odd-parity, spin-triplet superconductors the transition temperature, energy gap, as well as other properties can depend strongly on the orientation of the field relative to spin-quantization axis of the pairs. 65, The spin structure of the order parameter can be probed by measuring the spin susceptibility in the superconducting state. There are significant differences in odd-parity superconductors depending on whether or not there is weak or strong spin-orbit coupling in the pairing channel. For an ESP state, in the absence of spin-orbit coupling the d-vector will orient itself perpendicular to the magnetic field in order to minimize the Zeeman energy. Thus, the measured spin-susceptibility (for H → 0) will be unchanged below T c . However, if there is crystalline anisotropy and strong spin-orbit coupling then a rotation of d implies an energy cost of order T c . Thus, spin-orbit coupling is expected to select preferred directions for d in the crystal, and the orientation of the magnetic field may then directly probe the spin structure of the order parameter. The shielding effect of the Meissner current is a complication, which can be avoided by working with crystals that are small compared with the penetration depth. A further complication is surface pair-breaking, which is effectively avoided for crystals of dimension larger than the coherence length. Finally, vortex nucleation is suppressed for dimensions much less than the penetration depth. Thus, the optimum geometry is a single crystal of characteristic dimensions of order a several coherence lengths, ξ ≪ t ≪ λ. In this limit the shielding current can be ingnored, and the order parameter is approximately uniform over the sample. The transition to the superconducting state in a field is then determined by the Zeeman coupling. Fig. One of the principal techniques for investigating the symmetry and low-lying collective excitations of the order parameter in superfluid One possibility for detecting broken Tsymmetry would be to observe circular birefringence (CB) and/or dichroism (CD) in the reflectivity of electromagnetic or transverse acoustic waves with q||c (see Ref.(104) and references therein). This polarization effect is present if the ground state exhibits broken reflection symmetry, broken time-reversal symmetry and broken particle-hole symmetry, conditions satisfied by the ground state E 2u order parameter as well as other candidates. The effect is small; the nominal magnitude of the elliptical polarization expected for CB is of order 1 μrad. However, the CD/CB signal originates from the asymmetry in the coupling to a collective mode of the order parameter (due to the internal orbital currents) for right-vs. left-circularly polarized waves. As a result, the CD/CB signal is enhanced for frequencies near the resonance frequency of the collective mode, typically ω ∼ ∆. In an ideal, bulk material this field will be completely screened by surface currents. However, inhomogeneities, for example polycrystals with dimensions λ, impurities and vortices all inhibit perfect screening of the internal field. Choi and Muzikar 106 calculated the internal field induced by a nonmagnetic impurity in a superconductor with an orbital ground state that breaks T -symmetry; their result is B(0) ≃ π 2 18 ( e c )σ imp (ξ 0 /a)(N f ∆ 2 ), where σ imp = πa 2 is the scattering cross section of the impurity and N f ∆ 2 is the condensation energy density. Within a factor of O(1) the magnitude of the field is B(0) ≃ (a/ξ 0 )H c1 (0)/ ln(λ/ξ) ∼ 0.1 -1.0 G for reasonable estimates of the impurity scattering radius. Broken T -symmetry by the superconducting order parameter could have dramatic effects on flux penetration and flux motion in UPt 3 . In the orbital 2D models the broken T -symmetry ground state is doubly degenerate reflecting the two possible orientations (±c) of the orbital moment. Internal orbital pair currents are expected to generate an asymmetry in H c1 for the nucleation of vortices parallel or anti-parallel to the orbital moment. Recent measurements of the decay of remnant flux in single-crystals of UPt 3 exhibit nonthermally activated flux creep, with time-scales of order 10 4 -10 5 seconds for temperatures ranging from 7 , mK -350 mK. The internal structure of planar, superconducting domain walls separating broken T -symmetry phases is described by an order parameter with the approximate form, η = η 0 (cosh(x/ξ) , i sinh(x/ξ)), where ξ is of order the coherence length and x is the coordinate perpendicular to the domain wall. Supercurrents flow along the domain wall and generate a local field which reverses sign across the wall. In summary, the detailed measurements of the phase diagram, combined with the pressuredependent correlation between the AFM order and the double transition in zero field, provide strong constraints on the symmetry and dimensionality of the order parmeter for UPt 3 . The low-temperature anisotropy of the upper critical field is interpreted in terms of an odd-parity, spin-triplet state with d||c enforced by strong spin-orbit coupling. This interpretation appears to conflict with the model of Machida and Ozaki based on a spin-triplet order parameter and effectively no spin-orbit coupling. The phase diagram, including an apparent tetracritical point for all field orientations, can be explained naturally within the 2D E 2u model provided the hexagonal anisotropy is weak, which is consistent with absence of in-plane hexagonal anisotropy of H c2 (T ) at low temperatures. Although the E 2u order parameter seems to be able to explain a number of basic features of the superconducting phases of UPt 3 , there are many important open questions. For example: (i) What is the pairing mechanism and the origin of the correlation between the basal plane AFM order and superconductivity?, (ii) Is UPt 3 unique (and if so why) among the U-based heavy fermions in exhibiting multiple superconducting phases in its pure, stochiometric phase?, (iii) What is the residual symmetry group and the detailed structure of ∆(k f )?, and so on. Unfortunately, what is not within easy reach of existing theory is the pairing mechanism. Even if one accepts the spin-fluctuation-exchange model as a reasonable starting point for estimating the pairing interaction in UPt 3 , different RPA-type models for the pairing interaction, with information on the dynamic spin susceptibility obtained from neutron scattering data as an input, give different predictions for the symmetry channel. Fortunately, Fermi-liquid theory appears to work well for UPt 3 (and some of the other heavy fermion superconductors) so one can be optimistic that a solution to the identity of the phases of UPt 3 , and presumably other heavy fermion superconductors, is within reach. A number of key experiments, some discussed above, will hopefully be carried out in order to provide more direct tests of the residual symmetry group of the order parameter, as well as the SBF model for UPt 3 . Many of the remaining problems and interpretation of these experiments based on of various models will require the full power of the Fermi-liquid theory of superconductivity. Trappmann, et al. JETP 74, 1046 (1992). || c2 (T ), indirectly affects the determination of κ ′ a and κ ′ b from H ⊥ c2 (T ). However, if I assume that the differences, (κa -κ b )/2κa and (κ ′ a -κ ′ b )/2κ ′ a are roughly the same, then I obtain a ratio of ∼ 0.15 and can account for the tetracritical point for both field orientations. Garg and Chen 68 assume κa = κ b , in which case all of the slope discontiunity for H ⊥ c2 must be accounted for by the difference in the caxis stiffness coefficients; thus, (κ ′ a -κ ′ b )/2κ ′ a ≃ 0.3. In addition, in order to account for the tetracritical point with κa = κ b , one has to take ga ≫ g b for the two odd-parity amplitudes. 70 D. Rainer and J. A. Sauls, "Strong-coupling theory of superconductivity," in Superconductivity: From Basic Physics to New Developments (World Scientific, Singapore, 1994) Chap. x -10 k2 The indirect information we have is (i) the in-plane isotropy of the upper critical field at low temperatures, which suggests that little if any hexagonal anisotropy contributes to Fermi surface averages in eqs. (25), and (ii) the extrapolation of the heat capacity ratio, limT =0 C/T → γs. The latter could be interpreted as a gapless region of the Fermi surface, possibly due to negligible pairing amplitude on one or more sheets of the Fermi surface.. * permanant address: Department of Physics & Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL A. J. Leggett, Rev. Mod. Phys.47, 331 (1975).