Exploration of new superconductors still relies on the experience and intuition of experts, and is largely a process of experimental trial and error. In one study, only 3% of the candidate materials showed superconductivity These results open the way for the discovery of new high-temperature superconductor families. The candidate materials list, data, and method are openly available from the link. Extensive research has been conducted on superconductors with a high superconducting transition temperature, T c , because of their many promising applications, such as lowloss power cables, powerful electromagnets, and fast digital circuits. However, finding new superconductors is very difficult. In one study, it was reported Many studies have been reported on drug discovery and organic chemistry by deep learning (mainly by graph neural networks Here, we report a deep learning model for the exploration of new superconductors. Using deep learning to discover new superconductor families from known ones is analogous to using deep learning to recognize dogs from training data containing only cats. This form of learning, called zero-shot learning, is very difficult. However, that the properties of elements can be learned by deep learning is shown by us, and they can be applied to materials. Our strategy is to suitably represent these properties, use this representation as training data, and have the deep learning model learn these properties. We made the deep learning model learn how to read the periodic table as human experts do. Although humans cannot recall tens of thousands of data points, computers can. For this purpose, we represented the periodic table in a way that allows a deep learning model to learn it, as illustrated in Fig. The convolutional layers learn the relative positions of the elements on the table, because they use the same local weights to whole periodic table. This is the reason why we use convolutional layers. Full connection layers should be basically avoided, since over-fitting easily occurs, and they do not learn the relative relationship. This method, named reading periodic table, is our first contribution to deep learning. We considered inorganic crystal superconductors because the number of known organic superconductors is small. We used only the composition of materials because the applied superconductor database does not have sufficient spatial information. (See more detail in Supplementary Information.) We used the deep learning model to predict the critical temperatures, T c , of superconductors in the SuperCon dataset We refer to the model trained with only SuperCon as the preliminary model. The train-test split was 0.05. A scatter plot of the predicted and actual T c values is shown in Fig. We used the preliminary model trained with SuperCon to predict the T c values of 48,000 inorganic materials in the Crystallography Open Database (COD) to find new superconductors for experiments. However, for about 17,000 of the materials, the predicted T c was > 10 K, which is unreasonable. The failure to find new superconductors by this preliminary model seems to originate from the fact that the training data (SuperCon) included only 60 non-superconductors; the preliminary model was thus unable to learn nonsuperconductors. Data on non-superconductors are needed to differentiate superconductors from non-superconductors. However, no such dataset is available. Hence, we created synthetic data on non-superconductors, supposing that the T c values of the inorganic materials in FIG. COD that are not in SuperCon are 0 K under the assumption that most of these materials do not become superconductors with finite T c . We used the synthetic data and SuperCon as the training data. We refer to this data generation method as garbage-in, which is our second contribution to deep learning. As demonstrated by the above results for the preliminary model, scores of tests using only superconductor data, SuperCon, are not good for evaluating models. Usually, density functional theory is applied for evaluation in materials informatics; however, density functional theory cannot be used to evaluate models, because it is very difficult to calculate T c for strongly correlated systems. A database of non-superconductors is thus necessary. We applied a list of materials reported by Ref. Another interesting threshold is 10 K because only a limited number of superconductors have T c > 10 K. The deep learning method predicted materials as being above this T c threshold with a precision of 75%, which is about seven times higher than the baseline random precision (10%). The accuracy, recall, and f1 score were 95%, 76%, and 75%, respectively. The AUC was 0.94. In contrast, the preliminary model, trained with SuperCon only, predicted that all the materials would be superconductors, even though the training data were up to the year 2018 (i.e., not temporally separated). A previous study We also performed random forest binary classification with garbage-in and deep learning binary classification, which classify materials in terms of whether the T c is beyond 0 K or not. The AUC were 0.78 and 0.96, respectively. The results, summarized in Table show that the model is useful, experiments (currently under way) are required to validate the method. The list included CaBi 2 , which was recently found to be a superconductor Another interesting prediction regards BeB 2 . The material MgB 2 is a famous superconductor with T c = 40 K, and the element Be is just above the element Mg in the periodic table. In the used database, the number of two-element materials that include B is more than 300. Although BeB 2 is not a superconductor, it is not a coincidence that deep learning predicted BeB 2 as such. This is evidence that the deep learning model reads the periodic table to predict superconductors in a similar way as human do. To test the capability of our deep learning model of finding new types of superconductor, we investigated whether we could find high-T c FeSCs by using the model trained with data before 2008, the year FeSCs were discovered. We removed two materials, LaFePO and LaFePFO, from the training data because their discovery in 2006 led to the discovery of high-T c FeSCs. We used the 1,399 FeSCs known as of 2018 in SuperCon as the test data. A total of about 130 training and test runs were used. Although the models were made stochastically, we found some FeSCs that were predicted to have finite T c . A histogram of the number of predicted FeSCs with T c > 0 K is shown in Fig. The code and the data are available from the link. If we had searched for FeSCs following the prediction, we would have discovered FeSCs. However, the predicted T c of the FeSCs was rather low in our attempt to discover FeSCs. used. This problem will be considered in future research. We will incorporate crystal structure information to enhance the capability of the model of finding new high-T c superconductor families. Nevertheless, the present model is still useful as an auxiliary tool. Furthermore, the present method could be applied to other problems where crystal structure is difficult to obtain. FIG. Even though our method does not require feature engineering, unlike conventional methods in materials informatics, it achieved much better results. Our deep learning method may replace existing methods, just as other deep learning methods have done in computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement learning. Deep learning requires failure data (e.g., non-superconductors) for accurate prediction. As many datasets in materials search are a random train-test split, we must prepare a temporally separated train-test datasets for the field to progress. Because our method does not use specific properties of superconductors and uses only chemical formulas, the method can be applied to other problems with, in particular, inorganic materials. We demonstrate band gap estimation by our method in Ref. The summary is given for readers. A. Summary of Introduced methods The first deep learning model for finding new superconductors. 2. Reading periodic table: the method that allows deep learning to learn to read the periodic table in order to learn the laws of elements. 3. Garbage-in: the method to create synthetic data on non-superconductors. 4. Model evaluation scheme that uses temporally separate training and test data. 0. (Good R 2 value for estimating T c by using data of superconductors only.) 1. The deep learning method predicted superconductivity for a material with a precision of 62%. 2. The deep learning method had better capabilities than random forest. Although BeB 2 is not a superconductor, it is not a coincidence that deep learning predicted BeB 2 as such. This shows that the deep learning model reads the periodic table to predict superconductors in a similar way as human do. Appendix B: Garbage-in: a method for creating synthetic data on non-superconductors We have a database of superconductors. However, to explore new superconductors, we also need a database of non-superconductors, which does not exist. Hence, we created synthetic data. Under the assumption that most of the inorganic materials in COD do not become superconductors with finite T c , we input the inorganic materials in COD with T c = 0 to the deep learning model as training data along with SuperCon. The method is illustrated in Of the 17,000 remaining materials, about 4,000 did not have T c values. We considered setting T c = 0 for these materials or just excluding them. A comparison of the regression results of the preliminary models with SuperCon indicated that excluding the materials without T c values was better, so this was done. We use only the inorganic materials in COD. We remove duplicates, data with compositions difficult for machines to read, and overlap with SuperCon and the materials reported by Hosono et al. After this process, about 48,000 materials remained. 6. Overlap among SuperCon, COD, and materials reported by Hosono et al. The overlap with SuperCon was removed from COD and the materials reported by Hosono et al. with a disease, which is a problem for disease detection. Hence, we have recall. Recall is the percentage of identified samples with a disease out of all samples with a disease. If all 10,000 samples are predicted to be positive, recall will be 100% since all 100 samples with a disease were found, but accuracy and precision will be only 1%, which is unsatisfactory. The f1 score utilizes both precision and recall. It is given by the harmonic mean 2 × precision×recall precision+recall . The best measure for evaluating a model depends on the specific problem. results were averages over 10 models. Random forest analysis using only the data of superconductors, without garbage-in, encountered the same problem as our deep learning model. It predicted about 60% of the materials were superconductors. We performed classification regarding whether T c is beyond 0 K or not for materials reported by Hosono et al. because it is almost impossible for random forest regression to estimate T c = 0, due to random forest classification being an ensemble estimation. If even one tree estimates T c > 0, then random forest regression estimates T c > 0. Classification with respect to 10 K was also done. For the random forest, we set the number of estimators as 100. higher than the baseline random precision. The mean precision was 0.5 for about 130 training and test runs and the baseline random precision was 0.32. The precision was about two times higher than the baseline. We also checked whether each model satisfied the condition that the precision be sufficiently higher than the baseline. To confirm the reliability of a model, we checked whether the model learned the feature of superconductivity by checking the effect of training data on the number of predicted FeSCs. We compared the predictions of five models trained using different data based on SuperCon and Figure These results show that these two materials had a large impact on the predictions. It is surprising, in view of deep learning, that 2 out of 60,000 training data points had such a significant influence on the model. However, this influence is reasonable because human experts can infer many FeSCs if they know that LaFePFO and LaFePO are superconductors. The results for (iii) and (v) are shown in Fig. The above results show that the addition of training data increased the number of FeSCs with finite T c . We conclude that the model learned the feature of superconductivity. This confirms the reliability of the model, which was also confirmed by checking the precision of the prediction of superconductivities from the materials reported by Hosono et al. It was checked whether the deep learning model could predict cuprates when trained with data that did not include cuprates. We trained models with the following data combinations: (i) only conventional superconductors; (ii) only FeSCs; and (iii) both conventional superconductors and FeSCs. The data were as of 2018. We repeated the training and test approximately 130 times. The results for models (i) and (iii) are shown in Fig. Scores for predictions of superconductivity for materials reported by Ref. V. THE DISCOVERY OF TWO SUPERCONDUCTORS CABI 2 AND HF 0.5 NB 0.2 V 2 ZR 0.3