The main aim of the present work is to estimate the effective elastic stiffnesses of a two-phase diamond/β-SiC composite thin film that is fabricated by chemical vapor deposition. The parameters of linear elasticity are determined by numerical homogenization. The database is sparse since for the 3D volume of interest only two micrographs displaying the phase distributions in perpendicular planes are available; micrographs each of a cross-section and the surface of the thin film. A representative volume element (RVE) is reconstructed by an optimization software and by means of identified material symmetries in 2D of the specimen. The elastic homogenization results indicate that the two-phase diamond/β-SiC composite exhibits the behavior of transverse isotropy, for which the set of six independent material parameters is identified. Diamond thin films find an every more increasing interest for their outstanding mechanical properties, most notably for their high hardness, low friction coefficient and high wear resistance. A critical issue for their industrial application is their poor adhesion on many substrates due to high interface stresses induced by different thermal expansion coefficients of the diamond film and the substrate. An additional problem is the catalytic effect in the context of iron-, cobalt-and nickel-based materials which results in soot and graphite formation. As an effective solution to these problems a nanocrystalline diamond/β-SiC composite film is used as a transition layer that serves the purpose of an adhesion layer and/or a barrier layer to prevent the catalytic effect of the substrate elements. Diamond/β-SiC composite films fabricated by chemical vapor deposition Since diamond/β-SiC composites are part of engineering structures in a multitude of applications, their mechanical performance is of cardinal importance for the functionality and integrity of structures at various length scales. Recent progress made in the synthesis, characterization and applications of the diamond/β-SiC composite films are reviewed in In view of the ever more increasing sophistication of fabrication and the rapidly growing field of applications there is a strong need for computational modeling diamond-based composites. Remarkably, this need is in stark contrast to the achievements of computational materials science for this type of composite material so far. One reason is the heterogeneity of the material; while for two-phase diamond/β-SiC composites the elastic material parameters of single phases are available, very little is known about the effective elasticity properties of the composites. The present work aims to bridge the existing gap by a thorough analysis of the effective elasticity properties through computational homogenization of a 3D representative volume element (RVE) which must be reconstructed from two sectional micrographs. Hence, the parameter identification has to be carried out coping with a lack of 3D data, as only planar microscopic images are available. SiC exists in numerous crystalline forms (polytypes), β-SiC has cubic lattice which is the preferred type for composites with (cubic) diamond. The β type is stable only at temperatures below 1700 • C, in contrast to α-SiC which is formed at higher temperatures. In the CVD fabrication of microcrystalline diamond/β-SiC composite thin films, singlecrystalline p-type Si(100) wafers were used as substrates. A key requirement for the high crystallinity of diamond and β-SiC phases in the simultaneous co-deposition process is the utilization of high atomic hydrogen concentration. The high atomic hydrogen concentration, generated by a high microwave power density, hinders secondary heterogeneous nucleation and therefore enhances the selectivity of CH 3 and SiH 3 deposition onto diamond and β-SiC crystals. The high-quality diamond and β-SiC phase formation was examined and proved by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy, for more details of the fabrication process we refer to In this work the effective elastic properties of the composite material are computed based on a representation of the 3D microstructure and under consideration of the single phase properties (see Tab.1) which each exhibit isotropic, linear elastic behavior. 3D microstructure information can be obtained with suitable tomography methods. For our composite material a voxel resolution of 5 nm is required, which can be achieved with FIB-SEM tomography E [GPa] ν Diamond 775 0.20 β-SiC 250 0.17 Turner and Kalidindi The available database for estimating the 3D elasticity tensor in this work is restricted to two planar images of the two phase material; one for the surface plane, the second one for a cross section as displayed in Fig. The following modus operandi for the reconstruction of an RVE and for the computation of the homogenized 3D elasticity tensor is pursued: 1. Computation of the (i) phase fraction ratio and the (ii) homogenized 2D elasticity tensors, each for the surface plane and the cross sectional plane as displayed in Fig. (a) Consideration of full planar windows to cover the maximum of available microstructure information. (b) Consistency test, whether the phase fraction ratio for the surface plane equals the phase fraction ratio of the cross sectional plane. (c) Test of the hypothesis that in the surface plane the type of 2D elasticity law is close to isotropy, and in the cross sectional plane close to orthotropy. Quantification of the deviation between the real, homogenized elasticity coefficients from isotropy and orthotropy, respectively. 2. Identification of 2D representative area elements (RAEs) of reduced size each for the surface plane and the cross sectional plane. The criteria for the RAE selection is statistical representativeness, i.e. matching (i) the phase fraction ratio as well as (ii) the elasticity properties of those of the full planar windows. Moreover, an exemplar for the missing third plane perpendicular to the slices in Fig. 3. Reconstruction of a 3D RVE from RAEs by the application of an optimization software, 4. Computation of the homogenized 3D elasticity matrix; identification of the type of anisotropic linear elasticity law showing the best fit to the homogenized elasticities, and determination of the corresponding material constants. Arguments for and validation of the hypotheses of elastic isotropy in the surface plane and elastic orthotropy in the cross-sectional plane (point 1.(c) in the above list) will be given in the following. In the first step the phase fractions are determined and the homogenized elasticity matrices for both the (23) surface plane as well as the (12) cross sectional plane (compare Fig. In the planar pre-analyses we consider the full size of the SEM pictures shown in Fig. The resultant phase fraction ratios of diamond to SiC of 44:56 for the surface plane, and 42:58 for the cross sectional plane are in reasonable agreement with each other. The coefficients of the homogenized elasticity matrices -each from planar homogenization analyses-are displayed in Tab. 2. The parameters E and ν are identified by the homogenized coefficients S 22 and S 23 . The remaining coefficients are used to validate the hypothesis of isotropy. Equation ( Notice that for isotropy the shear modulus is not an independent material parameter; instead it holds G = E/(2(1 + ν)). These four conditions (i)-(iv) are used to check the homogenized elasticity tensor for isotropy. The deviation from isotropy is quantified by the percental deviation of the computed coefficients from the isotropic ones in (2) based on the identified parameters E and ν. For conditions (iii) and (iv) the deviation from isotropy is measured in terms of the magnitude of As a result, a comparison of coefficients underpins that the elasticity law in the (23) surface plane is very close to perfect isotropy thus justifying the hypothesis; the maximal deviation of a coefficient from the perfect isotropic one is less than 1.4%, C 24 and C 34 virtually vanish. 2.1.2 Test for orthotropy in the (12) cross sectional plane. In view of the fabrication process by CVD and the resultant phase alternations of the diamond and SiC phase forming roughly a laminate in the (12) cross sectional plane, elastic orthotropy in that plane is justified as a working hypothesis. For that case, (3) displays the law of linear elasticity in terms of the compliance matrix S. Four independent material parameters are enough to describe orthotropy in the plane, E 1 , E 2 , ν 12 and G 12 . The number of independent Poisson's contractions is reduced to one, here ν 12 , where the 1-direction aligns with the growth direction of the phases, see Fig. Notice that there are four conditions for a comparison of coefficients referring to the set {S 11 , S 12 , S 22 , S 66 }) to identify the four independent material parameters. The conditions Two additional conclusions can be drawn from the planar pre-analyses. • First, the resultant 3D microstructure is expected to be transverse isotropic due to the identified isotropy in one plane and orthotropy in a perpendicular plane. • Second, by virtue of isotropic elasticity in the ( As a result, microstructure data for three mutually perpendicular planes are available, which is sufficient for the reconstruction of the full 3D microstructure. The full image information of Fig. Figure As it turns out, the characteristics of the full planar information are accurately captured by the selected RAEs, see Tab.5; the deviation of the phase fractions from the full pictures is smaller than 0.05 %. The deviation from the elasticity coefficients is 0.5% at maximum if merely the non-vanishing coefficients are considered. The assumed elasticity laws are captured in good agreement with the full windows, see Tab. 5. The assumptions of isotropy and orthotropy, respectively, are underpinned by the excellent agreement of the homogenized coefficients with the idealized ones of the assumed type of material symmetry, see Tabs. 6 and 7, respectively. The procedure of 3D microstructure reconstruction based on the three cross-sectional exemplars in mutually perpendicular planes shall be described. The reconstruction makes use of the 2D exemplars spatial correlations. Methods and software are described in detail in The RAEs for reconstruction exhibit the edge length of 3 μm with a consistent resolution of 130 × 130 pixel (pixel size 23 nm) which results in a final reconstruction volume size of 130 3 voxels. Exemplarily, a convergence study for the surface RAE at edge length 3 μm using various pixel resolutions is carried out, see the appendix, Sec. A; it turns out that the chosen resolution of 130 pixel per edge slightly overestimates the fully converged homogenized elasticity coefficients. Following a successive hierarchy of a Gaussian pyramid, the exemplars are downsampled two times to half of the resolution in each reconstruction stage. Starting at the coarsest spatial resolution, this result is used as an initial guess for the algorithm at the next level. Alternating between two steps called the search and the optimization steps until the reconstruction converges (reconstruction stops changing significantly), a statistically representative 3D microstructure is obtained. The goal of the search step is to simply identify the best matching 2D neighborhoods (small square region from the available 2D exemplars) for every spatial bin in the reconstruction. The subsequent optimization step considers all the multiple recommendations and arrives at a single update for the current iteration of the reconstruction The diamond phase fraction of the resultant RVE is 0.43 and thereby well matching the entire surface (0.44) and cross section (0.42) images. The characteristic surface speckles as well as the cross-sectional laminates in the CVD growth direction are present throughout the volume in the corresponding slices. The computation of the effective elastic properties of the two-phase composite is carried out by numerical homogenization, which is based on the Hill-Mandel postulate that the stress power of the homogenized material must be equal to the average stress power in the RVE of the heterogeneous material The simulation is carried out imposing periodic boundary conditions on the reconstructed RVE. The material data for the linear elastic behavior of each phase was given in Tab. 1. The finite element discretization of the RVE contains 130 cubic finite elements in each direction of space. A comparison of coefficients in the homogenized compliance matrix with those of perfect transverse isotropy in the format of (4) identifies the six independent material constants, which are listed in the left of Tab. 9. The remaining three nonzero coefficients are used to check the validity of the assumed type of elasticity law by means of the criteria C 12 = C 13 , C 33 = C 22 , C 55 = C 66 . The small deviations for all of the three criteria (not more than 0.6%) in the right of Tab. 9 underpin that the effective elasticity properties are in excellent agreement with the hypothesized transverse isotropy. The porous diamond with SiC phase etched out. In a modified model we consider the case of porous diamond, where the SiC phase is etched out and thereby reproduce in silico what can be realized by an acid agency (e.g. hydrogen fluoride). For the same reconstructed volume as shown in Fig. The main aim of the present work was the 3D virtual reconstruction of an RVE for a diamond/β-SiC thin film composite and the determination of its effective elastic properties including the type of anisotropy by numerical homogenization. For the presented analysis some assumptions are made which refer to the required properties of a volume to qualify for being an RVE. According to A crucial step in the present work was the analysis of microstructures in planar cross sections. The analysis has determined the phase fractions and has identified the types of elastic anisotropies and thereby enabled a reduction to feasible exemplar sizes, the RAEs. Moreover, the obtained result of elastic isotropy in the surface plane was key to complement the existing data in two perpendicular cross sections by a third one. As a consequence a minimal database for the virtual 3D reconstruction procedure was available. Notice that the isotropy result in the surface plane and the orthotropy result in a perpendicular plane imply, that (i) orthotropy exists in all planes perpendicular to the surface plane, and that (ii) the resultant 3D elasticity is transverse isotropy. While the qualitiative agreement of the homogenized elasticities in 3D directly follows from mechanical reasoning, the figures of the corresponding elasticity parameters must be identified by numerical homogenization. The type of anisotropy is consistent with the CVD fabrication process. In this regard the presented analysis and its results are not only relevant for the particular material system but representative for a broader class of nano-/microcomposite thin films fabricated by CVD or PVD (Physical Vapor Deposition). The reconstruction of a 3D RVE from three planar exemplars by means of numerical optimization techniques exhibits some uncertainty, for a thorough discussion we refer to the original paper of The present work expands the field of nanoheterogeneous composite structures which are analyzed in their topology and mechanical properties by a new material system. So far, many significant contributions have considered (functionally graded) carbonnanofiber/CNT/graphene reinforced polymer and metal composites and combinations therof, The simulation results indicate that the nanoheterogeneous diamond/β-SiC composite fabricated by CVD exhibits the following effective properties • isotropic elasticity in the surface plane, • orthotropic elasticity in all planes perpendicular to the surface plane, • a resultant transverse isotropic elasticity of the reconstructed 3D microstructure. The corresponding six independent material parameters were identified; a consistency check resulted in minor deviations from those of ideal transverse isotropy with maximal deviation not more than 0.6%. The homogenized elasticity tensor opens the door to single-scale finite element analyses of the deformation of diamond/β-SiC structures at larger length scales, which are cheap and fast. This is a first step towards modeling the rather brittle behavior of this material class up to failure. For that aim, the experimental identification of damage and failure mechanisms on the submicron length scale is required, its modeling by continuum constitutive laws, and a validation of the latter by two-scale finite element simulations. The methods in this work set the basis to enable future material optimization, where the microstructure of the composite is tailor-made by an appropriate choice of fabrication parameters. By virtue of the simulation methods the optimal parameters (virtual materials testing) can be determined at moderate experimental efforts. Declarations of interest: None. Funding: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. elasticity constants (in GPa) of the entire surface plane assuming isotropy and deviation [%] of the remaining coefficients from isotropy. elasticity constants (in GPa) of the cross-sectional RAEs assuming orthotropy and deviation [%] of the remaining elasticity coefficients from orthotropy.