Herein, fundamentals of topology and symmetry breaking are used to understand crystallization and geometrical frustration in topologically close-packed structures. This frames solidification from a new perspective that is unique from thermodynamic discussions. Crystallization is considered as developing from undercooled liquids, in which orientational order is characterized by a surface of a sphere in four-dimensions (quaternion) with the binary polyhedral representation of the preferred orientational order of atomic clustering inscribed on its surface. As a consequence of the dimensionality of the quaternion orientational order parameter, crystallization is seen as occurring in "restricted dimensions." Homotopy theory is used to classify all topologically stable defects, and third homotopy group defect elements are considered to be generalized vortices that are available in superfluid ordered systems. This topological perspective approaches the liquid-to-crystalline solid transition in three-dimensions from fundamental concepts of: Bose-Einstein condensation, the Mermin-Wagner theorem and Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) topological-ordering transitions. In doing so, in this article, concepts that apply to superfluidity in "restricted dimensions" are generalized in order to consider the solidification of crystalline solid states. This article aims to elucidate the topological-ordering mechanisms that lead to solidification of undercooled atomic liquids into crystalline ground states. A topological viewpoint is pursued on the liquid-to-solid transition, which unifies several perspectives. This topological viewpoint on crystallization makes use of a quaternion orientational order parameter, and is thereby a generalization of Bose-Einstein condensation phenomena of superfluids (complex) in "restricted dimensions" (Mermin-Wagner theorem 1 ). This perspective builds on our recent computational work, that elucidates the topological origins of orientational ordering phase transitions in 4D quaternion ordered systems General features of Bose-Einstein condensation of superfluids (complex), for which the free energy function is a 'Mexican hat' and vortices are available as topological defects, are discussed in Section II. In particular, spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) in "bulk dimensions" is distinguished from topological-ordering that occurs for complex ordered systems that exist in "restricted dimensions." Furthermore, the manifestation of a frustration-induced quantum phase transition that occurs for complex ordered systems in "restricted dimensions" is introduced in Section II. In Section III, the concept of Bose-Einstein condensation is generalized beyond complex ordered systems by making use of a quaternion orientational order parameter to characterize the degree of order in undercooled atomic liquids. The notions of Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless topological ordering transitions A well-known example of SSB is the formation of superfluid Bose-Einstein condensates of electrons or helium particles, by broken U (1) (complex) symmetry, in threedimensions. At high-temperatures, above the Bose-Einstein condensation temperature (T BEC ), the system is disordered/normal and the free energy is minimized at the origin of the complex plane (Fig. In contrast to SSB, in "bulk dimensions," systems that exist in "restricted dimensions" are prevented from undergoing a conventional disorder-order phase transition (by SSB) at finite temperatures (Mermin-Wagner theorem 1 ). In complex ordered systems (i.e., superfluids), 2D and 1D are considered to be "restricted dimensions" as a consequence of the abundance of misorientational fluctuations (in θ) that develops just below T BEC and prevents phasecoherency. In these scenarios, a finite amount of undercooling (below T BEC ) is required prior to the formation of a phase-coherent superfluid state at low-temperatures. Phase-coherent superfluid states, that develop in "restricted dimensions," do so by a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) type topological ordering transition within the gas of misorientational fluctuations that take the form of vortex point defects and anti-defects. In such systems, since both the energy and entropy of isolated point defects de- pends logarithmically on the system size, energy dominates the thermodynamics at low-temperatures and these defects will bind into low-energy (sum-0) pairs at the BKT transition temperature. This topological ordering event enables the existence of a superfluid ground state (phase-coherent) in "restricted dimensions." Superfluid ordered systems that exist in "restricted dimensions" are well-modeled mathematically using O(2) quantum rotor models In Section III, the formation of crystalline ground states from clustered undercooled atomic fluids is discussed. In three-dimensions, a quaternion orientational order parameter characterizes the degree of atomic clustering in the undercooled fluid such that crystallization is considered to be a direct higher-dimensional analogy to the formation of superfluids in "restricted dimensions." As a higher-dimensional realization of orientational ordering in "restricted dimensions" (Mermin-Wagner), consider the process of crystallization in three-dimensions. Above the melting temperature T M , unclustered particles rotate fully in three-dimensions and the full orientational symmetry group is G = SO(3). In considering the structure of topological defects throughout the system (by homotopy theory On SSB of a compact Lie group Furthermore, the number of imaginary generators that define the compact group (complex or quaternion) elucidates the available topological defects in complex or quaternion ordered systems. Just as superfluids of broken U (1) symmetry permit π 1 (S 1 ) vortices (that concentrate external complex rotational fields), quaternion ordered sysa A universal covering space C of a space G is a covering space that is simply connected, i.e., π 1 (C) = 0 while π 1 (G) = 0. The product of complex numbers (C) may be seen as 90 • -rotations that span the complex plane with the 2D basis of {1, î}. Unlike real numbers (R) that are not compact, complex numbers are compact under standard operations (by including √ -1). Complex numbers then take the form: z = x + y √ -1 where x and y are real numbers, and î2 = -1 is an imaginary unit. When x 2 + y 2 = 1, a complex number lies on the unit circle. (B) The next higher-dimensional algebra domain, forming a compact group, are the quaternion numbers (H). The product of quaternion numbers may be seen as 90 • -rotations in the quaternion plane that spans the 4D basis {1, î, ĵ, k}. Just as complex numbers are formed as pairs of real numbers and an imaginary unit ( î), quaternion numbers may be formed in a similar manner as pairs of complex numbers: , a quaternion number lies on the unit hypersphere (S 3 ). While complex multiplication is Abelian, the order of operations of quaternion multiplication is important and hence the group is non-Abelian. tems of broken SU (2) symmetry permit π 3 (S 3 ) topological defects (that concentrate external quaternion rotational fields). Just as vortices are spontaneously generated points in two-dimensions that act to prevent the development of conventional orientational order at finite temperatures (Mermin-Wagner theorem), π 3 (S 3 ) topological defects are spontaneously generated points in four-dimensions that act to prevent a conventional disorder-order transition 2,26 at finite temperatures. Undercooling below the melting temperature is therefore analogous to the prevention of SSB at finite temperatures for complex ordered systems that exist in "restricted dimensions." Crystallization may occur after a finite amount of undercooling, as the clustered atomic fluid selects a particular orientational ground state from among the set of degenerate ground states on M. That is, translational order obtained on the formation of a crystalline lattice (after a finite amount of undercooling) is coincident with the development of global orientational order (quaternion). At the crystallization transition, by the adoption of an orientationallyordered ground state, the topology of the relevant order parameter space changes from a sphere to a torus. Specifically, in spatial dimensions D ≥ 2, the spherical orientational order parameter space (M) of the undercooled liquid changes discretely at the crystallization transition by "adding a handle" to its surface where T D is the D-dimensional torus. Mechanisms of orientational ordering that drive the formation of crystalline solids may be elucidated by considering the discrete change in topology of M at the crystallization transition (Ref. 26). The change in topology of the order parameter manifold at the crystallization transition, as the genus topological invariant changes from zero to one, implies a change in the structure of the fundamental homotopy group The genus topological invariant comes from the integration of curvature over the surface, and is quantified directly via the Gauss-Bonnet theorem In light of this, it is not surprising that many authors have made use of a flattening method to model the crystallization process In addition to third homotopy group defects, due to atomic clustering in undercooled atomic fluids, wedge disclinations are also spontaneously generated at finite temperatures and act to prevent the formation of a crystalline solid state at the melting temperature. Ultimately, in order to achieve a crystalline solid at finite temperatures, a topo-logical ordering event within this gas of wedge disclinations is required. This topological ordering event forces complementary wedge disclinations (Fig. For purposes of illustration, consider the crystallization process in 2D using the "iterative flattening method." For two-dimensional solidifying fluids, below the melting temperature, the degree of orientational order is related to the regular tessellation on the surface of a sphere in threedimensions (S 2 ∈ R 3 ) by the preferred orientational order of atomic clustering. Hence, regular polyhedra that tessellate S 2 ∈ R 3 act as ideal curved space models of orientational order in 2D undercooled atomic fluids. Only two of the five regular polyhedra, cubes ({4, 3} ∈ S 2 ) and tetra- hedra ({3, 3} ∈ S 2 ), are developable b in flat (Euclidean) plane, these periodic nets are discussed in Section III A 1. Crystallization of short-range orientational order that is not developable in flat space, i.e., that is considered to be geometrically frustrated, will be discussed in Section III A 2. The two regular periodic tilings of the Euclidean plane are by squares and by equilateral triangles, which have the Schläfli notation c of {4, 4} and {3, 6} respectively. These 2D periodic nets can be generated by unwrapping the relevant developable curved space tessellations of vertices, that characterize orientational order in the undercooled fluid, onto the plane. In particular, square nets ({4, 4}) can be generated by flattening cubic tessellations {4, 3} ∈ S 2 onto the plane. In doing so, the coordination at each vertex increases from three to four so that square faces may generate infinite tilings (Fig. b Developable curved surfaces may be flattened into infinite tilings without distortion or the introduction of permanent defects. c Schäfli notation defines Solidifying systems with five-fold symmetries are unable to generate infinite tilings of the Euclidean plane Ordered arrangements of topological defects in geometrically frustrated solids have been evidenced in physical (three-dimensional) crystalline systems, in cases of icosahedral short-range orientational order As a two-dimensional example using the "iterative flattening method" to generate a geometrically frustrated structure, consider the vertices of an icosahedron {3, 5} ∈ S 2 inscribed onto the faces of a cube (Figure In the event of geometrical frustration, there is intrinsic positive curvature that is associated with the preferred short-range orientational order of atomic clustering. Physically, this intrinsic positive curvature (geometrical frustration) explicitly breaks the symmetry between the concentrations of disclinations in the undercooled liquid towards those that concentrate negative curvature at their core. This ensures that the overall Euclidean space remains flat. In scenarios of geometrical frustration In three-dimensions, just below the melting temperature (T M ), the full orientational symmetry group of the hightemperature liquid (G = SO(3)) is broken locally by atomic clustering where H ⊂ SO(3) and H ⊂ SU (2) is the binary polyhedral group. Because the group SU (2) is isomorphic to the unit quaternions, local orientational ordering due to atomic clustering below the melting temperature may be characterized by the application of a quaternion orientational order parameter where Z = 0, ±1, ±2... is a lattice of integers. In threedimensional atomic systems That is, just like in the XY model and low-dimensional superfluids, there is no possibility for conventional longrange orientational order to develop in three-dimensional solidifying atomic systems at the melting temperature. Just below T M , it is an abundance of misorientational fluctuations taking the form of a plasma of spontaneously generated topological defects (Eqn. 3) that prevents global orientational-order. Thus, undercooling is necessary as a consequence of the phase-destabilizing nature of spontaneously generated topological defects. In order to allow for the development of crystalline solids at finite temperatures, a defect-driven Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless type transition In the event that the relevant orientational order parameter space that characterizes atomic clustering (Eqn. 2) is developable in flat space, the crystalline solid state that forms below a critical temperature is free of permanent topological defects at zero Kelvin The formation of a perfect crystal is therefore akin to the formation of perfectly phase-coherent superfluid ground states in "restricted dimensions," that are able to exist due to a prototypical BKT topological ordering transition within a balanced (classical) gas of vortices. Limiting ourselves to the discussion atomic clustering that has symmetries characterized by regular polytope, cubic crystal are the only space-filling regular tilings of 3D Euclidean space which derive from the hypercube {4, 3, 3}. These systems lack geometrical frustration and are hence flat everywhere. This is possible because no centers of concentrated curvature exist in the form of permanent topological defects. In the presence of geometrical frustration, consider the flattening of the {5, 3, 3} polytope (120-cell) into 3D Euclidean space (Fig. Geometrically frustrated crystalline solid states are known as topologically close-packed (TCP); Frank-Kasper structures In the presence of frustration, excess signed topological defects are unable to form bound pairs and persist to the ground state in a periodic manner Figure Above a critical value of geometrical frustration, the concentrations of topological defects in the undercooled fluid become entirely biased such that bound states (e.g., dislocations) are unable to form and the ground state is no longer crystalline. In three-dimensions, the hypothetical solid state that forms at a critical value of geometrical frustration lacks translational order but retains short-range orientational order. It has been suggested previously that The transition between geometrically-frustrated solid states and non-crystalline solid states, that occurs at the Kauzmann point ("ideal" glass transition), takes place at a finite temperature which corresponds to a first-order transition Two fundamental concepts that drive the manifestation of a particular ordered state of matter are: the topology of the order parameter space and, the spatial dimensionality of the ordered system. In this article, we have discussed a particular example of the role of topology in condensed matter physics by approaching the crystallization process in three-dimensions using a quaternion orientational order parameter. Owing to the fact that the solidifying system exists in "restricted dimensions," conventional orientational order is prevented at the melting temperature and undercooling is viewed as. In light of this, we have suggested that the crystallization process in three-dimensions is a higherdimensional realization of the formation of phase-coherent complex ordered systems in "restricted dimensions," twoand one-(Mermin-Wagner theorem). We have emphasized that, it is the discrete change in the topology of the order parameter space upon the formation of a crystalline lattice (by the addition of a handle to the otherwise spherical surface) that forces the emergence of bound states of topological defects via a defect-driven Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless like transition in three-dimensions. As a consequence of ordering in "restricted dimensions," geometrical frustration is possible in three-dimensional crystalline solid states. Geometrical frustration forces a periodic arrangement of signed topological defects into crystalline ground states which are known as topologically close-packed (TCP). Critical geometrical frustration entirely suppresses the crystalline ground state, at the Kauzmann point. N. D. Mermin and H. Wagner, "Absence of Ferromagnetism or Antiferromagnetism in One-or Two-Dimensional Isotropic Heisenberg