Despite decades of studies on charge density wave (CDW) of 2H-NbSe2, the origin of its incommensurate CDW ground state has not been understood. We discover that CDW of 2H-NbSe2 is composed of two different, energetically competing, structures. The lateral heterostructures of two CDWs are entangled as topological excitations, which give rise to a CDW phase shift and the incommensuration without a conventional domain wall. A partially melt network of the topological excitations and their vertices explain an unusual landscape of domains. The unconventional topological role of competing phases disclosed here can be widely applied to various incommensuration or phase coexistence phenomena in materials. The competition of distinct periodicities or ordered phases are widely found in various of material systems We pick up the charge density wave (CDW) in two dimensional (2D) materials, which is one of the most extensively investigated topics in condensed matter physics together with superconductivity In one of the most widely investigated model systems of 2D CDW, 2H-NbSe 2 , the intriguing nature of the incommensurate phase has become even a long term mystery. 2H-NbSe 2 undergoes a phase transition to the (3 × 3) * yeom@postech.ac.kr CDW state at 33 K In this work, we clarify the unconventional atomistic origin of the incommensurate CDW state in 2H-NbSe 2 using STM experiments and DFT calculations. The CDW state of 2H-NbSe 2 is divided by domains of two different CDW structures. Our DFT calculations and experimental results disclose atomic structures of the distinct CDW structures and their degenerate energies. The characteristic heterostructure of two CDW domains produces a phase shift for the discommensuration Single crystal 2H-NbSe 2 is cleaved in high vacuum to obtain clean surfaces and transferred to the ultrahighvacuum chamber equipped with a commercial cryogenic STM operating at 4.3 K. STM images were obtained using the constant current mode. Our DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package We identify atomic structures of two CDW structures using STM images and DFT calculations [Fig. STM simulations of our (3 × 3) CDW structures reproduce well the local topographies. In the HC structure, the bright trimer protrusion of three Se atoms on the Nb trimer is well compared with the STM topography at 100 mV and the bright (dark) triangular protrusion of six (three) Se atoms is in good agreement with the experiment at -100 mV. In contrast, in the AC structure, the brightest protrusion made by the center Se atom of the Nb sextet agrees well with the STM topography at both biases. The CDW ground state would be the HC structure which has a 13 With these CDW atomic structures, we can clarify the structural origin of the CDW discommensuration. As a matter of fact, a translation between HC and AC structures cannot be defined due to the absence of a common reference as shown in Figs. Among domain walls in CDW materials, those of 2H-NbSe 2 is unique. Most of CDW translations by discommensurations have been assumed between the same CDW structures with the translational degeneracy and is composed of well isolated broken CDW clusters. While there are very few examples of CDW domain walls with their structures determine, the recent case in 1T-TaS 2 shows such broken CDW clusters clearly In fact, the idea of degenerate CDW structures and their possible role as the discommensuration was introduced as early as 1982 for the case of 2H-TaSe 2 The discommensuration would ideally form a honeycomb lattice In this work, the long standing puzzle, the microscopic nature of the incommensurate CDW of 2H-NbSe 2 is thereby solved 