We systematically investigate the influence of annealing effect on terahertz (THz) generation from CoFeB based magnetic nanofilms driven by femtosecond laser pulses. Three times enhancement of THz yields are achieved in W/CoFeB through annealing effect, and double boosting is obtained in Pt/CoFeB. The mechanism of annealing effect originates from the increase of hot electron mean free path induced by crystallization, which is experimentally corroborated by THz transmission measurement on time-domain spectroscopy. Comparison studies of the thickness dependent THz efficiency after annealing are also implemented, and we eventually conclude that annealing and thickness optimization are of importance for scaling up THz intensity. Our observations not only deepen understanding of the spintronic THz radiation mechanism but also provide normal platform for high speed spintronic opto-electronic devices. Extensive applications of terahertz (THz) technology call for superior emitters Here, in order to verify the assumption, we conduct comparison emission experiments on W/CoFeB, Pt/CoFeB and W/CoFeB/Pt samples with and without annealing, which are different sample systems from those used in previous work Our experiment setups are schematically illustrated in Figure We conducted the THz emission experiments on both CoFeB-based bilayers and trilayers which includes W(2.2)/CoFeB(2.0), W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2), Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2), W(2.0)/CoFeB(2.2)/Pt(2.0). The numbers in the bracket indicates the layer thickness in nanometers. These heterostructures were fabricated on 1 mm thick glass substrate in a high-vacuum AJA sputtering system with a base pressure of 10-9 Torr. The deposition conditions were carefully optimized to ensure the best quality and reproducibility and the growth rate for W, CoFeB, and Pt was 0.21 Å/s, 0.06 Å/s and 0.77 Å/s, respectively. We performed a sample rotation so as to ensure a good uniformity. In order to make comparison studies, all the samples are distributed into two groups, which are the as-deposited group and the as-annealed group. For the asannealed group, samples were annealed at 280 °C in vacuum for one hour, and during this process, the magnitude of 1 T was set by a static external magnetic field. When conducting THz emission experiments, the applied static magnetic field is 50 mT. And for the THz transmission experiments, no external magnetic field is applied. Figure To gain a deep insight into the physics of annealing effect on THz emission enhancement, we will subsequently implement a comprehensive analysis on the possible mechanisms. Previously, one of the mechanisms was attributed to MgO contributed crystallization and enhancement of the spin Hall angle of Ta. In our case, as is shown in the sample preparation section, there is no MgO layer in our samples, but an intensity enhancement behavior is still observed. Therefore, this phenomenon may not be strongly correlated to this explanation. Then taking consideration into the other possibility, the crystallization of the ferromagnetic material layer leads to a reduction in atomic scale disorder caused by amorphous state, finally reducing spin-lattice scattering In summary, we observe ~3 times enhanced THz emission intensity in W/CoFeB and Pt/CoFeB bilayers driven by femtosecond laser pulses. We narrowing the enhancement physics to annealing induced lattice disorder reduction which is reasonably supported by the THz timedomain transmission measurements. Through these experimental observations and qualitative analyses, we extend the annealing effect for demonstrated optimal spintronic THz sources. We believe our investigations not only help further deeply understand the fundamental physics of femtosecond spin dynamics, but also provide an optimization procedure for the highly efficient THz sources. 