Huygens' metasurfaces are electrically thin devices which allow arbitrary field transformations. Beam refraction is among the first demonstrations of realized metasurfaces. As previously shown for extreme-angle refraction, control over only the electric impedance and magnetic admittance of the Huygens' metasurface proved insufficient to produce the desired reflectionless field transformation. To maintain zero reflections for wide refraction angles, magnetoelectric coupling between the electric and magnetic response of the metasurface, leading to bianisotropy, can be introduced. In this paper, we report the theory, design, and experimental characterization of a reflectionless bianisotropic metasurface for extreme-angle refraction of a normally incident plane wave towards 71.8 degrees at 20 GHz. The theory and design of three-layer asymmetric bianisotropic unit cells are discussed. The realized printed circuit board (PCB) structure was tested via fullwave simulations as well as experimental characterization. To experimentally verify the prototype, two setups were used. A quasi-optical experiment was conducted to assess the specular reflections of the metasurface, while a far-field antenna measurement characterized its refraction nature. The measurements verify that the fabricated metasurface has negligible reflections and the majority of the scattered power is refracted to the desired Floquet mode. This provides an experimental demonstration of a reflectionless wideangle refracting metasurface using a bianisotropic Huygens' metasurface at microwave frequencies. Huygens' metasurfaces are 2D equivalents of metamaterials which allow the arbitrary transformation of electromagnetic waves Due to their versatility, metasurface applications have included wave refraction, beam focusing, and polarization control, to name a few The solution to the wide-angle refraction problem was resolved when examining the stipulation in the boundary conditions. As the previous method only allowed control over the electric and magnetic impedances, the boundary conditions did not allow for a lossless and passive solution. Therefore, an extra degree of freedom was required to resolve this issue. Bianisotropy in the form of a magnetoelectric coupling coefficient was found to be a solution to realizing a lossless and passive surface While the theoretical solution of the perfect (reflectionless) refraction was formulated in terms of abstract surface boundary conditions In this paper, we address these issues by presenting a complete design cycle from theory, to design, and to the final experimental verification of a wide-angle reflectionless bianisotropic Huygens' metasurface. The metasurface refracts a normally incident plane wave towards 71.8 • at 20 GHz. The derivation of the boundary conditions will be shown for both non-bianisotropic and bianisotropic cases. While the theoretical boundary conditions have been presented previously in Huygens' metasurfaces utilize the equivalence principle to perform arbitrary wave transformations However, the equivalence principle does not state how the currents can be physically realized. One method is to use impressed sources in space to generate these currents In general the electric impedance and magnetic admittance are tensors accounting for arbitrary polarization of the desired fields Applying the above derivations, the surface boundary conditions required for any arbitrary TE field transformation can be obtained. Therefore, by stipulating the desired fields and applying the boundary conditions properly, the corresponding metasurface can be designed. In the case of reflectionless refraction, the desired waves are illustrated in Fig. As shown, the calculated electric impedance and magnetic admittance are both complex and contain nonzero real and imaginary components Investigating Eq. ( To involve bianisotropy into the formulation, Eq. ( As seen previously in Fig. As seen in Fig. Using the previously determined boundary conditions for the desired refraction scenario, the metasurface can now be physically realized. However, while the boundary conditions relate the surface currents to the desired fields, it is not intuitive how the physical metasurface can be designed. To assist with the physical realization, the field boundary conditions can be translated into an impedance equivalent system. Taking inspiration from microwave network theory, it is well known that any 2-port microwave device can be characterized in terms of an impedance matrix FIG. Once in this matrix format, the boundary conditions can then be related to the Z parameters in an equivalent Z matrix as seen in Eq. ( Examining the G matrix parameters, it is clear that G 11 and G 22 , which correspond to the port reflections, are zero. This proves that indeed our boundary conditions are able to produce reflectionless wave transformations. Additionally, the magnitudes of G 21 and G 12 , which implement the field transformation, are both unity. This shows that the refraction is performed with no losses. Furthermore, the G 21 phase is linear and corresponds to the phase required for the refraction. By examining this microwave equivalence system, a more intuitive understanding of the boundary conditions is obtained. Moreover, this translation technique is also useful in the metasurface physical realization. To demonstrate the effectiveness of using the equivalent Z matrix in realizing the metasurface, the boundary conditions are first discretized to be spatially sampled. Each discretization point will represent a unit cell that needs to model the boundary condition at that spatial location. Through idealized HFSS simulations using impedance/admittance sheets, we have determined that 10 unit cells per period yield good transmission with low reflection results. Thus, 10 cells per period represent a sufficiency fine discretization for the chosen angles of incidence and refraction, which results in unit cells with lateral dimensions of λ/9.5 × λ/9.5. As seen previously in the calculated G parameters, realizing the metasurface essentially becomes equivalent to designing unit cells which have unity G 21 magnitude and the appropriate G 21 phase To implement the metasurface unit cells, the 3-layer admittance sheet structure of To extract the behavior of the top layer for example, the middle and bottom metallic layers are removed, but both the dielectric substrates remain. The Floquet ports from HFSS are then referenced to be directly contacting the unit cell. While the ports themselves are placed sufficiently far away to avoid capturing evanescent modes, the phase of the Floquet-port parameters is referenced directly to the physical unit cell. The Floquet-port S parameters are then obtained from HFSS and translated into the equivalent ABCD matrix. This ABCD matrix contains the characteristics of the top metallic layer and the two substrates. To obtain just the effect of the top metallic layer, the substrates can be treated as transmission lines and numerically removed. For the middle layer, a similar approach is taken. In this case, both dielectric substrates remain, and the only metal feature included is the middle layer, with the top and bottom metallic features removed. The Floquet ports again are referenced directly to the unit cell. The ABCD matrix can be once again obtained and the substrates are then similarly numerically removed. The remaining shunt component of the metallic pattern is then characterized. The performance of the bottom layer can be obtained in the same fashion. As the metallic patterns are and characterized in the presence of the substrates, the effect of the effective dielectric constant seen by the metallic features is characterized. A similar approach can be found in Applying this extraction method, the responses of the middle and outer layers as a function of W mid , L top , and L bot can be seen in Fig. Using the above mentioned layer extraction method, the unit cell layer dimensions can be varied to match the desired admittance values shown in Fig. With the 10 unit cells designed, one period of the metasurface was simulated under periodic boundary conditions in HFSS. The metasurface was then excited by us- ing Floquet ports on the top and bottom of the structure. The Floquet ports are able to extract the transmission and reflections of the associated plane-wave modes which arise from the periodicity of the surface. By investigating the transmission and reflection of each of the Floquet modes, the refraction and reflection nature of the design could be quantified. Additionally, the full field distribution could also be obtained and is shown in Fig. Examining the electric field distribution, it is clear that refraction is indeed achieved. On the bottom region of the simulation domain, the metasurface period is excited with a normally incident plane wave. Although some reflection can be noticed from the surface, it does not qualitatively seem significant. On the top region, the transmitted fields can be seen. It is evident that a clear wave-front refracted at 71.8 • is observed. However, to quantify the characteristics of the design, the simulated G parameters from HFSS are obtained and can be seen in Fig. Due to the macro-periodicity of the boundary conditions, three propagating Floquet modes are allowed to exist. These modes are the 0 th mode, the +1 mode, and the -1 mode, corresponding to plane waves at 0 • , +71.8 • and -71.8 • relative to the normal of the metasurface. However, in this case, due to the metasurface possibly generating both reflected and transmitted fields, these three modes could exist in both transmission and reflection regimes. The desired effect of the metasurface would be to have low reflections in all three reflection modes, and having high transmission only in the +1 or +71.8 • mode while suppressing the 0 th and -1 transmission modes. Examining Fig. The metasurface can also be further examined in terms of its total efficiency and refraction efficiency, as shown in Fig. It should be mentioned that although the refractive and low reflection nature of the metasurface are clearly demonstrated, as seen from the total efficiency, simulations show that approximately 28% of the incident power is absorbed in the metasurface. The relatively high losses probably originate due to the resonant nature of the unit cells. However, ideas on reducing the loss via increasing the number of physical layers have been suggested Following the validation of the metasurface design via fullwave simulations, a metasurface PCB of size 12"×18" (30.48 cm×45.72 cm), approximately 20λ × 30λ, was fabricated. The fabricated surface contains 29 × 190 replicas of the simulated metasurface period. A photograph of one section of the metasurface from both sides is shown in Fig. To quantify the specular reflectionless nature of the metasurface, a quasi-optical experiment was designed. The setup is quasi-optical as it uses a dielectric lens and a horn antenna to establish a line of sight signal link. In this setup we used an A-Info LB-OMT-150220 horn and a bi-convex Rexolite lens to focus a Gaussian beam onto a reference plane. In doing so, the radiation from the horn antenna is collimated by the lens to form a planar wavefront at the reference plane. The horn antenna which is then fed and measured using an Agilent VNA is calibrated to measure the reflection from an object placed at this plane. When no device under test (DUT) is present, the reflections back to the horn antenna are essentially zero. However, when the DUT is inserted, the normally incident reflection can be characterized. Therefore, by using the fabricated metasurface as the DUT, the specular reflection of the 0 • incident face of the metasurface could be obtained. The setup with the horn antenna, lens, and metasurface can be seen in Fig. Examining the measured specular reflections, a shift of the resonant frequency to 20.6 GHz can be seen. The source of this shift is most likely attributed to fabrication errors and material parameters. Due to this resonance shift, the experiment results will be focused on 20.6 GHz rather than the nominal 20 GHz. Nonetheless, the measured G 11 at the resonant frequency indicates that less than 0.2% of the incident power is back-reflected, which is in agreement with simulations. Additionally, the general trend of the specular reflections match those of the fullwave simulation. Therefore, although there is a frequency shift, at the experimental resonant frequency, the measurements indeed demonstrates the metasurface's near reflectionless specular performance. While the quasi-optical experiment was able to demonstrate the specular reflectionless nature of the metasurface, its refraction properties must also be characterized. To demonstrate if the metasurface is able to refract an incoming wave to the desired angle, an anechoic chamber antenna test was performed. The metasurface was placed in front of a Quinstar QWH-KPRS-00 standard gain horn antenna and the radiation pattern of the overall system, horn with metasurface, was measured. A transmitting horn was placed sufficiently far from the metasurface to produce a planar wavefront, while a receiving horn was aligned behind the metasurface. In this setup, the normally incident side was faced towards the receiving horn and the 71.8 • refraction side was facing the transmitting horn, as shown in Fig. While this far-field method was able to characterize the metasurface's refraction characteristics, there are tradeoffs in the experimental setup which should be discussed. One such parameter is the distance of the receiving horn from the metasurface. As the metasurface was designed for plane-wave excitation, the receiving horn antenna should be placed sufficiently far away from the metasurface to match a planar wavefront. However due to the finite size of the metasurface, this was not possible. If the distance between the metasurface and horn was too large, the metasurface would not sufficiently shadow the receiving horn antenna. This would undoubtedly create edge diffraction and other measurement errors. On the other hand, if the metasurface to horn distance is too close, the experiment would no longer mimic interactions with plane waves. Therefore, an experimental distance of 24 cm which is roughly 16λ was used, which was found to be a good compromise to account for both issues. The measured radiation patterns at 20 GHz and 20.6 GHz can be seen in Fig. It should be noted that the only mode that cannot be reliably measured using this far-field measurement is the 0 th or specular reflection mode, due to the blockage of the receiving horn. However, the specular reflection was previously quantified in the quasi-optical setup, which showed near zero reflections at 20.6 GHz. Thus, combining the quasi-optical measurements and the far-field measurements, it is evident that the metasurface is indeed able to produce the desired refraction while suppressing all other undesired modes. The gain pattern at 20.6 GHz also reveals that the peak gain actually occurs at 62 • . This is due to the effective aperture size of the metasurface. As the metasurface is rotated, the effective aperture size will decrease. This translates into a taper of the measured gain by a cos(θ) factor, where θ is the rotation angle relative to broadside Apart from the refraction angle, the spreading of the refracted beam should also be discussed. In theory, the metasurface is designed as an infinitely periodic structure, however in reality it has a finite size. Additionally as the receiving horn is rather close to the metasurface, the illumination area is even smaller. This is clearly seen in the far-field measurements as the refracted beam has a finite beamwidth due to the finite illumination of the metasurface, whereas in a infinitely periodic setting, the radiation pattern should be a delta function in the direction of refraction. Using the 3dB beamwidth of the refracted beam at 20.6 GHz, it was calculated that the effective aperture length, in the refraction plane, is roughly 20 cm To characterize the refraction of the metasurface more quantitatively, the measured scattered refraction efficiency is calculated. As previously discussed, as the metasurface prototype has a finite size and illumination, there is an associated beamwidth for the refracted wave. As an effect of the beamwidth, the refracted power is spread out over an angular range. However, as seen from the off-resonance far-field pattern, all the propagating modes experience this effect. Thus, to quantify the scattered refraction efficiency, while accounting for this beam spreading, the integration of the gain of the refracted beam, from null (roughly 30 • ) to null (roughly 90 • ), is compared to the total integration of the 360 • gain pattern. The resulting calculation is the ratio of the refracted power at the desired beam angle over the total scattered power, which demonstrates how efficiently the metasurface is refracting at the designed beam angle. In this case, the scattered refraction efficiency at 20.6 GHz is calculated to be approximately 80%. While it is lower than the simulated result of 93%, accounting for experimental errors, finite size of the metasurface, and the resonant frequency shift, the measured 80% is still a strong indication of efficient refraction. Additionally, as ideal non-bianisotropic Huygens' metasurface implementing the same wide-angle refraction can only achieve a theoretical efficiency of 73% Metasurfaces have become an indispensable tool for tailoring electromagnetic waves. Applications of metasurfaces such as focusing, refraction and polarization control have been demonstrated in recent years. Refrac-tion, which was originally thought possible by controlling only the electric impedance and magnetic impedance of a metasurface, has proved problematic when the refraction angle was scanned far from normal incidence. The discovery of this issue, brought about the use of bianisotropy via a magnetoelectric coupling coefficient in the boundary condition formulations. In doing so, wide-angle refraction could be achieved with matched, lossless, and passive metasurfaces. In this work, we have demonstrated a PCB bianisotropic metasurface implementing reflectionless wideangle refraction. The theory and design of the proposed metasurface was presented. The proposed unit cells for demonstrating a 71.8 • refraction metasurface for normally incident planes waves at 20 GHz were discussed. Simulations of both the unit cells and a period of the metasurface under periodic conditions were conducted via HFSS fullwave simulations. The results showed promising performance and a PCB prototype was fabricated. Finally, experimental validation of the prototype was carried out by combining the results of a quasi-optical setup and radiation pattern measurements. Through the quasi-optical experiment, the specular reflections of the metasurface were demonstrated to be minimal. By utilizing the far-field radiation pattern measurement, the refraction of the metasurface was validated. This hybrid approach verifies that, indeed, the specular reflections of the metasurface are negligible, and approximately 80% of the scattered power is coupled to the desired beam. Although a resonant frequency shift may have resulted in increased losses, the overall refraction properties of the metasurface were validated. FIG. 9. Proposed physical 3-layer unit cell composed of dogbones and a loaded dipole.