The copolymerization of melamine with 2,4,6-triaminopyrimidine (TAP) in an electrochemical induced polymerization process leads to the formation of molecular doped poly (triazine imide) (PTI). The polymerization is based on the electrolysis of water and evolving radicals during this process. The incorporation of TAP is shown by techniques such as elemental analysis, FTIR and NMR spectroscopy and powder x-ray diffraction (XRD), and it is shown that the carbon content can be tuned by the variation of the molar ratio of the two precursors. This incorporation of TAP directly influences the electronic structure of PTI and as a result a red-shift can be observed in UV-Vis spectroscopy. The smaller bandgap and the increased absorption in the visible range lead to improved photocatalytic properties. In dye degradation experiments it was possible to observe an increase of the rate of the degradation of methylene blue (MB) by a factor of 4 in comparison to undoped PTI or 7 if compared to melon. Carbon nitrides as non-toxic and metal-free photocatalysts have been of particular interest in the scientific community starting latest with the discovery of photocatalytic water splitting by Wang et al. in 2009. One example is to increase the specific surface and to modify the morphology to increase the number of accessible active sites. This can be done by exfoliation or by soft or hard template methods, which often results in improved photocatalytic properties. In order to achieve molecular doping of PTI as it is shown in Figure The reactions were followed by UV-Vis spectroscopy for the evaluation of the reaction times. In accordance to the Lambert-Beer law the reactions were considered to be completed when no further changes in the absorption spectra depicted a constant concentration of the product. These spectra are shown in Figure The structure of PTI is illustrated in grey. An s-triazine unit, which has been substituted by a pyrimidine unit, is shown in black. The exchange of nitrogen by carbon is marked red. The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern is shown in Figure Figure the measured nitrogen amount in the doped samples can be explained by terminating amine groups. In general, it can be shown that the C/N-ratio increases with the addition of TAP. In Figure for the 0 % sample. With an increasing amount of TAP in the synthesis the samples turn yellow and orange. The 100 % sample appears brown. These observations are confirmed by the obtained spectra. The absorption spectra are defined by a shoulder at 410 nm, which becomes more pronounced with an increasing amount of TAP used in the synthesis. A shift of the absorbance in the visible range is clearly observable (Figure -9- Prior to photocatalytic experiments the specific surface of the catalyst was determined by BETmeasurements. For the 0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 % TAP samples specific surfaces of 51.4, 45.5, 42.5, 52.9 and 53.9 m 2 /g were found, respectively. The observed values are similar and do not show any trend which could be related to the amount of TAP used in the synthesis. Hence, changes in the photocatalytic properties of the different samples cannot be related to the specific surface. All of the prepared samples were capable of decomposing methylene blue (MB) without the addition of any co-catalyst. The adsorption/desorption equilibrium was set after 140 min stirring in the dark (Figure The observed rate is similar to the reference without any scavenger molecule. These results are in accordance to our previous work. In summary, we report a facile modification of the electrochemical synthesis approach recently reported by the authors, which is based on the formation of radicals during electrolysis of water and the reaction of those with melamine. Melamine (99 %) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, 2,4,6-triaminopyrimidine (>97 %) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, sodium hydroxide (97 %) was purchased from Grüssing GmbH, hydrochloric acid (37 %) was purchased from VWR, dimethyl sulfoxide (99.7 %) was purchased from ACROS organics, methylene blue was purchased from Merck Chemicals GmbH, tertbutanol (99 %) was purchased from Grüssing GmbH, EDTA-2Na (>98.5 %) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and para-benzoquinone was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and recrystallized in 2-propanol. Melon was synthesized by thermal induced polycondensation of melamine. 5 g (39.6 mmol) of melamine were placed in a semi-closed crucible and heated to 550 °C with a ramp of 5 °C/min. -14- After 2 h at 550 °C the product was allowed to cool down naturally, milled into a powder using mortar and pestle, washed with 100 mL boiling water and dried in a vacuum furnace at 60 °C. The synthesis is similar to the synthesis for poly (triazine imide) that has been recently reported. and working electrode (Platinum) a voltage of 5 V was applied for 90 min at room temperature under continuous stirring. The distance between counter and working electrode was 0.5 cm. The current was in the range of 600 mA. A photograph of the set-up is shown in Figure The product was obtained in solution. By addition of hydrochloric acid the pH value was adjusted to obtain a suspension. The product was separated by centrifugation for 5 min at 7500 rpm (13206 rcf) and washed twice with 30 mL hot demineralized water. 2,4,6-Triaminopyrimidine was used for molecular doping. The synthesis was as described above, but melamine was substituted by 0 mol%, 25 mol%, 50 mol%, 75 mol% and 100 mol% of 2,4,6triaminopyrimidine. Additionally, the duration of the reaction was changed to 120 min, 210 min, 240 min, 330 min and 300 min, respectively. 50 mg of the different catalyst materials were dispersed in 100 mL of a 10 mg/L methylene blue in water solution and stirred for 140 min in the dark to set an adsorption/desorption equilibrium. As a light source a 300 W Xenon lamp (UXL-302-O) combined with a water filter to avoid heating effects by infrared radiation was used. Aliquots of 4 mL were taken every 60 min. The aliquots were centrifuged once at 11000 rpm (28408 rcf) in order to remove the catalyst material. The supernatant was filtered using a hydrophilic syringe filter (nylon, 0.2 μm pore size). -15- For recycling experiments the catalyst was collected after every cycle and separated from the MB solution by centrifugation at 11000 rpm (28408 rcf) for 15 min at a temperature of 5 °C. The supernatant was discarded. The catalyst was redispersed in 30 mL of water and after the adsorption/desorption equilibrium was set again separated from the solution by centrifugation. This procedure was repeated twice. The second and third circle of the degradation was conducted as described above. The reactive species in the degradation process were identified by adding tert-butanol (10 vol.%), EDTA-2Na (1 mmol) or para-benzoquinone (1 mmol) to the experiment. UV-Vis-Spectroscopy: A quartz cuvette with an optical path length of 10 mm was used for absorption and photoluminescence experiments. UV-Vis absorption spectra were obtained with a PerkinElmer Lambda 25 spectrometer in a two-beam set-up. Photoluminescence spectra were obtained with a Horiba Fluoromax-4 spectrometer. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy: The FTIR spectra were collected on a Varian 660 infrared spectrometer with an attenuated total reflection sampling technique. The set-up was purged with nitrogen for 1 h. 32 scans were used to collect the spectrum. X-Ray diffraction: Powder X-Ray diffraction measurements were carried out on a Philips X'Perts PRO MPD diffractometer with monochromatic X-Ray radiation from a copper anode with a wavelength of 1.54 Å (CuKα). The samples were dispersed in water, drop casted and dried on a ˂911> or <711> silicon wafer. Electronmicroscopy: SEM images were collected with a Zeiss MA10 electron microscope with a LaB 6 emitter at 5 kV. TEM images were collected on a JEOL-1011 with a thermal emitter operated at an acceleration voltage of 100 kV. 17 (11), 3213-3221. 