Hyperspectral imaging is a technique that allows for the creation of multi-color images. At terahertz wavelengths, it has emerged as a prominent tool for a number of applications, ranging from non-ionizing cancer diagnosis Optical imaging techniques have long been indispensable in the natural sciences, with widespread adoption in the fields of biology, astronomy, material science and medicine. If merged with broadband spectroscopy, the traditional twodimensional image is expanded into its hyperspectral counterpart, where each pixel represents a spectrum. This transforms the image into a three-dimensional hyperspectral data cube. The initial interest in this field was predominantly driven by defense and astronomical applications, but the rapid advances in electronics and computing during recent decades have precipitated widespread adoption of hyperspectral imaging in diverse scientific areas, such as biomedicine, agriculture, and environmental sensing. Terahertz (THz) technologies have also experienced a similar growth over the past decades To date, the most commonly used THz spectroscopy systems are based on interferometric or on time-domain sampling techniques, which enable wide spectral coverage with good sensitivities and robust operation, but with significant fundamental limitations. The interferometric Fourier Transform spectroscopy (FTS) technique THz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) usually relies on electro-optical or photoconductive sampling to reconstruct the electromagnetic field of a THz pulse, where the short pulse durations of modern mode-locked fiber lasers make it inherently broadband with good signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the 1-3 THz range. However, just as in FTS systems, the time-domain sampling typically relies on a mechanically scanned optical delay line, which limits the acquisition speed and enlarges the system footprint. Over the last two decades, a novel approach to reconstruct the optical spectrum of a repetitive pulse train has increasingly gained popularity, the dual-comb spectroscopy (DCS) technique Our proof-of-concept THz hyperspectral imaging system is based on a pair of dispersion compensated THz-QCL OFCs employed in the asymmetric dual-comb configuration. The system achieves a spectral coverage of ~220 GHz at a center wavelength of 3.4 THz with more than 100 μW of optical power emitted by each comb. A hyperspectral composite image of a pressed disc consisting of α-D-glucose monohydrate (GMH), α-D-lactose monohydrate (LMH), and L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate (LHHM) is obtained via a raster scan of the sample. This demonstration of hyperspectral imaging using electrically-pumped semiconductor laser frequency combs, fabricated using scalable technology, opens possibilities of future compact hyperspectral imaging systems for applications in biomedicine, biochemistry and the pharmaceutical industry. The system was designed as shown in Fig. To evaluate the short-term precision and long-term stability of the system we performed an Allan deviation analysis of the relative beat note amplitude stabilities was performed. Rf beat note spectra were recorded with a 100 ms time-resolution for a total acquisition time of 500 s. The results are shown in Fig. A sample of two common pharmaceutical excipients and an amino acid in the form of a pressed disc was prepared to demonstrate the hyperspectral imaging capabilities of the system. The disc comprised three zones with a 10% mass concentration of α-D-glucose monohydrate (GMH), α-Dlactose monohydrate (LMH), and L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate (LHHM) powder (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) diluted in spectroscopic grade polyethylene and was pressed using 5 tons of pressure. The disc was placed in a sample holder with XYZ-translation capability, and the sample was raster-scanned across the focus of the THz beam with a step size of 0.5 mm resulting in a 81⨯53 pixel THz image acquired as a three-dimensional hyperspectral data cube using simultaneously acquired dual-comb spectra. The acquisition time was limited by the movement of the translation stage and the data transfer speed to approximately 0. The bottom-left zone with GMH appears as red in the transmission image due to a monotonically increasing absorption with frequency, as opposed to the bottom-right purple zone of LMH, which has the lowest attenuation in the blue (high-frequency) channel, and the strongest in green. Finally, the top LHHM zone appears as orange-white because it is the most transparent of all with slightly increased absorption in the blue channel. To demonstrate the resolution capabilities of the system, a reflective intensity image with ~12000 pixels of a US quarter was acquired [see Fig. In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated hyperspectral imaging system using dual chip-scale semiconductor laser frequency combs, all while operating in the challenging THz spectral region. An 81⨯53-pixel hyperspectral image was acquired through a raster scan of a solid pressed disc containing three differently absorbing compounds: α-D-glucose monohydrate, α-D-lactose monohydrate, and L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate. The THz sources operate at a center frequency of 3.4 THz and span approximately 220 GHz with an optical power of ~10 μW per mode, which is more than typically achieved with Fourier transform spectroscopy or time-domain spectroscopy at this wavelength. The acquisition speed of the instrument is currently limited by the slow mechanical raster scan, but assessments of the short-term precision of the system indicate that percentage level fractional absorption could be obtained on the subsecond time-scale with faster scanning. Future developments of the THz combs are expected to further increase the optical power and address the current limitations in optical bandwidth 