In this study, severe plastic deformation by high-pressure torsion is used as a fabrication method for nanocrystalline magnetic Cu-Co alloys in bulk quantities. By subsequent isothermal annealing, phase separation of the supersaturated solid solutions can be obtained. The magnetic properties of the as-processed and annealed materials have been studied systemically and correlated to the evolving nanostructures investigated in detail by transmission electron microscopy and atom probe tomography. By additional high-pressure torsion deformation at liquid nitrogen temperature the magnetic properties of the Cu74Co26 alloy can be further tuned. The magnetic properties of nanocrystalline Cu-Co alloys have received enormous attention since early studies carried out by Childress and Chien Severe plastic deformation (SPD) is another way to synthesize massive bulk Cu-Co alloys more conveniently Using high-pressure torsion (HPT) deformation, full supersaturation with a single-phase structure in several immiscible material systems, including the Cu-Co system, can be achieved as well In the present study, the magnetic properties of HPT processed supersaturated solid solutions in the Cu74Co26 alloy are studied for the first time. By HPT deformation at different temperatures and subsequent isothermal annealing, different nanostructures are adjusted and with that different magnetic properties can be achieved. Disks of coarse-grained Cu-26at.% Co composite materials, 8 mm in diameter and 0.6 mm in height, were severely deformed by HPT for 25 rotations at RT resulting in an equivalent strain of >200 at a radius of r=1.5 mm. Details of sample production can be found elsewhere To measure the magnetic properties, hysteresis loops of the as-processed and annealed samples were recorded at 4 K and 300 K with a magnetic field up to 7 Tesla in a SQUIDmagnetometer (QUANTUM DESIGN, MPMS-XL-7). Zero-Field-Cooling (ZFC) and fieldcooled (FC) curves with an external applied field of 50 Oe were additionally recorded for samples processed at RT and LN temperature up to a temperature of 300 K. All samples for magnetic investigations were cut from the HPT-deformed disks at a distance >1.5 mm from the sample center. Atom probe tomography (APT) was carried out on as-processed and annealed samples. Specimens were prepared by site-specific sample preparations in a dual-beam focused ion beam/scanning electron microscopy workstation The HPT process leads to a significant grain refinement down to grain sizes of ~100 nm and the formation of supersaturated solid solutions up to 26at.% Co in Cu, investigated by TEM and APT The hysteresis loop is not saturated even at a magnetic field as high as 7 Tesla and shows small coercivity and remanence. To modify the structure and initiate decomposition, isothermal heat treatments at 400°C corresponding to the peak temperature of the decomposition process The coercivity significantly increases from 75 Oe (as-processed) to 125, 165 and 245 Oe for annealing times of 1, 7 and 100 h, respectively. At the same time, the remanence rises from 7 emu/gCo for the as-processed sample to 27, 38 and 42 emu/gCo for the annealed samples. The Cu74Co26 alloy has a nanocrystalline face-centered cubic (fcc) structure after HPT deformation at RT, which is confirmed by TEM A μ close to zero would indicate a random Co solid solution, whereas the much higher μ of the as-processed sample confirms the visible non-random Co distribution in Fig. The hysteresis loop for the as-processed sample cannot be saturated in a high applied magnetic field, which is a hint for a breakdown of long range multi-domain magnetic order. As revealed by APT, the as-processed samples are inhomogeneous at the nanoscale. Although Co atoms are diluted into the Cu matrix and hence give no magnetic contribution, Co is still enriched in nanometer-sized clusters in the fcc Cu phase. Nanoclusters with a size smaller or equal to the exchange length of Co (3.4 nm at 300 K The critical cluster volume for blocked superparamagnetism (at which magnetocrystalline anisotropy becomes relevant) is directly proportional to the magnetic blocking temperature For the annealed samples, the blocked superparamagnetic character of the hysteresis loop becomes dominant at 300 K (Fig. The hysteresis measurements performed at 300 K further revealed a strong increase in coercivity with increasing annealing time. In single-domain particles magnetization reversal can occur only by coherent rotation, resulting in considerably higher coercivity than that of multidomain particles The magnetization curve of the as-processed sample exhibits small, but non-zero coercivity and remanence values. Since the hysteretic behavior of the as-processed Cu76Co24 alloy is believed to be caused by Co-rich nanoclusters whose size falls below the critical size (10 nm) for blocked superparamagnetism, hysteresis might be further reduced if the size of the nanoclusters can be generally decreased. This means that a greater homogeneity of the deformation-induced supersaturated solid solutions must be obtained. In principle, such a nanostructure might be achieved with more severe HPT deformation at RT, i.e. larger number of rotations. However, very high shear strains would be needed. A more convenient and better defined process might be subsequent HPT deformation at lowered deformation temperatures. Hence, the HPT deformation of samples already deformed at RT was repeated at LN temperature. This additional deformation leads to further refinement of the microstructure (Fig. The magnetic properties of the sample deformed at LN temperature are also measured by SQUID. Compared to the sample deformed at RT, magnetization is smaller by a factor of 1.2 and also does not saturate at 300K (Fig. The RDF analysis indicates that only extremely fine Co clustering occurs in the sample deformed at LN temperature. In addition, the coercivity and remanence radically decrease to only 7.5 Oe and 1 emu/gCo, respectively (Fig. Hysteresis will appear when the particles of a certain size are cooled below the blocking temperature The study shows that HPT deformation is an alternative fabrication method for magnetic Cu-Co alloys. In the as-processed state, evidence for both, superparamagnetic and ferromagneticlike behavior, is present. Combining magnetic measurements with results from APT further reveals that it is possible to control hysteretic or non-hysteretic evolution of magnetism from Co-rich nanoclusters in the fcc Cu solid solution. The coercivity, for example, decreases by 10 times due to additional HPT deformation at LN temperature. The magnetic properties of the alloy can thus be also used as a valuable fingerprint for the microstructural changes. A drawback is the reduction of saturation magnetization due to the presence of isolated nanoclusters and the absence of a percolating network of connected Co-clusters (in chains etc.) or even domains. The magnetization dynamics is different from the conventional domain-wall motion. However, precipitations of magnetic clusters in a nanostructured (nonmagnetic) environment obtained by SPD offer new possibilities to tailor magnetic materials in bulky quantities. 