Hidden phases" are metastable collective states of matter that are typically not accessible on equilibrium phase diagrams. These phases can host exotic properties in otherwise conventional materials and hence may enable novel functionality and applications, but their discovery and access are still in early stages. Using intense terahertz electric field excitation, we show that an ultrafast phase transition into a hidden ferroelectric phase can be dynamically induced in the quantum paraelectric SrTiO 3 . The induced lowering in crystal symmetry yields dramatic changes in the phonon excitation spectra. Our results demonstrate collective coherent control over material structure, in which a single-cycle field drives ions along the microscopic pathway leading directly to their locations in a new crystalline phase on an ultrafast timescale. A single-cycle terahertz-frequency electric field moves all the ions it encounters toward their positions in a new crystalline phase. In strontium titanate, the initial high-symmetry configuration around each Ti 4+ ion has no dipole moment and the crystal is paraelectric. The incident field drives the "soft" lattice vibrational mode, moving the ions along the directions indicated into a lower-symmetry geometry with a dipole moment. Long-range ordering of dipole moments in the same direction yields a ferroelectric crystalline phase. (B) Experimental setup. THz field-induced lowering of the SrTiO 3 crystal symmetry is observed using 800-nm probe pulses that are partially depolarized (terahertz Kerr effect, or TKE) and which are partially converted to the second harmonic frequency (THz field-induced second harmonic, or TFISH). DM: dichroic mirror; PMT: photomultiplier tube. In recent years, significant advances have been made in the search for materials with complex multi-phase landscapes that host photoinduced metastable collective states, or "hidden" phases. These phases are rarely accessible on equilibrium phase diagrams and may persist long after the external stimuli that induced them are over. Recent experiments STO is a widely-used dielectric material that has a cubic perovskite structure at room temperature. Many members of this crystal family, e.g. PbTiO 3 , undergo transitions into FE phases in which the transition-metal ions occupy positions that are displaced from the unit cell center so that the material has a macroscopic electric polarization. The collective pathway between the cubic, paraelectric phase and the FE phase involves motions of the ions along the soft phonon coordinate illustrated in Fig. constructive feedback to the FE soft mode that drives them by disrupting the balance between antiferrodistortive and ferroelectric structural distortions In order to reach a clearer understanding of THz-induced effects, we conducted classical MD simulations for a supercell of 20×20×20 unit cells in an isothermal-isobaric ensemble, with the interatomic interaction described by the bond-valence model (see Supplement for the simulation details). For each MD simulation, the system was first relaxed for 100 ps to reach equilibrium at 5 K, and then a Gaussian-profile electric field pulse with full-width at half-maximum duration of 0.66 ps was applied in either the z or x crystallographic direction. Trajectories of the system were collected for 20 ps after the electric field returned to zero. To evaluate whether the electric field could induce ferroelectricity in STO, simulations were performed with different field amplitudes, and in each case the global polarization of the system was calculated from the collected trajectories. As shown in Fig. The experimental data and molecular dynamics simulations together demonstrate a THz-induced ultrafast quantum-paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transition in STO. The THz field drives the soft mode, and additional coupled-mode displacements occur to reach the FE structure. Our results demonstrate collective coherent control of material structure that may be applicable to a wide range of classical and quantum phase transitions in which soft phonon modes play key roles in the collective structural transformations. The samples were Verneuil-grown, 10 ́10 ́0.5 mm 3 SrTiO 3 single crystals with epi-polished (100) surfaces obtained from MTI Corp. STO has a cubic perovskite lattice structure (space group Pm3m) at room temperature and undergoes an antiferrodistortive structural transition to a tetragonal structure (space group I4/mcm) at 105 K Our pulsed laser is a 1 kHz repetition rate Ti:Sapphire amplifier (Coherent Legend Elite Duo) seeded by an 80 MHz Ti:Sapphire oscillator (Coherent Vitara T) with an output power of 13 W at 800 nm and 35 fs pulse duration. 7 W of the power is split as the input to our setup and 95% of that input is used to generate the THz field. Single-cycle THz pulses are generated from a LiNbO 3 crystal by optical rectification using the tilted-pulse-front technique In TFISH experiments, the THz-induced second harmonics (SH) of a normal-incidence 800 nm probe pulse was measured in reflection geometry using a photomultiplier tube. The second harmonic of the reflected probe was isolated through high-pass filters. Second harmonic generation is normally forbidden in centrosymmetric materials. In TFISH, the THz-induced responses (in STO, the soft mode displacements and associated dipole moments) break the symmetry and allow optical second harmonic generation to occur. Since SH generation is second-order in the incident optical field, and the soft mode displacements (at moderate field strengths) are linear in the THz field amplitude, the TFISH signal is third-order altogether in incident field amplitudes (The FE phase transition that occurs at strong THz fields is a highly nonlinear response, so the associated non-oscillatory signal and low-frequency phonon signals are higher than third-order.) Note that due to the use of pump chopping, any static SH signals that are not due to THz excitation are excluded. As a result, TFISH enables background-free detection that is highly sensitive to polar mode excitation The heterodyne TKE experiment setup is similar to that described earlier Consideration of the possible origins of the 1.3 THz mode The observed 1.3 THz peak agrees well with the previous measurements for the Raman A 1g mode The bond-valence model is an empirical force field for molecular dynamics (MD) simulation based on bonds between neighboring ions. The model contains five energy terms: Coulomb interaction, the short-range repulsive energy, the bond-valence energy, the bond-valence vector energy, and the angle potential. The total energy of the model is written as where R ;< is the unit vector pointing from ion i to ion j. All parameters in the model are optimized by the simulated annealing method to fit energies and forces in DFT database. Detailed information about the bond-valence model can be found in reference Our simulations are performed in LAMMPS (41) for a 20 ́20 ́20 supercell in an isothermalisobaric ensemble (NPT), where the temperature is controlled at 5 K by Nosé-Hoover thermostat, and the pressure is controlled at 1 atm by Parrinello-Rahman barostat 