The discovery of Fe-based superconductors (FBS) as the second class of high-temperature superconducting transition (high-T c ) materials after the cuprates generated a significant impact on the community of fundamental and applied superconductivity research. Whenever a new class of high-T c superconducting materials is discovered, a lot of effort is devoted to growing single crystals and epitaxial thin films for exploring basic physical quantities. Although several properties of FBS are similar to the cuprates (large upper critical fields, as a consequence short coherence lengths, and small carrier density), others are distinctly different. For instance, in FBS the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter is most likely not a d-wave but an s±-wave, depending on the stoichiometry, crystallographic system, and doping level. Additionally, the critical current densities of FBS are less sensitive to the presence of grain boundaries (GBs) than those of the high-T c cuprates. These features are highly beneficial for the realization of cheaper conductors for high-field magnets at low temperatures. Indeed, several groups have demonstrated FBS thin films on technical metallic substrates and powder-in-tube processed FBS wires as proof-of-principle studies for conductor applications. FBS on technical substrates also give many opportunities for studying how GB networks affect the critical current and how uniaxial strain impacts the superconducting properties. In this article, we review FBS thin films, especially on technical metallic substrates, and focus on application-relevant properties like pinning improvement by natural and artificial defects as well as the transparency of grain boundaries and GB networks. The recent development of FBS thin films on technical substrates and their superconducting properties are presented and the performance gap with respect to films on single crystals is discussed. Since the first report of superconductivity in LaFeAs(O,F) 10 years ago by Hosono's group, 1 a lot of progress in the growth and synthesis of Fe-based superconducting (FBS) single crystals, bulks, wires, and thin films has been made. Now, high-quality thin films [e.g., FeSe, Fe(Se,Te), doped and undoped AEFe 2 As 2 , where AE being an alkali earth element, and LnFeAs(O,F), where Ln is a lanthanoide element, named respectively 11, 122 and 1111] are available on a large variety of single-crystalline and technical substrates. Hence fundamental as well as application-oriented research have been remarkably developed. In this article, we review FBS thin films, especially on technical metallic substrates, and focus on application-related properties like pinning improvement by natural and artificial defects as well as the transparency of grain boundaries (GBs) and GB networks. Many excellent review articles focussing on the growth of FBS thin films on single crystals and their physical properties have already been published Naturally grown pinning centers are summarized, followed by artificial pinning centers. Afterwards, grain boundary experiments on Fe(Se,Te), doped BaFe 2 As 2 (Ba-122) and NdFeAs(O,F) will be reviewed. Finally, FBS thin films on technical substrates will be described and discussed. One of the most important properties for wire and tape applications is the critical current density J c , which can be improved by microstructural engineering. Similar to the high-T c cuprates, the coherence length of FBS is in the order of a few nm. T c (K) κ μ 0 H c2 (0) (T) Gi(×10 -3 ) S(×10 -2 ) at T op FeSe where μ 0 H c (0) = μ 0 H c2 (0)/ √ 2κ is the thermodynamic critical field at 0 K, μ 0 H c2 (0) is the upper critical field at 0 K, is the anisotropy parameter defined as ξ c (0)/ξ ab (0), ξ ab (0) = φ 0 2πμ 0 H c2 Gi is smaller than for YBCO and, therefore, the flux creep at the probable operating temperatures (minimum flux creep rate is expressed by S ∼ Gi 1/2 (T /T c )) In general, thin films contain a higher density of natural defects than single crystals. In low magnetic fields, J c for thin films is higher than those for single crystals (fig. It is also noted that for single crystals J c has a non-monotonic field dependence due to the fish tail effect, whereas such an effect is absent in thin films. Considering the good performance already obtained in clean thin films, improvements in the in-field behavior are achievable by the introduction of artificial pinning centers with an appropriate control of their dimensionality (1D: columnar defects and dislocations, 2D: grain boundaries and anti-phase boundaries, and 3D: particles 27 ) and their density. In this section, the naturally grown pinning centers and artificial pinning centers in FBS are reviewed, and how these pinning centers influence the in-field J c is discussed. A. Naturally grown pinning centers Ba-122 on 001-oriented substrates ((LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 TaAlO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT), GdScO 3 , LaAlO 3 and Si) by pulsed laser deposition (PLD, KrF excimer laser). to the film surface (fig. The detailed microstructural analysis by TEM identified the Ba-Fe-O phase as BaFeO 2 , which is an isostructure of tetragonal SrFeO 2 (a=0.3991 nm and c=0.3474 nm). c-axis-correlated defects were also reported in Fe(Se,Te) thin films fabricated on SrTiO 3 (001) substrates by PLD (KrF excimer laser) in Genova. In fig. The introduction of threading dislocations in a controlled manner by tuning the growth conditions was reported for P-doped Ba-122 thin films by Sato et al. For P-doped Ba-122 thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), Sakagami et al. reported a maximum self-field J c of 10 MA/cm 2 (4.2 K) for Fe-rich films (Fe/Ba = 2.4) on MgO(001) substrates measured by a magnetization method. 1. BaZrO 3 nanoparticles in PLD-grown Co-and P-doped Ba-122 Using the same strategy for pinning enhancement of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 films, In P-doped Ba-122 films on MgO(001) substrate, nano-sized BaZrO 3 particles with average diameter of 5-10 nm were finely distributed in the Ba-122 matrix. Figure Up to 3 mol% (2.5 vol.%) of BaZrO 3 , the initial suppression rate of T c for both films is around -1 K/mol% (-1.3 K/vol.%), which is high compared to common values for GdBCO Compared to BaFeO 2 nanopillars (see section Ba-Fe-O), the reduction of T c is significant, which may be ascribed to the different lattice mismatch. To date, FBS superlattices for Ba-122 Besides introducing artificial pinning centers, the multilayer approach can improve the superconducting properties. The defects created by fast neutron irradiation on Fe(Se,Te) thin films produced only a small impact on the superconducting properties (T c , upper critical field, H c2 , irreversibility field, H irr and J c ). also investigated the effect of Au irradiation on the superconducting properties of Fe(Se,Te) thin films. Non-superconducting FeTe thin films were irradiated by oxygen ions. The effect of 3 MeV proton irradiation on the superconducting properties of Codoped Ba-122 was reported by Maiorov et al. The effect of proton irradiation on Co-doped Ba-122 thin films was also reported by Schilling et al. who investigated the disorder-induced symmetry change from s± to s + + by THz spectroscopy. These results suggested that the superconducting order parameter in the pristine film has s± symmetry. However, no information on H c2 , H irr and J c was reported. All bicrystal junctions of Fe(Se,Te), Co-doped, and P-doped Ba-122 have the same low level of I c R N (tens of μV) compared to that of YBCO (in the order of mV at 4.2 K). The main reason for such low I c R N is that the barrier layer is of metallic nature, which leads to a low junction resistance R N . Therefore, the dc-SQUIDs made from Fe(Se,Te) The properties mentioned above are not suitable for electronics applications, however, are highly beneficial to wire applications. To realize electronics applications like SQUIDs, one would have to increase the R N by an artificial insulating barrier. Interested readers for Josephson effects in FBS may refer to Ref. 76. 1. Fe(Se,Te) The inter-grain J c of Fe(Se,Te) across a θ GB =45 • grain boundary without magnetic field was around ∼ 10 4 A/cm 2 at 4.2 K, one order of magnitude lower than the intra-grain J c (J GB c ). In fact, it is likely that the nanorods (see subsection BaFeO A high inter-grain J c over 1 MA/cm 2 even at θ GB = 24 • and 4 K was reported by Sakagami et al. It was reported that polycrystalline K-doped Ba-122 bulk samples showed a large self-field J c of ∼ 0.1 MA/cm 2 . Shown in fig. As described in the previous section, grain boundaries are less critical an issue for FBS than for cuprates, and powder-in-tube-processed wires based on 11, 122 Quite recently, the group of IEE-CAS reported Fe(Se,Te) thin films on IBAD-MgO with LaMnO 3 (LMO) buffer layers. The group of CNR has been recently working on an attempt to decrease the number of necessary buffer layers or exchanging the metallic substrate to less expensive materials. Both solutions could reduce the fabrication costs of such Fe(Se,Te) coated conductors. This formula is analogous to (p = 0.5, q = 2, and H irr is the irreversibility field) found by Dew-Hughes for pinning by 2D defects such as grain boundaries. This confirms that the pinning in P-doped Ba-122 on IBAD-MgO is dominated by the dislocations with nano-size. Hosono's group even fabricated a 10 cm long P-doped Ba-122 tape using a reelto-reel system by PLD, The resultant film showed a slightly lower T c,10%Rn of 18.7 K and a low I c of 0.47 mA per cm-width at 4.2 K, corresponding to a J c of 4.7 × 10 4 A/cm 2 . They also found that even short samples had a low T c . To improve the superconducting properties, they fabricated Fe 3 P/P-doped Ba-122 bilayers on IBAD-MgO. As a result, the superconducting properties were improved to T c,10%Rn = 24 K and I c = 975 mA per cm-width (J c = 1.75 × 10 5 Acm 2 ) at 4.2 K. Biaxially textured NdFeAs(O,F) films on IBAD-MgO have been fabricated by MBE at Nagoya University. Such a difference in J c -H for the P-doped Ba-122 is mainly explained by the fact that the films on single-crystalline substrates are pinning-improved. It is expected that similar microstructures transferred to tapes would lead to similar J c levels. Additionally, the phase formation has to be optimized so that the full potential of the films on single crystals can be achieved on tape. On the other hand, J c -H of Fe(Se,Te) on RABiTS To evaluate the best possible J c performance, the ultimate critical current density, i.e., depairing current density at 4.2 K (J d (4.2 K)) for various FBS estimated by eqs. (4) and ( Clearly, Ba-122 compounds possess the highest J d (4.2 K) among the FBS. The maximum achievable J c by core pinning is around 30% of the depairing current density 104 . However, the pinning efficiency, here defined as J s.f. c /J d at 4.2 K for FBS even on single crystalline substrates reaches only 3.5 ∼ 5.8%. In order to understand the performance potential of FBS, we discussed the main application-related properties like pinning improvement by natural and artificial defects, the transparency of grain boundaries and the properties of GB networks. Naturally grown defects (BaFeO 2 in Co-doped Ba-122 and threading dislocations in Fe(Se,Te)) mainly contribute to the c-axis correlated pinning, and point pinning introduced by strain is beneficial as well. Artificial pinning centers can be introduced in the superconducting matrix by multilayer deposition, irradiation, and the addition of nanoparticles such as BaZrO 3 to the PLD targets. Although all methods described here are effective for improving in-field properties, the J c level at 4.2 K achieved so far is still only up to ∼6% of the depairing current density in films on single crystals, suggesting room for further improvement of superconducting properties of FBS. Bicrystal experiments on Ba-122 and Fe(Se,Te) revealed the metallic nature of grain boundaries. The critical angle above which inter-grain J c falls off is around 9 • . However, the initial slope for the logarithmic J c decrease with GB angle for FBS is similar to that of YBCO. A distinct difference between FBS and YBCO is recognised above θ GB = 24 • : for YBCO J GB c continuously decreases with θ GB , whilst J GB c remains constant for FBS. Overall, those properties are highly beneficial for making cheap FBS conductors. The three main systems with largest application potential (11, 122 and 1111) have already been realized on technical substrates. Most of the FBS coated conductor prototypes showed a comparable T c to their counterparts on single-crystalline substrates. Fe(Se,Te) and P-doped Ba-122 reached the practical level (0.1 MA/cm 2 at 15 T). It is noted that PIT-processed FBS wires (K-doped Ba-122 and Sr-122) also have reached this level, 8 despite the presence of many GBs. Therefore, further GB experiments on FBS, especially for K-doped 122, are desired. To further improve the in-field J c properties of FBS on technical substrates, the introduction of artificial pinning centers without compromising T c is necessary . Even though FBS tapes will never compete with YBCO tapes regarding their superconducting properties, they could compete with YBCO in terms of cost. For YBCO tapes, expensive highly-textured metallic substrates and Ag layers to allow oxygenation are necessary. However, FBS can be realized on poorly textured templates without expensive cover layers. For realizing FBS conductors, there are other properties that need to be evaluated: i) thick FBS thin films (∼1 μm) on technical substrates should be fabricated and characterized for realizing FBS coated conductors. ii) Strain tolerance dependence of J c should be investigated, which is important for making a magnet. prepared by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) Resistance and Superconducting Transition reflection rocking curve of STO SL is 0.97 . Furthermore, the STO SL exhibits strong and sharp peaks (1 = 1.1 ) only every 90 in the azimuthal phi scan of the off-axis 112 reflection of Co-doped Ba-122 (Supplementary Fig. Figure Figure We performed detailed studies of the grain and GB critical current densities J c ͑T , B͒ and J gb ͑T , B͒ for all the bicrystals in fields up to 16 T. Figure The totality of our data una GBs in 122 pnictides exhibit similar to that observed in high suppression of superconductivity the ratio, J gb ͑t͒ / J d ͑t͒ at the red where J d ͑T͒ = 0 / 3 3/2 0 2 is the FIG. 12. The θ GB dependence of inter-grain J c for various FBS bicrystals. The data were acquired at 4 K for P:Ba-122 To clarify the type of vertical defects, the chemical compositions of the vertical defects were determined. Figure • . • , which indicates that inplane misorientation alignments of FBS grains less than 9 • usually do not impede the critical current flow. Hence one can expect that grain boundary networks whose in-plane misorientation is less than 9 • work as flux pinning centers. Indeed, the pinning force density analysis of P-doped Ba-122 on technical substrates revealed that the GB pinning contribution is dominant for H c, P. Mele, "Superconducting properties of iron chalcogenide thin films," Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 13, 054301 (2012). T. For comparison the data of the single layer of Co-doped Ba-122 was also plotted. The figure is redrawn with some modifications based on the data taken from fig. 5c in Ref.42. 