We consider basic and easily extendible transport formulations for lithium batteries consisting of an anode (Li-foil), a separator (polymer electrolyte), and a composite cathode (composed of electrolyte and intercalation particles). Our mathematical investigations show the following novel features: (i) complete and very basic description of mixed transport processes relying on a neutral, binary symmetric electrolyte resulting in a non-standard Poisson equation for the electric potential together with interstitial diffusion approximated by classical diffusion; (ii) upscaled and basic composite cathode equations allowing to take geometric and material features of electrodes into account ; (iii) the derived effective macroscopic model can be numerically solved with well-known numerical strategies for homogeneous domains and hence does not require to solve a high-dimensional numerical problem or to depend on a computationally involved multiscale discretisation strategies where highly heterogeneous and realistic, nonlinear, and reactive boundary conditions are still unexplored. We believe that the here proposed basic and easily extendible formulations will serve as a basic and simple setup towards a systematic theoretical and experimental understanding of complex electrochemical systems and their optimization, e.g. Li-batteries. Energy storage systems play an increasingly important role for reliable, efficient, and preferably green energy and delivery in developed countries and also between them. Two major developments make affordable and endurable energy storage a necessity: (i) the global awareness of climate change and as such the need for renewable and low CO 2 energy-consumption/production; (ii) the realisation and affordability of electric mobility (cars and buses). In order to make storage systems more affordable, it is important to have a proper physical, chemical, and mathematical understanding of the processes involved in order to give systematic (i.e. based on variational principles) guidance on design optimization. Since electric cars are expected to become a multi-billion dollar buisness until 2030 and Li-ion batteries play a major role in this development, we aim here to provide a fundamental, basic, and effective macroscopic description of an active electrode. Due this expected demand, recently an increasing interest in mathematical modeling of lithium batteries emerged. Well-known and commonly used macroscale models were developed by Newman and collaborators already decades ago, e.g. We consider a basic and easily extendible non-re-chargeable Li-battery consisting of a polymer electrolyte/ separator D p , a composite cathode D c , a Li-foil Γ l as anode, and a cathodic current collector Γ r , see Fig. Under an applied discharging current density i a := I a /|Γ s,ǫ r |, charge transport in the homogeneous and heterogeneous electrolyte phases D = D p and D = D ǫ p , respectively, is governed by where n is an outward pointing normal vector, ε p and ε s are the electrical permittivities of D ǫ p and D ǫ s , respectively, R is and z i being diffusion, mobility, and charge number of species i ∈ {+, -}. The symmetry assumption on the electrolyte implies z + = -z -. The Li density c p and electric potential ψ p in D = D p satisfy the same system (2) as c ǫ p and ψ ǫ p in D = D ǫ p for boundary conditions defined as follows where describes Butler-Volmer (BV) reactions across the interface I ǫ ps and electrochmical reactions at the anode-electrolyte interface Γ l . The exchange current densities in the BV equations ( The Li-diffusion times τ s := To this end, we provide a systematic upscaling framework for active electrodes such as D c = D ǫ p ∪ D ǫ s by passing to the limit ǫ → 0 and by relying on crucial microscopic ingredients via ( Our main results depend on the following well-accepted concept of local equilibrium for every k ∈ N, 1 ≤ k ≤ d, and the upscaled quantities {C p , Ψ p }, which are independent of the microscale y ∈ Y. Remark 2.1. Local thermodynamic equilibrium is used in many different applications Note that after upscaling the phases D ǫ p and D ǫ s are super-imposed on the whole composite cathode D c while preserving the corresponding volume fractions. The specific boundaries are defined in Fig. Main results: (Upscaled cathode equations) Under local thermodynamic equilibrium (Definition 2.1), the microscopic formulations ( and where p = , and Σ = {s ik } d i,k=1 are given by for w ∈ {p, ψ p , s}, Y ψp = Y p , and A more detailed discussion and extensions will appear in The diffusion and elliptic equations, e.g. (2) 1 -(2) 2 and (6) are standard in homogenization theory (see where , we obtain after collecting terms of equal power in ǫ the following problems O(ǫ -1 ) : O(ǫ 0 ) : System which after inserting into (15) together with Definition 2.1 leads to the following cell problem for 1 ≤ k ≤ d, i.e., with boundary conditions as stated in where we already neglect possible boundary contributions which will disappear after rewriting. Using We have established a basic charge transport formulation capturing the essential electrochemical features of lithium batteries (i.e., non-rechargeable) with the goal of having a convenient and easily extendible prototype framework for the investigation of the influence of active electrode materials (here the composite cathode). We believe that the presented results (upscaled formulation) allow to study the influence of material and geometric properties on the current-voltage behaviour of Li-batteries and provide also the fundamental basis for subsequent extensions towards modelling of ageing and cycling dynamics. In fact, the formulation introduced will be of interest to researchers doing battery modelling as we provide a complete set of boundary conditions for a general prototype model allowing for various extensions such as an active anode, different reaction models as well as extensions for ageing and cycling dynamics. Finally, this novel model framework relies on basic physcial and electrochemical principles and hence serves as a promising theoretical and efficient computational tool to investigate Li-batteries. From a computational point of view, it allows us to apply powerful numerical strategies well-known and developed for homogeneous domains in contrast to a possible multiscale discretization strategy requiring demanding implementations for boundary conditions on interfaces due to highly heterogeneous domains which itself imply costly constraints such as small enough mesh sizes.