The mixed ferrite-cobaltites LnFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 , with Ln = Eu & Dy have been prepared by a sol-gel method and the samples have been characterized using X-ray diffraction and electron microscopy. The magnetic investigations reveal that both samples ordered in canted antiferromagnetic structures near room temperature. The Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya or antisymmetric exchange interaction induces weak ferromagnetism due to canting of the antiferromagnetically ordered spins. In the case of Ln-Fe-Co orthoferrites, two magnetic sublattices (Ln 3+ -4f and Fe 3+ /Co 3+ -3d) generally align in opposite directions and interesting temperature dependent phenomena: e.g. uncompensated antiferromagnetic sublattices and spin-reorientations, are observed in the system. The existence of hysteresis at low temperature region has been explained in terms of the strength of magnetic interactions between Fe 3+ and Co 3+ ions with different A-site rare earth cations. Orthoferrite perovskites LnFeO 3 have attracted researchers for decades due to their interesting magnetic, electrical and gas sensing properties Despite the interest in doped orthoferrites, their synthesis in pure phase remains a challenge, principally because high synthesis temperatures generally required for preparing perovskite orthoferrites. Also, entropy plays a dominant role in determining the pure phase and stable structure of reaction products. Previous investigations on the doped orthoferrites have motivated us to synthesize doped perovskite with smaller size of lanthanides in similar conditions Soft chemical route method sol-gel was used for synthesizing LnFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 (Ln = Eu and Dy) orthoferrites. The metal nitrates used in the synthesis were dissolved in distilled water along with citric acid (molar ration 1:2). The resulting solutions were heated for 3 hours at 60 oC and evaporated at 100 oC for gel formation. The gel mixture was dried at 150 oC for 12 h. Thereafter the resulting powders were allowed to decompose in air at 250 oC for 24 h. The resulting powders sintered at several temperatures ranging from 400 °C to 800 °C with intermediate grinding. The powder samples were again ground thoroughly and pressed into pellets, and finally sintered for 48 h in air at 927 oC (for EuFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 ) and 950 oC (for DyFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 ) respectively. The sintered pellets were used for various measurements and ground again to form fine powder for recording XRD patterns in the 2θ range of 10°-100° with a step size of 0.02°. The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) data were recorded with a Philips X-Pert diffractometer employing Cu-K α radiation (λ = 1.5418Å). The phases were indexed by performing Rietveld method using the FullProf program The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns of EuFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 and DyFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 could be indexed with the orthorhombic symmetry in the Pnma space group, as concluded from Rietveld refinement. The refined structural parameters of samples based on XRD patterns are shown in Fig. From PXRD study, we obtained information about the crystal structure however the distribution of different phases, crystallinity of grains etc., cannot be determined from it. In order to determine those factors, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) investigations have been carried out. The electron diffraction (ED) patterns (Fig. In order to correlate the effect of Dy 3+ cation (considering the contribution of 4f electrons) on magnetism, we have also carried out magnetization, M(T), investigation for DyFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 mixed ferrite-cobaltites. Fig. The complicated magnetic behavior of both mixed ferrite-cobaltites in measured temperature range could arise due to the two inequivalent magnetic ordering at low temperature between the cations in different magnetic sublattices, i.e. 4f electron based Ln sublattice and 3d electron based Fe-Co sublattice, which are arranged anti-parallelly For understanding the exact behaviour of magnetic interactions below room temperature, the field dependent isothermal magnetization needs to be investigated at different temperatures. Fig. We have also compared the isothermal magnetization, M(H), for DyFe 0.5 Co 0.5 O 3 perovskite under three different temperatures (Fig. Importantly, the H C values are higher for Eu-phase compared to Dy-phase, which could be due the AFM contribution of Dy 3+ cations at low temperature In this work on Ln-Fe-Co-O systems (Ln = Eu & Dy), the sol-gel synthesis method enables the orthorhombic structure to be obtained as a pure phase. The magnetic properties investigation of these oxides show that both the compositions exhibit near room temperature magnetic transitions. The canted antiferromagnetic state is realized at low temperature for both the perovskites, which is most likely due to the ordering of 3d and 4f sublattices as reported in the literature for Ln-Fe-Co-O systems valuable comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank the reviewers for their constructive guidance during evaluation process. 