Shear modulus is one of the fundamental mechanical properties of materials, while its quick and accurate measurement is still a challenge. Here we proposed two methods for shear modulus measurement based on torsional resonance and torsional wave propagation using a same piezoelectric torsional transducer. Firstly, the torsional transducer was introduced which consists of two thickness poled, thickness shear (d 15 ) piezoelectric half-rings. Secondly, the equivalent circuit of the transducer-cylindrical specimen system is derived and the shear modulus can be explicitly obtained using the torsional resonance frequency. The internal friction can also be obtained, which is calculated by using an approximate formula. Then, the principle of shear modulus and internal friction measurement based on torsional wave propagation were presented. Finally, shear modulus and internal friction measurement on four materials including 1045 steel, aluminum, quartz glass and PMMA, were conducted. Results indicate that the measured shear moduli using these two methods are very close to each other, and consistent with the reference values in literatures. The resonance method is quite convenient and highly repeatable, but is typically not suitable for long specimens where the first torsional resonance may not be visible. The wave propagation method is especially suitable for long specimens and high frequency measurement is suggested. The internal frictions measured by these two methods were also close to each other, and the simple wave attenuation method is suggested. The two shear modulus measurement methods proposed in this work are quite reliable and can be widely used in near Elastic moduli are the fundamental material properties and of great importance in engineering and science. For isotropic materials, there only exist two independent elastic moduli, i.e., the Young's modulus (E) and the shear modulus (G). Currently there are quite a few methods that can be used to measure the Young's modulus and shear modulus. It is well known that the static moduli can be measured by using the applied quasi-static tension (compression) and torsion. If not mandatory, the quasi-static methods are usually not suggested as the testing errors are typically large which can reach 5% or even larger. Dynamic testing methods are generally of good accuracy and most methods are valid for both Young's modulus and shear modulus measurement. In a famous interlaboratory testing program in 1980s, Actually, shear modulus is of special importance in solid state matters. For example, gradual variations of shear modulus had been observed in polymers, glass, metal glass, etc., during phase transitions (or glass transitions). In this work, we firstly proposed a piezoelectric torsional transducer based on two thickness-poled, thickness-shear (d 15 ) PZT half-rings. Then, the torsional transducer was bonded on one end of a cylinder specimen to excite torsional vibration and torsional guided waves. Equivalent circuit model As mentioned above, more accurate shear modulus measurement can be realized by excitation of torsional resonance in a cylinder sample while the structure of the EMAT to excite torsional vibration is too complicated for practical testing. Here we proposed a novel piezoelectric torsional transducer consisting of two thickness-poled piezoelectric half-rings, which is very easy to fabricate. As shown in Fig. After poling, the ring is evenly cut into two half-rings. Then, the top/bottom electrodes were removed and lateral electrodes were spread on the cutting faces of the two half-rings. Finally, the two half-rings were bonded together using conductive epoxy with the poling directions opposite to each other. Thin copper wires were inserted between the bonding faces for electrical excitation/reception. Fig. We firstly analyze the vibration mode of the thickness-poled piezoelectric half-ring. As shown in Fig. Here u θ is the circumferential displacement, Θ P is the angular displacement,V θ is the applied voltage and E θ is the electric field. Then the only non-zero shear strain of the half-ring can be expressed as The piezoelectric constitutive equations can be written as Where s 44 E is the elastic coefficient in short circuit, d 15 is the piezoelectric coefficient, D θ is the electric displacement along the circumferential direction, P 11 σ is the stress-free dielectric constant. Q mP is the mechanical quality factor of the PZT and Q e is the electric quality factor of the PZT. The equilibrium equation is where ρ P is the mass density of the piezoelectric half-ring. By substituting Eq.(3a) into Eq.( The approximate solution of Eq.( where 1 2 Here c P is the shear wave velocity of the piezoelectric ceramics in short circuit,ω P is the angular frequency. k P is the wavenumber whose real part determines the speed of sound and the imaginary part determines the attenuation of the wave amplitude. For the general solution in Eq.( Then we can get Based on the mechanical boundary conditions: The transport equations for the vibrations of the piezoelectric torsional half-ring can be obtained to be: Where Z P * is the impedance of the piezoelectric torsional half-ring, N * is the electromechanical conversion coefficient of the piezoelectric torsional half-ring, C 0 * is the static capacitance, P Now let us analyze the vibration mode of the piezoelectric torsional ring consisting of two half-rings with the opposite polarization. It can be easily deduced that the transport equation will keep the same form as Eq.( To verify the equivalent circuit model of the piezoelectric torsional transducer, we measured the frequency dependent admittance curve of the transducer and the results were shown in Fig. If the above-mentioned piezoelectric torsional transducer is perfectly bonded onto a cylindrical specimen with its diameter equal to the outer diameter of the transducer, as shown in Fig. Fig. Considering the internal friction, the shear modulus of the specimen can be written as For a single cylindrical specimen, the equilibrium equation for its torsional vibration can be expressed as ,, The general solution for Eq.( where 1 2 Here k M is the complex wavenumber whose real part determines the speed of sound, and the imaginary part determines the attenuation of the amplitude. c M , ρ M , G are the shear wave velocity, mass density and shear modulus of the testing specimen, respectively. Q mM is the quality factor of the specimen. Similar as the derivation process of the equivalent circuit mode for the piezoelectric torsional transducer, based on the boundary conditions of the cylindrical specimen's velocity: and the boundary conditions of the forces: The transport equations of the cylindrical specimen can be obtained as: Taking into account the displacement continuity on the transducer-specimen interface, i.e., , 0 0, 0 ,, We can get ω M =ω P 。 Based on Eq.( Taking into account the stress-free conditions on both ends, the equivalent circuit model can then be simplified to be Fig. where 2 tan tan 2 tan tan 2 To verify the equivalent circuit model for the transducer-specimen composite system, the frequency-dependent admittance curves of the torsional transducer bonded on three different specimens (1045 steel bars with the length of 55mm and 100mm, PMMA bar with the length of 55mm) were measured using an impedance analyzer (Agilent 4294A) and compared with the theoretical results based on Eq.( It can be seen from Fig. From Fig. By substituting the expressions for Z P and Z M into Eq.( Where f P1 is the first resonance frequency of PZT transducer which can be measured by the impedance analyzer directly. Note that Eq.( However, in practical applications, it is not convenient to solve Eq.( Then Eq.( That is, the influence of the piezoelectric transducer on the resonance frequency of the composite system can be neglected in this case with the induced testing error less than 2%. Since in Fig. Where f rn is the resonance frequency, f an is the anti-resonance frequency. Y rn is the admittance value corresponding to the resonance frequency and Y an is the admittance value corresponding to the anti-resonance frequency. Now let us discuss the testing errors of the electromechanical resonance method for shear modulus measurement. As indicated above, Eq.( On the other hand, the repeatable errors can be easily evaluated and good repeatability is especially useful for a practical testing method. Here the piezoelectric torsional transducer is bonded onto the specimen using the 502 epoxy cement, which can be easily removed by using acetone. To estimate the repeatable errors, for the first testing, the transducer was bonded onto the specimen and the specimen's shear modulus was measured, then the transducer was removed from the specimen. For the second testing, the transducer was bonded onto the same specimen again and the shear modulus measurement was repeated. Successive testing can be done similarly. So the difference between different testing on a same specimen is mainly due to the different bonding conditions. In this work, to reduce the repeatable errors, the thickness of the bonding epoxy in each testing is to be controlled as the same as possible. Fig. Since the two-half-ring based piezoelectric torsional transducer is bonded onto the cylindrical specimen, the shear modulus of the specimen can also be measured based on torsional wave propagation. The piezoelectric torsional transducer is expected to excite torsional guided waves in the cylindrical specimen among which the fundamental torsional mode T(0,1) should be dominant. Where the density ρ can be obtained by measuring the mass, the diameter and the length of the cylindrical specimen. It should be noted that the torsional transducer is usually excited around (or at least not far from) its own resonance frequency (about 460kHz in this work) to ensure that enough energy can be transferred to the testing specimen. Typically, the resonance frequency of the torsional transducer is well above the cutting off frequency of the second (or higher) order torsional wave T(0,2) in a cylindrical sample. For example, Fig. According to Eq.( Then the logarithmic attenuation  of the torsional wave is calculated to be The internal friction Q mM -1 is expressed as: 1 2 In this work, the shear modulus and internal friction of four types of materials, i.e., 1045 steel, aluminum, quartz glass and PMMA, were measured using both the torsional resonance method and the torsional wave propagation method. The testing results were presented in Section 3.1 and 3.2, respectively. The measured shear modulus and internal friction (Q mM -1 ) of the four types of materials using the torsional resonance method were listed in Table for the lossy PMMA. Furthermore, all the measured shear modulus based on Eq.(28) and Eq.(30) fit well with the reference values from literatures. Bearing in mind that Eq.( In comparison, the calculated shear modulus based on Eq.(31), i.e., neglecting the transducer's effect, differs up to 10% from the value based on Eq.(30) for the three lossless materials and about It should be noted that the received wave signals in Fig. The measured stabilized shear wave velocity, shear modulus and internal friction for the four types of materials are listed in Table From the measurement results in Table With regard to the internal friction measurement, as discussed above, the resonance method cannot be applicable to lossy materials which can be measured using the wave propagation method. It should be noted that although both the resonance method and wave propagation method work well for the internal friction measurement on lossless materials, very accurate measurement on internal friction is not possible because the interface effect between the transducer and the specimen cannot be exactly modelled. For the lossless metallic materials, the internal friction can be accurately measured based on the contactless electromagnetic acoustic resonance method (EMAR). In summary, we proposed two shear modulus measurement methods based on torsional resonance and torsional wave propagation using a same piezoelectric torsional transducer. The shear modulus measurement principles for both methods were derived and that for internal friction measurement were also presented. Testing results show that the torsional resonance method is more suitable for shear modulus measurement on short or middle-length bars (below 100mm) with high repeatability better than 0.2%. For longer specimen, the torsional wave propagation method is more suitable. As to the internal friction measurement, both methods works well for the lossless materials while for the lossy materials, only the wave propagation method is applicable. The proposed two methods using only one torsional transducer provide a quick and reliable solution to