Whether dispersal of plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) within a perovskite active layer can increase the efficiency of solar cells is a long-standing question. It is well known that inclusion of metallic NPs in an active layer can boost the surrounding near-field intensity around them owing to the dipolar localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR, also called antenna effect), which can increase light absorption by solar cells. However, the use of plasmonic NPs in perovskite solar cells has been barely reported, and it is not known whether inserting plasmonic NPs into a perovskite active layer produces any performance advantage compared with a pure perovskite counterpart. We explore the fundamental and practical limits of "plasmonic metamaterial" perovskite solar cells by applying effective medium theory and a detailed balance analysis. Our results indicate that an increase in effective refractive index of perovskite through dispersed plasmonic NPs can in principle enhance the performance of solar cells. Introduction: Increasing the refractive index (n) has long been a goal of photon management in solar cells. The Yablonovitch limit (4n 2 limit) is an example of a target maximum for ray-optic light trapping; nanophotonic regime. At the same time, photon management in perovskite solar cells via enhanced light-matter interaction has attracted comparatively less interest, probably due to their already excellent light absorption and strong photon-recycling ability. To address this question, we studied the effect of increasing neff on photon management in perovskite and the resulting solar cell performance. Deep-subwavelength-scale plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) dispersed within perovskite can act as electrical meta-atoms, broadly enhancing neff while simultaneously maintaining high transparency at a quasi-static (off-resonance) regime. Design of plasmonic metamaterial perovskite: Recently, a detailed balance analysis was successfully adapted to perovskite solar cells by explaining how efficiency is influenced by non-radiative recombination (Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) non-radiative recombination rate; ASRH=1/t, where t is non-radiative lifetime (s -1 )), Auger limit (CAug (s -1 )), light absorptivity (a), external luminescence efficiency (ηext (%)) and parasitic absorption of luminescence (Ppar). The thickness of a perovskite active layer in solar cells is typically comparable to the wavelength of the solar spectrum (< 1500 nm); consequently, a should be interpreted under the nanophotonic regime rather than its ray-optic counterpart. However, a previously reported detailed balance analysis on perovskite solar cells thinner than 1500 nm employed ray-optical light trapping for both flat and randomly textured solar cells. Generally, this approximation of a is effective when αd is much smaller than 1. The α of perovskite (i.e., lead halide) used in this study (see Figure Enhancement of neff at wavelengths larger than the bandgap should therefore be a main goal in designing a PMPEM. As shown in Figures S1a, increasing the neff of active layers (assumed to have α of lead iodide with a constant n of 2.5) selectively at wavelengths larger than 760 nm (i.e., from 2.5 to 4) can considerably enhance a and result in an increased short circuit current (Jsc) as follows: (2) where q and FS(E) are the elementary charge and solar spectrum, respectively. By contrast, increasing neff selectively at wavelengths smaller than 760 nm (i.e., also from 2.5 to 4) slightly enhance a and Jsc, due to the already matured light absorption of perovskite (see Figures Another key to success in the design of a PMPEM is minimizing Ppar of luminescence (at wavelengths of 680 nm ~ 880 nm), as follows. It is well known that ηext is a determinant for Voc according to the following equation derived by Ross in 1967 As such, we used aluminum (Al) NPs as meta-atoms rather than conventional Au and Ag counterparts (see Figure summarizes the neff of an Al NP PMPEM. Herein, 30 nm by 30 nm by 20 nm Al NPs are assumed to be arrayed in a 2D tetragonal lattice with a different lateral gap spanning from 5 nm to 100 nm. Also, Al NPs are designed to be encapsulated in a 1 nm polymeric shell (an organic ligand with an n of 1.45). The effective thickness of the PMPEM is found to be 30 nm, satisfying no explicit physical boundaries for retrieval of neff. Effective absorption (keff) of PMPEM with respect to vol% of Al NPs is shown in Figure Several features are noteworthy, as follows. First, a and Jsc increase with thickness of the PMPEM (Figures Second, in contrast, Voc decreases for thicker solar cells (Figures 2c). Increasing a, particularly beyond the direct bandgap, by increasing the thickness of the active layer reduces the gap between nand p-type quasi-Fermi levels (i.e., reducing the effective bandgap). Voc,max is tunable, because Voc,max relies on a quasi-Fermi level instead of an intrinsic bandgap. Also, ηext is reduced by increasing the thickness of the active layer (Figures 2d), because thicker active layers lead to a smaller Pesc: where FBB indicates blackbody radiation spectral density. These two effects synergistically decrease Voc when the thickness of the active layer is increased. Furthermore, an increase in neff reduces ηext and thus Voc, because an enhanced neff narrows the escape cone and thereby further decreases Pesc (see equation 5). FBB is not influenced by neff, as follows: where h, c, and nsub are Plank's constant, the speed of light, and n of the substrate, respectively. Pesc herein is solely affected by neff. Note that the n 2 term in the denominator of equation ( Overall, as the density of photo-generated carriers defines voltage, boosting photon-recycling by increasing neff results in a reduction in Voc. In addition, the rates of ηext and Voc decrease, caused by enhancing neff, are accelerated with increasing thickness of the active layer (see Figures 2d). This means that the effect of photon-recycling is also enhanced with increasing thickness of the active layer. In addition to photon-recycling, the effective bandgap of perovskite is narrowed by increasing the thickness-enabled enhancement of light trapping, as mentioned above. These two effects cooperatively reduce Voc. As a result, Voc and Jsc trade off with each other, once both light trapping and photon-recycling are simultaneously boosted by increasing neff. These results provide an important insight into potential new directions for plasmonic metamaterial solar cell design. Previous reports on embedding plasmonic NPs into active layers of solar cells focused mainly on near-field enhancement by localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and its use in increasing overall a (i.e., antenna effect). Meanwhile, Snaith et al. suggested that inclusion of plasmonic NPs (i.e., Ag NPs) in perovskite could result in enhanced radiative decay of excitons and therefore an increase in photocurrent. Figure Critically, as shown in Figures As a result, we can achieve an increase in maximum PCE (from 26.9 to 27.8) even with a thinner perovskite solar cell (from 200 nm to 60 nm) by using plasmonic metamaterials in realistic situations. Practical limitations due to use of a realistic mirror: In a realistic situation, the R of a rear mirror is less than 100 %. A flat Au back electrode is located at the bottom of perovskite solar cell, Furthermore, Pesc can be handicapped as follows: Because both a and Pesc are damaged by a factor of n 2 under realistic mirror conditions, an increase in neff dilutes the effect of light trapping, while simultaneously reducing ηext and Voc further. Figure Additionally, an unperfected R of a mirror reduces ηext (see Figure par esc P P n R = ́-fall in ηext caused by an increasing neff becomes more significant for a thinner active layer; the corresponding Voc is summarized in Figure We systematically verified how increasing the neff of the active layer affects the performances of perovskite solar cells. Using the concept of plasmonic metamaterials, a theoretical strategy for increasing the neff of perovskite is suggested. From a materialization perspective, our design could be readily accessible via random dispersing or entropic packing of Al NPs within perovskite media. In detailed balance analysis, the total current density (Jtotal) is calculated by generation and recombination rates expressed with current density. These current density components are combined as followings: (9) The three loss mechanisms of perovskite solar cell are considered: radiative recombination rate (J0,rad), auger recombination rate (JAuger), Shockley-Read-Hall recombination rate (JSRH). Each of these terms are defined by: (10) where a(E), FS, FBB, CAuger, i, d, and ASRH are the absorptivity, solar spectrum, black body radiation of the solar cell, auger recombination coefficient, intrinsic carrier concentration, thickness of solar cell, and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination coefficient respectively. The value of Bint, CAuger are 1.34×10 -10 (cm 3 /s), 1.1×10 -28 (cm 6 s 2 ) respectively. Numerical calculations of effective parameters of a PMPEM: Scattering parameters including transmission, reflection, and relevant phase changes are numerically calculated by finite-difference, time-domain (FDTD), supported by a commercial package (CST Microwave Studio 2014). The dielectric constants of Al, Au, and Ag were derived from a Drude-critical model. A periodic boundary condition was used; perfect matched layers (PML) were placed at the top and bottom of the simulation model to avoid reflection from the boundaries. We then obtained all effective parameters using an sparameter extraction method based on homogenization theory. 