Recently amorphous oxide semiconductors (AOS) have gained commercial interest due to their low-temperature processability, high mobility and areal uniformity for display backplanes and other large area applications. A multi-cation amorphous oxide (a-IGZO) has been researched extensively and is now being used in commercial applications. It is proposed in the literature that overlapping In-5s orbitals form the conduction path and the carrier mobility is limited due to the presence of multiple cations which create a potential barrier for the electronic transport in a-IGZO semiconductors. A multi-anion approach towards amorphous semiconductors has been suggested to overcome this limitation and has been shown to achieve hall mobilities up to an order of magnitude higher compared to multi-cation amorphous semiconductors. In the present work, we compare the electronic structure and electronic transport in a multi-cation amorphous semiconductor, a-IGZO and a multi-anion amorphous semiconductor, a-ZnON using computational methods. Our results show that in a-IGZO, the carrier transport path is through the overlap of outer s-orbitals of mixed cations and in a-ZnON, the transport path is formed by the overlap of Zn-4s orbitals, which is the only type of metal cation present. We also show that for multi-component ionic amorphous semiconductors, electron transport can be explained in terms of orbital overlap integral which can be calculated from structural information and has a direct correlation with the carrier effective mass which is calculated using computationally expensive first principle DFT methods. Large area thin film device applications such as activematrix (AM) flat panel displays and flexible electronics require high uniformity with low processing temperatures. Hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) had been used widely as the active channel material in thin film transistors (TFTs) because of its low fabrication cost and high areal homogeneity up until the last decade Amorphous structures of zinc oxy-nitrides (Zn x+1.5y O x N y ) were generated for two stoichiometries of x:y (O:N) ratios of 2:1 (Zn 42 O 24 N 12 ) and 1:1 (Zn 60 O 24 N 24 ), hereafter referred to as a-ZnON-21 and a-ZnON-11, respectively. We used an evolutionary algorithm based code USPEX (Universal Structure Predictor: Evolutionary Xtallography) We performed a detailed structural analysis of selected structures to calculate average bond lengths (ABL) and average coordination number (ACN). The average bond lengths for Zn-O and Zn-N bonds in both the compositions of a-ZnON were found to be very close to the bond lengths in c-ZnO and c-Zn 3 N 2 . The polyhedra shown in Fig. By nature, amorphous structures lack long range periodicity, making them difficult to be treated using DFT, which works best for periodic structures. However, DFT can still be employed, by making large unit-cells of amorphous materials with random distribution of atomic species. Electronic structure calculations were performed using plane-wave code Quantum Espresso with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) ultrasoft pseudo-potentials While most of the recent literature on a-IGZO attribute overlapping In-5s orbitals as the electron conduction path through the structure From this composite conduction band plot, the higher curvature at CBM for a-ZnON is apparent, signifying its lower elec-tron effective mass, which can be related to the higher electron mobilities observed for a-ZnON semiconductors. In a-IGZO, electron mobility also depends on the carrier concentration (due to the percolation mechanism of electron transport In the previous discussion, we argued that the electronic conduction path must be through overlapping s-orbitals of different cations in a-IGZO and overlapping Zn-4s orbitals in a-ZnON. Therefore, the ease of electron transport (electron mobility) must depend on the nature and extent of overlap between these orbitals. In the following discussion, we attempt to quantify the overlap between outermost s-orbitals of different metal cations in these amorphous semiconductors and relate the overlap to physically verifiable quantities such as electron mobilities. Orbital overlap integral (OI) between different orbitals is a measure of overlap between single electron wavefunctions in these orbitals. Orita et al. The sum of all pairwise orbital overlap integrals, normalized to volume (total normalized orbital overlap integral), gives us a parameter to compare electron transport among different structures and compositions. It should be noted that the orbital overlap integral would strongly depend on the density of the amorphous structure, as with increasing density the average distances between metal cation pairs would decrease. For two different compositions of a-IGZO, the total normalized orbital overlap integrals are very similar with slightly higher value for a-IGZO-1114 composition compared to a-IGZO-2217. From Table.II(a), it can be seen that the number of pairs for mix cations is much higher in comparison to the number of pairs of similar cations for a-IGZO. The value of overlap integral is found to be the highest for Zn-Zn pairs, but since the number of pairs are limited, this overlap cannot be solely responsible for the electronic conduction in the material. From the table, it is also evident that for a-IGZO-1114 composition, the main contribution to overall electron transport comes from electron transport between In-Zn, Zn-Ga and In-Ga cation pairs, and for a-IGZO-2217 composition, the main contribution is from electron transport between In-Ga and In-Zn metal-cation pairs. These results are also consistent with our observation of the contribution of different metal s-orbitals in conduction band of a-IGZO (Fig. Although we cannot directly relate the total overlap integral with measured values of hall mobilities, there is an apparent correlation between the two. Carrier mobilities in any material depend on the effective mass and the scattering time constants. The scattering mechanisms in amorphous semiconductors are not clearly understood and often difficult to measure or calculate. The carrier effective mass, on the other hand, can be estimated from the electronic structure of material and can give us valuable insight regarding carrier transport. From the pseudo band structures of a-IGZO and a-ZnON in Fig. . Since the structures are amorphous, the effective masses in three different directions might be slightly different, owing to different arrangements of ions in the three directions in real space. We took the average by calculating the effective masses in all three (Γ-X, Γ-Y and Γ-Z) directions. As shown in Table .II, for a-IGZO-1114 and a-IGZO-2217 structures, the electron effective mass was estimated to be 0.21 m e and 0.22 m e respectively. While these two values are nearly same, they are small compared to the measured values of 0.34 m e 19 for electron effective mass in a-IGZO but in agreement with calculated values reported in the Ref. A multi-anion approach towards amorphous semiconductors has distinct advantages over multi-cation based amorphous oxide semiconductors. Comparison of electronic structures of the two materials systems (a-ZnON and a-IGZO) highlights the role of cations and anions in the electronic transport. While the electronic conduction in a-IGZO is found to be through overlapping empty s-orbitals of mixed cations and so it also depends on composition (ratio of cations), in a-ZnON, the electronic conduction path is through overlapping Zn-s orbitals and is independent of composition (ratio of anions). The ease of conduction in these amorphous structure can be estimated in terms of extent of overlap between empty s orbitals of metal cations. The total normalized orbital overlap integral is shown to have a direct correlation with calculated carrier effective mass, this correlation can be used as a qualitative estimate for the observed electron mobilities. Effective mass calculations based on ab initio DFT calculation of electronic structure are computationally expensive, on the other hand, the calculation of the total normalized orbital overlap integral as an estimate for carrier effective mass can be done on for many different amorphous structures or structural averages from many amorphous structures can be calculated with very small computational expense. Calculation of the pairwise orbital overlap integrals for different metal cation pairs also provides an insight into the role of individual metal cations in forming the conduction path in multi-cation amorphous structures which is not straightforward from the DFT calculations. While single structure based DFT calculation are limited in their scope, calculations based on many structures or averages of many structures, such as generated by evolutionary algorithm based codes, should give us better insight into the av-erage properties and role of individual cations/anions in these materials and can be used effectively while predicting properties of new compositions of amorphous semiconductors. tive mass of a-IGZO, while the total orbital overlap integral is 2-3 times higher for a-ZnON compared to a-IGZO. Both of these do not adequately explain upto an order of magnitude higher mobilities observed in a-ZnON compared to a-IGZO. However, the difference in total orbital overlap integral is much closer to observed behavior. We speculate that the orbital overlap integral calculations inherently capture some of the physical aspects (such as carrier scattering) of carrier transport and hence able to ex-plain the observed behavior to a larger extent. On the other hand, effective mass calculations are based on DFT calculations, which is applicable to periodic structures and does not describe the scattering behavior at all and it may miss some of the physical aspects of amorphous structures which are captured in total orbital overlap integrals. This may be a subject of further studies to describe carrier transport in multi-component amorphous semiconductors. a-ZnON-21 a-ZnON-11 a-IGZO-1114 a-IGZO-2217 Orbital PDOS % Orbital PDOS % Orbital PDOS % Orbital PDOS %