Electron interactions are pivotal for defining the electronic structure of quantum materials. In particular, the strong electron Coulomb repulsion is considered the keystone for describing the emergence of exotic and/or ordered phases of quantum matter as disparate as high-temperature superconductivity and charge-or magnetic-order. However, a comprehensive understanding of fundamental electronic properties of quantum materials is often complicated by the appearance of an enigmatic partial suppression of low-energy electronic states, known as the pseudogap. Here we take advantage of ultrafast angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy to unveil the temperature evolution of the low-energy density of states in the electron-doped cuprate Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 , an emblematic system where the pseudogap intertwines with magnetic degrees of freedom. By photoexciting the electronic system across the pseudogap onset temperature T*, we report the direct relation between the momentum-resolved pseudogap spectral features and the spin-correlation length with an unprecedented sensitivity. This transient approach, corroborated by mean field model calculations, allows us to establish the pseudogap in electron-doped cuprates as a precursor to the incipient antiferromagnetic order even when long-range antiferromagnetic correlations are not established, as in the case of optimal doping. In the presence of strong correlations, the interactions within and among various degrees of freedom often obfuscate the microscopic origin of exotic electronic phenomena In the specific case of electron-doped cuprates, the PG is believed to bear a relation to the antiferromagnetic (AF) order which itself extends over a wide doping range In an effort to tie together the observations of the PG and short-range AF correlations via a unique experimental approach, we performed a time-and angle-resolved photoemission (TR-ARPES) study of optimally doped Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (NCCO, T c ≈24 K, yellow arrow in Fig. As in standard pump-probe spectroscopy, a near-infrared pump pulse is used to perturb the system, with its relaxation studied by varying the temporal delay of a subsequent UV probe pulse. Due to the strong coupling of excited quasiparticles to underlying excitations, the energy released by the pump pulse is rapidly (≈100 fs) shared among all the degrees of freedom Figure where k is the bare energy dispersion, ∆ PG the AF-driven pseudogap spectroscopic amplitude, determined by the local Coulomb interaction and spin susceptibility and compute the Fermi surface (Fig. Before moving to a detailed analysis of our TR-ARPES data, we provide a more qualitative overview to illustrate the general concepts which underlie our experimental strategy. Figure Having defined the framework for our investigation, we now track the temperaturedependent modification of the low-energy DOS at the HS in optimally-doped NCCO by introducing thermal excitations via optical pumping. Figure In order to establish a direct connection between the TR-ARPES phenomenology and the PG, as well as the reported T*, we must convert the measured time dependence of our data to an effective temperature evolution To further clarify the origin of T*, we now present a comprehensive analysis and modeling of the photoinduced thermal modification of the PG for both LF and HF pump regimes. The spectral features of NCCO are inherently broad, precluding the sort of detailed analysis of the transient spectral function which has been achieved for hole-doped cuprates Alternately, we focus our analysis on the temporal evolution of dEDCs, defined as: where DOS 0 (ω) and the Fermi-Dirac electronic distribution f 0 (ω) are the unperturbed quantities (see Refs. and binding energy (ω) for the near-nodal cut (top panel, LF), and the HS (middle and bottom panels for LF and HF, respectively). The TR-ARPES data reported here can be simulated remarkably well using the simple model of Eq. 1 (see right column in Fig. The experimental dEDCs are reproduced through a substantial increase of the broadening term Γ alone, which phenomenologically describes the loss of quasiparticle intengrity and the ensuing filling of the PG due to the reduction of the spin-correlation length Note that, Γ(T e ) ∝ ξ -1 spin (T e ) in Eq. 1 is assumed for simulation purposes, in agreement with theoretical predictions of Vilk and Tremblay In further support of our interpretation of the HS data, we compare single experimen-tal and simulated dEDCs along the near-nodal direction and HS for τ =+0.6 ps in Fig. Along the near-nodal direction we find an almost symmetric transient population/depletion (increase/decrease of the photoemission intensity for ω >/<0 across the Fermi level), characteristic of a mere thermal broadening effect (in the near-nodal region the PG is centered in the unoccupied states, details in the Supplementary Information). In contrast to this, at the HS we observe instead the increment of the intensity for ω ≈ -50 meV and a modest (null) depletion signal for ω ≈ -20 meV for LF (HF), in good agreement with the model and data of Fig. In conclusion, we have reported the intimate relation between the partial suppression of the electronic spectral weight, a.k.a pseudogap, and the short-range magnetic correlations in electron-doped cuprates. In particular, by performing a detailed ultrafast angle-resolved photoemission study at the hot-spot of the optimally-doped NCCO electron-doped cuprate, we have demonstrated that the temperature dependence of the low-energy DOS is closely related to the spin-correlation length ξ spin . We identified two different temperature regimes for the PG, moving from low to high temperature: i) T<T*, in which the PG begins to fill alongside with the reduction of ξ spin ; ii) T>T*, where the PG is completely filled-up. Our results show that the PG phenomenology in optimally-doped NCCO originates from short-range AF correlations, parametrized by ξ spin (T), and T* is the temperature crossover above which the spin-fluctuation-induced spectral broadening overcomes substantially the PG amplitude ∆ PG , manifest spectroscopically as a loss of quasiparticle integrity and subsequent filling of the PG. Therefore, the frequently reported onset temperature T* does not represent a thermodynamic phase transition, i.e. a sudden quenching of a well-defined order parameter; rather, T* is solely driven by the weakening of the short-range AF correlations and incipient (π,π)-folding Our TR-ARPES setup exploits the classic pump-probe scheme. A 6.2 eV probe beam is generated by fourth-harmonic generation of the fundamental wavelength (800 nm, 1.55 eV) of a Ti:sapphire laser (Vitesse Duo and RegA 9000 by Coherent, 250 kHz repetition rate). The 1.55 eV pump beam is split from the source before harmonic generation. The pump and probe beam diameters on the sample are 300 μm and 150 μm, respectively. The angle of incidence on the sample is approximately normal for both beams. The two pump incident fluences were 28±5 μJ/cm 2 for LF and 50±10 μJ/cm 2 for HF. The pump and probe beams were s-polarized. The sample was cleaved and measured at <5•10 -11 torr base pressure and 10 K temperature. Overall thermal effects have been taken into account and we estimate a temperature of approximately 40 K and 60 K for negative pump-probe delays for LF and HF excitations, respectively. Photoemitted electrons were detected by an hemispherical analyzer (Specs Phoibos 150). Energy and temporal resolutions were 17 meV and 250 fs, respectively. For T e =130 K the shortening of ξ spin leads to a filling-up of the PG (red curves). f, Simulated (top) and experimental (bottom) differential EDCs (dEDCs), as defined in Eq. 2, where we demonstrate that a filling of the PG manifests as an increase of the photoemission intensity for ω ≈-50 meV (blue arrows). 