Aqueous dispersion of Laponite, when exposed to CO 2 environment leads to in situ inducement of magnesium and lithium ions, which is, however absent when dispersion is exposed to air. Consequently, in the rheological experiments, Laponite dispersion preserved under CO 2 shows more spectacular enhancement in the elastic and viscous moduli as a function of time compared to that exposed to air. By measuring concentration of all the ions present in a dispersion as well as change in pH, the evolving inter-particle interactions among the Laponite particles is estimated. DLVO analysis of a limiting case is performed, wherein two particles approach each other in a parallel fashion -a situation with maximum repulsive interactions. Interestingly it is observed that DLVO analysis explains the qualitative details of an evolution of elastic and viscous moduli remarkably well thereby successfully relating the macroscopic phenomena to the microscopic interactions. The macroscopic properties of the colloidal dispersions are determined by various factors that include the nature, the shape and the size distribution of the particles, their concentration, the distribution of charges on the same, etc. Laponite is 2:1 is a synthetic clay mineral belonging to a family of hectorite clays with a chemical formula of the unit cell: Na +0.7 [(Si 8 Mg 5.5 Li 0.3 )O 20 (OH) 4 ] -0.7 Both these interactions contribute to structural build up in Laponite dispersion, which causes viscosity and elasticity of the same to show spectacular increase when Laponite is dispersed in water While Laponite has been in use in variety of industrial applications and in academic studies, Laponite is susceptible to chemical degradation when exposed to acidic environment. Many groups have investigated the chemical stability of hectorite clay mineral over the past few decades The chemical stability of Laponite was investigated for the first time by Mourchid and Levitz They proposed that increase in concentration of Mg 2+ and Li + ions is responsible for accelerated aging of Laponite dispersion. Jatav and Joshi The faces of the disk/plate shaped particles of clays experience repulsive interactions due to their negatively charged nature, while experience attraction due to van der Waals interactions. As a result, historically this system has been studied as a model candidate for an application of DLVO theory This work studies effect of Mg 2+ ion leaching by systematically exposing Laponite suspension to the CO2 environment. Furthermore, spontaneous evolution of Laponite dispersion with and without in situ Mg 2+ ion leaching is analyzed using rheology and DLVO theory, wherein the latter case involves consideration of multivalent cations. This work, on the one hand studies how the macroscopic rheological behavior changes as a function of time, while on the other hand, how the microscopic inter-particle interactions get altered with time is carefully analyzed. The objective of this work is to relate time evolving microscopic inter-particle interactions to the macroscopic rheological behavior of an aqueous dispersion of Laponite due to in situ change in the ionic concentration. In order to prepare aqueous dispersion, Laponite XLG ® (BYK Additives Inc.) was dried for 4 hours at 120°C. Before mixing Laponite with ultrapure water (resistivity 18.2 MΩ•cm) its pH was maintained at 10 by adding NaOH and molarity was fixed at predetermined value by adding NaCl. The mixing of Laponite and water was carried out for 45 min using Ultra Turrex drive, which leads to clear and colorless dispersion. In this work 2.8 mass% Laponite dispersion was studied with no externally added salt (0.1 mM Na + ion concentration). The freshly prepared dispersions were stored in several polypropylene tubes of (2.74 cm diameter) 50 ml volume so as to have 5 ml of empty space above the dispersion. The samples were purged with N 2 , air and CO 2 . 2.8 mass% Laponite dispersion with 5 mM NaCl was also used, and exposed this dispersion to only CO 2 environment. The reason for employing this system is discussed in the next section. All the tubes were stored in different desiccators. The free space of the desiccators was also purged with a gas same as that in the free space of tubes. For each experiment a fresh tube was used without disturbing the others. The samples were investigated for a period of 30 days with an interval time of 5 days. This time, over which the sample was kept under quiescent condition, has been represented as rest time   r t . Changes in pH and ionic conductivity of a dispersion were measured using Horiba F-71 pH Meter and Horiba DS-71 Conductivity meter respectively. Extent of dissolution of the Laponite particle leading to leaching of Mg 2+ ions was studied by performing complexometric titration, wherein dispersion is titrated against EDTA (ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid) using EBT (eriochrome black-T) as the indicator. In the presence of Mg 2+ ions the dispersion turns red or purple on addition of EBT. To maintain the pH of 10 throughout the titration process, ammonia buffer solution (ammonium chloride/ ammonia) was used. As Laponite forms thixotropic gel, the viscosity/elasticity of the dispersion was first reduced by shearing it vigorously to ease the titration process. The titration's end point occurs when EDTA changes the color of the dispersion to blue, which yields concentration of leached magnesium ion Frequency of oscillation was maintained at 0.1 Hz. Unless otherwise mentioned, measurements of the ionic conductivity, pH, and reported below are the values averaged over the entire volume of the tube. The rheological study, on the other hand, requires very small amount of sample (around 3 ml), which was collected near the free surface. For 2.8 mass% dispersion studied here, no difference was found in the results when dispersion was stored under the N 2 or air atmosphere for all the experiments. Therefore, only the results associated with the air atmosphere are reported below. All the experiments were performed at 25°C. A visual observation of the 2.8 mass% dispersions without any salt preserved under CO 2 and air indicates that dispersion stored under CO 2 environment undergoes liquid to soft solid transition after a rest time of 5 days. The samples stored under air atmosphere, on the other hand, took over 15 days to show soft solid-like consistency. More quantitatively the structural evolution of Laponite dispersion has been explored using rheology. In Fig. (squares), 5mM salt stored in CO 2 (triangles). In the inset G is plotted against r t for the dispersions kept under CO 2 for a better clarity. The lines serve as a guide to the eye. In t r [day] G [kPa] t r [day] air and that of CO 2 are identical as expected. On the other hand, the values of G for the salt containing system is higher than both the no salt systems on r t =0 and w t =3 h. However, over r t =0 to 5 days G of the no salt system preserved under CO 2 increases very spectacularly. It is apparent from Figure mM system preserved under CO 2 with that of 2.8 mass% and no salt system preserved under CO 2 over the initial period was the reason for employing the former system in this study). This observation of Fig. However, on later days once sufficient dissolution and diffusion has taken place the process is reaction controlled leading to the observed behavior. The rate of decrease in pH for initial rest time is significant, but it becomes almost constant after a period of 15 days. The decrease in pH is however smaller for a sample containing salt than that for no salt system suggesting presence of salt indeed prohibits formation of acid in a sample. Leaching of Mg 2+ ions causes erosion of the Laponite particles. Typically, a single particle of Laponite contains 1000 unit cells. Since each unit cell has around 5.5 Mg atoms, a particle as a whole has 5500 Mg atoms. With knowledge of leached Mg 2+ ions, as shown in Fig. Consequently, considering Mg atoms to be evenly placed over the area of a Laponite disk, the calculation suggests erosion of only 2.2% of the area and around 1.1% decrease in the radius of a particle. The ionic conductivity of sample as a function of rest time is also measured, which is plotted in Fig. Given that increase in conductivity in both these systems is due to leaching of Mg 2+ ions and change in pH, considering the behavior shown in Fig. FIG. The ionic conductivity of dispersion depends on concentration and mobilities of ions present in a dispersion given by Where  is the ionic conductivity of dispersion, e is the electron charge, while i With knowledge of the concentration of the each ion present in the dispersion, Debye screening length ( 1   ) of the electric double layer (EDL) associated with the faces of Laponite particles can be calculated by where, i  is the valence of the ith ion, B k is Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature and  is static permittivity of water. The variation of Debye screening length is plotted in Fig. almost remains constant. For the other two systems (preserved under CO 2 environment), on the other hand,   shows a remarkable decrease with r t . This decrease can be attributed to greater concentration of leached Mg 2+ ions and decrease in pH. For a system with 5 mM NaCl stored under CO 2 atmosphere, owing to the presence of higher amount of Na + and Cl -ions in the dispersion, the initial value of 1   was found to be less than that for dispersion prepared without any salt (irrespective of the storage condition). However, with increase in rest time, decrease in 1   is observed to be less intense compared to that for a system with no salt preserved under CO 2 atmosphere due to greater leaching of Mg 2+ ions in the latter. It is important to note that Debye screening length is not the only factor associated with the faces of Laponite particles, which determines their interactions with the neighboring particles. The dissociation of Na + ions from the faces of the particles, in addition to the nature and concentration of ions present in the EDL, influence the electrostatic surface potential of the same. The combined effect of the surface potential and the Debye screening length is given by the DLVO theory (Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek) theory The free energy per unit area due to van der Waals interaction is given by where H A is the Hamaker constant and  is the thickness of unit sheets measured between the same planes (for Laponite H A =1.06×10 -20 J and  =6.6 Å). The free energy per unit area between the two plates due to electrical doublelayer repulsion is straightforward to obtain when dielectric media contains ionic species of only single valency. However, the present system contains different kinds of ionic species with monovalent and divalent valencies for which nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann equation does not yield the analytical solution. For such case Israelachvili where, Na n is the total concentration of Na + ions in a dispersion obtained by solving equation (3), and . The dimensionless surface electric potential, 0  is related to surface charge density  by: The approximated forms of both the equations ( where Na n is the concentration of Na + ions originating from the sources other than Laponite (NaCl and NaOH), L A is the area of a face of Laponite, factor 2 represents two faces per particle and p m are the number of Laponite particles per unit volume. In equation ( , max DL W associated with a dispersion with no salt preserved under air remains practically constant over an entire duration. On the other hand, for a dispersion with no salt but preserved under CO 2 , , max DL W increases with r t . For a dispersion with 5 mM salt preserved under CO 2 , , max DL W increases with r t but the increase is not as significant as that of no salt system preserved under CO 2 . While van der Waals attraction prevails over an interparticle distance below 1 nm, double layer repulsion can be seen to be affecting over 5 nm. In addition to van der Waals and double layer interactions, interactions due to ion -ion correlations also play an important role particularly below the interparticle distance of 1 nm In Fig. Furthermore, for r t =0 day the height as well as the width of the repulsive barrier between approaching surfaces for dispersion with 5 mM salt stored under CO 2 is smaller compared to the no salt system as corroborated by figures 7 and 9. With increase in R t both the height as well as the width of repulsive barrier between approaching surfaces for dispersion without salt stored under air changes marginally compared to no salt dispersion stored under CO 2 . The latter shows significant increase in barrier height while decrease in its width. The dispersion with 5 mM salt stored under CO 2 also shows increase in barrier height and decrease in its width with increase in R t , but both the changes are not as intense as that of for no salt dispersion stored under CO 2 . The behavior shown by Fig. However, in reality various Laponite particles can approach each other in any orientation and parallel fashion is just one of the possibilities. Consequently, for a no salt system preserved under air, while undergoing Brownian motion, when two particles approach each other in a non-parallel fashion, at progressively higher r t , attraction between more electronegative face and electropositive edge with decreased width of repulsive barrier accelerates formation of the structure via edge -to -face attractive bonds. The accelerated structure formation is responsible for shifting of G evolution to lower w t as shown in Fig. Comparison of system with no salt and 5 mM salt preserved under CO 2 environment is more involved. On one hand, it is known that presence of salt decreases the width of energy barrier. On the other hand, salt renders a stabilizing effect to a dispersion so that decrease in pH as well as amount of leached Mg 2+ ions is less than that of with no salt system preserved under CO 2 as shown in Fig. , max DL W is always larger for the dispersion exposed to CO 2 environment containing no salt than that of containing 5 mM salt. Smaller Debye screening length originating from greater ionic conductivity suggests reduction in activation barrier to form inter-particle bonds. Due to this effect aggregation rate in salt containing system should be faster than no salt containing system up to day 15. In addition, as concentration of Mg 2+ ions in the salt free system starts increasing compared to that of salt containing system, the overall attractive interactions among the particles in former due to ion-ion correlation also start influencing the dynamics. Furthermore, the lower pH represents more electropositive edges, while for higher , max DL W , which represents electronegativity of the faces, the rate of aggregation in salt containing system should be lower than no salt containing system throughout the explored rest times. Consequently, due to the competing effects, G of no salt system shows significant increase initially. After r t = 5 day the values of G for both the system remain comparable up to 20 days as shown in the inset of Fig. In addition to academic aspect, the present work also has important implications from applications point of view. As mentioned before, Laponite is used as a rheology modifier or thickener in variety of industrial products such as home and personal care, mining, agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, paints, paper, etc. It is highly likely that under usual application conditions, the aqueous products containing Laponite may get exposed acidic environment. Under such conditions, on one hand the chemical degradation induced by the same will lead to erosion of the Laponite particles. On the other hand, it releases various kinds of ions in the aqueous media in which Laponite is suspended altering electrostatic interactions among the particles. Both these effects are not desirable for an intended end use of the product containing Laponite particles. The present work demonstrates such possibility under controlled conditions. In this work the interrelation between macroscopic rheological behavior and microscopic electrochemical properties are studied for an aqueous dispersion of Laponite, which demonstrates in situ change in ionic concentration when preserved under CO 2 atmosphere. In general, in the rheological experiments carried out on a latter day   r t after preparation, evolution of G subsequent to shear melting shows accelerated evolution. The acceleration is observed to be very spectacular for dispersion preserved under CO 2 environment. The complexometric titration and conductivity measurements reveal significant in situ leaching of Mg 2+ ions and high level ionic conductivity in dispersions preserved under CO 2 environment. On the other hand, in comparison, a dispersion preserved under air shows modest ionic conductivity and no traces of leached Mg 2+ ions. Furthermore, the pH of dispersion preserved under CO 2 decreases substantially unlike the pH of preserved under air that shows only slight increase. Knowledge of ionic conductivity and concentration of various participating ions leads to the surface charge density and Debye screening length associated with the faces of Laponite particle in dispersions preserved under various conditions. Also the DLVO theory for two Laponite particles approaching each other in parallel fashion is studied. Very interestingly, analysis of the DLVO results, in addition to the effect of pH on the edge charge of Laponite, explain the rheological behavior of the dispersion very well relating macroscopic behavior to microscopic inter-particle interactions. w t ). t for the studied Laponite dispersion in Fig.