Trove of exotic topoloid structures has recently been predicted by searching for compounds whose calculated band structure crossing points fulfill specific symmetry requirements. Discovery of exciting physical phenomena by experimental studies of such predicted compounds is just around the corner. Yet, the examination of some of these assumed high-symmetry structures suggests that not always will assembly of atoms in a configuration that yields exotic topological properties be protected against energy-lowering symmetry breaking modes. Indeed, although bulk topological characteristics lead to protected surface/edge states, nothing protects bulk states from structural instability. The burden of proof for theoretical predictions of exciting physical phenomena should include some compelling hints that such phenomena can live in thermodynamically stable (or near stable) compounds. Herein, we illustrate how the use of the calculated total (electron + ion) energies of candidate structures can remove false-positive predicted topoloids from the list of likely realizable compounds, to the benefit of the much-cherished iterative process of theory-experiment materials discovery. One of the most exciting recent developments in condensed matter physics and solid-state chemistry is the discovery of topological behavior of matter Yet, despite the recent predictions of thousands of topological compounds in the world, very few such compounds have been actually synthesized and proven to be topological. We note that the predicted topoloids were obtained by using just the upper part of the general flow in Scheme 1 denoted as "partial screening flow". The latter screening has been often based on the assumption that the crystal will take up the highest symmetry possible, not considering the possibility of energy-lowering symmetry breaking that obviates topological properties. Unfortunately, both experimental and theoretical databases of structures and properties of compounds sometimes omit information on magnetism, spontaneous defect formation, or how would the structure change when significant doping is required. Furthermore, in the case of polymorphous networks Undoubtedly, more of the projected topoloids from the published lists of candidates Fortunately, this type of assessment can be readily accomplished by using the sister quantity that goes handin-hand with the band structure calculation of such compounds -the total electron + ion energy of the said competing compounds. This needed next step of inspecting the total energies, following the already remarkable search for single-particle (band) energies that promise topological properties (i) The hypothetical structure that host topology is unstable: The selected crystal structure that manifests topology may not be the lowest energy structure. This is illustrated for the first predicted Dirac semimetal in three dimensions BiO2 in assumed cristobalite SiO2 structure (ii) Symmetry lowering by spontaneous defect formation defeats topology: The newly predicted unconventional quasiparticle in Ba4Bi3 This is illustrated for the predicted 8-fold band degeneracy of metallic CuBi2O4 (iv) The predicted topological property requires doping that inherently destabilizes the topological structure: This is illustrated for BaBiO3 The method used to assess the band structure-DFT-requires an exchange-correlation energy functional. But current approximated functionals suffer from the self-interaction error that lowers the unoccupied bands and raises the occupied bands, causing, at the extreme, unphysical band inversion. This occurs in InN and InAs[10-13], well known normal insulators predicted by DFT with current functionals to be topological metals. Avalible materials databases (e.g., ICSD We have studied only a few compounds from the published lists of predicted topological insulators with finite band gaps. These already illustrate possible failure modalities that can be detected by using simple, additional "search filters" from the same density functional theory used to establish the requisite target band structure. The current list of predicted topological insulators with real band gaps might then be a diminishing domain. Identifying actual realizations of topological compounds requires theories with a full atomic resolution that recognize site and space symmetries in crystals. The recent rebirth of density functional band theory of solids (and higher-order theories that use DFT to initialize the problem, such as DFT-DMFT To examine realizability of the predicted ACS that host topology, it may be wise to use not only the band single-particle energies as design filters but also the DFT total energy (Etotal) and its derivatives with respect to displacements (forces, force constants) of the given crystal ( Here, Ψi * (r) is (pseudo-)wavefunction of the valence electron where the index i denotes both the wavevector ki and the band index n and runs over all occupied valence states. Rμ, Eee, Eion-ion, and Exc are the lattice vector, electron-electron Coulomb energy, lattice (ion-ion) energy and exchange-correlation energy, respectively. U ps (l) (r -R μ )P ̂l is the angular-momentum-dependent pseudopotentials, where P ̂l is the projection operator on angular momentum. The need to use the total energy as an additional filter for material selection arises both because some candidate topoloid has been assumed to take up a hypothetical structure or composition not known to exist. Also, even if the selected structure does exist nominally, it is possible that simple microscopic mechanisms can create structural changes that defeat topology. Such situations are easily diagnosed by co-evaluation band structure conditions for topology, along with the potential instability with respect to total energy lowering deformations that defeat topology. The details of the methods used are described in the supplementary section S1. What about metastable compounds: Certainly, metastable materials can be realized and are often used in functional applications today. Long-lived metastable structures protected by practically insurmountable activation barriers certainly exist in special structures. Compounds with the energy of roughly 50-100 meV/atom above the convex hull could be sometimes synthesized in a metastable form  vulnerability towards decomposition during the inevitable perturbations (e.g., current, temperature) common in device applications Certain specialized growth techniques grow a material under artificial conditions when it is stable. Then it is quenched to low temperatures when it is no longer stable but can be long-lived because activation energies for structural transformation can be large at such low temperatures. The classic example is layer-by-layer artificial growth from the gas phase by Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), by opening and closing shutters that release certain atomic species and then quenched to low temperatures at which atomic diffusion is prohibitive. Predictions of the sequence of layers that delivers a given property, such as the spatial configuration of AlAs-GaAs having largest possible band gap BiO2 in the assumed cubic (Fd-3m) SiO2 cristobalite crystal structure was predicted to be the first 3D Dirac semimetal (the special degeneracy point circled in Fig. Another important stability criterion is related to dynamic phonon factors. Some crystal structures or atomic configurations are reported in a configuration that have negative second derivatives (e.g., a maximum of the potential energy surface), so phonon calculations will lead to negative branches-a clear indication of dynamic instability. One can then use the method of Stokes and Hatch Another example is the predicted wide gap oxide TI YBiO3 Ba4Bi3 in space group 220 is an example of a material with special band structure degeneracy that corresponds to recently predicted unconventional quasiparticle To examine this basic physical intuition, we calculated the total energy of the simplest donor defect namely Bi vacancy (see supplementary section S1 for details of defect calculations) in 16 formula units of Ba4Bi3 supercell (112 atoms). Fig. The energy bands of the Ba4Bi3 structure with 2% of Bi vacancies are shown in Fig. CuBi2O4 in the tetragonal P4/ncc crystal structure (space group 130) was predicted To examine this basic physical intuition, we allow for magnetism in the form of different spin arrangements among neighboring Cu atoms, still in the space group 130. This is done by starting the calculations with a specific arrangement for the spins on the Cu atoms that will mimic ferromagnetism (parallel spins) or different antiferromagnetic arrangements (antiparallel spins). We find that an antiferromagnetic arrangement of the Cu spins can lower the total energy by as much as 498 meV/formula units. Different spin configuration (antiferromagnetic or ferromagnetic) lead to very similar total energies within a few meV/atom (see supplementary section S4). Breaking time-reversal symmetry through the inclusion of magnetic moments on the Cu atoms opens a large energy gap in the Fermi energy (green shaded area in Fig. Cubic (Fm-3m) BaBiO3 was predicted To examine this basic physical intuition, we calculated the equilibrium structure of the undoped as well as doped system by evaluating its total energy. Doping can result in the local asymmetric environment, lowering the thermal energy barrier for phase transition, leading to phase transition. We find first that the cubic (Fm-3m) phase of BaBiO3 having a single BiO6 octahedron is unstable with respect to disproportionation into two octahedra with different volumes often loosely described as Ba2[Bi 3+ Bi 5+ ]O6, best described as the monoclinic structure (space group 14; P21/c), with metallic band structure shown in Fig. A more extreme example of a destructive response to doping is the recent suggestion In general, one should be aware that shifting the Fermi energy at will via doping of quantum materials, as required in numerous theoretically predicted would-be-topoloids, is higly unlikely Recent searches for topological phases Looking at instability modes of highly symmetric structures that harbor exotic properties reveals a number of basic symmetry breaking channels that can obviate exotic behavior. These additional filters are related to the stability of the hypothetical materials with respect to (i) decomposition to ground state crystalline compounds, (ii) spin polarization, (iii) formation of spontaneous intrinsic defects, (iv) external doping and (v) DFT underestimation of the band gap. The steps to account the above principles is straight forward: (i) perform analysis of thermodynamic stability of proposed materials via exploring energy convex hulls finding ground state compounds and stability of hypothetical material with respect to competing phases; (ii) verify stability of topological properties with respect to different spin arrangements and atomic/spin "nudging"; (iii) ensure that formation of point defects does not lead to spontaneous non-stoichiometry affecting the properties of the original materials; (iv) verifying that required doping is thermodynamically realizable and resulted system still possess the topology-enabling symmetry of the originally assumed structure. In addition to the above materials realization criteria, to propose a new topological system theoretically, (v) it is vital to ensure that topological properties of a hypothetical material are not affected by self-interaction error and more generally by the method used to describe electronic structure. Such additional material selection filters will help to avoid falsepositive predictions and would complete the burden of proof for recommending to experimentalists not only exotic but also potentially realizable materials that host with structural impunity exotic properties. This would convert "theory of effects" to the theory of real structures that could harbor such effects with impunity. This would enhance the friendship (and credibility) between theorists with experimentalists.