A thin oxide layer protects metals from electrochemical corrosion and hence the stability of this oxide layer is crucial for corrosion resistance of metals. The dynamics of cationic and anionic point defects which are injected into this oxide layer at the metal-oxide-layer interface and the oxide-layer-environment interface during electrochemical processes determine the stability of this oxide-layer. The point defect model originally advanced by Digby Macdonald and perfected into a correct and complete theory by Bosco Emmanuel provides a concrete basis for investigating this stability question. We have formulated a system of 3 coupled differential equations (2 PDE's and one ODE) with appropriate initial and boundary conditions that include the defect injection reactions. This system of equations recognize the diffusion, migration and clustering of the point defects in the oxide-layer. The defect clustering is modelled using the Avrami Theorem and the area-volume laws for random agglomerates. This research is expected to provide insights into the criticality associated with the oxide-layer breakdown and the periodic, aperiodic and chaotic oscillations in the electrical current / potential which signal the breakdown of the passive oxide-layer. A large body of experimental data is waiting to be understood within a frame-work such as the present. Some initial results from the model are also reported. Introduction: Passivity refers to the natural ability possessed by metals to form a protective oxide coat on their surfaces by reacting with oxygen present in the air, at normal temperature and pressure. This protective coating, known as the passive layer or the barrier oxide layer, masks the metal from any further exposure to the environment and saves the metallic structure from corrosion. The question is how and why the barrier oxide layer which is initially compact and robust develops instability and breaks down. In the case of porous over-layers on metals much is known about the mechanisms of corrosion when such surfaces are exposed to corrosive media Passivity was first observed and reported by Michael Faraday. Several theoretical efforts proposed to model the passive layer and its stability were extensively reviewed The PDM employs concepts from the physics of point defects in solids and electrochemistry to address the passivation phenomenon by proposing 7 defect reactions To remedy this situation, Emmanuel introduced the Variant Point Defect Model (VPDM) According to the PDM as well as per the VPDM, the defect reaction 1 that occurs at the M/MO interface, involves the consumption of a metal ion vacancy (VM χ ) which was generated at the MO/electrolyte interface vide the defect reaction 4. However, the PDM does not clearly explain the defect reaction 3. On the other hand, the VPDM reaction 3' clearly explains the formation of oxygen vacancies. The vacancy in the metal (Vm) is consumed and an oxygen vacancy is created. This reaction is oxide thickening reaction since metal oxide is formed as the product. Furthermore, equation 3' gives a theoretical footing to the well-known empirical relation in corrosion science: the so-called Pilling-Bedworth (PB) ratio. The PB ratio evolves naturally upon rearranging the equation 3' after imposing volume conservation The novelty of the present paper is based upon the idea that condensation is in between oppositely charged vacancies. This constraint satisfies the Coulomb's law. The cation vacancy (VM χ-) and the anion vacancy (Vo 2+ ), produced respectively by the PDM reaction 4 at the m/f interface and by the VPDM reaction 3' at the f/s interface diffuse into the bulk of the oxide and condense to form voids. The geometry of the system modelled is in Fig. Besides the diffusion and migration terms in the PDEs we need a source/sink term to account for the change of the concentrations of the anion and cation defects in the oxide due to the formation of defect pairs which further cluster to form voids. The physical picture behind the model is that the defect pairs that are generated in the oxide film join together and grow into voids by a nucleation and growth mechanism. These voids grow from pre-existing sites -the so-called active sites in nucleation and growth theories -which may energetically favor the accumulation of defect pairs. The PDEs are: πN o R 3 (x, t)] * 4πN o R 2 (x, t)} * {(k vf C A C C - D A eff and D C eff are effective diffusion coefficients which recognize the presence of voids in the oxide film and these in fact depend on the x-and t-dependent void radius R(x, t) [See the Note at the end of the paper]. The first and second terms on the RHS are respectively the diffusion and migration terms while the third term is the source/sink term accounting for the consumption or the production of anion and cation defects at the space-time point (x,t). The third term is a product of two factors in curly brackets. The second factor is the local flux of the elementary defect pairs which go into or come out of a void of radiusR(x, t). The first factor is the area per unit volume provided by the assembly of voids present in a thin slice of the oxide film at (x, t). The actual form of this factor follows from the Avrami's theorem These boundary conditions capture the defect reactions at the two interfaces. The RHS of these BCs have the diffusion and migration fluxes while their LHS contain the rate constantsk 1 ,k 3 , k 4 and k 6 of the four defect reactions considered in the present model. These rate constants depend on the applied voltage (V), oxide film thickness (L) and the pH. Macdonald parameterized these as Where k i o the standard is rate constant of the i-th reaction. a i , b i and c i are parameters defined in Table Macdonald et al had evaluated the values of these standard rate constants from some base rate constants. However the values of the base rate constants as published by Macdonald group shows large deviations from one paper The model will be incomplete without a law for the distribution and growth of the voids that nucleate inside the oxide film when the anion and cation defects collide to form a neutral defect pair (DP). We already discussed that defects generated at the M | BL and at the BL | El interfaces move into the bulk of the oxide through diffusion and migration effects. Oppositely charged vacancies combine to form defect pairs. The DPs are captured by the nucleating sites available in the metal oxides, to form voids and the radius of the void grows. In conformity with standard nucleation theories The flux corresponding to the addition of these DPs to the void is given by the equation: This is the radial flux in or out of the void and depends on x and t through the x and t dependence of the anion and cation concentrations. By an elementary analysis [See Appendix II] one can show that the radius R(x, t) of a void at the location x follow the ordinary differential equation (ODE): Initial conditions for the PDEs and the ODE: we assume that the barrier oxide has initially some defects. These defects are either naturally generated during the oxide growth or introduced later from the environment (e.g. neutron flux in a nuclear reactor).Thus the initial conditions for the two PDEs are: C A (x, 0) = C A o and C C (x, 0) = C C o . The ODE needs one initial conditionR(x, 0) = R o . It is convenient to work with non-dimensional forms. ODE: The non-dimensional forms of initial and boundary conditions are given in the Table Boundary conditions (Non-Dimensional form) PDE equation ( In the implementation of the present model, two physical constraints need to be kept in mind: 1] The void radius should not be allowed to decrease below its initial radius to avoid unphysical negative radii and 2] The voids should not be allowed to grow beyond the spatial boundaries of the oxide film. These two constraints are incorporated in equation ( The results presented below show only typical trends and we have not yet tuned the model parameters to correspond to real material systems which is to be taken up. These figures are self-explanatory and captions are not provided. The quantities on the figure axes are non-dimensional except for the current density which is inA cm -2 . Boundary conditions (BCs):