The enigmatic coupling between electronic and magnetic phenomena was one of the riddles propelling the development of modern electromagnetism 1 . Today, the fully controlled electric field evolution of ultrashort laser pulses permits the direct and ultrafast control of electronic properties of matter and is the cornerstone of light-wave electronics Here we record an orders of magnitude faster magnetic switching with sub-femtosecond response time by initiating optical excitations with near-single-cycle laser pulses in a ferromagnetic layer stack. The unfolding dynamics are tracked in real-time by a novel attosecond time-resolved magnetic circular dichroism (atto-MCD) detection scheme revealing optically induced spin and orbital momentum transfer (OISTR) in synchrony with light field driven charge relocation 17 . In tandem with ab-initio quantum dynamical modelling, we show how this mechanism provides simultaneous control over electronic and magnetic properties that are at the heart of spintronic functionality. This first incarnation of attomagnetism observes light field coherent control of spin-dynamics in the initial nondissipative temporal regime and paves the way towards coherent spintronic applications with Petahertz clock rates. While matter reacts to optical excitations by a virtually instantaneous and direct response of electrons to the electric field oscillations, ultrafast magnetic switching is intrinsically slower due to the need of mediating processes linking optical excitations to spin dynamics Femtosecond laser pulses can modify magnetic properties at response times of several tens of femtoseconds or longer (50 -500 x 10 -15 s) A route to the novel regime of attosecond magnetism has been worked out theoretically and proposes the use of ferromagnetic alloys or layer stacks where optical excitations result in the local displacement of charge carriers between different atomic species or across layer interfaces, in analogy to shift currents discussed in compound semiconductors Critical for advancing towards attosecond magnetism is an experimental scheme with the ability to control and detect the sub-optical-cycle evolution of electronic excitations driven by ultrafast electric fields, combined with simultaneous observation of modifications of the magnetic moment of individual sample constituents. Here we achieve this by linking attosecond transient absorption detection (atto-XAS), which is sensitive to the temporal evolution of electronic excitations In our experiment, ultrafast near-infrared (NIR) few-cycle laser pulses serve as temporally well confined trigger of electronic excitations in nickel. The metal exhibits broadband resonant absorption properties (see density of states DOS , Fig. The resulting depletion of majority spins oriented by placement of the samples in a static external B-field well beyond magnetic saturation (B ext = 50 mT) leads to a macroscopic reduction of the nickel layer magnetic moment. We employ atto-MCD as illustrated in Fig. Linearly polarized attosecond pulses are generated by the same ultrafast laser pulses used to pump the electronic system of the samples via high-harmonic-generation and subsequent spectral selection In our experiment, the resulting circularly polarized attosecond pulses cover XUV photon energies around the Nickel M2,3-transition (Fig. In a transient absorption scheme, these pulses permit to measure the dynamics of photo-excited electrons and modifications of the spin structure. Final state interactions between electrons photoinjected into conduction band (CB) states and electrons promoted into the CB by an XUV photon turn the energy resolved XUV absorption into a sensitive probe for pump laser induced population transfer between electronic states around the Fermi edge of Nickel Recording the transmitted XUV spectral intensities I +/-for two opposite magnetization directions oriented along the sample surface (or equivalently for two orthogonal helicities of the attosecond pulses) yields the magnetic dichroism contrast Δ M = I + -I -(atto-MCD, see Fig. Inspection of the simultaneously recorded atto-MCD contrast Δ M (blue line) yields no observable change within the sampled time interval, indicating the conservation of magnetic moment in the ferromagnetic nickel layer for the first ~10 fs during and after electronic excitation. In striking contrast, panel a shows the magnetic moment of nickel sandwiched between platinum layers (sample II, see Methods) under otherwise identical experimental conditions to respond as fast as the electronic system to the optical excitation. Platinum surrounding nickel acts as efficient spin absorber for optical excitations transferring charge across the interfaces. In these samples, ultrafast changes of Δ M (blue line) > 40% of the initial value are immediately discernible during the light field oscillations that cause optical excitation, attesting to the dominant role of OISTR in the loss of magnetic moment. The reduction acts out with a time constant of τ coherent = 4.5 fs ( 1 e ⁄ ), concurrent with the field induced excitation and identical to the response function computed from the laser pulse duration. This synchrony is direct evidence for coherent, subfemtosecond magnetization control extended over the macroscopic dimensions probed by the attosecond pulse spot size ∅ XUV ≈ 40μm. To shed light on the coherent electronic processes in the presence of the oscillating light field and its influence on initial stages of ultrafast spin dynamics, we turn to theory. experiments reporting the decay of magnetic moment in the range of 80 -400 fs depending on system dependent quench rates We observed light-wave induced coherent transfer of spin and orbital angular momentum in space and time caused by the interplay of the few-cycle optical excitation and the spin-orbit interaction in magnetic/non-magnetic multilayers. This excursion into the unexplored territory of ultrafast (t < 20 fs) all-optical control of spin dynamics and macroscopic magnetic moments by and in synchrony with the oscillations of ultrafast electric fields opens the door to the novel regime of attosecond magnetism and is a benchmark for the design of future coherent magnetic control protocols. Our ab initio theory predicts that in alloys or suitably chosen multilayer systems the same mechanism can be tailored to cause a local and ultrafast increase in magnetic moment to sustain reversible optical switching of magnetic moments bringing spintronics to the attosecond regime. Finally, the observed sub-femtosecond magnetization control via optically induced spin transfer, promises a new class of ultrafast spintronic applications, and suggests the feasibility of light wave gated coherent spin transistors mimicking spintronic functionality orders of magnitude faster than applicable today. Theory: Computations rely on the Runge-Gross theorem where the first term is the kinetic term and responsible for the flow of current across the interface Dynamics of the nuclear degrees of freedom and radiative effects described by simultaneously time-propagating Maxwell's equations, are not included in the present work limiting the predictive power of the method to the first ~100 fs during and after pumping. Calculations of a magneto-optical function for NiPt layer (see inset Fig. states and (iii) finally the response function was calculated on top of GW-corrected Kohn-sham ground-state. This response function is calculated within linear response TD-DFT in which the excitonic effects A fully non-collinear version of TDDFT as implemented within the Elk code A regular mesh in k-space of 8 × 8 × 1 is used and a time step of ∆t = 2 as is employed for the time-propagation algorithm. To mimic experimental resolution, a Gaussian energy broadening is applied with spectral width of 0.027 eV. The laser pulse used in the present work is linearly polarized (out of plane polarization) with central frequency of 1.55 eV, full-width-at-halfmaximum duration 8fs and fluence of 5.4 mJ/cm2. The experiments are carried out with a phase-stabilized few-cycle near-infrared laser as driver (FemtoPower). It delivers pulses with 4fs, 0.5mJ at a repetition rate of 4kHz. These pulses are focused into a neon-filled ceramics target, generating high-harmonic radiation with a cut-off energy around 70 eV. A Mach-Zehnder type interferometer is used to introduce a delay between the NIR and the XUV pulses. We use a 150nm Al filter to block the driving NIR laser pulse, while providing a constant transmission at the energies of interest. Isolated attosecond pulses are achieved by spectrally filtering the cut-off regime with a Si/B4C multilayer mirror with a reflection of 15% @66eV and a full-width-at-half-maximum bandwidth of 8eV under and angle of incidence of 45°. Subsequently, the multi reflection phase-shifter changes the polarization from linear to elliptical. Ellipticity of ε>0.75 is achieved with transmittance of >25% and without introducing significant wavelength dispersion, Four Mo/B4C multilayer mirrors are mounted under an angle of 78° with respect to the surface normal, a setting optimized for high broadband transmission and maximized ellipticity. To maximize the atto-MCD contrast while maintaining sufficient XUV transmission the samples are mounted under an angle of ~35° between the propagation direction of the laser and the surface normal. The surface normal and the magnetization direction of the sample span a plane parallel to the propagation direction of the laser field. We use a gold coated grating with 2105 lines/mm in reflection (Jobin-Yvon) with a 200 μm entrance slit as a spectrometer. For every delay step, we measured the transmitted spectrum for both magnetization directions of the sample and then scanned the delay over the region of interested. To check and compensate for long timescale drifts in the XUV spectrum we took spectra of the transmitted XUV in the absence of NIR laser light before and after every scan. to ensures that no irreversible changes were done to the multilayer or the supporting polycrystalline Silicon substrate. Typical integration times were on the order of 10-15s for every spectrum, leading to a measurement duration of 30-60 minutes. We observe the OISTR effect for pump light intensities ranging between I NIR = 1.5 -4 × 10 12 W cm 2 ⁄ . At lower intensities, only the slow demagnetization component depicted in Fig. For the energy calibration of our spectrum we used the pronounced aluminum L2,3-edges at 72.7 eV and the Nickel M3-edge at 66.2 eV. The grating equation n * λ = d * (sin θ i -sin θ f ) gives a relation between the position of a spectral feature on the XUV sensitive camera (Princeton Instrument PIXIS) and the photon energy. We checked for the influence of the non-homogeneous diffraction and reflection efficiency of the grating and found it to be negligible within the range of photon energies relevant in this study. We applied an equal weight sliding average to the spectrograms along the energy (ΔE = 50 meV) as well as along the delay dimension (Δt = 0.5 fs). We determine the magnetic dichroism contrast according to Δ M = I + -I -. Application of alternative definitions of the contrast or computing the magnetic dichroism asymmetry has no influence on the transient signals. A number of Ni and Ni/Pt multilayer films were grown on Si membranes and optimized to grow and Glan-laser prisms in longitudinal geometry. Measurements on both, the frame and the samples membrane window, yield similar ferromagnetic properties. For both types of samples, we found coercive fields of a few mT and a remanence around 60-70% of the saturation magnetization. MOKE measurements confirm that the Ni seed layer does not magnetize at room temperature and thus the layer does not affect the magnetic moment of the sample. The recorded MOKE signal also confirms that the ferromagnetic properties of the pure Ni layer does not suffer from an assumed oxidic passivation of the sample surface. which represents the unperturbed system, shortly after its arrival (t2) and hundreds of femtoseconds after excitation (t3). In the multilayer (as opposed to bulk nickel) the optical excitation causes a coherent trans-interface charge current driven by the few-cycle light pulse, associated with which is the synchronous transfer of spin into the heavy metal (panel c), where the spin is subjected to the strong spin-orbit coupling of the heavy metal ad-layer (panel d). 