Titan's icy shell and subsurface ocean may be affected by any impurities such as methanol • We measure the freezing point of methanol/water solutions as a function of pressure • Previous estimates may have underestimated the effectiveness of methanol as an antifreeze A number of icy satellites likely contain subsurface oceans Detailed models of the interior of Titan rely on the properties of aqueous solutions at the low temperatures and high pressures found within such an ocean, and such properties would be affected by the presence of impurities. Important impurities likely include ammonia, but methanol may also be present As a potent antifreeze compound, small concentrations of methanol could play an important role in the formation and development of the subsurface ocean On Enceladus, the observations of water-rich plumes As with Titan, any subsurface ocean would likely contain impurities, such as ammonia and methanol More generally, thermodynamic models of the interiors of icy moons can benefit from an improved understanding of how the addition of small amounts of methanol will change the temperature and pressure-dependent properties of ice In this work, we present results for the liquidus temperature for methanol concentrations between 5 wt.% and 75 wt.%, for pressures from 5 MPa to 350 MPa. We find that interpolation underestimates the effect of small concentrations of methanol on the freezing point. The phase diagram for methanol/water solutions at atmospheric pressure is shown in Fig. Sample solutions were made from HPLC-grade methanol (EMD Chemicals, 99.8%) and HPLC-grade filtered water (Fisher Scientific). Solutions of approximately 4.9, 9.9, 33.8, and 75 wt.% methanol were studied. (All concentrations are methanol mass divided by total solution mass.) Since methanol is highly hygroscopic, the concentration would change somewhat during the extensive filling and leak-testing process. The beaker of solution was exposed to the atmosphere for periods of hours, and residual water from flushing and cleaning the connecting tubing could not be completely eliminated. In addition, when leak-testing with partially frozen Ice Ih samples, any leaked fluid would be enriched in methanol. The net effect could be a significant change, on the order of 4%. Accordingly, in each case, once the system was filled and sealed, and leak testing was completed, the concentration of the sample was estimated by extrapolating the low-pressure liquidus temperature to 1 atmosphere, and comparing it with the data in Fig. The range of concentrations was chosen to explore both the low-concentration regime where the initial solid formed is ice Ih, and the high-concentration regime where the initial solid formed is methanol monohydrate. The former is relevant for the proposed primordial bulk composition of Titan's ocean The range of pressures was limited by the maximum pressure able to be maintained with the apparatus, generally about 350 MPa. For models of Titan that include an outer Ice Ih shell roughly 100 km thick and a subsurface ocean atop an inner high-pressure Ice V or Ice VI layer, such as The apparatus and technique are similar to those described in previous papers for magnesium sulfate and ammonia-water mixtures Approximately 1 mL of sample is loaded into a pressure cell that is placed in a copper container and immersed in an insulated, temperature-controlled ethanol/water bath. The pressure cell is made from a 316 stainless steel block with four ports, known as a cross (High Pressure Equipment Company #60-HF6). Two opposing ports contain replaceable plugs that have sapphire windows sealed in them with epoxy. The third port contains a plug in which a silicon diode thermometer is installed. The fourth port connects the cell to the pressure system. Pressure is applied through a pump with ethylene glycol as the pump fluid. Pressure is measured with two Heise gauges: an analog pressure gauge valid for all pressures studied, and a more sensitive digital pressure gauge for pressures below 200 MPa. The sample in the pressure cell is separated from the ethylene glycol pump fluid by a vertical U-tube filled with mercury. A steel capillary tube of constant cross section forms one arm of the U-tube. A small Alnico magnet is placed in the capillary on the interface between the pump fluid and the mercury, and the height of that magnet is measured by a transducer. Changes in the transducer voltage are approximately proportional to changes in sample volume. As long as the sample is mostly liquid, this system allows simultaneous measurements of temperature, pressure, and volume of the sample. The imaging system consists of a lamp that shines light through an infrared filter and optical fiber that directs the beam horizontally through the sample cell. The infrared filter is used to minimize heating of the sample by the light source. After passing through the cell, the beam is reflected by a 45 • mirror upward through a matched pair of lenses to a long working distance optical microscope objective coupled to a Pulnix digital camera. The camera obtains images of a vertical cross-section of the sample, with 1392 × 1040 pixels and an overall resolution of about 1.7 μm/pixel. The gap between the sapphire windows is approximately 1 mm. Although the camera's field of view does not cover the entire system, we typically observed dissolving or growing crystals corresponding to changes in temperature, pressure, and volume, indicating that the crystal images reflect the phase transitions within the sample. For runs above a temperature of 210 K, the temperature is controlled by a immersion cooler in the ethanol/water bath. The cooling and warming rates are controlled by computer. In these viscous solutions, it is important to allow sufficient time for the system to approach thermodynamic equilibrium. Typically, the temperature was increased at a rate of 0.005 K/minute, or even more slowly, to ensure that the system was near thermodynamic equilibrium. For colder temperatures (such as were needed for the 75 wt.% runs), liquid nitrogen was used to cool the system, and the system warmed up as the nitrogen evaporated. The warming rates in those cases were typically closer to 0.1 K/minute. The results for a run with a 4.9 wt.% solution at a nominal pressure of 263 MPa are shown in Fig. The liquidus temperature was then estimated by finding the intersection of straight lines fitted to the end of the melting curve (just before point d) and the pure liquid warming curve (after point d). For sufficiently slow warming, the transition was fairly sharp and the uncertainties in the liquidus temperature were typically less than ±0.2 K. For transition temperatures below about 210 K, where liquid nitrogen was used for cooling and the warming rates were closer to 0.1 K/min, the transitions were more rounded and the uncertainties were closer to ±1.0 K. Uncertainties in pressure were typically less than ±0.3 MPa for runs below 200 MPa, and about ±1 MPa for runs above 200 MPa, due to the different pressure gauges used. An image of crystals formed at 212.8 MPa, presumably Ice-III, is shown in Fig. The resulting liquidus temperatures for two low-concentration samples (4.9 wt.% and 9.9 wt.%) are shown in Fig. In the region between 200 MPa and 350 MPa, we observed three different states, all for the same 4.9 wt.% sample. In one run at 244 MPa, the volume increased upon freezing, and the ice crystals were less dense than the surrounding fluid. The liquidus point for that sample was approximately 243 K, clearly consistent with a metastable continuation of the Ice-Ih regime curve. We also observed two different states where the volume decreased upon freezing, and the ice crystals were more dense than the surrounding fluid. These states fall on two distinct curves in Fig. The two states also differed in the experimental protocol necessary for their formation. For pressures below about 240 MPa, the system would spontaneously freeze upon supercooling into either Ice-Ih or Ice-III (as in Fig. To fit the data, we considered a number of different candidate functional forms. In particular, we tried functions of the form used by where the numerical values of the parameters for pure ice are given in However, our data do not cover a wide enough range of temperatures to constrain the parameters, particularly in the Ice III regime, especially since the the values for p 0 and T 0 are not independently known. We also considered the Simon-Glatzel equation where ∆p = pp 0 . This is similar to including a single term from Eq. 1, but with an additional exponential decay term a 3 . However, that term did not significantly improve the quality of the fit, and the values for a 3 were consistent with zero. We also considered other forms sometimes used for the melting of pure substances, such as that recommended by The best descriptions of the data were ultimately obtained with simple polynomial fits of the form The p 0 term was arbitrarily fixed at a convenient pressure so that the uncertainties more accurately reflected the fit over the pressure range of interest. The coefficients for the curves in Fig. Table Conc. Regime T Range (K) p 0 (MPa) The results for two additional samples, at 33.8 and 75 wt.%, are included in Fig. Methanol is a potentially important antifreeze. Specifically, we find that the freezing point depression due to the addition of methanol is about 3.1 K for a concentration of 4.9 wt.%, 5.8 K for 9.9 wt.%, and grows to about 31 K for a concentration of 33.8 wt.%. For the low concentrations of planetary relevance (< 10 wt.%), we find the freezing point depression f z(x) (in Kelvin) due to the addition of methanol is roughly independent of pressure, at (4) In contrast, a linear interpolation between the Ice-Ih and pure methanol curves, as was used in In their modeling of Titan's primordial ocean, More generally, models of the interiors of Titan, Enceladus, and other bodies with subsurface oceans can benefit from more information about the thermodynamic behaviors of aqueous solutions at the relevant temperatures and pressures. For Titan and Enceladus, methanol is one reasonable impurity to include in such models. For other outer solar system bodies and even exoplanets, incorporation of methanol may similarly lead to a subsurface ocean being maintained where a pure water ocean might completely freeze. Since many of the of thermodynamic and rheological properties of an ocean and icy shell are strongly