The transition metal dichalcogenide 1T -TiSe2 is a quasi-two-dimensional layered material with a phase transition towards a commensurate charge density wave (CDW) at a critical temperature Tc ≈ 200K. The relationship between the origin of the CDW instability and the semimetallic or semiconducting character of the normal state, i.e., with the non-reconstructed Fermi surface topology, remains elusive. By combining angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we investigate 1T -TiSe2-xSx single crystals. Using STM, we first show that the long-range phase coherent CDW state is stable against S substitutions with concentrations at least up to x = 0.34. The ARPES measurements then reveal a slow but continuous decrease of the overlap between the electron and hole (e-h) bands of the semimetallic normal-state well reproduced by DFT and related to slight reductions of both the CDW order parameter and Tc. Our DFT calculations further predict a semimetal-tosemiconductor transition of the normal state at a higher critical S concentration of xc=0.9 ±0.1, that coincides with a melted CDW state in TiSeS as measured with STM. Finally, we rationalize the x-dependence of the e-h band overlap in terms of isovalent substitution-induced competing chemical pressure and charge localization effects. Our study highlights the key role of the e-h band overlap for the CDW instability. Quasi-two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are layered compounds exhibiting a wide variety of interesting electronic properties In contrast to 1T -TiSe 2 , no phase transition has been reported in 1T -TiS 2 Here, we re-investigate the CDW melting in 1T -TiSe 2-x S x single crystals by combining ARPES, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, thereby giving a direct view of both real-space and electronic band structures and characterizing the crystals extremely well with respect to native defects and S concentrations. We demonstrate that in contrast to the electron-donors Ti and Cu intercalants that shift the 1T -TiSe 2 chemical potential The 1T -TiSe 2-x S x single crystals were grown by iodine vapor transport and contain less than 0.2% of intercalated Ti as measured by STM. Constant current STM images were recorded at 4.5 K with a Omicron lowtemperature (LT)-STM in constant current mode by applying a bias voltage V bias to the sample. The base pressure was better than 5 × 10 -11 mbar. The temperaturedependent ARPES study was carried out using a Scienta DA30 photoelectron analyzer and monochromatized He-I radiation as exciting source (hν=21.22 eV, SPECS UVLS with TMM 304 monochromator). The total energy resolution was of the order of 12 meV and the sample temperatures were deduced from fits of the Fermi edge spectra on the Cu sample holder. DFT model calculations were performed using the plane-wave pseudopotential code VASP In order to compute the electronic band structures measured in ARPES, DFT calculations were done using the WIEN2K package Let us now focus on the x-dependence of the 1T -TiSe 2 band structure. The 1T -TiSe 2 low-energy electronic states consist of a Se 4p hole-pocket and Ti 3d electron-pockets at the Γ and three-equivalent L points of the three-dimensional (3D) Brillouin zone (BZ) [see Fig. More precisely, the experimental Γ-M band gap is found to linearly increase with x [A-L exp. on Fig. At low temperature, in the CDW phase, the Γ and L points are connected by the new reciprocal lattice vectors corresponding to the doubling of the lattice periodicity and large band renormalizations at high-symmetry points of the BZ as well as a large transfer of spectral weight to backfolded bands appear in ARPES. The p-d hybridization is strongly orbital and k z -dependent ARPES spectra at Γ in the CDW phase are displayed on Fig The detailed T -evolution of the Ti 3d and backfolded Se 4p bands extrema of our three 1T -TiSe 2-x S x crystals are indicated Fig. We indeed see the previously discussed ∆μ(T ) on the Ti 3d bands, and the downward shift of the Se 4p backfolded bands accompanied by continuous increases of their spectral weight. The green curves are EDCs obtained at the maximum temperature at which the backfolding spectral weight can be straightforwardly identified, i.e., approximatively at the critical CDW temperatures [the corresponding Se 4p backfolded band positions are indicated by the green arrows on (g)-(i)]. Within a BCS-like approach, the shift of the backfolded band at L (corrected by ∆μ(T )) relates to the order parameter ∆ describing the coupling strength between the valence band at Γ and three symmetry equivalent conduction bands at L As a confirmation, we show, on Fig. At this stage, we have shown that slight S substitutions induce a slow but continuous increase (decrease) of the e-h band gap (overlap) of the semimetallic normalstate, well reproduced by DFT and that the CDW melts at a rather high x c . We now show that the reductions of both the CDW order parameter ∆ and T c are intimately related to the e-h band gap opening. Figure At last, our DFT analysis reveals the underlying mechanisms responsible for the e-h band gap opening and the CDW melting. We first mimic chemical pressure effects introduced by isovalent S substitutions by calculating the electronic band structures of 1T -TiSe 2 for couples of a and c lattice parameters corresponding to the experimental values of Ref. In summary, we have investigated the CDW melting in well characterized 1T -TiSe 2-x S x single crystals by means of ARPES, STM, and DFT calculations. We have demonstrated that isovalent S-substitutions reduce the e-h band overlap in the normal state and do not affect the long-range phase coherent CDW state as long as the 1T -TiSe 2 normal state remains semimetallic. The CDW has been experimentally found to be melted at x ∼1 in good agreement with the DFT-predicted semimetalto-semiconductor transition. Our DFT analysis has revealed that whereas the isovalent S substitution induces an increase of the overlap of the Ti 3d electron and the Se 4p hole bands by positive chemical pressure, charge localization effects lead to a reduced p-d hybridization and dominates the e-h band gap opening. The mechanism of the CDW melting in 1T -TiSe 2-x S x therefore indicates that only a semimetallic normal-state Fermi surface is unstable towards the 2 × 2 × 2 CDW phase. This project was supported by the Fonds National Suisse pour la Recherche Scientifique through Div. II. E. Razzoli acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) Grant No. P300P2-164649. Skillful technical assistance was provided by F. Bourqui, B. Hediger and O. Raetzo.