We report the optimized conditions for growing the high quality single crystals of candidate quantum spin-ice Pr2Hf2O7 using the optical floating-zone method. Large single crystals of Pr2Hf2O7 have been grown under different growth conditions using a four-mirror type optical floating-zone furnace and their microscopic structural differences have been probed by high-resolution synchrotron x-ray diffraction (SXRD). The SXRD data reveal that the crystals grown under flowing argon (∼ 2 L/h) atmosphere with slightly off-stoichiometric (optimized) starting composition yields the highest quality crystals. The magnetic susceptibility, isothermal magnetization and heat capacity data of optimally grown crystals are presented. I. The 227 rare earth pyrochlores have been a topic of interest owing to their exotic properties, for example Dy 2 Ti 2 O 7 and Ho 2 Ti 2 O 7 present spin-ice behavior for which magnetic monopoles are believed to be the fundamental excitations In our efforts to extend work on rare earth pyrochlores, we recently started working on hafnate pyrochlores Very recently the hafnate pyrochlore Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 was identified to be a potential candidate quantum spin-ice system In order to probe and understand the intrinsic properties of Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 in more detail it is highly desired to have a high quality single crystal of this compound. Because of the higher melting point of hafnate pyrochlores (compared to titanate pyrochlores) the synthesis of large single crystals of Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 using optical floating-zone method turns out to be somewhat tricky. While one can grow titanate pyrochlores in air at ambient pressure, the same recipe does not work for Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 which tends to decompose to Pr 6 O 11 and HfO 2 . As such one needs to grow Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 under a pressurized/argon atmosphere. Very recently Ciomaga Hatnean et al. Single crystal growth of Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 was carried out by the Floating-zone technique using a four-mirror type high-temperature optical floating zone furnace (Crystal Systems corp. FZ-T-12000-X-VII-VPO-PC) equipped with four 3 kW Xenon arc lamps at the Core Lab for Quantum Materials, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin (HZB). Crystals were grown under high purity argon atmosphere with a growth rate of 1-5 mm/h. The average power required for the growth was 36 % of lamp power (four 3 kW lamps). During the growth the seed and feed rods were counter-rotated at 5 and 20 rpm, respectively. The seed and feed rods were prepared from high purity materials: Pr 6 O 11 (99.99%, Alfa Aesar) and HfO 2 (99.95%, Alfa Aesar) mixed and ground thoroughly and fired at 1300 • C for 15 h, reground and fired again at 1300 • C for 24 h, then powdered and pressed hydrostatically in the form of cylindrical rod. The cylindical rods were then sintered for 60 h at 1500 • C. The sintered rods were typically about 5 mm in diameter and 8-10 cm in length. All grindings and heat treatments were done in air. For subsequent growths we used single crystals from previous growths as seed crystals to avoid random nu-cleation and to obtain one large single crystal. Laue diffraction was used to check the quality of the single crystals and orient along specific crystallographic direction. The oriented crystal was then cut into small pieces for magnetic measurements. The crystal quality was also examined by polarized optical microscopy. The chemical composition of crystals were checked by energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis using a scanning electron microscope. Further, the quality of the single crystals were probed by high-resolution synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements on crushed crystals performed on the MS-beamline The dc magnetic susceptibility χ versus temperature T and isothermal magnetization M versus magnetic field H measurements were performed using a superconducting quantum interference device vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM, Quantum Design, Inc.) and VSM option of a physical properties measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design, Inc.) at Core Lab for Quantum Materials, HZB. The heat capacity C p (T ) was measured by the adiabatic-relaxation technique using the heat capacity option of PPMS at Core Lab for Quantum Materials, HZB. The optimization of the crystal growth of Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 was done by varying the growth conditions in several subsequent growths. According to the phase diagram of Pr 2 O 3 -HfO 2 system [20, 21] Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 melts incongruently around 2420 • C in vacuum. However, the melting behavior in other atmospheric environments remains unclear. To check the melting behavior of the material in air, in the first growth attempt we used a feed-rod having stoichiometric composition and an ambient air atmosphere. During the growth we observed evaporation of large quantity of black fumes. The black evaporated powders condensed on the inner surface of the quartz tube and made the growth impossible to continue after a while. The deposit inside the quartz tube was found to be Pr 6 O 11 , which suggests that Pr 3+ is oxidizing to higher oxidation state. This oxidizing behavior suggests that air does not serve as a good atmosphere, thus urging for an inert atmosphere to be more suitable for the growth. From this growth attempt we could also assume that Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 melts incongruently in air atmosphere. Therefore crystal growth using a self-flux, that can reduce the melting temperature, was thought be more suitable. In our second attempt the growth was done by the traveling solvent floating zone technique, using a solvent with excess Pr 2 O 3 (60 mol% Pr 2 O 3 and 40 mol% Hf 2 O 4 ). With excess Pr 2 O 3 the eutectic melting point is lowered which allows growth at a relatively lower temperature. In order to compensate for the loss due to evaporation, we used a feed rod with 3% excess Pr 2 O 3 (3% excess Pr 6 O 11 was added to the starting composition of feed rod). The growth atmosphere was changed to argon in order to prevent Pr 2 O 3 from oxidizing to higher oxidized state. Crystal growth was done at a rate of 1.2 mm/h. Under these conditions we observed significant reduction in evaporation during growth. Single crystal of Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 could be grown by this solvent floating zone growth process, though the crystal was not of high quality. Further, the visual observation of the melting behavior of the feed-rod suggested that the compound possibly melts congruently in Ar atmosphere. That the Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 may be congruently melting in Ar atmosphere, prompted us to try floating zone growths (without traveling solvent) so that the growth rate can be increased, and large crystals can be grown in a relatively shorter time. Indeed, in Ar atmosphere we could successfully grow large single crystals by the floating zone method using the feed rods prepared from both stoichiometric and off-stoichiometric starting compositions. Subsequently, the crystals were grown under flowing argon atmosphere (2 L/h) by the floating zone technique. Crystal growths were done at a relatively higher speed of 5 mm/h. Large single crystals of about 5 mm in diameter and 4-8 cm in lengths could be successfully grown by this process. We noticed that the appearance of the crystal depends on the stoichiometry of the starting material. We will be focussing here mainly on two crystals, one grown with a stoichiometric feed rod (crystal X1), and the other grown (optimally) with an offstoichiometric feed rod (crystal X2). The crystal X1 grown with stoichiometric feed rod (growth rate 5 mm/h, Ar amosphere) was bottle green in color [Fig. Growth conditions for crystal X2 was found to be optimum in terms of crystal quality and stoichiometry. The as-grown crystal X1 and a piece of crystal X2 are shown in Fig. Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 forms in face-centered cubic (space group F d 3m) pyrochlore structure The room temperature high-resolution synchrotron XRD pattern for powdered Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 single crystal X2 is shown in Fig. The microscopic differences in the SXRD patterns of the single crystals X1 and X2 are compared in Fig. The isothermal magnetization M (H) data of single crystal Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 are shown in Fig. [100], H [110] and H [111] at T = 1.8 K, 5 K, 10 K and 20 K. It is seen that the M (H) isotherms for all three directions of H become nonlinear at lower temperatures reflecting the saturation tendency of magnetization in a mean-field We note that the magnetic susceptibility, isothermal magnetization and heat capacity measurements on crystal X1 and X2 did not reveal any noticeable difference within the accuracy of instruments used. The bulk properties of optimized crystal X2 are consistent with those of polycrystalline sample We have successfully grown the large single crystals of candidate quantum spin-ice Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 using optical floating-zone method and optimized the growth conditions. Further, the microscopic structural differences of crystals grown under different conditions were probed by the high-resolution synchrotron x-ray diffraction which revealed that the crystal grown under the optimized condition is free from sub-lattice formation or site mixing. The best crystal was obtained with starting material having 3% excess Pr 6 O 11 , grown at a growth rate of 5 mm/hour under flowing argon atmosphere (∼ 2 L/h). As the presence of distribution of lattice parameters can affect the quantum spin ice physics, the optimally grown crystals should provide a scope for further study of the intrinsic properties of quantum spin-ice candidate Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 . The optimally grown crystal was investigated by the magnetic susceptibility, isothermal magnetization and heat capacity measurements. The χ(T ) and M (H) data confirm the Ising anisotropy and presence of weak non-Ising contribution as previously observed for polycrystalline Pr 2 Hf 2 O 7 .