The isotropic, non-magnetic doped BaBiO3 superconductors maintain some similarities to high-Tc cuprates, while also providing a cleaner system for isolating charge density wave (CDW) physics that commonly competes with superconductivity. Artificial layered superlattices offer the possibility of engineering the interaction between superconductivity and CDW. Here we stabilize a low temperature, fluctuating short range CDW order by using artificially layered epitaxial (BaPbO3)3m/(BaBiO3)m (m = 1-10 unit cells) superlattices that is not present in the optimally doped BaPb0.75Bi0.25O3 alloy with the same overall chemical formula. Charge transfer from BaBiO3 to BaPbO3 effectively dopes the former and suppresses the long range CDW, however as the short range CDW fluctuations strengthens at low temperatures charge appears to localize and superconductivity is weakened. The monolayer structural control demonstrated here provides compelling implications to access controllable, local density-wave orders absent in bulk alloys and manipulate phase competition in unconventional superconductors. The properties of quantum materials are often determined by multiple distinct order parameters that represent the importance of coupled and competing phases. The high-Tc cuprates exhibit a rich phase diagram with magnetic and electronic phases that are commonly thought to compete with the emergence of superconductivity The CDW and monoclinic distortion in BBO are similar to those found in the rare-earth nickelates We grew BPO3m/BBOm superlattices using 90° off-axis magnetron sputtering, with the BPO:BBO fixed at 3:1, the optimal doping in the random alloy system. The total sample thickness is fixed at ~85 nm to avoid thickness related disorder effects when characterizing superconductivity Due to the extreme electron beam sensitivity of BBO materials, atomic-resolution transmission electron microscopy quickly degraded the films making reliable chemical mapping challenging (see supplemental information and ref. (1) It exhibits remarkably strong temperature dependence. The m=3 sample (black line) in (2) The broad, Raman spectral shape in Fig. Therefore, in the absence of the sharp CDW peak from the long-range order, these distinct monolayer number m and temperature dependences of the residual resonances provide a compelling evidence for the existence of short-range CDW correlations for samples showing superconductivity. This local electronic order strongly renormalizes the breathing mode that gives rise to the persisting spectral weight with a strong temperature dependence absent in bulk single crystal BPBO (3) The strong m dependence of the residual spectral weight further demonstrates the monolayer thickness control of CDW fluctuations in our superlattice systems. This is clearly seen in Fig. (blue) and BPBO bulk alloy (green) samples. Prior studies of bulk single crystals related optical spectra and pseudogap formation with a spatially-temporally fluctuating short-range CDW order of a few unit cells in BiO6 octahedra on the Bi-rich, underdoped side of the BPBO phase diagram This work demonstrates structural and electronic engineering of a model system BPO3m/BBOm at the monolayer limit for understanding CDW that competes with superconductivity. The design and discovery of previously-unestablished superlattices allow the manipulation of the CDW and its fluctuations by controlling charge transfer. This hints additional quantum control of hidden phases by combining with other complementary tuning methods 