Pure Topological Insulating materials preserve a unique electronic state comprising of bulk insulating gap and conducting surface states. Here we use bulk Bi2Se3 single crystals possessing Se vacancy defects as a prototype topological insulator (TI) material for exploring the effect of non-magnetic disorder on the conducting properties of TI. We employ a sensitive, noncontact mutual inductance based technique for measuring the surface and bulk contribution to electrical conductivity in the TI. We discern the bulk and surface contributions by observing that predominant surface electrical conduction shows linear frequency dependence of the pickup signal while bulk conductivity gives rise to quadratic frequency dependence. We also observe an algebraic temperature dependent surface conductivity and an activated form of bulk electrical conductivity. Using the above we uncover an interplay between surface and bulk contribution to electrical conductivity in the TI as a function of temperature. In the Bi2Se3 crystals the transformation from surface to bulk dominated electrical transport is found to occur close to a temperature of 70 K. This temperature matches well with our results from activated bulk electrical transport results which shows an activation energy scale  which is in the meV range. The gap  is much less than the bulk band gap in Bi2Se3 which we argue is associated with defect states in the TI material. To understand our results, we propose a model of TI comprising of an inhomogeneous low electrically conducting medium (bulk) which is sandwiched between thin two high electrically conducting sheets (surface). The inhomogeneous TI state we argue is generated by Selenium vacancies defects in Bi2Se3, which is responsible for producing an interplay between bulk and surface conductivity. In recent times, new materials like three dimensional (3D) topological insulator, exhibit topologically protected bulk gapped state enclosed by conducting surface state Herein no continuous variation of the lattice parameter can change the unique character of the electronic states in these materials. These gapless surface states in a topological insulator (TI) exhibit Dirac-like linear energy -momentum dispersion To study the effect of disorder on TI, the popular Bi2Se3 crystals are a suitable choice, as they intrinsically possess Se vacancies which are a nature source of disorder in this material. The TI nature of Bi2Se3 has been identified through magneto-transport studies which confirm the presence of conducting surface states through the observation of SdH oscillations and weak anti-localization effects Hence, due to the limitations of the transport studies mentioned above, while the presence of disorder like Se vacancies seem to weaken the TI state, the details of how exactly the surface and bulk conductivities are affected by disorder and modified by Se vacancies, still remains unclear. Furthermore, studies have shown that due to degradation of surface of Bi2Se3, for example due to oxidation of the surfaces, causes band bending of the surface states extending upto 20 nm into the bulk Experimental details: Transport measurement of Bi2Se3 single crystals. For our study we use single crystals of Bi2Se3 prepared by slow cooling stoichiometric melts of high purity bismuth (Bi) and selenium (Se) powders [for details see refs. Note that as transport measurements involves making of electrical contacts on the sample which introduce irreversible physical changes in the sample, hence for our non contact measurements (which is the main topic of our manuscript) and transport measurements (here and refs. As mentioned earlier the appearance of finite bulk conductivity in Bi2Se3 sample with Se vacancies mixes the surface and bulk contributions to electrical conductivity making it difficult to discern the individual contributions. In the next section, we discuss a non-contact measurement technique which allows us to distinguish between the two contributions to electrical conductivity. The data is fitted to, Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) equation is used to fit the ΔRxx data at 4.2 K which is shown by black solid line. For fitting to the magneto-resistance data in Fig. To characterize the surface and bulk states of TI we use a modified non-contact two coil mutual inductance measurement technique. The two coil mutual inductance technique is well-established experimentally Furthermore, we would like to emphasize that for all our measurements we subtract the background voltage at all temperature and frequencies by measuring the pickup signal without a sample and with only the Cu sheet with a hole placed between the coils. We test the performance of the setup using a superconducting sample as its shielding response is well known. Tc estimated from the peak position in V ′′ is 24.7 K which compares well with Tc reported for this stoichiometry and V ′′ signal (viz., the dissipation response), suggests that these feature cannot be related to features associated with the background signal (when no sample is present and only the Cu sheet with hole is present). The behavior of the background signal of the two coil setup (with only the Cu sheet placed between the hole) is simulated and pickup voltage signal due to solid Cu sheet is shown in the supplementary information (see S3 section in supplementary information of Ref. [46]). The close match between the experimentally measured background signal with the simulated data (S3 section in supplementary information of Ref. Figure , as for these TI crystals, . In the figure One can identify two regimes of behavior in V(f), namely, one in the low frequency regime where V(f)  f 2 (see red dotted line through the data), and the other in the higher frequency regime where, (where α = 0.9  0.05 ) (see black solid line to the data). The V(T) data in Fig. where C is related to static disorder scattering and D to electron-phonon coupling strength. While above 70 K to 170 K the data fits We would like to mention that the pickup signal, at low f is lesser than that at 70 kHz in a frequency dependent measurement or it is lesser at low T compared to that above 300 K in a T dependent measurement. Therefore, while measuring the pickup signal as a function of f or T one can balance out the signal above, 70 kHz or 300 K, to note the negative sign of the pickup signal corresponding to the diamagnetic nature of Bi2Se3. To understand the above frequency dependence of the pickup voltage, we recall that AC magnetic field produced from the excitation current in the primary induces screening currents extending upto different depths inside the conducting TI sample (skin depth). The magnetic field generated from the sample by these induced screening currents couple with the pickup coils to induce a pickup voltage. It is known that the depth upto which the currents are induced in the sample depends on the frequency of AC field. At low frequencies as the AC excitation penetrates deeper into the bulk of the sample (due to large skin depth), hence the bulk properties in the TI sample At low T our transport measurements in Fig. Another possible explanation to the observed frequency dependence is given as follows: The pickup voltage develops due to the current induced in the sample. These induced currents depend on the electrical conductivity of the sample. Based on the above discussion the electrical conductivity of the TI has two contributions . The pickup voltage is given by (see S9 section in supplementary information of Ref. [46] for detailed calculation) where ξ(r, z) is a geometric factor which is a function of the pickup coil radius (r), the height between the two coils (z),  is the magnetic flux passing through the sample, τ is scattering time scale and 2 f . Terahertz spectroscopy measurements [46] for details). When bulk state dominates in conduction, we use a limit f << 1. Under this assumption Eq. (1) gives us If the surface state start to dominate in conduction, using the limit fτ >> 1, Eq. ( . This form of temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity has been reported for surface conducting state in TI , sets in above 40 K (i.e., D >> C). Our, and other investigations Based on our above discussions, in Fig. We would like to reiterate here that surface and bulk, both conductivities contribute to the pickup voltage, as the induced currents are generated in both surface and bulk of the sample. The region III and region IV (Fig. , where α ~1 when T is in region IV. This suggest the re-emergence of significant surface contributions to conductivity along with bulk. Here within the temperature window III the bulk contribution to conductivity dominates over the surface contribution, while in region IV it is vice versa. We simulate the electromagnetic response of this topological insulator with defects using COMSOL multi-physics software. In Fig. [46]). We use an AC excitation current of I = 150 mA (similar to our experiment). First, the rate of change of induced flux ( ) in the pickup coil is calculated from which the mutual inductance (real and imaginary components) M ′ and M ′′ are calculated (analog to our experiments, The modelled TI has crystal thickness and surface area similar to S20 sample, with a thickness of 5 nm for the metallic high conducting sheets and 20 m for the bulk insulating layer. The above is based on estimates indicating the thickness of conducting surface in Bi2Se3 is between 5 to 10 nm At higher f where the M ′ is weakly dependent on f, corresponds to V(f)  f. Figure , where ns is the surface carrier density, we get ns = (2.268 ± 0.012) cm -2 , which compares well with earlier estimates in this batch of samples While the above observations are consistent with our results based on pickup coil measurements, however our technique is applicable over a wider T range. A bulk gap in Bi2Se3 of 0.3 eV suggests that thermally activated conductivity should be seen at significantly elevated temperatures, but we see activated conductivity from T ~ 70 K onwards (viz., the region III in Fig. These defects states add excess electrons in the bulk due to which the conductivity of the bulk interplay between bulk and surface conductivity, leading to an inhomogeneous TI state in Bi2Se3.Based on the above discussion, we propose that in region III of Fig. In conclusion, our non-contact two coil mutual inductance measurements in Bi2Se3 single crystals suggest that the surface states are coupled to bulk state with filamentary high conducting structures. The inhomogeneous state gets precipitated in the bulk of the TI only above the threshold temperature, which is associated with the activation of charge between the surface and bulk. This leads to an interplay between bulk and surface dominated transport regimes at different T, which is produced as a result of disorder introduced in the system. While material disorder leads to interplay between bulk and surface conductivity in a TI material, it is also responsible for resurfacing of the surface conductivity at high temperature which is a potentially feature useful for applications. In our two coil mutual setup, both coils are dipole coils. The most important point in coil design is that the winding of the excitation and pickup coils should be as close as possible. The excitation coil has four layers and each layer have 36 turns while pickup coil has four layers having 32 turns. We have also verified our experimental data with simulation using a simple model. The simulation part has been performed using Comsol multiphysics software (AC-DC module). The simulation is done by the solving the standard Maxwell EM equations: where ω is the angular frequency of the applied AC signal, A is the magnetic vector potential, σ is the conductivity of the material, v is the velocity of the charge particle, N is the number of turns, Rcoil is the resistance of the coil, Je is the current density and Vcoil is the applied AC voltage in the coil. Clearly the close match between the experimental data and the calculations shows the validity of not only the equations we have used for analyzing our problem but also the accuracy of the solutions given by Comsol. Figure (b) displays the pickup voltage as function of temperature when a solid Cu plate (without a hole, thickness 2 mm) is placed between the coil. The pickup voltage from Copper increases linearly with T. It can be clearly seen that the behavior of the pickup signal from Cu is completely different from that of the BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 superconducting sample and the Bi2Se3 TI sample which are discussed in the main paper. In our measurements we have infact used a Copper sheet with a hole in it over which the sample is placed. This would further reduce the amount of Copper within the pickup area of the coil. From here it is clear that the presence of Copper between the coil doesn't affect the signal measured from samples we are investigating. , as for these TI crystals, the . One can identify two regimes of behavior in V(f), namely, one in the low frequency regime where V(f)  f 2 (see red dotted line through the data), and the other in the higher frequency regime where, V(f)  f α ; where α close to one (see black solid line to the data). dependence gradually develops in the lower f range while at a higher frequency range still a linear frequency dependent regime is maintained. Therefore, below 50 K, V(f) has a predominantly linear dependence on f while at higher T above 50 K V(f) is an admixture of quadratic and linear dependence on f. To explain the pickup data, we use the following model: The AC current in the primary excitation coil produces an AC magnetic field ,where ω is the angular frequency of the AC signal and B0 is the amplitude of the AC magnetic field. For simplicity the sample is assumed to be cylindrical shape with radius r. Due to this AC magnetic field, the current density induced in the sample is   , where σt is total conductivity of the sample and ( z )  is the magnetic flux passing through the sample. The magnetic field is generated in the pickup coil from this induced current in the sample. So, the total output voltage in the pickup coil can be written using Faraday's law: Here we have used the Drude like AC conductivity for the surface as well as bulk state of the TI. Herer we have assumed that the distance between the two coils is much larger than the sample thickness. If we consider the temperature dependent conductivity, the total output voltage becomes where ξ(r, z) is a geometric factor which is a function of the pickup coil radius (r), the height between the two coils (z). To understand the frequency and temperature dependence of V, we use the parallel transport channel model for TI, where the total electrical conductivity ( t , where s  is the surface conductance and b  is the thermally activated bulk conductance of the bulk. We use the known temperature dependence of the surface (σ s ) and bulk (σ b ) conductivities of TI , viz.,   Surface and bulk state have different scattering time scale which we have used here to explain the linear and quadratic frequency dependence. Motivated by this, we have used different limit for surface and bulk state Hence we are using two different limit for the bulk and surface state. For conduction through the bulk of the TI the τ (average collision time interval of electron with disorder site) is expected to be small due to large probability of collision, hence at low for small τ values, the approximate condition  << 1 can be used. It can be shown that with this condition in Eq. 1 one gets, V(f)  f 2 for low frequencies (namely when response is associated with conduction through the bulk of the TI)  Therefore for high  and other condition τ >> 1, due to which from Eq. 1 we get V(f)  f for the surface state of a TI, viz., From these two figures, we can notice that the Bz distributions are same for these two cases as the skin depths are mm range in these frequency range. From these simulation, we can notice that due to the presence of micron thickness sample, the Bz distribution changes with frequencies in spite of the bulk skin depth in mm range. So, the high conducting surface state which is extended in nm rang, has strong contributions in the Bz distribution. 5 k H z , 2 5 K 5 kH z, 160 K V (mV) Surface area (mm 2 ) (c)