The current-and voltage-scaled sensitivities and signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) (with respect to thermal noise) of various octagonal AlGaN/GaN and InAlN/GaN Hall-effect sensors were examined in this work. The effect of metal contact lengths on sensitivity and sensor offset was evaluated. Calculations that take into account the shape of the device show that devices with point-like contacts have the highest current-scaled sensitivity (68.9 V/A/T), while devices with contacts of equal length to their non-contact sides have the highest voltage-scaled sensitivity (86.9 mV/V/T). The sensitivities of the two other devices follow the predicted trends closely. All the devices have offsets less than 20 μT at low supply current operation (< 300 μA) and most remain below 35 μT at higher supply current (up to 1.2 mA). The consistent low offsets across the devices imply that the choice of Hall-effect sensor geometry should mainly depend on whether the device is currentbiased or voltage-biased and the frequency at which it will operate. This work demonstrates that GaN Hall-effect sensor performance can be improved by adjusting the geometry of the Hall-effect plate specific to its function (e.g., power electronics, navigation, automotive applications). AGNETIC field sensors have a wide array of applications, including position and velocity sensing in vehicles (e.g., valve positions, gear rotation speed, seatbelt buckle clamping, heading determination) and current sensing in power electronics. Devices based on the Hall effect are advantageous over other magnetic field sensing technologies because they are low-cost, easy to integrate, and linear over a wide range of magnetic fields This work was supported in part by the Stanford SystemX Alliance, the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship, and the National Science Foundation Engineering Research Center for Power Optimization of Electro-Thermal systems (POETS) with cooperative agreements EEC-1449548. H. S. Alpert, C. A. Chapin, and D. G. Senesky* (corresponding author) are with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 United States of America (e-mail: halpert@stanford.edu; cchapin3@stanford.edu; dsenesky@stanford.edu). Hall-effect sensors are typically made of silicon due to its low cost, ease of fabrication, and complimentary metal-oxidesemiconductor (CMOS) compatibility; however, silicon's narrow bandgap of 1.1 eV limits its functionality to temperatures below 200°C GaN heterostructures have a 2D electron gas (2DEG) that is formed when a nanometer-thick layer of unintentionally doped aluminum or indium gallium nitride (AlGaN or InGaN) is deposited on an underlying GaN buffer layer. The 2DEG, created from differences in the polarization fields of the III-nitride layers In this paper, we investigate the effect of Hall plate geometry on its sensitivity and magnetic field offset. We altered the size of the Ohmic contacts to maximize the sensitivity and signalto-noise ratio (SNR) with respect to supply current and supply voltage, and we compare our experimental results to the theoretical performance based on shape factor. While the effect of contact length on sensitivity has been discussed in previous papers The Hall voltage (V H ), measured perpendicular to both the applied current (I) and the external magnetic field (B), is defined as where r n is the scattering factor of the material (~1 for GaN) The sensitivity of a Hall-effect device with respect to supply current (S i ) is proportional to G H ; In addition, the sensitivity with respect to supply voltage (S v ) is proportional to G H /(L/W) eff ; where V s is the supply voltage, R is device resistance, and μ H is the Hall mobility of the electrons. Equations ( In addition to high sensitivity, another desirable parameter in a Hall-effect device is low offset. The offset voltage is defined as the Hall voltage measured in the absence of a magnetic field. Offset voltages are usually caused by mechanical stress, thermal gradients, geometrical errors, defects, and other irregularities within the device A third parameter of interest is the SNR of the device. The shape optimization described in the ensuing sections only accounts for thermal noise, as it is geometry-dependent and more significant than shot-noise and flicker noise at high frequency where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, ∆f is the operation bandwidth, and R is the device resistance across transverse contacts, which is also defined as the sheet resistance (R sh ) multiplied by (L/W) eff . Although at low-frequency operation thermal noise is smaller than the offset voltage, it becomes significant at higher frequencies. The SNR of the device with respect to thermal noise is V H /V n , which is proportional to mobility, like S v . Both SNR/I and SNR/V are directly proportional to G H , while they have a dependence on (L/W) eff -1/2 and (L/W) eff -3/2 respectively, as shown in Octagonal Hall-effect plates with four different geometries, each 100 μm across, were fabricated with metal contact lengths Fig. The geometrical parameters involved in the optimization are summarized in Table Two sets of devices were fabricated: one on an AlGaN/GaNon-Si wafer grown by metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) in an Aixtron close-coupled showerhead (CCS) reactor in the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, and the second on an InAlN/GaN-on-Si wafer purchased from NTT Advanced Technology Corporation. The AlGaN/GaN stack consists of a 1.5 μm buffer structure, a 1.2 μm GaN layer, a 1 nm AlN spacer, a 30 nm Al 0.25 Ga 0.75 N barrier layer, and a 2 nm GaN cap. The InAlN stack consists of a 300 nm buffer structure, a 1 μm GaN layer, a 0.8 nm AlN spacer, and a 10 nm In 0.17 Al 0.83 N barrier layer. For the AlGaN/GaN and InAlN/GaN stacks respectively, the sheet resistances at room temperature were 361 Ω/□ and 248 Ω/□ and the carrier mobilities were 1811 cm 2 /V•s and 1143 cm 2 /V•s. The subsequent fabrication process was followed for both sets of devices: a mesa etch was performed on the III-nitride layer, a Ti (20 nm)/Al (200 nm)/Mo (40 nm)/Au (80 nm) metal stack was deposited and annealed for 35 seconds at 850°C to form Ohmic contacts, a 7-nm-thick Al 2 O 3 passivation layer was atomic layer deposited (ALD) to prevent oxidation, vias were etched to allow for electrical connection to the contacts, and bond metal (Ti/Au) was deposited on top. The devices were then diced and wirebonded to a printed circuit board (PCB) for testing. The devices were tested in a tunable 3D Helmholtz coil, detailed in For both material platforms, the devices with the point-like contacts had the highest current-related sensitivity while the devices with equal sides had the highest voltage-related sensitivity. The measured S i and S v closely follow the predicted trends in Table At low bias currents (< 300 μA), the offset voltages of all the AlGaN/GaN and InAlN/GaN devices were consistently in the nanovolt range, corresponding to a magnetic field offset below 20 μT. At high biases (up to 1.2 mA), the magnetic field offsets for some of the devices remained constant below 20 μT, while some showed larger increases. The magnetic field offsets of the AlGaN/GaN and InAlN/GaN devices with equal sides are shown in Fig. We designed Hall-effect sensors to examine current-and voltage-scaled sensitivities and SNR (with respect to thermal noise), and experimentally verified how device sensitivity depends on the metal contact lengths of the Hall-effect sensor. Both the AlGaN/GaN and InAlN/GaN devices follow similar trends, confirming the validity of the shape factors over multiple material platforms. Additionally, the two material platforms confirm that increased current-related sensitivity is associated with decreased sheet density, and increased voltagerelated sensitivity is associated with increased mobility. The consistent low offset of the various devices suggests that one should design or select the geometry of a Hall-effect sensor based on operating frequency and bias conditions rather than offset.