An important feature of strong correlated electron systems is the tunability between interesting ground states such as unconventional superconductivity and exotic magnetism. Pressure is a clean, continuous and systematic tuning parameter. However, due to the restricted accessibility introduced by high-pressure devices, compatible magnetic field sensors with sufficient sensitivity are rare. This greatly limits the detections and detailed studies of pressure-induced phenomena. Here, we utilize nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond as a powerful, spatially-resolved vector field sensor for material research under pressure at cryogenic temperatures. Using a single crystal of BaFe2(As0.59P0.41)2 as an example, we extract the superconducting transition temperature (Tc), the local magnetic field profile in the Meissner state and the critical fields (Hc1 and Hc2). The method developed in this work will become a unique tool for tuning, probing and understanding quantum many body systems. Strongly correlated electronic systems are rich playgrounds to realize a wide variety of phases. Due to the large degrees of freedom inherent in this class of materials, these phases are naturally sensitive to external perturbations. Take superconductivity for example, Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory explicitly highlights the relevance of the superconducting transition temperature T c to both the interaction strength and the density of states at the Fermi level One of the most successful tuning parameters is hydrostatic pressure, which changes the electronic structure and the interaction strength without introducing additional chemical inhomogeneity to the sample. Moreover, for many systems, pressure is the only way to reach certain quantum states. Pressure has played an influential role on stabilizing superconductivity by suppressing the competing phases. For example, in the heavy fermion intermetallic CePd 2 Si 2 , pressure suppresses the antiferromagnetic state and induces a superconducting phase with a T c that peaks at ∼ 28 kbar To generate high pressure, the sample is enclosed in a pressure cell that is orders-of-magnitude larger than the sample itself. Moreover, to ensure a stable pressure environment, electrical accessibility to the sample volume is severely restricted. Cryogenic conditions place further restrictions. Under these demanding experimental conditions, very few detection methods can be applied. Especially, having a robust DC magnetic field sensor in the immediate vicinity of the sample is a major experimental challenge, which we overcome in this work successfully. Negatively charged NV center is a point defect in diamond with a spin-1 ground state. Due to its spin dependent fluorescence rate, electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrum can be measured via optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) method. From these spectra, we can derive the magnetic field with sensitivity of μT Hz -1/2 The sample we use is a piece of single crystalline BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 with x = 0.41, which comes from the ultraclean family BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 Fig. Under a weak external magnetic field, for T > T c , the sample is in the normal state and the magnetic field felt by NV centers is the same as the external magnetic field (Fig. The Meissner effect is measured with the pulse sequence shown in Fig. The change of the local magnetic field distribution can also be seen in the temperature evolution of the splitting for NV E and NV F , shown in Fig. Fig. Next, we illustrate the performance of our setup under a varying pressure. In a separate run, we have calibrated our ODMR shift against the shift of the ruby fluorescence spectrum up to 60 kbar, thereby confirming our capability to sense the pressure (see Supplementary) and to conduct ODMR experiments at high pressures. It remains to show that our setup does not lose sensitivity to the superconducting transition when pressure is varied. Figure Repeating the measurements at different applied fields, we can trace out αH c1 (T ) and H c2 (T ) for x = 0.41 at 8.3 kbar (see Fig. relative to the free electron mass, the almost vertical H c2 (T ) is consistent with the strongly correlated nature of the material system. In summary, we successfully demonstrate the usage of NV centers in diamond as a vector magnetic field sensor with superior spatial resolution and field sensitivity in pressure cells under cryogenic conditions. We demonstrate our sensing capability by studying superconductivity through Meissner effect. Using a piece of single-crystalline BaFe 2 (As 0.59 P 0.41 ) 2 as a model system, we construct the temperature-pressure phase diagram, and determine both the lower critical field and upper critical field. The spatial resolution of the protocol shown here can be pushed to sub-100 nm. This resolution will provide the unique opportunity to sense the dynamics of magnetically related features such as magnetic domains, vortices 