The direction of ferroelectric polarization is prescribed by the symmetry of the crystal structure. Therefore, rotation of the polarization direction is largely limited, despite the opportunity it offers in understanding important dielectric phenomena such as piezoelectric response near the morphotropic phase boundaries and practical applications such as ferroelectric memory. In this study, we report the observation of continuous rotation of ferroelectric polarization in orderdisorder type LiNbO3 thin films. The spontaneous polarization could be tilted from an out-of-plane to an in-plane direction in the thin film by controlling the Li vacancy concentration within the hexagonal lattice framework. Partial inclusion of monoclinic-like phase is attributed to the breaking of macroscopic inversion symmetry along different directions and the emergence of ferroelectric polarization along the in-plane direction. The ability to rotate the direction of spontaneous polarization in ferroelectrics provides an essential insight in understanding and utilizing the piezoelectric and ferroelectric phenomena. The rotation of the ferroelectric polarization is closely coupled with the ferroelectric instability and piezoelectric elongation, LiNbO3 (LNO) is known as a classic order-disorder type ferroelectric. However, growth and characterization of crystalline LNO thin film have been largely limited. Most of the limited number of studies on LNO thin films have adopted sapphire as substrates, despite a large lattice mismatch (-8.2%, compressive). In this study, we aim to demonstrate rotation of the spontaneous polarization direction in the order-disorder type ferroelectric LNO thin film. The strong coupling between chemical potential and lattice structure is attributed to the rotation of the polarization. In particular, the unexpected polarization rotation from an out-of-plane direction to an in-plane direction of the LNO thin film could be understood in terms of inclusion of anti-site Nb defects and resultant local monoclinic LiNb3O8-like structure in possession of off-centered ions along the in-plane direction. As a result, a LNO thin film with fully in-plane ferroelectric polarization could be realized. Thin Film Growth. We fabricated LNO (001) thin films by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) under various oxygen partial pressures (P(O2)) of 5-50 mTorr at 600oC. The thin films were deposited on Ti-terminated atomically flat SrTiO3 (STO) (111), and Nb (0.5wt%)-doped STO (Nb:STO) (111) substrates (when a metallic bottom electrode was necessary). Lattice structure characterization. X-ray diffraction (XRD) θ-2θ and pole figure measurements were performed using high resolution x-ray diffractometer (Rigaku SmartLab and PANalytical X'Pert). For pole figure measurements, 2θ positions were aligned to the Bragg reflection conditions of SrTiO3 (110) and monoclinic LiNb3O8 (212) at 2θ = 32.396o and 32.200o, respectively. Atomic-scale LNO structures were analyzed on a spherical aberrationcorrected scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM, JEOL ARM200CF) operating at 200 kV. To resolve light elements such as oxygen and lithium in the structure, annular bright field (ABF) STEM imaging mode was employed. The incident electron probe angle was 24 mrad and the ABF signals were collected over a detector angle window of 7.5-17 mrad. TEM crosssectional samples were prepared with the use of dual-beam focused ion beam system (FIB, FEI Helios Nano Lab 450) and consecutive low-energy Ar ion milling at 700 V (Fischione Model 1040 NanoMill) was carried out for 15 min to remove damaged surface layers caused by heavy Ga ion beam milling in the FIB system. X-ray spectroscopy. Qualitative changes in the stoichiometry were evaluated by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo Scientific) and x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) at room temperature. XPS was carried out using a monochromatic Al Kα source (1486.6 eV) with step size of 0.05 eV, pass energy of 50.0 eV, and spot size of 400 μm. Nb L3-edge XAS (~2370 eV) was performed in the 16A1 beamline at the Taiwan Light Source (TLS). The fluorescence yield was collected using a Lytle detector. The angle between the sample plane and incident x-ray was set to 60°. The photon energy was calibrated by the edge energy of an Nb metal foil. Second harmonic generation. A second harmonic generation (SHG) experiment was performed at room temperature in order to confirm the structural inversion symmetry breaking. Fundamental light source was a 100-fs-long pulsed laser (Coherent Vitara-T) with a center wavelength at 800 nm and repetition rate of 80 MHz. Fundamental wave with average power of 100 mW was incident on the sample surface within a diameter of about 100 μm, and the SHG light intensity was detected using a photomultiplier tube (PMT) operating in specular reflection geometry with incidence angle of 45°. Fundamental light polarization was established using a half wave plate (HWP), and the polarization state of SHG light was analyzed by an additional polarizer placed just after the sample. Piezoresponse force microscopy. Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) was conducted at room temperature for exploring anisotropic distribution of polarizations. Here, AC modulation bias of 1.0 V at 17 kHz was applied to a conductive probe (BudgetSensors Multi75E-G) using a commercial atomic force microscope (Park Systems NX10) combined with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830). Electrical and photoconductivity measurements. Electrical transport measurements were performed along the in-plane direction of the LNO thin films. Au electrodes were patterned on the LNO thin film surface by thermal evaporation using a shadow mask with thickness of 100 nm, defining a channel 1000 μm long and 75 μm wide. For the light source, we used a UV laser of 325 nm (~3.8 eV) and intensity of 0.5 mW/cm 2 . A systematic vacancy modulation was achieved in LiNbO3 (LNO) thin films using pulsed laser deposition (PLD), while preserving the global hexagonal framework structure. Figure For example, the out-of-plane lattice spacing showed a systematic increase with increasing P(O2) (up to 30 mTorr), as shown in Figure As the chemical stoichiometry plays a major role in determining the atomic and crystal structure, we proceeded to measure the relative atomic concentrations using x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). Figure The large modulation of Li concentration (from 19.8% to 11.2%) together with the relatively large Nb concentration (> 26%), allowed us to consider the inclusion of anti-site Nb defects, i.e., Nb ions replacing nominal Li ions at Li sites. Anti-site Nb defect has been frequently observed in LNO crystals, owing to the dissimilar bond strength and nearly equal ionic radii of the Li and Nb ions. The stoichiometry change leads to an unexpected, yet substantial rotation in the ferroelectric polarization direction in LNO thin films. The rotation of the polarization direction was revealed by measuring the structural symmetry breaking direction by means of second harmonic generation (SHG). Dipole-allowed SHG signal is generated by a polarized light applied on a crystal with broken inversion symmetry. We monitored the SHG response in three different configurations, i.e., PinPout, SinPout, and SinSout, where P and S with a subscript in (out) indicates a parallel and perpendicular polarization with respect to the plane of incidence for fundamental (second harmonic) light, respectively. Among these, PinPout and SinPout configurations are relevant for understanding the polarization rotation, and the sample azimuth dependent SHG intensity is shown in the inset of Figure where φ is the azimuth angle. Li vacancies are introduced. The anisotropic symmetry breaking components obtained by fitting of SHG signal is shown in Figure The evidence for rotation of the inversion symmetry breaking direction could be corroborated using piezoresponse force microscopic (PFM) measurements in both out-of-plane and in-plane directions. The PFM images of the as-prepared LNO thin film deposited at P(O2) = 5 mTorr in the upper For the LNO films deposited at high P(O2), the peaks of the monoclinic-like phase grow in intensity (Figure (Figure is still a hexagonal one. However, the hexagonal structure from the LNO thin film grown at high P(O2) is clearly different from the one from the film grown at low P(O2). The substantial difference in the Li and Nb concentration and the increased volume fraction of the monoclinic LiNb3O8-like phase distort the original hexagonal lattice, which seems to promote global inplane ferroelectricity. The inclusion of local monoclinic phase could be further verified through STEM data. While the global crystal structure was identified to be the same as that of the FFT pattern (insets of Figures The monoclinic LiNb3O8-like phase can indeed facilitate the unexpected in-plane polarization. In bulk, the monoclinic LiNb3O8 does not have any out-of-plane ionic displacement as observed for the hexagonal LiNbO3 (See Figure The in-plane symmetry breaking in LiNb3O8-like phase would give rise to the in-plane ferroelectric polarization, consistent with our PFM and SHG results. Specifically, (i) the nonzero in-plane polarization for the thin films deposited at low P(O2), (ii) the increase of in-plane polarization with increasing P(O2), and (iii) the decrease of out-of-plane polarization with increasing P(O2) can all be understood in terms of enlarged monoclinic-like phase within the LNO thin film due to absence of Li ions and following structural distortion of the original hexagonal phase. This leads to rotation of the direction of the spontaneous polarization in the order-disorder type ferroelectric LNO. Interestingly, the polarization rotation observed in the LNO thin films is fundamentally different from that observed in conventional displacive-type ferroelectrics. In displacive-type ferroelectrics, the polarization rotation occurs discontinuously at an MPB with high electromechanical response, leading to an enhanced piezoelectric and dielectric response. On the other hand, in order-disorder-type ferroelectrics, or at least in our case with LNO thin film, the polarization rotation occurs continuously. The absence of a discontinuous rotation and MPB suggests the absence of the maximum in the dielectric response in the order-disorder type ferroelectrics, consistent with our experimental observation. Indeed, we observe qualitatively similar degree of symmetry breaking (Figure The rotation of the spontaneous polarization direction may have wide implication in various electronic phenomena including the ferroelectric photovoltaic effect. Selective etching can occur in heterostructures composed of materials having large differences in mechanical properties, which could lead to interface amorphization as seen in GaN thin films deposited on sapphire substrates. 