The unprecedented power of brain suggests that it may process information quantum-mechanically. Since quantum processing is already achieved in superconducting quantum computers, it may imply that superconductivity is the basis of quantum computation in brain too. Superconductivity could also be responsible for long-term memory. Following these ideas, the paper reviews the progress in the search for superconductors with high critical temperature and tries to answer the question about the superconductivity in brain. It focuses on recent electrical measurements of brain slices, in which graphene was used as a room-temperature quantum mediator, and argues that these measurements could be regarded as evidence of superconductivity in the neural network of mammalian brains. The estimated critical temperature of superconducting network in the brains is rather high: 2063±114 K. A similar critical temperature was predicted in the Little's model for one-dimensional organic chains linked to certain molecular complexes. A reasonable suggestion is that superconductivity develops in microtubules inside the neurons of brain. Superconductivity in brain was suggested in 1972 in order to explain long-time memory and following a general argument that if room-temperature superconductivity is existing, it should be in a system with high level of organization Since its discovery in 1911 Analyzing mechanisms leading to superconductivity, several pathways to materials with possible roomtemperature superconductivity are outlined Among the pioneers of research in low-dimensional materials were Kosterlitz and Thouless Following pathway of reduced dimensionality, one may ask about possible high Tc in quasi-1D systems. This case was, again, analyzed theoretically. As early as in 1964, Little It is important to note that in the model of Little the superconducting pairing is provided by electron-electron interaction, in contrast to more common electron-phonon interaction (Nobel Prize in Physics to Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer for the year 1972). In case of Little's model, at least three particular paths: lower dimensionality, specific pairing interaction and increased complexity were followed. To display such high Tc as in the model of Little, one needs to modify Fig. Increasing complexity, which is important pathway to superconductivity with high Tc, inevitably leads to mostorganized structures of living organisms: nervous system and brain The graphene-based technique was already applied to a rat's brain slice The electrical measurements of the slices of pigs' (Sus domesticus) brains were carried out by four-electrode technique designed to connect (via the nano-plates of graphene) conductive channels in the brain. The possible types of connection are schematically shown in Fig. The measurement system features large-area contacts of neural network to thick (0.2-0.5 mm in diameter) current and potential wires shown in Fig 3d . The length of the wires is about 1 cm. Several millions microtubules are connected in parallel to the wires via graphene nanoflakes, as shown schematically in Fig. A range of current and potential wires made of copper, copper covered with a Pb-Sn alloy and gold were used as electrodes. Altogether, 26 slices of the thickness of about 1 mm of Sus domesticus' brains from the samples shown in Fig. The carried transport measurements rely on possibility that nano-structures in the brain responsible for hypothesized superconductivity are preserved after the preparation of slices and the samples remain in superconducting state for sufficiently long time to be measured. It is also taken into account that superconductivity could be suppressed in the vicinity of electrodes. Following these suggestions, in Figs. If the superconductivity is suppressed close to one of the potential electrodes (b), a finite resistance should always be present in the measurement. The largest contribution to it may come from the superconductor-normal metal (SN) interface, on which the current flow is strongly suppressed for voltages below /e, where  is the energy gap of the superconductor. At /e, a decrease in resistance should take place, because at this voltage charge carriers are allowed to fill empty states above the energy gap. In the third case, superconductivity is suppressed close to both electrodes (c). Resistance is, again, finite, but it is expected to decrease at voltage 2/e corresponding to two NS boundaries. In the case of a 1D superconducting network, there is a very large number of connections to both electrodes, and the configurations outlined in Fig. The simplicity of outlined description comes from expected large value of , in which case serial resistance of the normal phase N in Fig. Current-voltage (IV) characteristics of a formaldehydefixed slice of rat's brain of the thickness of 40 microns exposed to graphene solution for 1 minute and recorded at room temperature in two areas of different width are shown in Fig. A remarkable fact is that in spite of a nearly three order of magnitude difference in current, the voltage jumps are of the same magnitude, about 0.6 V. For the IV curve of a superconductor, such jumps could appear during thermomagnetic instability-driven local suppression of superconductivity. The minimum voltage jump for the instabilities is 2/e where kB is the Boltzman constant and (0) is the energy gap at zero temperature. Suggesting that Tc is much higher than room temperature, the measured at 297 K 2/e  0.6 V should be close to 2(0). Then, from (1) one obtains Tc of about 2000 K, which is in good agreement with the model of Little The quasi-1D nanostructures in neurons, in which one could expect superconductivity, are microtubules. It is interesting that they were already suggested as structures responsible for quantum processing of information Another suggestion is that superconductivity is the property of water inside the microtubules. The microtubules are hollow tubes with the inner diameter of 14 nm. It is currently not known in what state water is present there. According to a recent analysis of the possibility of roomtemperature superconductivity The importance of water was revealed earlier in experiments performed in The short, one minute, exposure to graphene used in To better reveal this anomaly in conductance, IV curves in the inset were approximated by polynomials of 9 th order and differentiated. Several derivatives at both positive and negative voltages are shown in the main plot of Fig. These peaks are of smaller amplitude than the main peak and are marked with vertical red arrows. The small unmarked peak close to V = 0 seen on most of the curves could be the feature of graphene itself or evidence of two-gap superconductivity common to hydrates The straight red line at the bottom of Fig. The shape of the red curve in Fig. Evidently, during the first measurement, connections of superconducting channels to one of the potential electrodes were without suppression. However, they quickly deteriorated, making more-common connection of the type shown in Fig. To improve connections of conducting channels to electrodes, the exposure to graphene was combined with a 30-minute ultrasound treatment at the end of the 3-hour graphene exposure of the sample. The result of such treatment is shown in the inset in Fig. The results presented above reveal that using graphene, it is possible to observe superconducting gap corresponding to extremely high Tc of about 2000 K. More accurate value of Tc could be found from (1) taking into account temperature dependence of energy gap. It is also important to make statistical treatment of experimental data starting with double-gap voltage defined as position of peaks in S(V) in Figs. The mean value of the double-gap voltage for each experiment with its number on the x-axis corresponding to the number of the figure, on which experiment is presented in this paper, together with the standard error in mean is shown in Fig. To estimate critical temperature of superconductor, the mean value of the double-gap voltage, averaged for all four experiments shown in Fig. combining it with the formula (1) for  (0). The result of this fit is shown in Fig. The treatment in Fig. Whereas extracting gap and estimating Tc was relatively simple, obtaining genuine superconductor-like IV curves for thick slices of pig's brains appeared to be more difficult than for the rat's brain slice, primarily because difficulties of incorporating graphene nanoflakes into the samples. Such difficulties would be expected, because if the superconductivity in the network enables quantum processing of information, it should be well protected from the environment and the superconductivity could be easily destroyed when this protection is lifted, i.e. in the attempt to connect electrodes to the network. Still, genuine superconductor-like IV curves were seen for a short time in in the rat's brain in To address this challenge, different (both fresh and fixed) slices of pig's brains with different exposure to graphene were measured with different materials for electrodes and different distances between them. From the 26 measured samples, superconductor-like IV curves have been observed in 5 samples. In one of the samples, due to its large thickness in comparison with the rat's brain slice measured in In the inset, the low-current parts of IV curves are shown to demonstrate their low-dissipation behavior. One can see from the main plot that the critical current density is slightly improving with time, until, on the seventh day, too large a current was passed (red curve) and the IV curves lost their superconducting features (black). In the measurements above, the influence of a magnetic field of few hundreds of mT on the IV curves was also tested. It was found that a sudden increase in magnetic field frequently lead to an increase of resistance and produced jumps between the resistive states, as shown, for example, by the blue curves in the main plot of Fig. To finalize the description of the results, it is important to compare the recorded IV curves with those in the control samples. One of the control samples was a piece of filter paper soaked in graphene solution. It was measured in the same way as the brain slices. The results of its measurements are shown in Fig. The main plot of Fig. Overall, experiments show that superconductivity with very high Tc is likely to be present in the neural network of the brain. Although it is well protected, it still could be measured using graphene as quantum mediator. There are indications that water could play essential role in superconductivity. For example, it was shown previously that superconductivity could appear in 3D form at high pressure when ice is doped with nitrogen or other elements In the very tightly confined space inside microtubules, water is likely to be structured in a specific way or be in the form of entangled H-O chains, which are schematically shown in Fig. Alternative explanation is that in the confined space of microtubules, each atom of oxygen is surrounded by several atoms of hydrogen. It was already demonstrated that in hydrates, Tc is dramatically increasing with hydrogen coordination number While the search for the room-temperature superconductivity continues, nature may have discovered it a long time ago in water, one of the most abundant substances in the universe, and it might be in use to enable, through the enhanced coherence, quantum processing of information. In this sense, intelligent life might be literally dependent on water. Since it is evident One could even claim that the nano-scale jigsaw puzzle of intelligent life might be close to completion with realizing that the hydrates-based superconductivity in microtubules could be responsible for quantum processing of information. With superconductivity, quantum processing could follow one of already suggested mechanisms, for example, that described by S. Hameroff and R. Penrose In summary, there is immense progress in search for superconductors with high critical temperature. In particular, graphene-mediated experiments could be treated as providing evidence for superconductivity in brain with extremely high critical temperature of 2063 ± 114 K. Such a high Tc would enable quantum processing of information at room temperature if the temperature of biological structures is kept stable within a modest temperature interval, as it takes place in natural brains. As a coherent quantum phenomenon, superconductivity could be responsible for coherent behaviour of living organisms and even consciousness The implications of the findings described in the review could be very diverse. Superconductivity, for example, may provide explanation for long-term memory. As the quantum coherent phenomenon, it could form basis of the coherent behavior of living organisms. Finally, the coherent features of the brain and nervous system could be analyzed using well developed and constantly improving models developed for superconductivity.