A comparative study is performed to explore the periodic structure formation upon intense femtosecond pulsed irradiation of dielectrics with radially and azimuthally polarised beams. Laser conditions have been selected appropriately to produce excited carriers with densities below the optical breakdown threshold in order to highlight the role of phase transitions in surface modification mechanisms. The frequency of the laser induced structures is calculated based on a theoretical model that comprises estimation of electron density excitation, heat transfer, relaxation processes, and hydrodynamics-related mass transport. The influence of the laser wavelength in the periodicity of the structures is also unveiled. The decreased energy absorption for azimuthally polarised beams yields periodic structures with smaller frequencies which are more pronounced as the number of laser pulses applied to the irradiation spot increases. Similar results are obtained for laser pulses of larger photon energy and higher fluences. All induced periodic structures are oriented parallel to the laser beam polarisation. Laser processing of dielectrics with femtosecond pulses has received remarkable attention due to its important technological applications One type of surface modification, the laser induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS) (see In this work, we investigate the mechanism of periodic structure formation induced on fused silica upon irradiation with, radially and azimuthally polarised, (RPB and APB, respectively) femtosecond pulses. To evaluate the role of the polarisation state in the LIPSS periodicity, a comparative study is conducted to quantify morphological changes for using CVB laser beams with respect to fluence and number of pulses variation. The role of the laser beam wavelength on the periodicity of the produced structures is also highlighted. To simulate the excitation mechanism in fused silica, we consider the multiple rate equation model (MRE) where n e , n v , are the number densities of the excited electrons, and valence band electrons (n v =2.2×10 22 cm -3 ), respectively. The last term in the first equation corresponds to free electron decay that is characterised by a time constant τ r (τ r ~150fs in fused silica) that leads to a decrease of the electron density. For the sake of simplicity, formation of selftrapped excitons is ignored in Eq.1 In Eq.2, ph N corresponds to the minimum number of photons necessary to be absorbed by an electron in the valence band to overcome the relevant energy gap E G and reach the conduction band. Also, R(t,x,y,z=0) stands for the reflectivity of the material, E d is the fluence while F(x,y) is proportional to 2 E (as E is the applied laser electric field). Hence, a. For a radially polarized beam,  10 01 ˆr E HG x HG y , where r E denotes radial polarization and x , ŷ are the unit vectors along the x-and y-axis, respectively. Hence, the field is expressed as the superposition of orthogonally Hermite-Gauss HG 01 and HG 10 modes with x-and y-polarisation, respectively, which yields where intensity is higher at distance 0 R / 2 from the spot-centre. b. On the other hand, for an azimuthal beam, , where E  denotes azimuthal polarization. Hence, the field is expressed as the superposition of orthogonally Hermite-Gauss HG 01 and HG 10 modes with y-and x-polarisation, respectively, which yields F equal to Eq.( where ε un corresponds to the dielectric constant of the unexcited material, ε 0 stands for the vacuum permittivity, e is the electron charge, m r (=0.5m e , m e stands for the electron's mass) is the electron's reduced mass, and τ c =0.5 fs to quantify the effect of the polarisation state. In the above expressions, N=n+i r i k is the complex refractive index of the irradiated material (n is the real part of the refractive index and r i k is the extinction coefficient) and θ i stands for the angle of incidence. Due to the metallic character of the excited material, a TTM model is used to describe the spatio-temporal dependence of the temperatures T e and T L of the electron and lattice subsystems The complete expression for source term S(x,t) is given by to account for photoionisation of electrons, avalanche ionisation, free electron absorption and energy loss due to trapping processes. We point out that a term that describes the divergence of the current of the carriers ( J  ) has not been taken into account (it appears when carrier dynamics in irradiated silicon is explored upon irradiation e , k e , C L and g are provided from well-established expressions derived from free electron gas based on the metallic character of the excited material To correlate the excited electron density with surface structures, the inhomogeneous energy deposition into the irradiated material is computed through the calculation of the product η(k L ,k i )×|b(k L )| as described in the Sipe-Drude model To correlate the induced surface profile with thermal effects, two processes are considered resulting from the intensity profile of the laser beam and the laser energy. In principle, surface modification is usually associated with a phase transition (i.e. melting of the material). Nevertheless, near the centre of the laser spot, the deposition of energy is not large enough to produce a phase transition and, thermoplastic effects are predominantly responsible for the permanent deformations. Due to the, significantly, smaller size of surface deformation in the irradiated spot due to the latter effects It is also assumed that the material in the molten phase behaves as an uncompressed fluid and therefore, the Navier-Stokes equation is used to describe the fluid dynamics where u is the fluid velocity, μ (m) is the dynamic viscosity of the liquid, () m L  ) is the density of the molten material, T melt is the melting temperature for SiO 2 , P stands for pressure, κ () m L and () m L C stand for lattice heat conductivity (see Table To determine the modification characteristics, a solidification criterion is used based on the lattice displacements when the associated lattice temperature drops to lower values than the melting point Fitting Fitting Regarding the adequate description of fluid dynamics, the hydrodynamic equations are solved in the subregion that contains either solid or molten material. To include the "hydrodynamic" effect of the solid domain, material in the solid phase is modelled as an extremely viscous liquid (μ solid = 10 5 μ liquid ), which results in velocity fields that are infinitesimally small. An apparent viscosity is then defined with a smooth switch function to emulate the step of viscosity at the melting temperature. A similar step function is also introduced to allow a smooth transition for the rest of the temperature-dependent quantities (i.e., heat conductivity, heat capacity, density, etc.) between the solid and liquid phases. For time-dependent flows, a common technique to solve the Navier-Stokes equations is the projection method, and the velocity and pressure fields are calculated on a staggered grid using fully implicit formulations. More specifically, the horizontal and vertical velocities are defined in the centers of the horizontal and vertical cells faces, respectively, where the pressure and temperature fields are defined in the cell centers (see description in Tsibidis et al. Commercial polished samples of SiO 2 of 99.9% purity and average thickness of 1 mm were used. An Yb:KGW laser source was used to produce linearly polarized pulses with pulse duration equal to 170 fs, 1 kHz repetition rate, at 1026 nm central wavelength and 56μm Gaussian spot diameter. Beams with radial and azimuthal polarisation were generated using an s-waveplate. Following the s-waveplate, the beams were focused on the sample via an achromatic convex lens of 100mm focal length. The samples were fixed onto a 3-axis motorized stage and positioned perpendicular to the incident beam. The number of pulses was controlled by an electromagnetic beam shutter and all irradiations were performed in ambient environment. The morphology of the laserinduced structures has been characterized by scanning electron microscopy (JEOL JSM-7500F). The morphological features of the structures were computed by a two dimensional fast Fourier transform analysis of the respective SEM images using the Gwyddion software (See Supplementary Material for a more detailed description). The experimental investigation for the period analysis of the irradiated laser spots was conducted for multiple experiments, for both azimuthal and radial polarization states. In particular, the presented measured period values are not a product of a single experiment, but of five different experiments, performed under identical conditions. Moreover, for each experiment , at least four measurements of the periodicity at different areas of each spot have been obtained. The standard deviation and the mean of the error bars, presented in the discussion, are the outcome of those measurements. As repetitive irradiation of a material leads to a gradually deepening of the affected zone (an initially flat profile is transformed in a curved morphology that suggests that an increase of the irradiation pulses produce a larger incidence angle), the need to distinguish the influence in the energy absorption of the differently polarised beams, APB and RPB, suggests that it is imperative to estimate the reflectivity of the material at various angles of incidence (up to the Brewster's angle that is approximately 55 0 for fused silica) as a spatially variable energy absorption will influence the overall density of the excited carriers. Hence, a generic scheme is developed to determine the amount of energy that is absorbed from each segment of the curved geometry as a result of exposure of the material to a sequence of laser pulses The differences in the thermal effects for the two polarisation states and the significance of the angle of incidence (up to the Brewster's angle) are also depicted in Fig. Simulations show, also, that due to the induced larger lattice temperatures a deeper damaged region is produced for irradiation with RPB compared to APB. In Fig. Theoretical models and experimental observations have indicated that upon repetitive irradiation periodic structures are formed To correlate the periodic structure formation with the development of thermal effects, the ablation (by removing the lattice points with T L >4000K), carrier density, relaxation processes, phase transformation, Marangoni effects and resolification process are taken into account for every laser pulse. This is due to the fact that hydrodynamics is expected to contribute to the change of periodicity size (correction to the value Λ derived from the efficacy factor computation) of the final profile due to fluid movement contribution of the thermal effects were computed to estimate the periodicity at the new NP after the material has resolidified. The aforementioned scheme towards solving Eqs.1-10, allows a parametric investigation of the morphological features of the produced structures as a function of the laser wavelength, polarisation state, fluence, and number of pulses. In Fig. In the present work (where the role of phase transition was particularly highlighted towards determining the final morphological profile), simulations show that periodic structures are formed either perpendicularly to the r-axis (APB) or the θ-axis (RPB) and they are more pronounced inside the crater (around 0 R / 2 ) where the energy deposition is higher. It is noted that, firstly, mass displacement produced periodicities due to the two polarisation states disappears as there is no energy absorption difference. Finally, the periodicity values appear to saturate at larger values of fluence and NP (Fig. In conclusion, we have performed a comparative study to explore and interpret the surface profile and the periodicity of the self-assembled periodic structures formed upon irradiation of fused silica with CVB femtosecond laser pulses at two laser beam wavelengths. It was shown that compared to RPB, APB lead to periodic structures with a larger periodicity than that produced with APB and this difference is more enhanced as the irradiation pulses/fluence increase. On the other hand, the two polarisation states lead to the formation of periodic structures with different orientation. This significant conclusion emphasises particularly the ability to control the size/orientation of the morphological changes via modulating the beam polarization; it is evident that, laser processing through control of use of beams with various polarisation states may provide novel types of surface and bulk structures with significant advantages for potential applications. R / 2