At the Faraday Discussion, in the paper titled 'Neuromorphic computation with spiking memristors: habituation, experimental instantiation of logic gates and a novel sequence-sensitive perceptron model' it was demonstrated that a large amount of computation could be done in a sequential way using memristor current spikes (d.c. response). As these spikes are found in many memristors (possibly all), this novel approach could be highly useful for fast and reproducible memristor circuits. However, questions were raised as to whether these spikes were actually due to memristance or merely capacitance in the circuit. In this longer version of the Faraday Discussion response, as much information as is available from both published and unpublished data from my lab is marshalled together. We find that the devices are likely imperfect 1 At the New Memory Paradigms: Memristive Phenomena and Neuromorphic Applications Faraday discussion on my paper 1 the question of whether or not the devices that I have been characterizing and using as memristors were, or were not, memristors came up. For years, I have been suggesting that the spikes I first observed with the devices in my lab 2012 2 were a critical part of memristance, and, in fact, that these current spikes were in fact the d.c. response of the memristor. This implies that memristors are capable of operating as a d.c. device, something about which there had been doubt previously. As it is not only with my memristors that one can observe this phenomenon, and, in fact others have seen similar spikes, figuring out whether the spikes are largely to do with memristance or largely to do with capacitance is critical. In this short letter, I will gather as much information that I have to hand to try and answer this question, and I will use R.S. William's question from the Faraday discussion, as he phrased the issue well. For the Faraday discussion, R. S. Williams wrote: 'I'm afraid that the devices you show in your paper are not memristors at all, but are in fact leaky capacitors. Just putting some form of titanium dioxide between two electrodes does not meant that you will obtain memristive behaviour if there is some type of ionic species, e.g. O vacancies, that acts as a mobile electronic dopant, or some type of phase change. You have neither in your system, as can be seen in Fig. Sometimes one can see a similar transient in a circuit containing a dielectric between two electrodes -in that case, one needs to construct a model for the physical device that has a memristor in parallel with a capacitor to model it correctly. There is an effective parallel resistance in your system, either from leakage through capacitor or from the measurement circuit. I have taken for Fig 1 . and show that you can compute the RC time constant from the 1/e decay time of your capacitor, which is about 5 seconds (there appears to be a second and somewhat longer time scale in your system, which probably comes from electrons escaping from charge traps in your sol-gel oxide). You can then calculate the resistance of the effective parallel resistor from R=V/I, where V is the DC bias voltage (0.1 V? -it was not clear to me what the applied voltage was for Fig. In principle, you can now build a nearly identical equivalent circuit from a set of standard linear capacitors and resistors, with no memristors involved. R.S. Williams raises an interesting point: is this observed spike response of a memristor to a voltage step merely explained by a capacitor and resistor in parallel (as he suggests) or is it all explained by memristance, or is it explained by a memristor and capacitor in parallel? As my memristor devices are physical devices, and not ideal circuit elements, and as they are made of a-TiO 2 3 spin-coated onto sputtered electrodes, they are highly unlikely to be modelled by pure memristor theories. So the question really is, are these devices (and thus the observed behaviour) due to a capacitor-resistor (RC) circuit, or a memristor-capacitor (MC) circuit. Since this is such an important point, I will attempt to marshal as much evidence as I have to elucidate which of these possibilities is the correct one. Point 1. Some of my devices are capacitors: R. S. Williams is correct that it is possible to make a capacitor with my set-up, and a capacitor V-I curve can be recorded, 3 were seen out of 64 devices. . Aside 2: There are there Oxygen vacancy dopants in my system: R. S. Williams said 'Just putting some form of titanium dioxide between two electrodes does not meant that you will obtain memristive behaviour if there is some type of ionic species, e.g. O vacancies, that acts as a mobile electronic dopant, or some type of phase change. You have neither in your system,' and I am slightly confused by this point. I do have oxygen vacancies in my system, and given that they were sputter coated onto aluminium, I do not think I needed to dope the material in order to get them, the methodology itself introduced than the electrode that was sputtered onto the TiO 2 (gel) layer. Aside 3: My measurement kit has no leakage R. S. Williams wrote: 'There is an effective parallel resistance in your system, either from leakage through capacitor or from the measurement circuit.' There is no leakage capacitance from the measurement circuit as I used a Keithley electrometer set-up which was rated to very high accuracy and which is designed to test devices, so of course, it will not have capacitance leakage. Point 2. Many of my devices exhibit the pinched hysteresis loop typical of memristors: As my devices (like, I suspect, many other peoples) were so variable in quality and behaviour, I developed a system of classifying their behaviour over a very small voltage As these devices do not cross zero, there is obviously some capacitance in the devices. However, these open curves are not circles, so this is not a pure capacitor. (And my measurement system was a Keithley electrometer, so there is no source of capacitance elsewhere in the system). These open curves exhibit the same asymmetry I see in my devices' over a larger voltage range (namely the positive polarity voltage has a larger magnitude current response By adding in a contact resistance, which was measured from the actual devices at the start of the experiment, we obtain these predicted curves, which have the expected asymmetry, but are pinched. In this paper In that paper, 9 I merely suggested that as this relation was known, the theory could be used with a look up table to usefully predict device properties. From looking at the graphs in this letter, and considering R. S. Williams point, I now believe that the missing hysteresis is that of a capacitor, and that the capacitance increases with device size and I plan to add the capacitance into the model in that paper before publication. So, I have shown that my devices exhibit the pinched memristor curve at high voltages and are thus accepted as being memristors, but that at low voltages, a capacitance can be seen close to 0V which prevents the memristor curves from crossing at 0. A memristor theory models the shape and asymmetry of the devices, but seems to require a capacitance in order to not cross at zero, this demonstrates that memristance is involved in the low voltage V-I curves, as well as in the high voltage V-I. These results suggest that my devices are non-ideal memristors, best modelled as memristor-capacitor circuits, and that their behaviour requires memristance to be properly explained. Now I shall turn to the description of my devices I-t behaviour. Point 5: the memristor spikes are well fit by a memristor theory In 10 I fitted both positive and negative memristor spikes to the memory conservation theory of memristance. For the positive spike, the summed square of residuals was 1.61x10 -17 . For the negative spike, the summed square of residuals of 1.63x10 -17 . For the exponential fit (to the short time spike), 2.43x10 -15 . I got similar results with Erokhin et als 3-terminal memristor 11 (it was fit better by the memory conservation theory than an exponential). Point 6. The d.c. responses (spikes) are related to the frequency effect in memristor hysteresis curves, which is one of memristors defining features. Finally, and most importantly, I will now demonstrate that these spikes are part of the definitions of memristance as they are behind the 'frequency effect' described by L. O. Chua as a 'fingerprint of the memristor'. O. Chuas equations, of course, as he modelled this effect in ideal memristors), or that R. S. Williams is correct, and my devices, and many other, possibly all, 'memristors' are just leaky capacitors. Note that, I always test my devices the same way round