Intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon films can provide outstanding surface passivation of crystalline silicon wafer surfaces. This quality of Intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon makes it valuable in heterojunction with intrinsic thin layer (HIT) solar cell fabrication. This paper describes the material characteristics and electronic properties of Intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon that affects its passivation quality. A study of passivation quality of intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer has been done with respect to deposition parameters in Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD), the most commonly used method of its deposition. It was found that very good surface passivation with surface recombination velocity < 50 cm/s can be obtained from thickness of 30 nm of Intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H(i)), which is better than most other passivation techniques. A mathematical model based on Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is designed to predict the carrier lifetime for a given deposition condition and it is shown that the prediction capability of developed ANN model varies with the number of neurons in the hidden layer using Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), which is a widely accepted model selection method for measuring the validity of nonlinear models. Silicon photovoltaics technology can provide the world with a renewable, reliable and economical source of energy. Among the semiconductor materials with suitable optoelectronic properties for photovoltaic applications, silicon is the most widely used. Advantages of silicon are its abundance in nature, and a well-developed fabrication technology that can contribute in the development of highly efficient futuristic solar cells. Conventional solar cells, made of crystalline silicon, have remained the most common type till now. Although crystalline silicon solar cells technology has high photovoltaic conversion efficiency, it is also associated with high production cost. In conventional solar cells manufacturing, the cost of crystalline silicon wafer (thickness > 220 μm) is about 40% to 60% of the solar cell cost State of the art intrinsic a-Si:H layers are deposited using Radio Frequency (RF) Plasma-enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD), in which the deposition conditions crucially influence the surface passivation effectiveness. Here, the passivation efficiency of intrinsic a-Si:H layers deposited using PECVD at 13.56 MHz is quantified using carrier lifetime, which is compared at various deposition pressures, dilution ratios of precursors, and temperatures. In general, the systematic experimental approach to optimize the parameters involved in the passivation layer is not only time consuming but also requires special attention in cases where the contributions of parameters are correlated. Therefore, a good model can be of significant interest to simulate and predict the carrier lifetime from the variables involved in the deposition process. Several approaches are present to study the behavior of input parameters towards the output response properties but Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has been used to study this complex phenomenon as it is the most powerful technique to effectively analyze the effects of several independent variables simultaneously without the objective function between variables. Intrinsic a-Si:H layers are deposited on one side of double-side polished 4" n-type 1-5 Ωcm Fz wafers (100) using a conventional capacitively-coupled parallel-plate (CCP) RF PECVD reactor with a power density of up to 33 mWcm -2 . The scanning electron microscopy images of the deposited intrinsic a-Si:H are shown in Figure where is effective carrier lifetime, is bulk carrier lifetime and is surface carrier lifetime. In this section we review the deposition parameters varied in the experiment like pressure, temperature, dilution ratio, and thickness that affect the passivation quality of hydrogenated amorphous silicon The hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer acts as a reservoir of hydrogen for passivation of crystalline silicon surface. The size of this reservoir increases with increase in thickness As the lifetime increases with increase in thickness, the study of other parameters of deposition was performed keeping the deposition thickness as constant. The gas pressure determines the mean free path for collisions of the gas molecules and influences whether the reactions are at the growing surface or in the gas 