Although nanoscale deformation, such as nanostrain in iron chalcogenide (FeSexTe1-x, FST) thin films, has attracted attention owing to the enhancement of general superconducting properties, including critical current density (Jc) and critical transition temperature, its formation has proven to be an extremely challenging and complex process thus far. Herein, we successfully fabricated an epitaxial FST thin film with uniformly distributed nanostrain by injection of a trace amount of CeO2 inside FST matrix using sequential pulsed laser deposition. Using transmission electron microscopy and geometrical phase analysis, we verified that a trace amount of CeO2 injection forms nanoscale fine defects with a nanostrained region, which has a tensile strain (ε ≅0.02) along the c-axis of the FST matrix. The nanostrained FST thin film achieves a remarkable Jc of 3.5 MA/cm 2 for a self-field at 6 K and a highly enhanced Jc under the entire magnetic field with respect to a pristine FST thin film. Superconductors are essential materials for high magnetic field applications such as in nuclear fusion energy devices, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and superconducting magnetic energy storage systems. In recent years, iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) have attracted attention for high magnetic field applications because of their high upper critical field (Hc2) and low magnetic anisotropy (γ). Several approaches have been used to improve Jc in FST to date such as the use of a buffer layer, Nanostrain has been generated via the introduction of various defect formations to date. For example, the insertion of a desired material with a slightly different lattice constant can induce strain through the formation of a secondary phase; Herein, we report that nanostrain was successfully formed in an epitaxial FST thin film through the formation of the minimal nanoscale defects in FST thin film using sequential pulsed laser deposition (S-PLD), which can insert artificially the desired material while fabricating an epitaxial thin film. The reason for using CeO2 as an insertion material is that CeO2 exhibits not only good chemical stability but also the compatible in-plane lattice constant with FST, We fabricated the both P-FST and Ce-FST thin films on a (001)-oriented CaF2 substrate by PLD using a KrF (248 nm) excimer laser (Coherent, COMPEX PRO 205F) in a vacuum of 2×10 -5 Pa at 400 °C. We used a FeSe0.45Te0.55 target, which was made by an induction melting method. FST thin films were grown using a laser energy density of 3 J/cm 2 , a repetition rate of 3 Hz, and target to substrate distance of 4 cm. The method for fabrication of Ce-FST thin film is as follow. We first deposited 20 nm (445 laser pulses) FST layer on CaF2 substrate. Then, CeO2 was deposited on FST layer. These processes were repeated four times in total, and finally, an FST layer is deposited on top surface. The total thickness of all FST thin films was 100 nm (2225 laser pulses). CeO2 was deposited between FST layers with a dependence on p (2, 5, 10, and 20); p is the number of the laser pulses of the inserted CeO2 (laser energy density of 1.5 J/cm 2 and a repetition rate of 1 Hz). The target changing time between the FST and CeO2 targets was 10 seconds which is the drive time when the laser is turned off and then on again. The composition of FST thin film is considered as FeSe0.7Te0.3, approximately, based on our previous report. 11 To characterize the crystal structure, the θ-2θ scan, azimuthal phi scan, and rocking curve were measured using a four-circle XRD (PANalytical, X'Pert pro, λ = 1.5406 Å). We also performed an additional θ-2θ scan at the beamline 3A in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory with a six circle XRD (λ = 1.148 Å). STEM images and EDS were obtained in a Cs-corrected FEI Titan Themis G2 at an accelerating voltage of 300 KV with a beam current of 70 pA, a convergence semi-angle of 15 mrad, and a collection semi-angle snap in the range of 80-379 mrad. To obtain GPA maps for Ce-FST and P-FST thin films, same parameters were used for all calculation (same Fourier vector, resolution: 5 nm, smoothing: 10 nm, color scale: -0.1~0.12). The resistivity-temperature measurement was performed using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). T c onset and T c zero were determined using the 0.9 ρn criterion and 0.01 ρn criterion, respectively, where ρn is resistivity at 23 K. Magnetization Jc was measured using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, Oxford) by applying a magnetic field perpendicular to the film. It was estimated using a Bean model for thin film: Jc = 15ΔM/Vr, where V is the thin film volume in cubic centimeter, r is the equivalent radius of the sample size (πr 2 = a ⨯ b; a and b are width and length of the sample), and ΔM is the width of magnetic moment from the M-H loop (for further information, see Supplementary Fig. Figure Thus, 20 p Ce-FST thin film forms superlattice FST thin film with CeO2. We performed a θ-2θ scan using XRD to identify the out-of-plane crystalline quality of the Ce-FST thin films. Figure We additionally measured the θ-2θ scan for the 2 p Ce-FST and 20 p Ce-FST thin films using a synchrotron based XRD to further verify for the crystalline structure (for further information, see Supplementary Fig. Additionally, we measured the rocking curve for the (001) reflection of both P-FST and 2 p Ce-FST thin films using four circles XRD to compare the out-of-plane crystalline quality and the mosaicity (Figure To confirm in-plane texture and epitaxial quality, we performed an azimuthal phi scan using four circles XRD. Figure To determine the nanoscale strain caused by the infinitesimal CeO2 injection at the interface of each FST layers, we analyzed atomically resolved-STEM images for the 2 p Ce-FST thin film. Figure For a more accurate comparison, we performed STEM analysis of the P-FST and 20 p Ce-FST thin films. The P-FST thin film exhibits a relatively clear phase as shown in Fig. In general, nanostrain is induced at various types of defect perimeters. Thus, it is important to demonstrate why Se deficiency is observed in nanostrained region without residual CeO2 particle. In the PLD system, the laser ablation of the target forms a plume which contains the ionized species with high kinetic energy. These ionized energetic species cause re-sputtering and the formation of fine defects on the surface in the initial stage before these species form the cluster or layer. Furthermore, we examined whether the formation of the nanostrain is affected by pausing time (10 s) during target exchange between the FST and CeO2 targets, because Se and Te are sensitive and volatile in FST thin films. Also, we plotted lattice constant, c, and magnetization Jc, at 4.2 K as a function of p of the inserted CeO2 to further understand the relationship between nanostrain and Jc (Figure To understand the pinning mechanism of the 2 p Ce-FST thin film, we plotted Jc(t)/Jc(0) In P-FST thin film which has pure FST phase without defects, the interlayer spacing between Fe-Se(Te) planes can be the intrinsic pinning center due to short coherence length of FST. One interesting fact is that the 2 p Ce-FST thin film also has surface pinning geometry even though Jc is relatively improved than P-FST thin film. This means that 2 p Ce-FST thin film has similar pinning type to compare with P-FST thin film. The difference characteristic between P-FST thin film and 2 p Ce-FST thin film is that the c lattice of 2 p Ce-FST thin film is expanded by nanostrain rather than P-FST thin film, indicating that interlayer spacing of 2 p Ce-FST thin film at nanostrained region is larger than that of P-FST thin film. Thus, the interlayer spacing of 2 p Ce-FST can be more effective pinning center than that of P-FST. To evaluate the efficiency of our method, we compared the pinning characteristics with that of the previous papers. T and 14.2 GN/m 3 under 11 T at 6 K, respectively. In particular, the 2 p Ce-FST thin film shows ~400% higher Fp,max than for the P-FST thin film at 13 T (H//c). In addition, the 2 p Ce-FST thin film exhibits a higher Fp than that of other reported FST even though our samples were measured at relatively higher temperature of 6 K. 4.2 K Jc data of high field superconductors. Except for our samples, all data are adopted from the literature. Herein, we have successfully induced nanostrain inside FST thin films via the injection of an infinitesimal amount of CeO2 using S-PLD without additional post-processing. Through STEM analysis with GPA and EDS, we demonstrate that the injected infinitesimal amount of CeO2 forms nanoscale defects such as dislocation core and Se deficiency, which forms tensile nanostrain along the c-axis in the FST thin film. The nanostrain significantly improves the selffield transport Jc of the FST thin film from 0.91 MA/cm 2 up to 3.5 MA/cm 2 at 6 K, while minimizing the degradation of the Tc of the FST thin film. This study demonstrates that the formation of the nanostrain using S-PLD is significantly effective in attempting to achieve the ultimate goal of high magnetic field applications of iron chalcogenide. We also believe that this technique will be of great utility in inducing artificial nanoscale strains in other epitaxial chalcogenide thin films. pinning force (fp) as a function of the normalized field (h); fp is Fp/Fp_max, and h is H/Hirr (for further information, see Supplementary Fig.