A single-sample synthesis concept based on multi-element ceramic samples can produce a variety of local products. When applied to cuprate superconductors (SC), statistical modelling predicts the occurrence of possible compounds in a concentration range of ~50 ppm. In samples with such low concentrations, determining which compositions are superconducting is a challenging task and requires local probes or separation techniques. Here, we report results from samples with seven components: BaO 2 , CaCO 3 , SrCO 3 , La 2 O 3 , PbCO 3 , ZrO 2 and CuO oxides and carbonates, starting from different grain sizes. The reacted ceramics show different phases, particular grain growth, as well as variations in homogeneity and superconducting properties. High-T c superconductivity up to 118 K was found. Powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) in combination with energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) can assign "Pb1223" and "(Sr,Ca,Ba) 0.7-1.0 CuO 2 " phases in inhomogeneous samples milled with 10 mm ball sizes. Rather uniform samples featuring strong grain growth were obtained with 3 mm ball sizes, resulting in T c 70 K superconductivity of the "La(Ba,Ca) 2 Cu 3 O x " based phase. Scanning SQUID microscopy (SSM) establishes locally formed superconducting areas at a level of a few microns in inhomogeneous superconducting particles captured by a magnetic separation technique. The present results demonstrate a new synthetic approach for attaining high-T c superconductivity in compounds without Bi, Tl, Hg, or the need for high-pressure synthesis. The synthesis of new high-T c superconductors is one of the most challenging tasks in solid-state chemistry In this situation, one can conceive alternative procedures able to explore with a high probability all the possible reaction pathways. To this aim, we recently proposed Once phase formation has occurred, we will end up with samples of strongly intergrown crystallites, most of them non-superconducting. However, numerical simulations 2,8 have shown that such a combinatorial system should be able to produce any possible (T, p) phase in the range of at least 50 ppm. Therefore, further processing will either need (i) magnetic phase separation 13 or (ii) local phase and property analysis. Magnetic separation (i) is at present able to catch superconducting grains of size up to 20-50 m at a level of ppm concentration 9-13. Local probe analysis (ii) can rely on Lorentz microscopy 14 to demonstrate superconductivity for m to nm sized crystallites, along with elemental or even compositional analyses. A third method (iii), which we will apply here, is scanning SQUID microscopy (SSM) 15. SSM allows a spatial resolution down to a few hundred nm, without, however, gaining information on composition. In the search for new cuprate materials of practical interest that do not contain Tl, Hg or Bi, high pressure syntheses starting from Ca, Sr, Ba and Cu have yielded T c ʼs up to 110-115 K 16,17. In the present work we rely mainly on these elements (Ca, Sr, Ba and Cu) plus minor additions of La, Zr and Pb. These last three elements are found to be necessary components in the combinatorial system in order to produce unexpected phases at normal pressure, so far only obtained by high pressure syntheses 18. As mentioned above, we vary the grain size of starting materials in order to allow the chemical system to proceed along mechanisms (i) or (ii). For analysis we apply magnetic grain separation, scanning SQUID microscopy, bulk SQUID, X-ray and EDS measurements to characterize the superconducting phases. Initial compositions were prepared to react the combinations of seven elements in different relative molar ratios and the best results were obtained for the following volume fractions 2BaO 2 , 2CaCO 3 , 2SrCO 3 , 0.25La 2 O 3 , 0.1PbCO 3 , 0.5ZrO 2 and 4.5CuO. Mixtures of an attempted grain size were obtained by ball milling (FRITSCH, Planetary mono mill pulverisette 6) for one hour at 450 rpm in the presence of isooctane to provide a slurry. For milling we used either an (i) agate container with balls of 10 mm or (ii) a zirconia container with balls of 3 mm in diameter. After drying, powders from (i), (ii) were pressed into disk shaped pellets (Ø = 10 mm, d = 1.5 mm) at a pressure of 900 MPa. Sample pellets were placed in an alumina (Al 2 O 3 ) crucible and heat-treated within a horizontal quartz glass tube. Oxygen gas was flowed continuously at p(O 2 ) of about 1 bar during the annealing process. Typically the temperature was first raised to 930 °C (just below the formation of liquids) within ~ 6 h, then decreased to 800 °C with a cooling rate of 10 °C/h. Finally, the samples were cooled to room temperature at a rate of 100 °C/h. Although eutectic phases can appear in combinations of these components, surprisingly, liquid phase formation at T below ~ 930 C was not observed by DSC or optical microscopy. The phase analysis of sintered samples was carried out by means X-ray powder diffraction using a STOE StadiP diffractometer and Cu K α radiation. The morphology of crystallites and the elemental distribution within the bulk material were investigated by the Hitachi S-3000 N scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a Noran SIX NSS 200 dispersive X-ray detector. Temperature dependent dc magnetic susceptibility measurements of bulk samples were performed by a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-XL, Quantum Design) equipped with a reciprocating-sample option. The critical temperature (T c ) was evaluated as a linear extrapolation of the steepest part of the M(T) curves to M = 0. For magnetic separation 11,13, as obtained samples were ground and sieved (d  300 m). By this method we could capture superconducting particles of a minimum size of 20-50 μm at a temperature T  80 K. For this, particles were suspended in a liquid mixture of alkene gases. The procedure (for details see ref. 11,13) allowed the removal of superconductive particles from the suspension for single grain analyses. Scanning SQUID microscopy (SSM) imaging of the local magnetic moment and magnetic susceptibility was carried out on SC grains isolated by magnetic separation to detect local areas of superconductivity 15. SSM measurements have been performed in two ways: (i) First from the as obtained surface and (ii) second after removing about 50 m of a large grain by polishing. For these measurements a SQUID susceptometer produced in a joint collaboration between IBM and Stanford University was used 15. It uses (Fig. Applying a low-frequency ac current to the coil and detecting the resultant flux through a pickup loop enabled the measurement of the mutual inductance between the pickup loop and field coil, which is modified by the presence of any magnetic sample. In the case of superconductivity, the repulsion of the applied field due to the Meissner effect results in a reduced flux near the sample and a negative total mutual inductance. It is estimated that the pickup loop area is about 1  3 μm 2 . The SQUID was operated in a flux-locked feedback loop. A second set of SSM measurements were conducted with a susceptometer providing a larger pickup loop for enhanced sensitivity. All susceptibility data was taken with 1 mA through the field coil at 1117 Hz, with current running from the "back" field coil / pickup loop pair to the "front" pair. To gain elemental information regarding the superconducting particles isolated by the magnetic separation method, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM -Philips/FEI CM300UT-FEG) was used. For this the sample was prepared in a glove box and Ar atmosphere. It was washed with acetone to remove the vacuum grease from X-ray measurements and crushed in a mortar using hexane as a dispersing agent. A droplet of the dispersion was placed on the sample holder, a permeable carbon film, which was supported by an aluminium grid. By this technique we were able to investigate the possible phases in captured superconducting particles. These findings allow us to conclude that the size of the particles in the starting mixtures substantially affects the phase formation in these multi-component systems. A smaller average grain size (dozens or hundreds of nanometers) may favour local products using up grains, whereas a larger size may give rise to products appearing also in necks. While both samples represent multiphase objects, high-T c superconductivity appears only in those prepared by mixtures milled with 10 mm balls. Given a diversity of interfaces, spontaneous nucleation may produce metastable and stable phases belonging to phase diagrams constituted by the number of components participating in locally occurring phase formation. This is made visible by SEM: The surface morphology of sintered samples shown in Fig. The elemental analyses of sintered B-3 and B-10 samples, performed by EDS in SEM mode, are shown in Table We have attempted to reach the 118 K phase also by using a 3 mm ball size with various treatments, different Pb content, or sintering temperature. However, we obtained only T c  70 K, implying that the LaBaCaCu 3 O x is the preferred phase under these conditions. In addition we could identify the Sr 0.7 Ca 0.3 CuO 2 phase (Fig. Scanning squid microscopy (SSM) measurements were performed on a single 300  200 μm 2 superconducting B-10 particle, isolated by magnetic separation. An SSM overview image from the surface of an entire grain taken at 4.2 K is shown in Figure Further SSM measurements have been performed on the same 300 m grain as in Figure From these results we can conclude that in these combinatorial samples, there are local reaction centers, producing the superconducting compounds observed here down to 2 -4 m in size. We note that areas corresponding to superconducting regions are not always uniform but often consist of even smaller and connected spots. This reflects a non-uniform superconductivity inside superconducting regions. One might imagine that during the reaction a superconducting area was initially formed at several reaction centers around some particular grains and their subsequent growth resulted in the formation of somewhat weaker superconducting links between them. For further analysis to determine the high-T c phase in B-10, subsequent elemental compositions have been explored by EDX with a 5 nm beam size in conjunction with STEM on several captured particles, extracted by the magnetic separation technique. Lateral resolution and penetration depth of EDX strongly depend on beam-broadening and particle thickness. The thinner the sample and the smaller the beam-broadening, the more accurate the analytical information will be. Data on two of the typical particles and its relative elemental analysis performed at randomly chosen areas as marked in Figure According to elemental compositions and atomic percentages of different spots in Table In this paper we explored the phase space of samples made up of a mixture of seven (Ca, Sr, Ba, La, Zr, Pb, and Cu) components processed with different milling conditions. The size of grinding balls, number of balls and feed materials are the key to obtain starting mixtures of powders. 10 mm balls induce a low level of interaction between balls and feed components, resulting in a more inhomogeneous sample, while the small balls provide rather uniform samples with a higher grain connectivity produced by the heat treatment. By XRD analysis on bulk samples we can identify the non-superconducting 