Recently the discovery of magnetic order in two-dimensional monolayer chromium trihalides opens the new research field in two-dimensional materials. We use first-principles calculations to systematically examine the doping effect of chalcogen on CrBr3. In the case of S-doping, four stable configurations, Cr2Br5S, Cr2Br4S2-A, Cr2Br4S2-B and Cr2Br3S3-A, are predicted to be ferromagnetic semiconductors. It is found that the new bands appearing in the original bandgap are made up of S-p and Cr-d-eg orbits, lead to the obvious reduce of bandgap and the enhanced optical absorption in the visible range. Due to the decrease of valence electron after chalcogen doping, the magnetic moment also decreases with the increase of S atoms, and the character of ferromagnetic semiconductor is always hold in a wide range of strain. The results shown that monolayer CrBr3 with chalcogen doping supply a effectual way to control the magnetism and extend the optoelectronic applications. In the last decade, two-dimensional (2D) materials Fortunately, the magnetocrystalline anisotropy make some materials be not limited by the Mermin-Wagner theorem. The recent reports of magnetic order in different 2D crystals (Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 , CrI 3 and FePS 3 ) [10-14] mark a milestone in the research of 2D magnetic materials and explore the 2D magnetic physics, indispensable for the low-dimensional spintronics. The small cleavage energy in the ferromagnetic van der Waals (vdW) bulk CrI 3 is propitious to the mechanically exfoliated monolayer structure, prevalent in other common 2D materials. The magnetization experiments show the bulk crys- * yongliu@ysu.edu.cn tal has the out-of-plane ferromagnetic (FM) order below T C = 68 K In the present work, we focus on the 2D semiconductor CrBr 3 and study the doping effect of chalcogen (S, Se and Te), in consideration of ferromagnetic metal in chromium chalcogens Technical details of the calculations are as follows. All calculations of electronic structures and optical properties accurately were carried out using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) code In addition, we have also calculated the doping effect on the optical properties of Cr 2 Br 6 with chalcogen. As shown We have investigated the doping effect of chalcogen (S, Se and Te) on the CrBr 3 using first-principles calculations. We now take Cr 2 Br 6-x S x as the example to summarize our results. Four stable configurations are predicted to be ferromagnetic semiconductors: Cr 2 Br 5 S, Cr 2 Br 4 S 2 -A, Cr 2 Br 4 S 2 -B and Cr 2 Br 3 S 3 -A. After the doping of S atom, the new bands appearing in the energy range of 0 ∼ 1 eV are made up of S-p and Cr-d-e g orbits and lead to the obvious reduce of bandgap in the spin-up direction. Since the change of valence electron, the magnetic moment also decreases with the increase of S atoms, such as Cr 2 Br 3 S 3 -A has the minimum magnetic moment of 3 μ B per primitive cell. And the character of ferromagnetic semiconductor is always hold in a wide range of strain. Furthermore, the doping of chalcogen can also lead to the increase of optical absorption in the visible range and make it to be possible candidates for optoelectronic applications. As an important material in FM semiconductor, CrI 3 is con-sidered certainly, but we do not find any stable structures, as shown in Appendix B. Except for the substitution, we also calculate the case of atomic adds because of the vacancy at the lattice vertex [Fig. 