The interactions between elementary excitations such as phonons, plasmons, magnons, or particlehole pairs, drive emergent functionalities and electronic instabilities such as multiferroic behaviour, anomalous thermoelectric properties, polar order, or superconductivity. Whereas various hybrid excitations have been studied extensively, the feed-back of prototypical elementary excitations on the crystal electric fields (CEF), defining the environment in which the elementary excitations arise, has been explored for very strong coupling only. We report high-resolution neutron spectroscopy and ab-initio phonon calculations of CeAuAl3, an archetypal fluctuating valence compound. The high resolution of our data allows us to quantify the energy scales of three coupling mechanisms between phonons, CEF-split localized 4f electron states, and conduction electrons. Although these interactions do not appear to be atypically strong for this class of materials, we resolve, for the first time, a profound renormalization of low-energy quasiparticle excitations on all levels. The key anomalies of the spectrum we observe comprise (1) the formation of a CEF-phonon bound state with a comparatively low density of acoustic phonons reminiscent of vibronic modes observed in other materials, where they require a pronounced abundance of optical phonons, (2) an anticrossing of CEF states and acoustic phonons, and (3) a strong broadening of CEF states due to the hybridization with more itinerant excitations. The fact that all of these features are well resolved in CeAuAl3 suggests that similar hybrid excitations should also be dominant in a large family of related materials. This promises a predictive understanding towards the discovery of new magneto-elastic functionalities and instabilities. As the elementary excitations in solids reflect different aspects of the entire system of electrons, a wide range of coupling phenomena may be expected. For instance, the phonon-polariton, plasmon-polariton, or electro-magnon change their character continuously as a function of wavevector and energy Crystal electric fields (CEFs) may be considered one of the most important aspects in local-electron many-body physics, as they determine the environment in which elementary excitations arise. In this capacity, the CEFs control the nature and coupling of spin and orbital degrees of freedom, as well as electronic and magnetic anisotropies. The conventional static properties of the CEF excitations are extremely well understood and documented. In comparison, long-standing open questions concern the feed-back of elementary excitations on the CEFs, which leads to the formation of additional excitations beyond the expectations on the single ion level, as well as finite lifetimes and anomalous temperature dependences. Two primary mechanisms have been considered as the origin of such CEF properties. First, phonons may create CEF transitions between neighboring ions 3 , representing an important example of so-called magnetoelastic (ME) coupling While various facets of the CEFs have been studied for nearly five decades, experimental evidence reflecting different coupling strengths as well as the full range of properties of the CEFs is surprisingly limited Experimentally, the direct measurement of such complex low-energy dynamics requires a single crystal spectroscopic method with high resolution in both energy and momentum transfer. In contrast, as CEF excitations are traditionally assumed to be momentum-independent they have typically been determined in polycrystalline samples. Moreover, studies reporting momentum-resolved data on single crystals focus on a single facet of the hybrid character only, and lack the necessary comprehensive information. In turn, there are a number of long-standing issues that may be resolved with targeted spectroscopic measurements, such as the feed-back of the ME coupling on the CEFs and spectrum of phonon excitations Taken together, these represent general problems, which are potentially relevant in any correlated-electron system. However, rare-earth intermetallics with moderate ME coupling are particularly suited for their study, because the different aspects of the hybrid character are well-defined and tractable. Namely, as both spin and orbital angular contributions generate the ME coupling, the well defined multiplett structure of the f-shells in rare earth compounds makes the ME coupling particularly tractable The rich diversity of CEF-driven magnetoelastic phenomena in rare-earth based compounds has been recognized for a long time. Perhaps most prominent is the formation of a bound state between the CEF excitations and phonons in CeAl 2 , known as vibronic-bound state (VBS) Several studies have proposed the formation of a VBS in other materials, considering an interplay of optical phonons with CEF excitations as in CeAl 2 . For instance, consistent with this mechanism evidence for a VBS in polycrystalline PrNi 2 vanishes as the optical phonon levels shift to lower energies under doping A different interplay with dispersive phonon branches as a function of momentum has been proposed in the regime of a steep crossing with the CEF excitations. For the case of dipolar magnetic interactions the emergence of an anticrossing in the presence of an applied magnetic field or spontaneous magnetic order has been observed, e.g., in Pr, PrAl 2 , and TmVO 4 Finally, the lifetime and temperature dependence of CEF excitations have been known to display pronounced deviations from the expected thermal population of single-ion states In this paper we report a comprehensive inelastic neutron scattering study of the spectrum of low-lying excitations in CeAuAl 3 and ab initio phonon calculations. This compound is a member of the CeTAl 3 series (T=Ce, Au, Pd, Pt), which forms part of a wider family of BaAl 4type materials The enhancement of the linear temperature dependence of the specific heat and quadratic temperature dependence of the resistivity (γ = 227 mJ mol -1 K -2 and A = 5 μΩcmK -2 , respectively) are characteristic of a heavy Fermi liquid state. The CEF lifts the degeneracy of the Ce 3+ J = 5/2 manifold, which has a characteristic impact on both the magnetic susceptibility and specific heat of the material. However, the first and second doublet at T I = 57 K and T II = 265 K are split from the ground state such that they have no bearing on the bulk properties and the enhancement of the Fermi liquid ground state. Overall, CeAuAl 3 appears to be a typical Ce-intermetallic, which shares many of it physical properties with a large number of related materials. One High symmetry positions are marked according to the Bilbao notation unusual feature is its anisotropic reduced thermal conductivity (compared to non-magnetic LaAuAl 3 ). This has been interpreted in terms of enhanced magnetoelastic phonon scattering on the Ce ions taking into account the CEF splitting The observation of a VBS state in CePd 2 Al 2 10 , a related tetragonal compound, appears to be intimately related to a structural phase transition and underscores a strong interplay of the CEF excitations and phonons in this class of systems. Indeed, time of flight (TOF) neutron spectroscopy revealed also a VBS in polycrystalline CeCuAl 3 In contrast, revisiting the properties of single-crystal CeAuAl 3 in careful triple-axis neutron spectroscopy we find clear evidence for strong feed-back of phonons and particle-hole excitations on the CEF excitations. In particular we find a VBS, a clear anticrossing and substantial broadening of the CEFs. The observed behaviour is rather subtle and below the detection limit of neutron TOF spectroscopy in polycrystals The direct observation of the interplay between the lattice and electronic properties requires a spectroscopic probe which couples both to the lattice and electronic transitions with high resolution in both energy-and momentum transfer. Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) is uniquely suited to the task. Careful comparison of the INS signal in different Brillouin zones, and the temperature dependence of this response allows to distinguish nuclear and magnetic contributions to the spectral response, even without the need for polarization analysis. We have therefore used neutron triple axis spectroscopy at the spectrometers PANDA and PUMA at the Heinz-Maier Leibniz Zentrum at the Technical University of Munich. For technical details, we refer to the methods section and supplementary information 57 . A high-quality and high-purity single crystals of CeAuAl 3 was grown by the optical floating zone method, using a ultra-high-vacuum compatible preparation chain Shown in Fig. An overview of the excitation spectra of CeAuAl 3 as a function of reduced scattering wave vector q we observe is presented in Fig. We now turn to a more detailed discussion of these observations. The crystal field excitation at E CF = 4.9 meV (red shading) may be attributed to the transition from the |Γ 6 ground state to the first excited doublet |Γ 1 7 , cf. Fig. The strongly dispersive excitations at the Γ-points may be clearly attributed to acoustic phonons as they emanate from nuclear Bragg peaks. Taking into account the tetragonal crystal symmetry, a longitudinal and a transverse acoustic branch are observed along the Γ to M direction, labeled as Λ LA and Λ TA , respectively. As illustrated in Fig. The momentum dependence of the intensity of the dispersion-less excitations at E CF and E VBS follows the from factor of the Ce 3+ ion (see Fig. As illustrated by the energy scans at the Γ and M points shown in Fig. For the discussion of our experimental results we assume that the magnetoelastic properties of CeAuAl 3 are dominated by the interactions of the 4f -electrons with the electrostatic crystal field. A Hamiltonian describing this situation is given by where H L accounts for the kinetic and potential energy of the Bravais lattice, H CF denotes the conventional crystal field Hamiltonian, and H ME represents the single-ion magnetoelastic coupling of the spin to lattice strains. It is important to note that the phonons and crystal field excitations must share the same symmetry to couple directly. Treating the contribution of the Bravais lattice, H L , in a harmonic approximation we calculated the structural properties and spectrum of phonon excitations 60 using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) in the frozen-core projector augmented wave (PAW) method. The calculated lattice constants a = 4.335 Å and c = 10.844 Å were found to be in excellent agreement with experiment For the tetragonal symmetry of CeAuAl 3 , point group C 4v (4mm), contributions of the Ce 3+ ions in the presence of a crystal electric field may be expressed as where B m n and O m n are the crystal electric field parameters and Steven's operators, respectively The calculations of the phonon spectrum and crystal field levels presented so far, clearly identify the dispersionless excitation at E VBS = 7.9 meV (green shading in Fig. Similarly, the formation of the VBS in the tetragonal crystal structure of CeCuAl 3 , illustrated in Fig. . Thus, in both cases the formation of a Thalmeier-Fulde VBS presumes strong magnetoelastic interactions between weakly dispersive optical phonons and a nearby crystal field level. In contrast, in CeAuAl 3 at the energy of the putative VBS the phonon calculations do not yield the required high density of states. A low phonon density of states at at E = 8 meV, as well as E ≈ 6 meV and E = 11 -13 meV is also supported by our calculations (see Fig. Nevertheless, our measurements suggest that a comparatively weak coupling between the excitation from the |Γ 6 to |Γ Using similar methods as reported in Refs. The magneto-elastic interactions may also be expected to affect the spectrum of phonon and crystal field excitations where their interplay is strongest. This is indeed the case in the regime of the anticrossing 57,60 . Indeed, the anticrossing also proves to be a direct consequence of the magnetoelastic coupling. We follow considerations first reported for PrNi 5 where ω q± represent the energies of the two anticrossing excitations; ω 0 is the phonon energy which depends on k, E is the non-dispersive energy of the crystal field level involved and g AC is an effective coupling constant related to the renormalization of elastic constant, see supplement for details The magneto-elastic coupling is also reflected in the temperature dependence of the scattering intensity, shown in terms of energy scans at the M point in Fig. When additionally considering the coupling to the conduction electrons following the suggestion of Ref. As summarized in Tab. I, the coupling constants g BFK and g VBS in CeCuAl 3 are smaller than in CeAl 2 . This highlights that the spectrum of low-lying CEF excitations may be modified profoundly, even for systems with rather weak magneto-elastic coupling. In summary, we find a remarkable combination of different facets of the interactions of phonons and conduction electrons with the CEF excitations in CeAuAl 3 . The magneto-elastic hybrid character of the excitation comprises the formation of a bound state akin to the VBS in CeAl 2 , a well-resolved anticrossing, and strong damping of the CEF levels. The combined observation of all of these different effects in the same material, the importance of acoustic phonons in their formation, and the comparatively weak coupling imply that these effects must be present in many materials. This underscores, that moderately interacting rare-earth compounds offer tractable insights towards a predictive understanding of magneto-elastic functionalities and instabilities. This value was obtained by fitting the data reported in Ref. A high quality single crystal of CeAuAl 3 was prepared by optical float-zoning under ultra-high vacuum compatible conditions Inelastic neutron scattering measurements were carried out on the triple axis spectrometers PUMA and PANDA at MLZ, Garching Ab initio calculations have been carried using VASP and the frozen-core projector augmented wave (PAW) method. Taking into account weak interactions of the rare-earth (RE) ions with phonons in terms of magnetoelastic effects, an analytical expression for the hybridization of quadrupole excitations and phonons from the poles of the one-phonon Green-function is derived. For details see 57 and Ref. The pure crystal field levels without taking into account perturbations were analyzed using the standard Stevens formalism arXiv:1812.01020v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 3 Dec 2018 where B m n and O m n are the CEF parameters and Steven's operators, respectively Neutron scattering of the crystal field transitions between these states on a single crystal sample bears the advantage, that different ground states may be distinguished directly from a comparison of the different crystallographic directions. The intensity of the transition between two CF levels depends on the matrix elements of the transition matrix where f (Q) is the magnetic form factor, P n expresses thermal occupation of level E n , α = x, y or z, and J is the total angular momentum operator. Since neutrons are sensitive to the magnetic moment perpendicular to Q only, it is possible to observe the different J α matrices. Because of the simple form of the J z matrix, it does not contribute to transitions from/to the |Γ 6 state. Consequently for the case of the |Γ 6 ground state, the J x and J y components can be measured together along the crystallographic c direction whereas only J x , J y is measured along the b, a direction respectivelly. In addition, transition intensities J x and J y are the same for the |Γ 6 ground state in tetragonal structure. On the other hand, for the |Γ (2) 7 ground states there is not such simplification. Pure crystal field excitations are expected to have negligible lifetime. In turn, the width of the CEF peaks is expected to be limited by the resolution of the spectrometer and temperature independent. As shown in Fig. The reason is that part of the magnetic intensity transfers into the background with increasing temperature. This effect is well described by a theoretical model proposed by by Becker, Fulde and Keller (BFK) In order to account for the anticrossing and to evaluate the coupling energy, the results of Aksenov and coworkers for PrAl 2 where D 0 (q, ω) is the phonon GF in the harmonic approximation, q is wave vector of phonons, and where f m = exp (-βE m )/ m exp (-βE m ) is the occupation number of one-ion states, and E mn are energies of transitions between CEF levels. V 1 mn = m|V 1 (J , q)|n are matrix elements of the operators V 1 (J , q) which are functions of the J operators depending on the symmetry of the magnetoelastic coupling The total Hamiltonian of the system may be written as H f CEF denotes the interaction of the spin J of the f -th ion with the crystal field caused by the other ions, with the zeroth-order term H 0 CEF being the conventional crystal field Hamiltoninan described by Eq. ( The one-ion magnetoelastic Hamiltonian, accounts for the direct coupling between the deformations of the lattice and the 4f shell. This Hamiltonian may be constructed according to group theory where B Γ jj is a phenomenological magnetoelastic coupling constant, and Γ,j i represents linear combinations of the first-order strain components xx , yy , zz , xy , yz , and zx . The shear strains are defined as xy = 1 2 ( ∂uy ∂x + ∂ux ∂y ). It is reasonable to assume that the crystal is constrained so that all "antisymmetric strains" such as TABLE Strain functions Γ,j i One-ion operators S Γ,j (f ) Thus the one-ion magnetoelastic Hamiltonian for the tetragonal symmetry (point group 4mm) may be expressed directly as 19 In other words, the magnetoelastic Hamiltonian may be considered as the strain derivative of the crystal field Hamiltonian. The two-ion magnetoelasticity is in turn related to the modification of the two-ion magnetic interactions by the strain. The one-ion magnetoelastic Hamiltonian is sufficiently general when considering the main effects. Therefore, in this study two-ion magnetoelastic interactions were ignored which may lead to structural and magnetic phase transitions We specialize our example of magneto-elastic interaction of shear deformations within the xz plane (all ∂uα ∂β = 0 except ∂ux ∂z and ∂uz ∂x ). Then we have where e(q) is the polarization vector for the phonon. For the Γ-M direction, only the matrix elements determined by Γ A 6 -Γ 1B 7 and Γ B 6 -Γ 1A 7 differ from zero. Using the wave functions of one-ion states, the matrix elements for Eq. ( where B is the magnetoelastic coupling constant and |q| is reciprocal wavevector. In order to compare the coupling in different materials, we introduce an effective coupling constant g AC , which is directly related to the renormalization of elastic constant (see Eq. 37 in Ref. where c 44 is an elastic constant, Ω is the volume of the primitive cell, v s is the speed of sound and m c is the mass of the primitive cell. Using Eqs. ( With equation ( where A is related to the amplitude of the branch at the border of the Brillouin zone. At first data points were determined by Gaussian fits of the raw data, Fig. Refitting the data reported n PrNi 5 we obtain as an upper bound g AC < 4 μeV, which is much smaller than for CeAuAl 3 . An exact determination of the coupling constant is unfortunately due to resolution of the data as illustrated in Fig. The total Hamiltonian may be written as where the first term is the tetragonal CEF Hamiltonian mentioned above, the second term is the phonon Hamiltonian (H ph ), and the third term is the c-ph coupling term. Here hω 0 denotes the phonon energy, and a + u or a u are phonon creation or annihilation operators, u is the phonon displacement, and g is a magnetoelastic parameter proportional to the coupling between CEF and phonon excitations. O u is the CEF-phonon operator, with u = α, γ, δ, 1 and 2 . According to ref. In the basis states of the CEF states, O γ is given by with Then the oscillator strengths Q γ is given by with We have Q , 0 and |Γ 6 , 1 = a + |Γ 6 , 0 with unperturbed energies 0, E Γ6Γ 1 7 , E Γ6Γ 2 7 , and hω 0 , respectively. The diagonalization of the Hamiltonian H total yields phonon-like states, which represent linear combinations of purely electronic |Γ This may be interpreted as bound states of a CEF excitation with phonons. For a rough estimate of the coupling constant g VBS we have assumed hω 0 = 6.5 meV, just between E CF and E VBS . This value is in agreement with an enhanced density of phonon states as determined in DFT calculations (see Fig. In the following additional figures are presented to illustrate further the phenomena described in the main text. Fig. Detailed energy scans through different Q-points of the anticrossing in the (101) Brillouin zone is shown in Fig. Γ M S Γ TDOS reciprocal space (A -1 ) Γ 202 Γ 220 Γ 101 Γ 200 Γ 110 Γ 004 Γ 002 Γ 000 Γ 200 Γ 220 Q-scans E-scans