The observation of substantially enhanced superconductivity of single-layer FeSe films on SrTiO 3 has stimulated intensive research interest. At present, conclusive experimental data on the corresponding electron-boson interaction is still missing. Here we use inelastic electron scattering spectroscopy and angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy to show that the electrons in these systems are dressed by the strongly polarized lattice distortions of the SrTiO 3 , and the indispensable non-adiabatic nature of such a coupling leads to the formation of dynamic interfacial polarons. Furthermore, the collective motion of the polarons results in a polaronic plasmon mode, which is unambiguously correlated with the surface phonons of SrTiO 3 in the presence of the FeSe films. A microscopic model is developed showing that the interfacial polaron-polaron interaction leads to the superconductivity enhancement. As one of the most important concepts in many body systems, electron-boson interaction (EBI) determines many fundamental properties of materials. The most prominent example is the formation of Cooper pairs in superconductivity, mediated by a proper type of bosons via EBI. Identification of the precise nature of the mediating bosons is necessarily the key step in understanding any superconducting system, be it conventional or unconventional. Unlike the cases of conventional superconductors where the bosonic modes are phonons associated with lattice vibrations, the mediating modes in unconventional copper-and iron-based superconductors In a recent study, a specific type of EBI was invoked to be responsible for the T C enhancement in FeSe/STO, where the electrons in the FeSe are coupled with the phonons in the STO, the latter manifested by the replica bands In this study, single-layer FeSe films were grown on STO (001) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy. The surface bosonic excitations of both single-layer FeSe/STO and bare STO (001) were measured in an angle-resolved high resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) system with two-dimensional (2D) energy and momentum mapping Figure We first note that, as a vital reference system, the STO substrate is a polar semiconductor, in which the electrons and their companying lattice polarizations (or phonons) form quasi-particles called polarons Returning to FeSe-capped STO, the identification of the ρ mode to be also the polaronic plasmon mode is based on the consideration that this mode exhibits qualitatively similar temperature behaviors as the ρ' mode [Figs. The temperature dependence of β, α, and ρ/ρ' modes reveals a striking contrast with and without the FeSe capping, as shown in Figs. The underlying reason for such an enhanced EBI could be attributed to the reduced symmetry associated with the capping and charge transfer from the STO into the FeSe. The latter introduces significant variations in the band structure, accordingly in the EBI, and is indispensable for the interfacial enhanced superconductivity The corresponding scattering magnitudes in the phonon momentum space, shown in Fig. The relative magnitude of the Fermi energy [E F ~ 56 meV, as indicated in Fig. The dynamic nature of the interfacial polarons is expected to have important manifestations in mediating the superconductivity if the corresponding EBI is indeed mainly responsible for the enhanced pairing. One of the essential aspects is the short coherence length, corresponding to local pairing 1.12 10 m/s is the Fermi velocity and ∆ 0 20 meV is the superconducting gap extracted from Fig. To further exploit the local pairing nature of the dynamic interfacial polarons, here we develop a microscopic model to describe the local polaron-polaron coupling, which may lead to superconductivity enhancement. The dynamic nature of the interfacial polarons can induce an additional attractive interaction within a short range (see the Ref. [22] for details). Here the dynamic interfacial polarons only enhance the existing pairing strength in the FeSe without the polar field effect of the STO, irrespective of the detailed pairing mechanism involved. A schematic drawing of the strengthened pairing through the dynamic interfacial polarons is illustrated in Fig. [22]), which translates into a T C enhancement from ~ 40 K for optimally doped FeSe to ~ 65 K. Such an enhancement mechanism is likely to be broadly applicable to other interfacial superconducting systems on polar substrates, such as STO, BaTiO 3 , and TiO 2 . We have shown that the electrons in the single-layer FeSe/STO are dressed by the strongly polarized and penetrating electric field associated with the phonons of the substrate, leading to the formation of dynamic interfacial polarons. The corresponding polaronic plasmon has been revealed to be strongly correlated with the surface phonons of the STO upon FeSe capping. We have also developed a microscopic model to show that the dynamic polaron-polaron interaction can induce an additional attraction between the electrons in FeSe, resulting in enhanced superconductivity. The mechanism is expected to be broadly applicable, for example, to other interfacial systems such as FeSe/TiO 2 