The observation of sub-grained cellular features in additively manufactured (AM)/selectively laser melted (SLM) 316L stainless steel components has remained an interesting, though incompletely understood phenomenon. However, the recently observed correlation linking the presence of these features with significantly enhanced mechanical strength in SLM 316L materials While all research groups studying SLM of 316L report observing cellular substructures via some combination of optical, scanning and/or transmission electron microscopy (SEM and TEM, respectively), only a subset of these groups report the presence of an increased concentration of certain elements (typically Cr and/or Mo) to cell walls via TEM/EDS In contrast to the intermittent observation of solute concentration, TEM inspection shows that cell walls are always associated with the presence of dense dislocation tangles. These dislocation structures represent one echelon in the above-referenced microstructural hierarchy identified as the basis for enhanced strength and ductility The existing theory for cell formation invokes cellular solidification as the primary mechanism for the formation of these arrangements. It has thus been posited that the compositional cell structure acts as a spatial framework for pinning mobile dislocations as they propagate due to the generation of residual stress upon cooling All studies that observe the presence or absence of microsegregation characterize samples obtained from macroscale AM structures, i.e. components that consist of multiple laser scans in-plane, as well as multiple layers of processed materials. In order to eliminate the confounding variables associated with multiple heat/re-heat and melt/re-melt cycles, we have opted to focus on single SLM tracks processed on a 316L base plate with a single layer of powder. Several single-track efforts have been conducted previously, specifically on 316L Figure Figures 1d and 1e display a topographical image and corresponding profile obtained via atomic force microscopy (AFM), revealing that cell walls protrude from the surface, implying enhanced chemical stability of cell walls relative to cell interiors. If the cell structures were due to the presence of dislocations alone, then the cell walls would be expected to etch preferentially, and form grooves or pits instead of protrusions Although prior studies, as well as our own observations (see supplement) reveal full infiltration of surface cellular features in bulk AM-produced parts, i.e. many layers, this is not the case for single-tracks. In fact, every single-track cross-section analyzed incorporates some area within the processed zone that yields no visible surface cell structure upon polishing and etching. In some cases almost the entire cross-section appears to be devoid of structure. Though puzzling, the presence of these non-surface-cell-structured regions is fortuitous, and greatly facilitates the explanation of the mechanism for cellular formation. Figure Micro-segregation is a prerequisite for cellular solidification The formation of pure dislocation cell structures in work-hardened metals is a well-known phenomenon It is well documented that significant residual stresses are generated upon solidification for SLM-processed metals If it is accepted that substructure is due solely to dislocation cell generation, the presence of coincident chemical heterogeneity must also be reconciled. Strain-aging, either static or dynamic and not vice-versa. The stabilizing effect of the solute acts to pin the dislocations, thus effectively strengthening the material, and, at elevated temperatures and/or strain levels, gives rise to the Portevin-Le Chatelier effect, or the apparent saw-tooth behavior in stress-strain response We put forth the claim that it is the dynamic evolution of dislocation structures, followed by strain aging that are the underlying mechanisms responsible for the apparent cell structure generation, and subsequent (solid-state) microsegregation. It follows that if the regions that do not exhibit surface cells are purely dislocation structures, then a subsequent heat treatment (well below the melt temperature) may result in local solute diffusion to the cell walls via the formation of Cottrell atmospheres. Indeed, Figs. 3a-c reveal just that. Figure Figure The presence of twin boundaries is obviously correlated with the presence or absence of surface structure. However, a causal relationship is less clear. Close inspection of the fusion zone boundary reveals that the twin boundaries that are present in the track are simply those that persist upon epitaxial regrowth into the melt. It can thus be concluded that the (lack of) surface structure is not causing their presence. However, the significant difference in grain boundary energy The exact nature of a potential causal relationship is currently incompletely understood, though we offer the following hypothesis. Pure dislocation cell structures are generated upon solidification due solely to local thermomechanical conditions, i.e. orientation with respect to thermal shrinkage and the (local) Schmid factor. The statistical presence or absence of Σ3 boundaries contribute to the overall free energy of the respective crystals in a manner such that the time at elevated temperature upon cooling from the melt is or is not sufficient for causing solid-state diffusion to occur via the formation of Cottrell atmospheres around the preexisting dislocation cell structures. That is, general high angle grain boundaries contribute significantly to the local volumetric free energy, thus effectively reducing the marginal energy barrier for diffusion. Whereas the presence of Σ3 boundaries essentially increases the driving force (by lowering the volumetric free energy) for diffusion. Furthermore, HAGBs are also more efficient sources of dislocation nucleation The theory presented accounts for the intermittent reported observation of elemental concentrations as follows: dislocation structures act as sinks for solute diffusion. However the extent of that diffusion will depend on the preponderance of Σ3 boundaries (and their three-dimensional configuration), elastic strain energy, an overall contribution of average grain boundary energy (due to grain size/total grain boundary area within a representative volume) and spatially localized conditions such as thermal conductivity, which may be decreased or enhanced by combinatorial effects of AM part geometry (and support structures) and the precise laser scan path. Further variables such as the number of heat/reheat cycles (again dependent on scan path) experienced by a particular area will also strongly influence residual strain energy fields. Therefore, depending on the specifics of the AM build and the sampling locations chosen, the extent of observed chemical heterogeneity will vary widely. Based on the plurality of evidence, it is clear that cellular solidification is an extremely unlikely candidate for the generation of cellular sub-structuring in AM 316L stainless steel. We have shown that pure dislocation cell structures are indeed present, and it is these structures that drive subsequent solute diffusion to cell walls. Furthermore, the nature of the observed structure is heavily influenced by the presence (or absence) of Σ3 boundaries. SLM is essentially providing an intrinsic strain aging treatment that has been shown to significantly enhance mechanical strength Finally, it is noted that the high solidification rates of SLM imply that strain-rate dependent phenomena may also be playing a vital role, and merit further investigation. All presented single tracks were generated on a GE/Concept Laser M2 SLM system using P = 370 W, V = 900 mm/s and d = 160 um. Concept Laser CL-20ES 316L stainless steel powder was used with approximate composition Cr17.5 at.%:Ni11.5 at.%:Mo2.3 at.%:Mn1.0at.%:Si0.5at.%:Fe Balance (P, C, S < 0.03 at.%). Powder layers were 25 um thick. All single tracks were processed directly on a 5 mm thick 316L baseplate. All cross sections and longitudinal sections were cut with a diamond saw, and subsequently ground with successively finer grit 320 -1200 SiC paper. This was followed by polishing via 9 μm, 3 μm, and 40 nm colloidal silica suspensions. Samples were then etched for five minutes in Krolls etchant (DI-H 2 0:H 2 SO 4 :HF -90:8:2) Characterization SEM: Imaging was performed on a JEOL JSM 7001F scanning electron microscope at 10 kV. EBSD: Crystallographic indexing was performed on a JEOL JSM 7001F scanning electron microscope at 30 kV tilted 70 • with respect to the incident electron beam. An EDAX EBSD camera was used with a 0.3 μm step size and 4 ms acquisition time. AFM: Topographic scans were made with a Veeco atomic force microscope in tapping mode. TEM/Sample Preparation: An FEI Scios dual-beam focused ion beam with a Ga ion source operating at 30 kV was used to prepare thin foil samples for analysis. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) bright field (BF) imaging, and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping was performed using an aberration-corrected JEOL JEM-ARM200CF operating at 200 kV. Subsequently, the lightness of the pixels is used to calculate pixels that are white and pixels that are black as follows: Finally, to calculate the histogram of the pixel values on the darkfield image, we collect the values of pixels that satisfy the condition: 