Gallium nitride (GaN) has emerged as an essential semiconductor material for energyefficient lighting and electronic applications owing to its large direct bandgap of 3.4 eV. Present GaN/AlGaN heterostructures seemingly feature an inherently existing highly-mobile 2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), which results in normally-on transistor characteristics. Here we report on an ultra-pure GaN/AlGaN layer stack grown by molecular beam epitaxy, in which such a 2DEG is absent at 300 K in the dark, a property previously not demonstrated. Illumination with ultra-violet light however generates a 2DEG at the GaN/AlGaN interface and the heterostructure becomes electrically conductive. At temperatures below 150 K this photo-conductivity is persistent with an insignificant dependence of the 2D channel density on the optical excitation power. Residual donor impurity concentrations below 10 17 cm -3 in the GaN/AlGaN layer stack are one necessity for our observations. Fabricated transistors manifest that these characteristics enable a future generation of normally-off as well as light-sensitive GaN-based device concepts. Group-III-Nitrides and their heterostructures have become key elements in energy-saving daily life applications, such as white solid-state lighting [1] and short wavelength lasers for data storage concepts high-voltage applications The aforementioned mobile channel at the GaN/AlGaN interface is a 2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in close proximity to the surface (10 -50 nm) with record low temperature electron mobility in excess of 100000 cm 2 /Vs When inspecting the band diagram of the underlying GaN/AlGaN heterostructure in more detail, impurities or defects in the GaN or AlGaN layers represent another possible source of the channel charges, as they will be transferred into the inherently existing polarizationinduced confinement potential to minimize their potential energy (Fig. Under investigation is a GaN/AlGaN heterostructure with a low level of residual impurities (approximately 2 • 10 16 cm -3 ). The GaN/Al0.06Ga0.94N/GaN layer stack with respective thicknesses of 1 μm/16 nm/3 nm (inset Fig. The discussed GaN/AlGaN heterostructure with ohmic contacts shows electrically insulating behavior in the dark at low temperatures as well as at 300 K, as discussed later. Under ultraviolet (UV) illumination the sample turns conductive, which is explained by the formation of a 2DEG at the GaN/AlGaN interface. In addition, below 150 K the conductivity becomes persistent in the dark, i.e. several hours after blanking the UV light the electron density reaches an equilibrium (persistence) value independent of the initial excitation power of ~ 2 • 10 12 cm -2 (Fig. Albeit the equilibrium channel density is power-independent, the value under steady UV illumination depends on the excitation power (Fig. The observed Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations also allow for the assignment of Landau level filling factors and the subsequent extraction of the 2D channel density. In the described experiment a change in steady UV excitation power over almost 5 orders in magnitude only accounts for a ~ 50 % increase of the 2D channel density up to 3.0 • 10 12 cm -2 , compared to its equilibrium value of ~ 2 • 10 12 cm -2 (see values given in Fig. The insulating behavior at 300 K in the dark combined with the possibility to generate a conductive channel under UV illumination will facilitate new routes for device application by exploiting the electrostatic population of the confinement potential at the GaN/AlGaN interface. This is equivalent to the technologically desired normally-off switching characteristics of lateral HFETs. A normally-off device processing scheme includes an overlap of the gate layer with the ohmic source and drain contacts. To achieve this, lithographically defined lateral HFET test structures were covered with a highly insulating aluminum oxide layer subsequent to ohmic contact formation (Fig. Lateral HFETs based on our GaN/AlGaN stack were processed with the described normallyoff scheme. As shown in Fig. The presented data strongly indicate that the confinement potential at the GaN/AlGaN interface is inherently not populated with charge carriers. Upon illumination with photon energies in the region of the GaN bandgap the channel is filled and a 2DEG -and only a 2DEG -as a conduction path is generated. This 2DEG persists at low temperature (i.e. after blanking the UV illumination) and exhibits an equilibrium electron density of ~2 • 10 12 cm -2 . Further steady optical excitation will certainly add photo-generated electrons, though this only insignificantly impacts the channel density. The layer stack architecture and the resulting potential landscape set a limit for the number of electrons accommodating the 2DEG. This channel density robustness is demonstrated under steady flooding with photoinduced electrons over several magnitudes in excitation power. The low impurity level of ~2 • 10 16 cm -3 (with an even lower value for ionized impurities below 10 16 cm -3 ) in the epitaxial GaN/AlGaN stack is the hitherto unidentified source of the channel charges. A back-on-theenvelope calculation yields a number of 10 13 cm -2 electrons, when 10 17 cm -3 ionized impurities are distributed over the 1 μm thick MBE stack. In this case a 2DEG is present independent of illumination. The transistor transfer characteristics IDS(VGS) at 300 K at low drain-source voltage (VDS) with and without UV illumination support this interpretation (Fig. Those transferred electrons could be captured in traps at the GaN cap / dielectric interface as observed in hysteresis phenomena with a shift towards positive VGS of transfer curves measured during back-sweeping to lower VGS again. However, negligible hysteresis (< 0.1 V) was observed in double sweep measurements of transfer characteristics with highest VGS values below overloading the 2DEG density. Moreover, once electron trapping occurred, the transfer characteristics could be shifted back to the original position on the VGS scale by stressing the device at high negative VGS values, e.g. -8 V, for several minutes for complete de-trapping. Additionally, double-pulsed measurements of transfer characteristics with a repetition rate of 20 Hz and pulse width 1 ms performed at quiescent gate-source voltages of -3 V, 0 V and 3 V always result in positive threshold voltages > 1.5 V. Therefore, we can exclude trapped electrons in the dielectric or at the GaN cap / dielectric interface as the root cause of the positive threshold voltage in the dark case. The same scenario holds for photo-excited electrons. Once the channel is filled up to its equilibrium density, additional electrons will favorably overcome the AlGaN barrier and transfer into the GaN cap / surface by tunneling or thermal stimulation. This very likely explains the density robustness of the channel demonstrated in Fig. The discussed heterostructure was grown along the Ga-polar c-axis in a VG80H MBE system at a temperature slightly below the rapid Ga desorption point on an insulating 2 inch GaN bulk substrate prepared by ammonothermal synthesis with a density of threading and mixed dislocations < 10 5 cm -2 . Ga and Al with nominal purity of 8N and 6N5, respectively, were evaporated from filament effusion sources, active Nitrogen (nominal purity 10N) was supplied by a radio-frequency plasma source. The growth rate for GaN amounts to 240 nm/h. After decollating pieces of the 2 inch wafer, Hall bars and transistor test structures were lithographically defined and mesa structures patterned in a reactive ion etch step using a chlorine-based plasma. Ti/Al/Ni/Au stacks annealed at 800 °C in nitrogen atmosphere for 30 s serve as ohmic contacts. For transistors the entire surface (including contacts, mesa and etched regions) was covered with 27 nm Al2O3 by atomic layer deposition. A 100 nm thick Ti/Au film serves as gate electrode. Background impurity levels have been verified by secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS), demonstrating an unintentional oxygen level of ~ 2 • 10 16 cm -3 in the grown GaN material. Temperature-and illumination-dependent magneto-transport measurements between 2 K and 300 K were performed in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from Quantum Design with optical access. A low-frequency (17 Hz) lock-in technique with excitation current of 100 nA was employed. A 3 He cryostat equipped with a superconducting magnet (up to 15 Tesla) was used for low temperature magneto-transport studies. The sample photoexcitation at 325 nm wavelength was realized with the fiber-coupled output of a He-Cd laser. The large distance of ~ 20 mm between the bare fiber end (numeric aperture = 0.22) and the sample surface enabled a good uniformity of both the illumination and the resulting 2DEG density as confirmed by the onset of SdH oscillations. The photoexcitation power was attenuated by optical filters and then measured at the fiber input, the fiber optical transmission amounts to ~ 80 %. Magneto-transport data were recorded using a low-frequency lock-in technique. The capacitance vs. voltage C(VGS) measurements were carried out by sweeping a quasistatic DC bias modulated with an AC signal with a frequency of 20 kHz and with an amplitude of 30 mV using an Agilent B1505A Power Device Analyzer equipped with a capacitance measurement unit. The DC bias voltage at the gate electrode was swept in the direction from lower to higher voltages with a staircase-like sweep pattern and a rate of approximately 0.5 V/s. Depth profiles of the charge carrier density were extracted by applying the data transformation according to reference Fig. 