We study the static charge correlation function in an one-band model on a square lattice. The Hamiltonian consist of effective hoppings of the electrons between the lattice sites and the Heisenberg Hamiltonian. Approximating the irreducible charge correlation function by a single bubble yields the ladder approximation for the charge correlation function. In this approximation one finds in general three charge instabilities, two of them are due to nesting, the third one is the flux phase instability. Since these instabilities cannot explain the experiments in hole-doped cuprates we have included in the irreducible charge correlation function also Aslamasov-Larkin (AL) diagrams where charge fluctuations interact with products of spin fluctuations. We then find at high temperatures a nematic or d-wave Pomeranchuk instability with a very small momentum. Its transition temperature decreases roughly linearly with doping in the underdoped region and vanishes near optimal doping. Decreasing the temperature further a secondary axial charge-density wave (CDW) instability appears with mainly d-wave symmetry and a wave vector somewhat larger than the distance between nearest neighbor hot spots. At still lower temperatures the diagonal flux phase instability emerges. A closer look shows that the AL diagrams enhance mainly axial and not diagonal charge fluctuations in our one-band model. This is the main reason why axial and not diagonal instabilities are the leading ones in agreement with experiment. The two instabilities due to nesting vanish already at very low temperatures and do not play any major role in the phase diagram. Remarkable is that the nematic and the axial CDW instabilities show a large reentrant behavior. Cuprate superconductors show besides superconductivity and antiferromagnetism phases with different modulations of the charge and spin density 1 including nematic 2 and liquid-crystal The paper is organized as follows. After an introduction in section I we specify the Hamiltonian in section II and discuss some of its properties which are relevant for the following. This section also contains a discussion of the diagrams taken into account in our calculation, namely, ladder and sums of ladder diagrams (details are given in Appendix A) and AL diagrams. The evaluation of these diagrams is given in section III. In section IV we investigate d-wave charge instabilities as a function of temperature and doping using only one basis function with d-wave symmetry to represent charge fluctuations. Since the evaluation of the AL diagrams is somewhat involved we present details of it in Appendix B. Finally, we consider in Appendix C a complete set of four basis functions for charge fluctuations and the related 4x4 susceptibility matrices. It is shown that the leading instability has indeed mainly d-wave symmetry. We also discuss the relationship between different definitions of d-wave charge susceptibilities and the set of employed basis functions. We consider the following effective Hamiltonian for electrons moving on a square lattice, c † iα and c iα are fermionic creation and annihilation operators for electrons on site i and spin direction α. t ij denote effective hopping amplitudes for electrons between the sites i and j. The second term in Eq. (1) represents the Heisenberg interaction where J is the Heisenberg constant and ij denotes nearest-neighbor sites i and j. δ is the hole doping. Without the factor δ in the first term in Eq. (1) H describes a t-J model without any restrictions on double occupancies, see Ref. [48]. The conventional t-J model is obtained if a constraint is added to H which excludes double occupancies of lattice sites. The effective Hamiltonian Eq. ( It is convenient to rewrite H in momentum space. The first term in the parenthesis in H becomes, with J(p) = 2J(cos(p x ) + cos(p y )). J(p ′p ′′ ) can be written as a sum over 4 separable kernels, The functions γ r (p) are given by γ and inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. ( Using similar arguments the last term in H is found to be equal to -H J /2 neglecting small non-local spin interaction terms. Altogether the effective Hamiltonian H becomes, ǫ k are one-particle energies, t and t ′ denote hopping amplitudes between nearest and second nearest neighbors, respectively. H ′ is the interaction part of H given by The Matsubara Green's function describing charge fluctuations reads τ 1 and τ 2 are imaginary times, T the time ordering operator and ... the expectation value. Π rs is a 4x4 matrix describing the coupling of charge fluctuations with the symmetries r and s. After a Fourier transform with respect to τ 1 -τ 2 , Π can be written as Π(k) where k denotes both the momentum k and the Matsubara frequency iω n , k = (k, iω n ). Using H ′ and performing a sum over ladders one obtains Eq. ( The diagrams which we will take into account for Π (0) (k) are shown in Fig. In the present paper Maki-Thompson processes, as those considered in Ref. [38], are not included. In Ref. [38] an axial CDW was obtained, however, this result is controversial The first diagram in Fig. f (ǫ) is the fermionic occupation number and μ the chemical potential. The solid and dotted lines in Fig. The calculation of the second and third diagrams, the AL diagrams, needs some care in performing the analytic continuation. The usual procedure to sum over pole contributions leads in general to Green's functions which should be evaluated right on the cut. Clearly, the resulting singularities must vanish again if all pole contributions are taken into account. Since it is difficult to achieve such a compensation explicitly we describe in detail a method in Appendix B where the compensation is done analytically. Our final result for the AL diagrams is, n(ǫ) is equal to 1/(exp(ǫ/T ) -1) and V S is the symmetrized vertex given by with An explicit expression for V (k; q) is given in Eq. (B2). Using the symmetrized vertex V S both AL diagrams are taken into account. D(k, ǫ) is the spin response function given in Refs. 54-56 with ). ξ is the magnetic correlation length given approximately by ξ 2 = 1.6/δ, The dashed curve in Fig. The total irreducible charge correlation function is given by Figure The transition temperatures can be determined in the same way as in Fig. we have calculated Π (0) (k) for a fixed distortion Φ as a function of the axial momentum k. Π (0) (k) shows a well-pronounced minimum near the momentum k min defined in Fig. Two of the filled squares in Fig. In conclusion, we have identified in our approach five different charge instabilities in the underdoped region. The leading one corresponds to a nematic transition with a transition temperature T nem , which decreases strongly and approximately linearly with increasing doping and vanishes near the doping δ = 0.12. Below T nem there exist secondary charge instabilities with wave vectors k 1 , k min ≈ k 2 , k 3 and k 4 which are shown in the inset of Fig. Since t γ t (p)γ t ′ ) depends only on the difference p-p ′ the two factors as well as the two diagrams are equal. This is plausible because interchanging the left and right sides of the rectangle in the upper diagram produces the lower one and vice versa. Adding both diagrams yields t Π (0) rt (k)JΠ (0) ts (k), i.e., the linear term in J in Eq. (10). Π (0) rt (k) is the unperturbed charge Green's function. Let us consider now the ladder contributions to Π rs (k) of order J n . There is one diagram of this order where pairs of electrons connect opposite sides of adjacent rectangles. Interchanging the sides of one or more rectangles produces different diagrams which all have the same value similar as in the case n = 1 treated above. Summing over all the diagrams, the overall prefactor becomes (-1) n (J/2) n × 2 n = J n . Moreover, the electron lines yield a matrix product of n + 1 matrices Π (0) rt (k), i.e., we have obtained the n-th order term in J of Eq. ( [A(q, ǫ)ReD(kq, -ǫ) + ReD(q, ǫ)A(kq, ǫ)] × (ReV S (k, q, ǫ)) 2 -(ImV S (k, ǫ)) 2 + 2B(ǫ)ReV S (k, q, ǫ) × [ReD(q, ǫ)ReD(kq, ǫ) -ImD(q, ǫ)ImD(kq, ǫ)] (B29) flux instability is lost if r = 1 and Eq. (C4) are used. In this case the choice Eq. ( 