Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), black phosphorus (BP) and related derivatives, have attracted great attention due to their advantages of flexibility, strong light-matter interaction, broadband absorption and high carrier mobility, and have become a powerful contender for next-generation infrared photodetectors. However, since the thickness of twodimensional materials is on the order of nanometers, the absorption of two-dimensional materials is very weak, which limits the detection performance of 2D materials-based infrared photodetector. In order to solve this problem, scientific researchers have tried to use optimized device structures to combine with two-dimensional materials for improving the performance of infrared photodetector. In this review, we review the progress of room temperature infrared photodetectors with hybrid structure based on 2D materials in recent years, focusing mainly on 2D-nD (n = 0, 1, 2) heterostructures, the integration between 2D materials and on-chip or plasmonic structure. Finally, we summarize the current challenges and point out the future development direction. Infrared (IR) photodetectors can convert infrared light signals into easily detectable electrical signals, which are widely used in imaging, communications, medical and night vision applications at present. In order to circumvent this disadvantage, new type semiconductors are proposed to use in the application of IR photodetectors, which can achieve low current at room temperature and high photocurrent. In recent years, two-dimensional materials with an atomic layer thickness, are verified to overcome the shortcomings induced by traditional semiconductors used in traditional IR detection due to their excellent electrical, optical and mechanical properties. In this review, we review the development of infrared photodetectors with mixeddimensional structure between two-dimensional materials and other low-dimensional materials, focusing on quantum dots, single-wall carbon nanotubes, and 2D vertical or lateral heterostructures composed of different two-dimensional materials. Moreover, we also discuss the integration of two-dimensional materials and on-chip structures, including waveguides and cavities. We also introduce the application of surface plasmon resonance in infrared photodetectors based on two-dimensional materials. Finally, we summarize the faced challenges currently in infrared photodetectors with hybrid structures based on two-dimensional materials and point out the future directions for further development. In order to meet the demand for high-speed response of infrared photodetectors, the materials used to fabricate the detectors is often required to have high carrier mobility to reduce the transit time of photogenerated carriers in conducting channel. The carrier mobility of graphene is as high as 60,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , phototransistor with ultrahigh gain of 10 8 and responsivity of 510 7 AW -1 . After the photogenerated holes are transferred to the graphene channel, they are driven by the source-drain voltage (VSD) to reach the drain. The linear dependence of the photocurrent on VSD is shown in Figure Similarly, Zheng et al. demonstrated an ambipolar broadband photodetector based on N, S codecorated graphene-PbS quantum dot heterostructure. The device exhibits excellent detection performance with responsivity of 10 4 A/W and specific detectivity of 10 12 Jones at 1550 nm. The responsivity as a function of the applied back-gate voltage VBG. VSD=5 V. (a-d) are reproduced from Ref. [32] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. Another important two-dimensional material, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), has also been extensively studied in recent years. MoS2-HgTe QDs hybrid photodetectors beyond 2m. In order to obtain high gain to make up for the weak light absorption of 2D materials, many infrared photodetectors based on hybrid 2D-QDs heterostructures are phototransistors that have an electronic passive sensitization layer composed of strong light absorbing material. Photogenerated electron-hole pairs are created at the QDs layer, and then drifted by the built-in electric field at the interface and by the applied bias voltage to form photocurrent directly in photodiode operation. However, after the electron-hole pairs are separated, electrons remain in the QDs layer and holes are driven by depletion region on the graphene/PbS QD interface and transferred to graphene in phototransistor operation. For VTD>0, the width of the depletion region expands, increasing the efficient charge collection area, and thus the external quantum efficiency also increases. The graphene-QDs photodiode responsivity and EQE are shown in Figure One-dimensional nanomaterials, such as single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), have unique and excellent optical and electrical properties due to 1D quantum confinement effect. demonstrated a high-performance photodetector based on a planar atomically thin SWNT-graphene hybrid film across visible to near-infrared range (400-1,550 nm). Jariwala et al. demonstrated a gate-tunable carbon nanotube-MoS2 heterjunction pn diode. Two-dimensional vertical heterostructure is fabricated by stacking different twodimensional materials in the vertical direction. This heterostructure is generally prepared by targeted transfer method or CVD growth technique. WSe2 heterostructure covering visible to short-wavelength infrared range at room temperature. Fermi level pinning, The band gap of MoS2 (Eg1) and WSe2 (Eg2) are 1.88 eV and 1.65 eV, respectively, and the corresponding wavelengths are 660 nm and 750 nm. For h <Eg1<Eg2, only graphene can generate photoelectron electron-hole pairs, and thus the photocurrent is drastically reduced. Qiao et al. reported a broadband photodetectors based on graphene-Bi2Te3 heterostructure (Figure shows that the latter is ten times higher than the former. Both graphene and Bi2Te3 absorb light to generate photoelectron-hole pairs, which are subsequently separated by a built-in electric field. Then, photogenerated electrons in graphene are transferred into Bi2Te3, while the photogenerated holes in Bi2Te3 are transferred into graphene, which suppresses the recombination of carriers and generates a larger photocurrent. Figure (d-f) are reproduced from Ref. [82] with permission from the American Chemical Society. So far, highly polarization sensitive infrared photodetector based on twodimensional materials working at room temperature are still lacking. Ye et al. first demonstrated a broadband photodetector based on a vertical photogate heterostructure of BP-on-WSe2 with highly polarization sensitive for infrared detection (Figure Similarly, the mid-wave infrared photodetector based on BP and MoS2 heterostructure designed by Bullock et al. also utilized the anisotropy of BP to achieve polarization detection, which is bias-selectable and operates without the need for external optics. The above results show that the 2D vertical heterostructure can effectively extend the response range of the photodetector to achieve infrared detection. In addition, CVD epitaxial growth technology provides a guarantee for the scaled preparation of vertical heterostructures. By combining 2D materials with different unique and excellent physical properties, a multifunctional infrared detector with excellent detection performance can be prepared. V. (a-d) are reproduced from Ref. [85] with permission from Elsevier. The heterostructures mentioned above are basically vertical, and the built-in electric field at the interface promotes the separation of photogenerated electron-hole pairs and charge transfer, thereby reducing the recombination and accelerating the response speed. In addition, two-dimensional lateral heterostructures, a heterostructure composed of materials with different work functions or homojunction composed of the same material but different doping types in the lateral direction, form a built-in electric field at the interface and play a similar role. At present, the methods for forming lateral heterostructures generally include chemical doping, However, the current methods for preparing lateral heterojunctions have their own limitations. Chemical doping has the characteristic that it is difficult to find suitable dopants. The density of the carrier modulated by the electrostatic gating is relatively low, so the modulation effect is limited. Two-dimensional materials show strong interaction with light, but the spectral response range and responsivity of the photodetector based on 2D materials are limited due to the reason of the atomically ultra-thin thickness and the limitation of the band gap. In order to obtain better infrared detection performance to achieve practical applications, it is necessary to enhance the infrared light absorption of two-dimensional materials. Integrating two-dimensional materials with waveguides is a good strategy to enhance light absorption. Recently, a series of similar but independent waveguide integrated graphene photodetectors have been reported, The absorption coefficient of metal electrode M increases with increasing electrode width W. For W>100 nm (W>160 nm), the light absorption of the metal electrode will exceed the absorption of monolayer (bilayer) graphene. However, the contact resistance between metal and graphene also increases with decreasing width of electrode, so the metal electrode absorption coefficient and contact resistance should be considered comprehensively to obtain the best device performance. Figure (e-f) are reproduced from Ref. [102] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. Similarly, Youngblood et al. demonstrated a waveguide-integrated few-layer black phosphorus photodetector with high responsivity and low dark current. of the optical power in the waveguide, of which only 17.5% is absorbed by the black phosphorus and the rest is absorbed by the graphene top-gate. Figure The reason that the PhC transmission peak can be observed at the blue line is that the excited states of MoTe2 have been filled by the electrically excited carriers in the LED mode, so the absorption of MoTe2 will not cause interference. When the device is operating in photodetector mode, the responsivity and external quantum efficiency of the photodetector at the wavelength of 1,160 nm are 4.8 mA/W and 0.5%, respectively. Figure The integration of two-dimensional materials and cavities, including photonic crystal cavities, In order to further enhance the photoresponse of the photodetector and obtain a tunable response spectrum, plasmonic nanostructures can also be applied to the infrared photodetector based on two-dimensional materials. Fang et al. demonstrated a graphene-antenna sandwich photodetector with response spectrum in the range of visible to near-infrared and explained the reasons for photocurrent enhancement. indicating that this structure has potential in the field of infrared polarization detection. bending between the Fermi level of graphene channel and the Ti electrode-doped graphene. The steeper band bending results in a correspondingly larger built-in electric field, which can obtain higher the separation efficiency of the photogenerated electronhole pairs and thus produces a greater photocurrent. The resonance wavelength of the plasmonic clusters can be controlled by varying the diameter of disks. For example, when the diameter of heptamer plasmonic clusters changes from 80 nm to 180 nm, the corresponding resonance wavelength changes from 650 nm to 950 nm. Figure Ni et al. reported a photodetector based on plasmonic Si QD/graphene heterostructure that enables effective detection from UV to mid-infrared. Infrared photodetectors with hybrid structure based on two-dimensional materials still face many challenges and need us to explore further. Many of the currently reported hybrid structures based on two-dimensional materials are prepared just only through mechanical exfoliation and targeted transfer techniques, leading to poor reproducibility and relatively low yield of photodetectors. This method can only meet the needs of scientific research and cannot be used for commercial applications. Although the 2D vertical or lateral heterostructure can be prepared by the CVD method and 2D-QDs structure can be prepared by the solutionprocessed method, which shows the potential of large-scale production, but they still have many limitations and need further improve. The reported overall performance parameters of infrared photodetectors with hybrid structure based on two-dimensional materials are excellent, but they are still far from the theoretical value. The excellent optical and electrical properties of twodimensional materials have not been fully exploited. In order to obtain better detection performance, it is necessary to further study the interfacial charge transfer and photocurrent generation mechanism in hybrid structure based on two-dimensional materials for designing or optimizing various hybrid structures. There are various currently limitations for two-dimensional materials used in the field of infrared detection. For example, the band gap of graphene and many TMDs (such as MoS2, WSe2) are not conducive to the absorption of infrared light. The instability of MoTe2 and BP with an appropriately bandgap in the air also limits their use. In order to obtain better infrared detection performance, novel two-dimensional materials with suitable band gap and good stability have to be developed. Many existing heterostructures based on two-dimensional materials simply combine two materials that appear to be suitable. However, this combination may not be optimal, which may leads to the inability to maximize the advantages of heterostructure. It is a worthwhile research direction to further understand the properties of various two-dimensional materials through theoretical research and computational simulation methods, and to design a more rational and ingenious novel heterostructure. It has the potential to dramatically improve the performance of the photodetector and even discover new phenomena. Two-dimensional materials are particularly sensitive to interface problem due to their large specific surface area and atomic thickness. On the one hand, interface