The discovery of ferroelectricity in both pure and doped HfO 2 -based thin films have revitalized the interest in using ferroelectrics for nanoscale device applications. To take advantage of this silicon-compatible ferroelectric, fundamental questions such as the origin of ferroelectricity and better approach to controlled realization of ferroelectricity at the nanoscale need to be addressed. The emergence of robust polarization in HfO 2based thin films is considered as the cumulative effect of various extrinsic factors such as finite-size effects and surface/interface effects of small grains, compressive stress, dopants, oxygen vacancies, and electric fields. The kinetic effects of phase transitions and their potential impacts on the emergence of ferroelectricity in HfO 2 at the nanoscale are not well understood. In this work, we construct the transition paths between different polymorphs of hafnia with density functional theory calculations and variablecell nudged elastic band technique. We find that the transition barriers depend strongly on the mechanical boundary conditions and the transition from the tetragonal phase to the polar orthorhombic phase is a fast process kinetically under clamping. The effects of growth orientations and epitaxial strains on the relative stability of different phases of HfO 2 are investigated. The two orthorhombic phases, polar P ca2 1 and non-polar P bca, become thermodynamically stable in (111)-oriented thin films over a wide range of epitaxial strain conditions. This work suggests a potential avenue to better stabilize the ferroelectric phase in HfO 2 thin films through substrate orientation engineering. Ferroelectrics characterized by the switchable spontaneous polarization have long been considered as a candidate material to realize low-power high-speed nonvolatile memories and logic devices. All these phases are centrosymmetric and thus non-polar. Böscke et al. first reported the presence of ferroelectricity in thin films of SiO 2 -doped hafnium oxide with a thickness of 10 nm. Previous studies on epitaxial strain engineering of ferroelectricity have mostly focused on thin films grown on (00l)-oriented substrates. We use the variable-cell nudged elastic band (VC-NEB) technique We explore three biaxial strain states corresponding to the epitaxial growth of (100)-, Z. The XY plane is chosen as the epitaxial matching plane and the Z axis is considered as the out-of-plane direction of a thin film. Figure and and For each phase, we first construct a supercell with the prescribed crystal orientation and then fully relax the lattice vectors and atomic positions. After the equilibrium lattice parameters are obtained, the biaxial strain is applied in XY plane by scaling the lattice vectors along X and Y while conserving the in-plane lattice angle γ (Figure Phase Transitions of HfO 2 polymorphs Figure We now compare the two phase transitions that have low barriers: T→ M and T→ PO. It is found that the transition T→ M involves a large change (11% increase) in lattice angle β (between a and c axes) whereas the transition T→ PO undergoes a modest unit cell variation (see details in Supporting Information). The substantial shear deformation required to realize the T→ M transition hints at a stronger impact of substrate clamping. To test this hypothesis, we carry out conventional clamped-cell NEB calculations where the lattice constants are fixed to the values of the T phase, assuming the T phase is the "precursor" phase during the growth of thin films. The VC-NEB and clamped-cell NEB investigations highlight the kinetic and strain effects on the emergence of ferroelectric phase in HfO 2 thin films. Specifically, the barrier heights estimated with the VC-NEB method are more relevant to phase transitions in bulk-like environments or films with relaxed strain, whereas the barrier heights obtained with the clamped-cell NEB method reflect the kinetics of phase transitions in strained grains or thin films. Our results show that when the shear strain required for the T→ M transition is inaccessible, the T phase is more likely to become the ferroelectric PO phase kinetically even though the non-polar AO phase is still favored thermodynamically. In this regard, growing HfO 2 -based films on unconventionally oriented substrates may introduce appropriate mechanical boundary conditions that enhance the ferroelectricity, thus inspiring our following investigations. We first study the conventional (001)-oriented films. The effect of epitaxial strain in the (001) plane (X[a00]Y [0b0]Z[00c]) on the relative stability of different phases of hafnia was already explored in ref. 29 with DFT using PBE exchange-correlation functional. Figure To distinguish different crystal orientations, we introduced the convention that the a, b, and c axes of the unit cell are aligned along the Cubic crystallographic directions [100], [010], and [001], respectively (Figure Next, we consider the effect of biaxial strain applied in {101} planes on the relative stability of M, AO, and PO phases (Figure There is also a compressive strain-induced M → AO transition at η ≈ -0.3%. We now focus on (111)-oriented films where the effective in-plane lattice constant is calculated using a = S XY /2 √ 3 (see Figure The remaining issue is the consistent higher energy of the ferroelectric PO phase relative to the "antiferroelectric-like" AO phase. We propose two mechanisms potentially responsible for the formation of ferroelectric PO phase in thin films. Kinetically, as revealed by our VC-NEB calculations, the transition from the T phase to the PO phase is faster than to the AO phase in a bulk-like environment. The substrate orientation and the underlying mechanical clamping will likely affect the transition barriers and kinetics. We suggest the intrinsic barrier heights estimated with VC-NEB are good approximations to those in (111)oriented thin films at the optimal equilibrium strain where the crystal is in a nearly stress-free equilibrium state similar to a bulk condition. Therefore, if the T phase forms first during the high temperature annealing process when preparing the thin films, a significant portion of the T phase may transform to the PO phase because of the low activation energy of the T → PO transition. This kinetic argument is supported by recent experimental work on the effect of heat treatment on the formation of ferroelectric epitaxial (111)-oriented 7% Y-doped HfO 2 (YHO7) thin films. , where E DFT is the DFT energy per formula unit and P [111] is the polarization. The strain dependence of P [111] and the free energy difference between PO and AO phases (∆G(PO-AO)) are shown in Figure In summary, we have investigated the kinetic effects of phase transitions on the emergence of ferroelectricity in HfO 2 thin films by quantifying the transition barriers between different polymorphs of hafnia with density functional theory calculations. The multi-well potential energy surface obtained with the variable-cell nudged elastic band technique suggests that the mixture of different phases often presented in HfO 2 -based thin films has both kinetic and thermodynamic reasons. We propose the tetragonal P 4 2 /nmc phase, likely formed during the annealing process at high temperatures, is the key "precursor" phase, responsible for the formation of monoclinic and orthorhombic phases because of the low transition barriers. One important finding is that the transition from the tetragonal phase to the polar orthorhombic P ca2 1 phase is kinetically faster than the transition to the competing non-polar orthorhombic P bca phase though the latter is favored thermodynamically. Additionally, the transition barriers depend strongly on the mechanical boundary conditions. In particular, when the shear deformation required for the tetragonal to monoclinic phase transition becomes inaccessible (e.g., clamping by grains or capping electrodes), the formation of the monoclinic phase will be suppressed whereas the formation of the polar orthorhombic phase is favored. Growing differently-oriented crystals on substates of unconventional cuts offers a new modality to tune the mechanical boundary conditions. We systematically investigate the effects of growth orientations and epitaxial strains on the relative stability of different phases of HfO 2 . In agreement with previous studies, the biaxial compressive stress will drive the monoclinic to orthorhombic transition. Notably, the two orthorhombic phases at their optimal equilibrium strains are thermodynamically more stable than the monoclinic phase in (111)-oriented thin films. Combined with the kinetic effect that the transformation from the tetragonal phase to the polar orthorhombic phase is faster than to the non-polar orthorhombic phase, we propose it is likely to better stabilize the ferroelectric P ca2 ) is chosen as the reference. Epitaxial strain is calculated with respect to cubic HfO 2 as described in the text. (b) Energy vs strain diagram of polymorphs of HfO 2 of (001), (010), and (001) orientations. The M, T, AO, and PO are colored in red, blue, orange, and green, respectively. For a given strain and phase, the lowest-energy orientation is highlight with filled diamond for (100), square for (010), and circle for (001). 